great merit. They then proceeded to Mahidhara consecrated by that
virtuous royal sage Gaya of unrivalled splendour. In that region is the
hill called Gayasira, as well as the delightful river called Mahanadi,
with fine banks graced by bushes of canes. On that celestial hill of
holy peaks is a sacred _tirtha_ called _Brahmasara_ which is much adored
by ascetics. There on the banks of that lake had dwelt of yore the
eternal god himself of justice, and it was thither that the illustrious
Rishi Agastya had repaired to behold that deity. It is from that lake
that all the rivers take their rise and there in that _tirtha_, Mahadeva
the wielder of the _Pinaka_, is present for aye. Arriving at that spot,
the heroic sons of Pandu practised the vow that is known by the name of
the _Chaturmasya_ according to all the rites and ordinances of the great
sacrifice called _Rishiyajna_. It is there that that mighty tree called
the Eternal banian stands. Any sacrifice performed there produces merit
that is eternal. In that sacrificial platform of the gods producing
eternal merit, the Pandavas began to fast with concentrated souls. And
there came unto them Brahmanas by hundreds endued with wealth of
asceticism. And those Brahmanas also all performed the _Chaturmasya_
sacrifice according to the rites inculcated by the Rishis. And there in
that _tirtha_, those Brahmanas old in knowledge and ascetic merit and
fully versed in the Vedas, that constituted the court of the illustrious
sons of Pandu, talked in their presence upon various subjects of sacred
import. And it was in that place that the learned vow-observing, and
sacred Shamatha, leading, besides, a life of celibacy, spake unto them,
O king, of Gaya, the son of Amurttaraya. And Shamatha said, 'Gaya, the
son of Amurttaraya, was one of the foremost of royal sages. Listen to
me, O Bharata, as I recite his meritorious deeds. It was here, O king,
that Gaya had performed many sacrifices distinguished by the enormous
quantities of food (that were distributed) and the profuse gifts that
were given away (unto Brahmanas). Those sacrifices, O king, were
distinguished by mountains in hundreds and thousands of cooked rice,
lakes of clarified butter and rivers of curds in many hundreds, and
streams of richly-dressed curries in thousands. Day after day were these
got ready and distributed amongst all comers, while, over and above
this, Brahmanas and others, O king, received food that was clean and
pure. During the conclusion also (of every sacrifice) when gifts were
dedicated to the Brahmanas, the chanting of the Vedas reached the
heavens. And so loud, indeed, was the sound of the Vedic _Mantras_ that
nothing else, O Bharata, could be heard there. Thus sacred sounds, O
king, filled the earth, the points of the horizon, the sky and heaven
itself. Even these were the wonders that persons noticed on those
occasions. And gratified with the excellent viands and drinks that the
illustrious Gaya provided, men, O bull of the Bharata race, went about
singing these verses. In Gaya's great sacrifice, who is there today,
amongst creatures, that still desireth to eat? There are yet twenty-five
mountains of food there after all have been fed! What the royal sage
Gaya of immense splendour hath achieved in his sacrifice was never
achieved by men before, nor will be by any in future. The gods have been
so surfeited by Gaya with clarified butter that they are not able to
take anything that anybody else may offer. As sand grains on earth, as
stars in the firmament, as drops showered by rain-charged clouds, cannot
ever be counted by anybody, so can none count the gifts in Gaya's
sacrifice!

"'O son of the Kuru race, many times did king Gaya perform sacrifices of
this description, here, by the side of this Brahmasara!'"


SECTION XCVI

Vaisampayana said, "After this the royal son of Kunti who was ever
distinguished for his profuse gifts unto Brahmanas, proceeded to the
asylum of Agastya and took up his abode in Durjaya. It was here that
that foremost of speakers, king Yudhishthira asked Lomasa as to why
Agastya had slain Vatapi there. And the king also enquired after the
extent of that man-destroying Daitya's prowess, and the reason also of
the illustrious Agastya's wrath being excited against that Asura.

"Thus questioned, Lomasa said, 'O son of Kuru race, there was in the
city called Manimati, in days of yore, a Daitya named Ilwala, whose
younger brother was Vatapi. One day that son of Diti addressed the
Brahmana endued with ascetic merit, saying, "O holy one, grant me a son
equal unto Indra." The Brahmana, however, did not grant the Asura a son
like Indra. And at this, the Asura was inflamed with wrath against the
Brahmana. And from that day, O king, the Asura Ilwala became a destroyer
of Brahmanas. And endued with power of illusion the angry Asura
transformed his brother into a ram. And Vatapi also capable of assuming
any form at will, would immediately assume the shape of a ram. And the
flesh of that ram, after being properly dressed, was offered to
Brahmanas as food. And after they had eaten of it, they were slain. For
whomsoever Ilwala summoned with his voice, he would come back to Ilwala
even if he had gone to the abode of Yama, in re-embodied form endued
with life, and show himself to Ilwala. And so having transformed the
Asura Vatapi into a ram and properly cooked his flesh and feeding
Brahmanas therewith, he would summon Vatapi. And the mighty Asura
Vatapi, that foe of Brahmanas, endued with great strength and power of
illusion, hearing, O king, those sounds uttered with a loud voice by
Ilwala, and ripping open the flanks of the Brahmana would come
laughingly out, O lord of earth! And it was thus, O monarch, that the
wicked-hearted Daitya Ilwala, having fed Brahmanas, frequently took away
their lives.

"'Meanwhile, the illustrious Agastya beheld his deceased ancestors
hanging in a pit with heads downwards. And he asked those personages
thus suspended in that hole, saying, "_What is the matter with you?_"
Thus questioned those utterers of _Brahma_ replied, "It is even for
offspring." And they also told him, "We are your ancestors. It is even
for offspring that we stay suspended in this pit. If, O Agastya, thou
canst beget us a good son, we may then be saved from this hell and thou
also wilt obtain thy blessed state of those having offspring." Endued
with great energy and observant of truth and morality Agastya replied,
saying, "Ye Pitris, I will accomplish your desire. Let this anxiety of
yours be dispelled." And the illustrious Rishi then began to think of
perpetuating his race. But he saw not a wife worthy of him on whom he
himself could take his birth in the form of a son. The Rishi
accordingly, taking those parts that were regarded as highly beautiful,
from creatures possessing them, created therewith an excellent woman.
And the Muni, endued with great ascetic merit, thereupon gave that girl
created for himself to the king of the Vidharbhas who was then
undergoing ascetic penances for obtaining offspring. And that blessed
girl of sweet face (thus disposed of) then took her birth (in Vidarbha's
royal line) and, beautiful as the effulgent lightning, her limbs began
to grow day by day. And as soon as that lord of earth--the ruler of the
Vidarbhas--saw her ushered into life, he joyfully communicated the
intelligence, O Bharata, unto the Brahmanas. And the Brahmanas
thereupon, O lord of earth, blessed the girl and they bestowed upon her
the name Lopamudra. And possessed of great beauty, she began, O monarch,
to grow quickly like unto a lotus in the midst of water or the effulgent
flame of a fire. And when the girl grew and attained to puberty, a
hundred virgins decked in ornaments and a hundred maids waited in
obedience upon her blessed self. And surrounded by those hundred maids
and virgins, she shone in their midst, endued as she was with bright
effulgence, like Rohini in the firmament amid an inferior multitude of
stars. And possessed as she was of good behaviour and excellent manners,
none dared ask for her hand even when she attained to puberty, through
fear of her father, the king of the Vidharbhas. And Lopamudra, devoted
to truth, surpassing the Apsaras even in beauty, gratified her father
and relatives by means of her conduct. And her father, beholding his
daughter--the princess of Vidharbha--attain to puberty, began to reflect
in his mind, saying, "To whom should I give this daughter of mine?"'"


SECTION XCVII

"Lomasa continued, 'When Agastya thought that girl to be competent for
the duties of domesticity, he approached that lord of earth--the ruler
of Vidharbhas--and addressing him, said, "I solicit thee, O king, to
bestow thy daughter Lopamudra on me." Thus addressed by the Muni, the
king of the Vidharbhas swooned away. And though unwilling to give the
Muni his daughter, he dared not refuse. And that lord of earth then,
approaching his queen, said, "This Rishi is endued with great energy. If
angry, he may consume me with the fire of his curse. O thou of sweet
face, tell me what is thy wish." Hearing these words of the king, she
uttered not a word. And beholding the king along with the queen
afflicted with sorrow, Lopamudra approached them in due time and said,
"O monarch, it behoveth thee not to grieve on my account. Bestow me on
Agastya, and, O father, save thyself, by giving me away." And at these
words of his daughter, O monarch, the king gave away Lopamudra unto the
illustrious Agastya with due rites. And obtaining her as wife, Agastya
addressed Lopamudra, saying, "Cast thou away these costly robes and
ornaments." And at these words of her lord, that large-eyed damsel of
thighs tapering as the stem of the plantain tree cast away her handsome
and costly robes of fine texture. And casting them away she dressed
herself in rags and barks and deerskins, and became her husband's equal
in vows and acts. And proceeding then to Gangadwara that illustrious and
best of Rishis began to practise the severest penances along with his
helpful wife. And Lopamudra herself, well pleased, began to serve her
lord from the deep respect that she bore him. And the exalted Agastya
also began to manifest great love for his wife.

"'After a considerable time, O king, the illustrious Rishi one day
beheld Lopamudra, blazing in ascetic splendour come up after the bath in
her season. And pleased with the girl, for her services, her purity, and
self control, as also with her grace and beauty, he summoned her for
marital intercourse. The girl, however, joining her hands, bashfully but
lovingly addressed the Rishi, saying, "The husband, without doubt,
weddeth the wife for offspring. But it behoveth thee, O Rishi, to show
that love to me which I have for thee. And it behoveth thee, O
regenerate one, to approach me on a bed like to that which I had in the
palace of my father. I also desire that thou shouldst be decked in
garlands of flowers and other ornaments, and that I should approach thee
adorned in those celestial ornaments that I like. Otherwise, I cannot
approach thee, dressed in these rags dyed in red. Nor, O regenerate
Rishi, it is sinful to wear ornaments (on such an occasion)." Hearing
these words of his wife, Agastya replied, "O blessed girl, O thou of
slender waist, I have not wealth like what thy father hath, O
Lopamudra!" She answered saying, "Thou who art endued with wealth of
asceticism, art certainly able to bring hither within a moment, by
ascetic power, everything that exists in the world of men." Agastya
said, "It is even so as thou hast said. That, however, would waste my
ascetic merit. O bid me do that which may not loosen my ascetic merit."
Lopamudra then said, "O thou endued with wealth of asceticism, my season
will not last long, I do not desire, however, to approach thee
otherwise. Nor do I desire to diminish thy (ascetic) merit in any way.
It behoveth thee, however, to do as I desire, without injuring thy
virtue."

"'Agastya then said, "O blessed girl, if this be the resolve that thou
hast settled in thy heart, I will go out in quest of wealth. Meanwhile,
stay thou here as it pleaseth thee."'"


SECTION XCVIII

"Lomasa continued, 'Agastya then, O son of the Kuru race, went to king
Srutarvan who was regarded as richer than other kings, to beg for
wealth. And that monarch, learning of the arrival of the pot-born Rishi
on the frontiers of his kingdoms, went out with his ministers and
received the holy man with respect. And the king duly offering the
_Arghya_ in the first instance, submissively and with joined hands
enquired then after the reason of the Rishi's arrival. And Agastya
answered saying, "O lord of the earth, know that I have come to thee,
desirous of wealth. Give me a portion according to thy ability and
without doing injury to others."'

"Lomasa continued, 'The king, then, representing unto the Rishi the
equality of his expenditure and income, said, "O learned one, take thou
from my possessions the wealth thou pleasest." Beholding, however, the
equality of that monarch's expenditure with income, the Rishi who always
saw both sides with equal eyes, thought that if he took anything under
the circumstances, his act would result in injury to creatures. Taking,
therefore, Srutarvan with him, the Rishi went to Vradhnaswa. The latter,
hearing of their arrival on his frontiers, received them duly. And
Vradhnaswa also offered them the _Arghyas_ and water to wash their feet.
And the monarch, with their permission, then enquired after the reason
of their coming. And Agastya said, "O lord of earth, know that we have
come to thee desirous of wealth. Give us what thou canst, without doing
injury to others."'

"Lomasa continued, 'That monarch then represented unto them the equality
of his expenditure and income, and said, "Knowing this, take ye what ye
desire." The Rishi, however, who saw both sides with equal eyes,
beholding the equality of that monarch's income with expenditure,
thought that if he took anything under the circumstances, his act would
result in injury to all creatures. Agastya and Srutarvan, with king
Vardhnaswa then went to Purokutsa's son, Trasadasyu, of enormous wealth.
The high-souled Trasadasyu, learning of their arrival on the confines of
his kingdom went out, O king, and received them well. And that best of
monarchs in Ikshvaku's line, having worshipped all of them duly,
enquired after the reason of their arrival. And Agastya answered, "O
lord of earth, know that we have all come to thee, desirous of wealth.
Give us what you can, without injuring others."'

"Lomasa continued, 'That monarch then, represented unto them the
equality of his income with expenditure, and said, "Knowing this, take
ye what ye desire." Beholding, however, the equality of that monarch's
expenditure with income, the Rishi who saw both sides with equal eyes,
thought that if he took anything under the circumstances, his act would
result in injury to all creatures. Then, O monarch, all those kings
looking at one another, together spoke unto the Rishis saying, "O
Brahmana, there is a Danava of the name Ilwala who of all persons on
earth, is possessed of enormous wealth. Let us all approach him to-day
and beg wealth of him."'

"Lomasa continued, 'This suggestion, O king, of begging wealth of Ilwala
appeared to them to be proper. And, O monarch, all of them went together
to Ilwala after this!'"


SECTION XCIX

"Lomasa said, 'When Ilwala learnt that those kings along with the great
Rishi had arrived on the confines of his domain, he went out with his
ministers and worshipped them duly. And that prince of Asuras received
them hospitably, entertaining them, O son of the Kuru race, with well
dressed meat supplied by his brother Vatapi (transformed into a ram).
Then all those royal sages, beholding the mighty Asura Vatapi, who had
been transformed into a ram thus cooked for them, became sad and
cheerless and were nearly deprived of themselves. But that best of
Rishis--Agastya--addressing those royal sages, said, "Yield ye not to
grief, I will eat up the great Asura." And the mighty Rishi then sat
himself down on an excellent seat, and the prince of Asuras, Ilwala,
began to distribute the food smilingly. And Agastya ate up the whole of
the meat supplied by Vatapi (transformed into a ram). And after the
dinner was over, Ilwala began to summon his brother. But thereupon a
quantity of air alone came out of the illustrious Rishi's stomach, with
a sound that was as loud, O child, as the roar of the clouds. And Ilwala
repeatedly said, "Come out, O Vatapi!" Then that best of
Munis--Agastya--bursting out in laughter, said, "How can he come out? I
have already digested that great Asura." And beholding his brother
already digested, Ilwala became sad and cheerless and joining his hands,
along with his ministers, addressing the Rishi (and his companions),
said, "What for have ye come hither, and what can I do for you?" And
Agastya smilingly answered Ilwala, saying, "We know thee, O Asura, to be
possessed of great power and also enormous wealth. These kings are not
very wealthy while my need also of wealth is great. Give us what thou
canst, without injuring others." Thus addressed Ilwala saluted the Rishi
and said, "If thou say what it is that I mean to give, then will I give
you wealth." Hearing this Agastya said, "O great Asura, thou hast even
purposed to give unto each of these kings ten thousand kine and as many
gold coins. And unto me thou hast purposed to give twice as much, as
also a car of gold and a couple of horses fleet as thought. If thou
enquirest now, thou wilt soon learn that your car is made of gold."
Thereupon, O son of Kunti, Ilwala made enquiries and learnt that the car
he had intended to give away was really a golden one. And the Daitya
then with a sad heart, gave away much wealth and that car, unto which
were yoked two steeds called Virava and Surava. And those steeds, O
Bharata, took those kings and Agastya and all that wealth to the asylum
of Agastya within the twinkling of an eye. And those royal sages then
obtaining Agastya's permission, went away to their respective cities.
And Agastya also (with that wealth) did all that his wife Lopamudra had
desired. And Lopamudra then said, "O illustrious one, thou hast now
accomplished all my wishes. Beget thou a child on me that shall be
possessed of great energy." And Agastya replied unto her, saying, "O
blessed and beauteous one, I have been much gratified with thy conduct.
Listen thou unto me as regards the proposal I make in respect of thy
offspring. Wouldst thou have a thousand sons, or a century of sons each
equal to ten, or ten sons equal each to an hundred, or only one son who
may vanquish a thousand?" Lopamudra answered, "Let me have one son equal
unto a thousand, O thou endued with wealth of asceticism! One good and
learned son is preferable to many evil ones."'

"Lomasa continued, 'Saying, "So be it," that pious Muni thereupon knew
his devout wife of equal behaviour. And after she had conceived, he
retired into the forest. And after the Muni had gone away, the foetus
began to grow for seven years. And after the seventh year had expired,
there came out of the womb, the highly learned Dridhasyu, blazing, O
Bharata, in his own splendour. And the great Brahmana and illustrious
ascetic, endued with mighty energy, took his birth as the Rishi's son,
coming out of the womb, as if repeating the Vedas with the _Upanishads_
and the _Angas_. Endued with great energy while yet a child, he used to
carry loads of sacrificial fuel into the asylum of his father, and was
thence called _Idhmavaha_ (carrier of sacrificial wood). And the Muni,
beholding his son possessed of such virtues, became highly glad.

"'And it was thus, O Bharata, that Agastya begat an excellent son in
consequence of which his ancestors, O king, obtained the regions they
desired. And it is from that time that this spot hath become known on
the earth as the asylum of Agastya. Indeed, O king, this is the asylum
graced with numerous beauties, of that Agastya who had slain Vatapi of
Prahlada's race. The sacred Bhagirathi, adored by gods and Gandharvas
gently runneth by, like a breeze-shaken pennon in the welkin. Yonder
also she floweth over craggy crests descending lower and lower, and
looketh like an affrighted she-snake lying along the hilly slopes.
Issuing out of the matted locks of Mahadeva, she passes along, flooding
the southern country and benefiting it like a mother, and ultimately
mingleth with the ocean as if she were his favourite bride. Bathe ye as
ye like in this sacred river, ye son of Pandu! And behold there, O
Yudhishthira, the _tirtha_ of Bhrigu that is celebrated over the three
worlds and adored, O king, by great Rishis. Bathing here, Rama (of
Bhrigu's race) regained his might, which had been taken away from him
(by Dasaratha's son). Bathing here, O son of Pandu, with thy brothers
and Krishna, thou wilt certainly regain that energy of thine that hath
been taken away by Duryodhana, even as Rama regained his that had been
taken away by Dasaratha's son in hostile encounter.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "At these words of Lomasa, Yudhishthira bathed
there with his brothers and Krishna, and offered oblations of water, O
Bharata, to the gods and the Pitris. And, O bull among men, after
Yudhishthira had bathed in that _tirtha_, his body blazed forth in
brighter effulgence, and he became invincible in respect of all foes. The
son of Pandu then, O king, asked Lomasa, saying, 'O illustrious one, why
had Rama's energy and might been taken away? And how also did he regain
it? O exalted one, I ask thee, tell me everything.'

"Lomasa said, 'Listen, O king, to the history of Rama (the son of
Dasaratha) and Rama of Bhrigu's line gifted with intelligence. For the
destruction of Ravana, O king, Vishnu, in his own body, took his birth
as the son of illustrious Dasaratha. We saw in Ayodhya that son of
Dasaratha after he had been born. It was then that Rama of Bhrigu's
line, the son of Richika by Renuka, hearing of Rama the son of
Dasaratha--of spotless deeds--went to Ayodhya, impelled by curiosity,
and taking with him that celestial bow so fatal to the Kshatriyas, for
ascertaining the prowess of Dasaratha's son. And Dasaratha, hearing that
Rama of Bhrigu's race had arrived on the confines of his domains, set
his own son Rama to receive the hero with respect. And beholding
Dasaratha's son approach and stand before him with ready weapons, Rama
of Bhrigu's line smilingly addressed him, O son of Kunti, saying, "O
king, O exalted one, string, if thou canst, with all thy might, this
bow which in my hands was made the instrument of destroying the
Kshatriya race." Thus addressed, Dasaratha's son answered, "O
illustrious one, it behoveth thee not to insult me thus. Nor am I,
amongst the regenerate classes, deficient in the virtues of the
Kshatriya order. The descendants of Ikshwaku in special never boast of
the prowess of their arms." Then unto Dasaratha's son who said so, Rama
of Bhrigu's line replied, "A truce to all crafty speech, O king! Take
this bow." At this, Rama the son of Dasaratha, took in anger from the
hands of Rama of Bhrigu's line that celestial bow that had dealt death
to the foremost of Kshatriyas. And, O Bharata, the mighty hero smilingly
strung that bow without the least exertion, and with its twang loud as
the thunder-rattle, affrighted all creatures. And Rama, the son of
Dasaratha, then, addressing Rama of Bhrigu's said, "Here, I have strung
this bow. What else, O Brahmana, shall I do for thee?" Then Rama, the
son of Jamadagni, gave unto the illustrious son of Dasaratha a celestial
arrow and said, "Placing this on the bow-string, draw to thy ear, O
hero!"'"

"Lomasa continued, 'Hearing this, Dasaratha's son blazed up in
wrath and said, "I have heard what thou hast said, and even pardoned
thee. O son of Bhrigu's race, thou art full of vanity. Through the
Grandsire's grace thou hast obtained energy that is superior to that of
the Kshatriyas. And it is for this that thou insultest me. Behold me now
in my native form: I give thee sight." Then Rama of Bhrigu's race beheld
in the body of Dasaratha's son the Adityas with the Vasus, the Rudras,
the Sadhyas with the Marutas, the Pitris, Hutasana, the stellar
constellations and the planets, the Gandharvas, the Rakshasas, the
Yakshas, the Rivers, the _tirthas_, those eternal Rishis identified with
_Brahma_ and called the Valkhilyas, the celestial Rishis, the Seas and
Mountains, the Vedas with the Upanishads and _Vashats_ and the
sacrifices, the Samans in their living form, the Science of weapons, O
Bharata, and the Clouds with rain and lightning, O Yudhishthira! And the
illustrious Vishnu then shot that shaft. And at this the earth was
filled with sounds of thunder, and burning meteors, O Bharata, began to
flash through the welkin. And showers of dust and rain fell upon the
surface of the earth. And whirlwinds and frightful sounds convulsed
everything, and the earth herself began to quake. And shot by the hand
of Rama, that shaft, confounding by its energy the other Rama, came back
blazing into Rama's hands. And Bhargava, who had thus been deprived of
his senses, regaining consciousness and life, bowed unto Rama--that
manifestation of Vishnu's power. And commanded by Vishnu, he proceeded
to the mountains of Mahendra. And thenceforth that great ascetic began
to dwell there, in terror and shame. And after the expiration of a year,
the Pitris, beholding Rama dwelling there deprived of energy, his pride
quelled, and himself sunk in affliction, said unto him, "O son, having
approached Vishnu, thy behaviour towards him was not proper. He
deserveth for aye worship and respect in the three worlds. Go, O son, to
that sacred river which goeth by name of Vadhusara! Bathing in all the
_tirthas_ of that stream, thou wilt regain thy energy! There in that
river is the _tirthas_ called Diptoda where thy grandsire Bhrigu, O
Rama, in the celestial age had practised ascetic penances of great
merit." Thus addressed by them, Rama, O son of Kunti, did what the
Pitris bade him, and obtained back at this _tirtha_, O son of Pandu, the
energy he had lost. Even this O child, was what befell Rama of spotless
deeds in days in of yore, after he had, O king, met Vishnu (in the form
of Dasaratha's son)!'"


SECTION C

"Yudhishthira said, 'O best of regenerate ones, I desire again to hear
of the achievements in detail of Agastya--that illustrious Rishi endued
with great intelligence.'

"Lomasa said, 'Listen now, O king, to the excellent and wonderful and
extraordinary history of Agastya, as also, O monarch, about the prowess
of that Rishi of immeasurable energy. There were in the Krita age
certain tribes of fierce Danavas that were invincible in battle. And
they were known by the name of Kalakeyas and were endued with terrible
prowess. Placing themselves under Vritra and arming themselves with
diverse weapons they pursued the celestials with Indra at their head in
all directions. The gods then all resolved upon the destruction of
Vritra, and went with Indra at their head to Brahma. And beholding them
standing before him with joined hands, Parameshthi addressed them all
and said, "Everything is known to me, ye gods, about what ye seek. I
shall indicate now the means by which ye may slay Vritra. There is a
high-souled and great Rishi known by the name of Dadhicha. Go ye all
together unto him and solicit of him a boon. With well-pleased heart,
that Rishi of virtuous soul will even grant you the boon. Desirous as ye
are of victory, go ye all together unto him and tell him, '_For the good
of the three worlds, give us thy bones_.' Renouncing his body, he will
give you his bones. With these bones of his, make ye a fierce and
powerful weapon to be called _Vajra_, endued with six sides and terrible
roar and capable of destroying even the most powerful enemies. With that
weapon will he of a hundred sacrifices slay Vritra. I have now told you
all. See that all this is done speedily." Thus addressed by him, the
gods with the Grandsire's leave (came away), and with Narayana at their
head proceeded to the asylum of Dadhicha. That asylum was on the other
bank of the river Saraswati and covered with diverse trees and creepers.
And it resounded with the hum of bees as if they were reciting _Samans_.
And it also echoed with the melodious notes of the male _Kokila_ and the
_Chakora_. And buffaloes and boars and deer and _Chamaras_ wandered
there at pleasure freed from the fear of tigers. And elephants with the
juice trickling down from rent temples, plunging in the stream, sported
with the she-elephants and made the entire region resound with their
roars. And the place also echoed with the loud roars of lions and
tigers, while at intervals might be seen those grisly monarchs of the
forest lying stretched in caves and glens and beautifying them with
their presence. And such was the asylum, like unto heaven itself, of
Dadhicha, that the gods entered. And there they beheld Dadhicha looking
like the sun himself in splendour and blazing in grace of person like
the Grandsire himself. And the celestials saluted the feet of the Rishi
and bowed unto him and begged of him the boon that the Grandsire had
bade them do. Then Dadhicha, well pleased, addressing those foremost of
celestials, said, "Ye celestials, I will do what is for your benefit. I
will even renounce this body of mine myself." And that foremost of men
with soul under control, having said this, suddenly renounced his life.
The gods then took the bones of the deceased Rishi as directed. And the
celestials, glad at heart, went to Twashtri (the celestial Artificer)
and spake to him of the means of victory. And Twashtri, hearing those
words of theirs, became filled with joy, and constructed (out of those
