enemies a thousand times more, to the intent that, when we
judge, we should carefully think of thy goodness, and when we
ourselves are judged, we should look for mercy.

Wis 12:23
Wherefore, whereas men have lived dissolutely and
unrighteously, thou hast tormented them with their own
abominations.

Wis 12:24
For they went astray very far in the ways of error, and held
them for gods, which even among the beasts of their enemies were
despised, being deceived, as children of no understanding.

Wis 12:25
Therefore unto them, as to children without the use of
reason, thou didst send a judgment to mock them.

Wis 12:26
But they that would not be reformed by that correction,
wherein he dallied with them, shall feel a judgment worthy of
God.

Wis 12:27
For, look, for what things they grudged, when they were
punished, that is, for them whom they thought to be gods; [now]
being punished in them, when they saw it, they acknowledged him
to be the true God, whom before they denied to know: and
therefore came extreme damnation upon them.

Wis 13:1
Surely vain are all men by nature, who are ignorant of God,
and could not out of the good things that are seen know him that
is: neither by considering the works did they acknowledge the
workmaster;

Wis 13:2
But deemed either fire, or wind, or the swift air, or the
circle of the stars, or the violent water, or the lights of
heaven, to be the gods which govern the world.

Wis 13:3
With whose beauty if they being delighted took them to be
gods; let them know how much better the Lord of them is: for the
first author of beauty hath created them.

Wis 13:4
But if they were astonished at their power and virtue, let
them understand by them, how much mightier he is that made them.

Wis 13:5
For by the greatness and beauty of the creatures
proportionably the maker of them is seen.

Wis 13:6
But yet for this they are the less to be blamed: for they
peradventure err, seeking God, and desirous to find him.

Wis 13:7
For being conversant in his works they search him diligently,
and believe their sight: because the things are beautiful that
are seen.

Wis 13:8
Howbeit neither are they to be pardoned.

Wis 13:9
For if they were able to know so much, that they could aim at
the world; how did they not sooner find out the Lord thereof?

Wis 13:10
But miserable are they, and in dead things is their hope, who
call them gods, which are the works of men's hands, gold and
silver, to shew art in, and resemblances of beasts, or a stone
good for nothing, the work of an ancient hand.

Wis 13:11
Now a carpenter that felleth timber, after he hath sawn down
a tree meet for the purpose, and taken off all the bark
skilfully round about, and hath wrought it handsomely, and made
a vessel thereof fit for the service of man's life;

Wis 13:12
And after spending the refuse of his work to dress his meat,
hath filled himself;

Wis 13:13
And taking the very refuse among those which served to no
use, being a crooked piece of wood, and full of knots, hath
carved it diligently, when he had nothing else to do, and formed
it by the skill of his understanding, and fashioned it to the
image of a man;

Wis 13:14
Or made it like some vile beast, laying it over with
vermilion, and with paint colouring it red, and covering every
spot therein;

Wis 13:15
And when he had made a convenient room for it, set it in a
wall, and made it fast with iron:

Wis 13:16
For he provided for it that it might not fall, knowing that
it was unable to help itself; for it is an image, and hath need
of help:

Wis 13:17
Then maketh he prayer for his goods, for his wife and
children, and is not ashamed to speak to that which hath no
life.

Wis 13:18
For health he calleth upon that which is weak: for life
prayeth to that which is dead; for aid humbly beseecheth that
which hath least means to help: and for a good journey he asketh
of that which cannot set a foot forward:

Wis 13:19
And for gaining and getting, and for good success of his
hands, asketh ability to do of him, that is most unable to do
any thing.

Wis 14:1
Again, one preparing himself to sail, and about to pass
through the raging waves, calleth upon a piece of wood more
rotten than the vessel that carrieth him.

Wis 14:2
For verily desire of gain devised that, and the workman built
it by his skill.

Wis 14:3
But thy providence, O Father, governeth it: for thou hast
made a way in the sea, and a safe path in the waves;

Wis 14:4
Shewing that thou canst save from all danger: yea, though a
man went to sea without art.

Wis 14:5
Nevertheless thou wouldest not that the works of thy wisdom
should be idle, and therefore do men commit their lives to a
small piece of wood, and passing the rough sea in a weak vessel
are saved.

Wis 14:6
For in the old time also, when the proud giants perished, the
hope of the world governed by thy hand escaped in a weak vessel,
and left to all ages a seed of generation.

Wis 14:7
For blessed is the wood whereby righteousness cometh.

Wis 14:8
But that which is made with hands is cursed, as well it, as
he that made it: he, because he made it; and it, because, being
corruptible, it was called god.

Wis 14:9
For the ungodly and his ungodliness are both alike hateful
unto God.

Wis 14:10
For that which is made shall be punished together with him
that made it.

Wis 14:11
Therefore even upon the idols of the Gentiles shall there be
a visitation: because in the creature of God they are become an
abomination, and stumblingblocks to the souls of men, and a
snare to the feet of the unwise.

Wis 14:12
For the devising of idols was the beginning of spiritual
fornication, and the invention of them the corruption of life.

Wis 14:13
For neither were they from the beginning, neither shall they
be for ever.

Wis 14:14
For by the vain glory of men they entered into the world, and
therefore shall they come shortly to an end.

Wis 14:15
For a father afflicted with untimely mourning, when he hath
made an image of his child soon taken away, now honoured him as
a god, which was then a dead man, and delivered to those that
were under him ceremonies and sacrifices.

Wis 14:16
Thus in process of time an ungodly custom grown strong was
kept as a law, and graven images were worshipped by the
commandments of kings.

Wis 14:17
Whom men could not honour in presence, because they dwelt far
off, they took the counterfeit of his visage from far, and made
an express image of a king whom they honoured, to the end that
by this their forwardness they might flatter him that was
absent, as if he were present.

Wis 14:18
Also the singular diligence of the artificer did help to set
forward the ignorant to more superstition.

Wis 14:19
For he, peradventure willing to please one in authority,
forced all his skill to make the resemblance of the best
fashion.

Wis 14:20
And so the multitude, allured by the grace of the work, took
him now for a god, which a little before was but honoured.

Wis 14:21
And this was an occasion to deceive the world: for men,
serving either calamity or tyranny, did ascribe unto stones and
stocks the incommunicable name.

Wis 14:22
Moreover this was not enough for them, that they erred in the
knowledge of God; but whereas they lived in the great war of
ignorance, those so great plagues called they peace.

Wis 14:23
For whilst they slew their children in sacrifices, or used
secret ceremonies, or made revellings of strange rites;

Wis 14:24
They kept neither lives nor marriages any longer undefiled:
but either one slew another traiterously, or grieved him by
adultery.

Wis 14:25
So that there reigned in all men without exception blood,
manslaughter, theft, and dissimulation, corruption,
unfaithfulness, tumults, perjury,

Wis 14:26
Disquieting of good men, forgetfulness of good turns,
defiling of souls, changing of kind, disorder in marriages,
adultery, and shameless uncleanness.

Wis 14:27
For the worshipping of idols not to be named is the
beginning, the cause, and the end, of all evil.

Wis 14:28
For either they are mad when they be merry, or prophesy lies,
or live unjustly, or else lightly forswear themselves.

Wis 14:29
For insomuch as their trust is in idols, which have no life;
though they swear falsely, yet they look not to be hurt.

Wis 14:30
Howbeit for both causes shall they be justly punished: both
because they thought not well of God, giving heed unto idols,
and also unjustly swore in deceit, despising holiness.

Wis 14:31
For it is not the power of them by whom they swear: but it is
the just vengeance of sinners, that punisheth always the offence
of the ungodly.

Wis 15:1
But thou, O God, art gracious and true, longsuffering, and in
mercy ordering all things,

Wis 15:2
For if we sin, we are thine, knowing thy power: but we will
not sin, knowing that we are counted thine.

Wis 15:3
For to know thee is perfect righteousness: yea, to know thy
power is the root of immortality.

Wis 15:4
For neither did the mischievous invention of men deceive us,
nor an image spotted with divers colours, the painter's
fruitless labour;

Wis 15:5
The sight whereof enticeth fools to lust after it, and so
they desire the form of a dead image, that hath no breath.

Wis 15:6
Both they that make them, they that desire them, and they
that worship them, are lovers of evil things, and are worthy to
have such things to trust upon.

Wis 15:7
For the potter, tempering soft earth, fashioneth every vessel
with much labour for our service: yea, of the same clay he
maketh both the vessels that serve for clean uses, and likewise
also all such as serve to the contrary: but what is the use of
either sort, the potter himself is the judge.

Wis 15:8
And employing his labours lewdly, he maketh a vain god of the
same clay, even he which a little before was made of earth
himself, and within a little while after returneth to the same,
out when his life which was lent him shall be demanded.

Wis 15:9
Notwithstanding his care is, not that he shall have much
labour, nor that his life is short: but striveth to excel
goldsmiths and silversmiths, and endeavoureth to do like the
workers in brass, and counteth it his glory to make counterfeit
things.

Wis 15:10
His heart is ashes, his hope is more vile than earth, and his
life of less value than clay:

Wis 15:11
Forasmuch as he knew not his Maker, and him that inspired
into him an active soul, and breathed in a living spirit.

Wis 15:12
But they counted our life a pastime, and our time here a
market for gain: for, say they, we must be getting every way,
though it be by evil means.

Wis 15:13
For this man, that of earthly matter maketh brittle vessels
and graven images, knoweth himself to offend above all others.

Wis 15:14
And all the enemies of thy people, that hold them in
subjection, are most foolish, and are more miserable than very
babes.

Wis 15:15
For they counted all the idols of the heathen to be gods:
which neither have the use of eyes to see, nor noses to draw
breath, nor ears to hear, nor fingers of hands to handle; and as
for their feet, they are slow to go.

Wis 15:16
For man made them, and he that borrowed his own spirit
fashioned them: but no man can make a god like unto himself.

Wis 15:17
For being mortal, he worketh a dead thing with wicked hands:
for he himself is better than the things which he worshippeth:
whereas he lived once, but they never.

Wis 15:18
Yea, they worshipped those beasts also that are most hateful:
for being compared together, some are worse than others.

Wis 15:19
Neither are they beautiful, so much as to be desired in
respect of beasts: but they went without the praise of God and
his blessing.

Wis 16:1
Therefore by the like were they punished worthily, and by the
multitude of beasts tormented.

Wis 16:2
Instead of which punishment, dealing graciously with thine
own people, thou preparedst for them meat of a strange taste,
even quails to stir up their appetite:

Wis 16:3
To the end that they, desiring food, might for the ugly sight
of the beasts sent among them lothe even that, which they must
needs desire; but these, suffering penury for a short space,
might be made partakers of a strange taste.

Wis 16:4
For it was requisite, that upon them exercising tyranny
should come penury, which they could not avoid: but to these it
should only be shewed how their enemies were tormented.

Wis 16:5
For when the horrible fierceness of beasts came upon these,
and they perished with the stings of crooked serpents, thy wrath
endured not for ever:

Wis 16:6
But they were troubled for a small season, that they might be
admonished, having a sign of salvation, to put them in
remembrance of the commandment of thy law.

Wis 16:7
For he that turned himself toward it was not saved by the
thing that he saw, but by thee, that art the Saviour of all.

Wis 16:8
And in this thou madest thine enemies confess, that it is
thou who deliverest from all evil:

Wis 16:9
For them the bitings of grasshoppers and flies killed,
neither was there found any remedy for their life: for they were
worthy to be punished by such.

Wis 16:10
But thy sons not the very teeth of venomous dragons overcame:
for thy mercy was ever by them, and healed them.

Wis 16:11
For they were pricked, that they should remember thy words;
and were quickly saved, that not falling into deep
forgetfulness, they might be continually mindful of thy
goodness.

Wis 16:12
For it was neither herb, nor mollifying plaister, that
restored them to health: but thy word, O Lord, which healeth all
things.

Wis 16:13
For thou hast power of life and death: thou leadest to the
gates of hell, and bringest up again.

Wis 16:14
A man indeed killeth through his malice: and the spirit, when
it is gone forth, returneth not; neither the soul received up
cometh again.

Wis 16:15
But it is not possible to escape thine hand.

Wis 16:16
For the ungodly, that denied to know thee, were scourged by
the strength of thine arm: with strange rains, hails, and
showers, were they persecuted, that they could not avoid, and
through fire were they consumed.

Wis 16:17
For, which is most to be wondered at, the fire had more force
in the water, that quencheth all things: for the world fighteth
for the righteous.

Wis 16:18
For sometime the flame was mitigated, that it might not burn
up the beasts that were sent against the ungodly; but themselves
might see and perceive that they were persecuted with the
judgment of God.

Wis 16:19
And at another time it burneth even in the midst of water
above the power of fire, that it might destroy the fruits of an
unjust land.

Wis 16:20
Instead whereof thou feddest thine own people with angels'
food, and didst send them from heaven bread prepared without
their labour, able to content every man's delight, and agreeing
to every taste.

Wis 16:21
For thy sustenance declared thy sweetness unto thy children,
and serving to the appetite of the eater, tempered itself to
every man's liking.

Wis 16:22
But snow and ice endured the fire, and melted not, that they
might know that fire burning in the hail, and sparkling in the
rain, did destroy the fruits of the enemies.

Wis 16:23
But this again did even forget his own strength, that the
righteous might be nourished.

Wis 16:24
For the creature that serveth thee, who art the Maker
increaseth his strength against the unrighteous for their
punishment, and abateth his strength for the benefit of such as
put their trust in thee.

Wis 16:25
Therefore even then was it altered into all fashions, and was
obedient to thy grace, that nourisheth all things, according to
the desire of them that had need:

Wis 16:26
That thy children, O Lord, whom thou lovest, might know, that
it is not the growing of fruits that nourisheth man: but that it
is thy word, which preserveth them that put their trust in thee.

Wis 16:27
For that which was not destroyed of the fire, being warmed
with a little sunbeam, soon melted away:

Wis 16:28
That it might be known, that we must prevent the sun to give
thee thanks, and at the dayspring pray unto thee.

Wis 16:29
For the hope of the unthankful shall melt away as the
winter's hoar frost, and shall run away as unprofitable water.

Wis 17:1
For great are thy judgments, and cannot be expressed:
therefore unnurtured souls have erred.

Wis 17:2
For when unrighteous men thought to oppress the holy nation;
they being shut up in their houses, the prisoners of darkness,
and fettered with the bonds of a long night, lay [there] exiled
from the eternal providence.

Wis 17:3
For while they supposed to lie hid in their secret sins, they
were scattered under a dark veil of forgetfulness, being
horribly astonished, and troubled with [strange] apparitions.

Wis 17:4
For neither might the corner that held them keep them from
fear: but noises [as of waters] falling down sounded about them,
and sad visions appeared unto them with heavy countenances.

Wis 17:5
No power of the fire might give them light: neither could the
bright flames of the stars endure to lighten that horrible
night.

Wis 17:6
Only there appeared unto them a fire kindled of itself, very
dreadful: for being much terrified, they thought the things
which they saw to be worse than the sight they saw not.

Wis 17:7
As for the illusions of art magick, they were put down, and
their vaunting in wisdom was reproved with disgrace.

Wis 17:8
For they, that promised to drive away terrors and troubles
from a sick soul, were sick themselves of fear, worthy to be
laughed at.

Wis 17:9
For though no terrible thing did fear them; yet being scared
with beasts that passed by, and hissing of serpents,

Wis 17:10
They died for fear, denying that they saw the air, which
could of no side be avoided.

Wis 17:11
For wickedness, condemned by her own witness, is very
timorous, and being pressed with conscience, always forecasteth
grievous things.

Wis 17:12
For fear is nothing else but a betraying of the succours
which reason offereth.

Wis 17:13
And the expectation from within, being less, counteth the
ignorance more than the cause which bringeth the torment.

Wis 17:14
But they sleeping the same sleep that night, which was indeed
intolerable, and which came upon them out of the bottoms of
inevitable hell,

Wis 17:15
Were partly vexed with monstrous apparitions, and partly
fainted, their heart failing them: for a sudden fear, and not
looked for, came upon them.

Wis 17:16
So then whosoever there fell down was straitly kept, shut up
in a prison without iron bars,

Wis 17:17
For whether he were husbandman, or shepherd, or a labourer in
the field, he was overtaken, and endured that necessity, which
could not be avoided: for they were all bound with one chain of
darkness.

Wis 17:18
Whether it were a whistling wind, or a melodious noise of
birds among the spreading branches, or a pleasing fall of water
running violently,

Wis 17:19
Or a terrible sound of stones cast down, or a running that
could not be seen of skipping beasts, or a roaring voice of most
savage wild beasts, or a rebounding echo from the hollow
mountains; these things made them to swoon for fear.

Wis 17:20
For the whole world shined with clear light, and none were
hindered in their labour:

Wis 17:21
Over them only was spread an heavy night, an image of that
darkness which should afterward receive them: but yet were they
unto themselves more grievous than the darkness.

Wis 18:1
Nevertheless thy saints had a very great light, whose voice
they hearing, and not seeing their shape, because they also had
not suffered the same things, they counted them happy.

Wis 18:2
But for that they did not hurt them now, of whom they had
been wronged before, they thanked them, and besought them pardon
for that they had been enemies.

Wis 18:3
Instead whereof thou gavest them a burning pillar of fire,
both to be a guide of the unknown journey, and an harmless sun
to entertain them honourably.

Wis 18:4
For they were worthy to be deprived of light and imprisoned
in darkness, who had kept thy sons shut up, by whom the
uncorrupt light of the law was to be given unto the world.

Wis 18:5
And when they had determined to slay the babes of the saints,
one child being cast forth, and saved, to reprove them, thou
tookest away the multitude of their children, and destroyedst
them altogether in a mighty water.

Wis 18:6
Of that night were our fathers certified afore, that
assuredly knowing unto what oaths they had given credence, they
might afterwards be of good cheer.

Wis 18:7
So of thy people was accepted both the salvation of the
righteous, and destruction of the enemies.

Wis 18:8
For wherewith thou didst punish our adversaries, by the same
thou didst glorify us, whom thou hadst called.

Wis 18:9
For the righteous children of good men did sacrifice
secretly, and with one consent made a holy law, that the saints
should be like partakers of the same good and evil, the fathers
now singing out the songs of praise.

Wis 18:10
But on the other side there sounded an ill according cry of
the enemies, and a lamentable noise was carried abroad for
children that were bewailed.

Wis 18:11
The master and the servant were punished after one manner;
and like as the king, so suffered the common person.

Wis 18:12
So they all together had innumerable dead with one kind of
death; neither were the living sufficient to bury them: for in
one moment the noblest offspring of them was destroyed.

Wis 18:13
For whereas they would not believe any thing by reason of the
enchantments; upon the destruction of the firstborn, they
acknowledged this people to be the sons of God.

Wis 18:14
For while all things were in quiet silence, and that night
was in the midst of her swift course,

Wis 18:15
Thine Almighty word leaped down from heaven out of thy royal
throne, as a fierce man of war into the midst of a land of
destruction,

Wis 18:16
And brought thine unfeigned commandment as a sharp sword, and
standing up filled all things with death; and it touched the
heaven, but it stood upon the earth.

Wis 18:17
Then suddenly visions of horrible dreams troubled them sore,
and terrors came upon them unlooked for.

Wis 18:18
And one thrown here, and another there, half dead, shewed the
cause of his death.

Wis 18:19
For the dreams that troubled them did foreshew this, lest
they should perish, and not know why they were afflicted.

Wis 18:20
Yea, the tasting of death touched the righteous also, and
there was a destruction of the multitude in the wilderness: but
the wrath endured not long.

Wis 18:21
For then the blameless man made haste, and stood forth to
defend them; and bringing the shield of his proper ministry,
even prayer, and the propitiation of incense, set himself
against the wrath, and so brought the calamity to an end,
declaring that he was thy servant.

Wis 18:22
So he overcame the destroyer, not with strength of body, nor
force of arms, but with a word subdued him that punished,
alleging the oaths and covenants made with the fathers.

Wis 18:23
For when the dead were now fallen down by heaps one upon
another, standing between, he stayed the wrath, and parted the
way to the living.

Wis 18:24
For in the long garment was the whole world, and in the four
rows of the stones was the glory of the fathers graven, and thy
Majesty upon the daidem of his head.

Wis 18:25
Unto these the destroyer gave place, and was afraid of them:
for it was enough that they only tasted of the wrath.

Wis 19:1
As for the ungodly, wrath came upon them without mercy unto
the end: for he knew before what they would do;

Wis 19:2
How that having given them leave to depart, and sent them
hastily away, they would repent and pursue them.

Wis 19:3
For whilst they were yet mourning and making lamentation at
the graves of the dead, they added another foolish device, and
pursued them as fugitives, whom they had intreated to be gone.

Wis 19:4
For the destiny, whereof they were worthy, drew them unto
this end, and made them forget the things that had already
happened, that they might fulfil the punishment which was
wanting to their torments:

Wis 19:5
And that thy people might pass a wonderful way: but they
might find a strange death.

Wis 19:6
For the whole creature in his proper kind was fashioned again
anew, serving the peculiar commandments that were given unto
them, that thy children might be kept without hurt:

Wis 19:7
As namely, a cloud shadowing the camp; and where water stood
before, dry land appeared; and out of the Red sea a way without
impediment; and out of the violent stream a green field:

Wis 19:8
Wherethrough all the people went that were defended with thy
hand, seeing thy marvellous strange wonders.

Wis 19:9
For they went at large like horses, and leaped like lambs,
praising thee, O Lord, who hadst delivered them.

Wis 19:10
For they were yet mindful of the things that were done while
they sojourned in the strange land, how the ground brought forth
flies instead of cattle, and how the river cast up a multitude
of frogs instead of fishes.

Wis 19:11
But afterwards they saw a new generation of fowls, when,
being led with their appetite, they asked delicate meats.

Wis 19:12
For quails came up unto them from the sea for their
contentment.

Wis 19:13
And punishments came upon the sinners not without former
signs by the force of thunders: for they suffered justly
according to their own wickedness, insomuch as they used a more
hard and hateful behaviour toward strangers.

Wis 19:14
For the Sodomites did not receive those, whom they knew not
when they came: but these brought friends into bondage, that had
well deserved of them.

Wis 19:15
And not only so, but peradventure some respect shall be had
of those, because they used strangers not friendly:

Wis 19:16
But these very grievously afflicted them, whom they had
received with feastings, and were already made partakers of the
same laws with them.

Wis 19:17
Therefore even with blindness were these stricken, as those
were at the doors of the righteous man: when, being compassed
about with horrible great darkness, every one sought the passage
of his own doors.

Wis 19:18
For the elements were changed in themselves by a kind of
harmony, like as in a psaltery notes change the name of the
tune, and yet are always sounds; which may well be perceived by
the sight of the things that have been done.

Wis 19:19
For earthly things were turned into watery, and the things,
that before swam in the water, now went upon the ground.

Wis 19:20
The fire had power in the water, forgetting his own virtue:
and the water forgat his own quenching nature.

Wis 19:21
On the other side, the flames wasted not the flesh of the
corruptible living things, though they walked therein; neither
melted they the icy kind of heavenly meat that was of nature apt
to melt.

Wis 19:22
For in all things, O Lord, thou didst magnify thy people, and
glorify them, neither didst thou lightly regard them: but didst
assist them in every time and place.




The Book of Sirach (or Ecclesiasticus)
[The Wisdom of Jesus the Son of Sirach, or Ecclesiasticus]



Sir 1
[A Prologue made by an uncertain Author]
This Jesus was the son of Sirach, and grandchild to
Jesus of the same name with him: this man therefore lived in the
latter times, after the people had been led away captive, and
called home a again, and almost after all the prophets. Now his
grandfather Jesus, as he himself witnesseth, was a man of great
diligence and wisdom among the Hebrews, who did not only gather
the grave and short sentences of wise men, that had been before
him, but himself also uttered some of his own, full of much
understanding and wisdom. When as therefore the first Jesus
died, leaving this book almost perfected, Sirach his son
receiving it after him left it to his own son Jesus, who, having
gotten it into his hands, compiled it all orderly into one
volume, and called it Wisdom, intituling it both by his own
name, his father's name, and his grandfather's; alluring the
hearer by the very name of Wisdom to have a greater love to the
study of this book. It containeth therefore wise sayings, dark
sentences, and parables, and certain particular ancient godly
stories of men that pleased God; also his prayer and song;
moreover, what benefits God had vouchsafed his people, and what
plagues he had heaped upon their enemies. This Jesus did imitate
Solomon, and was no less famous for wisdom and learning, both
being indeed a man of great learning, and so reputed also.

[The Prologue of the Wisdom of Jesus the Son of Sirach.]
Whereas many and great things have been delivered unto us by the law
and the prophets, and by others that have followed their steps,
for the which things Israel ought to be commended for learning
and wisdom; and whereof not only the readers must needs become
skilful themselves, but also they that desire to learn be able
to profit them which are without, both by speaking and writing:
my grandfather Jesus, when he had much given himself to the
reading of the law, and the prophets, and other books of our
fathers, and had gotten therein good judgment, was drawn on also
himself to write something pertaining to learning and wisdom; to
the intent that those which are desirous to learn, and are
addicted to these things, might profit much more in living
according to the law. Wherefore let me intreat you to read it
with favour and attention, and to pardon us, wherein we may seem
to come short of some words, which we have laboured to
interpret. For the same things uttered in Hebrew, and translated
into another tongue, have not the same force in them: and not
only these things, but the law itself, and the prophets, and the
rest of the books, have no small difference, when they are
spoken in their own language. For in the eight and thirtieth
year coming into Egypt, when Euergetes was king, and continuing
there some time, I found a book of no small learning: therefore
I thought it most necessary for me to bestow some diligence and
travail to interpret it; using great watchfulness and skill in
that space to bring the book to an end, and set it forth for
them also, which in a strange country are willing to learn,
being prepared before in manners to live after the law.

Sir 1:1
All wisdom cometh from the Lord, and is with him for ever.

Sir 1:2
Who can number the sand of the sea, and the drops of rain,
and the days of eternity?

Sir 1:3
Who can find out the height of heaven, and the breadth of the
earth, and the deep, and wisdom?

