drinking is so, or that it is a religious duty, and so the way is
clear for urging regard to others' weakness as an element in the
case.

That being premised, Paul comes to his final point; namely, that
Christian men are bound to restrict their liberty so that they shall
not tempt weaker brethren on to a path on which they cannot walk
without stumbling. He has just shown the danger to such of partaking
of the sacrificial feasts. He now completes his position by showing,
in verse 10, that the stronger man's example may lead the weaker to
do what he cannot do innocently. What is harmless to us may be fatal
to others, and, if we have led them to it, their blood is on our
heads.

The terrible discordance of such conduct with our Lord's example,
which should be our law, is forcibly set forth in verse 11, which has
three strongly emphasised thoughts--the man's fate--he perishes; his
relation to his slayer--a brother; what Christ did for the man whom a
Christian has sent to destruction--died for him. These solemn
thoughts are deepened in verse 12, which reminds us of the intimate
union between the weakest and Christ, by which He so identifies
Himself with them that any blow struck on them touches Him.

There is no greater sin than to tempt weak or ignorant Christians to
thoughts or acts which their ignorance or weakness cannot entertain
or do without damage to their religion. There is much need for laying
that truth to heart in these days. Both in the field of speculation
and of conduct, Christians, who think that they know so much better
than ignorant believers, need to be reminded of it.

So Paul, in verse 13, at last answers the question. His sudden
turning to his own conduct is beautiful. He will not so much command
others, as proclaim his own determination. He does so with
characteristic vehemence and hyperbole. No doubt the liberal party in
Corinth were ready to complain against the proposal to restrict their
freedom because of others' weakness; and they would be disarmed, or
at least silenced, and might be stimulated to like noble resolution,
by Paul's example.

The principle plainly laid down here is as distinctly applicable to
the modern question of abstinence from intoxicants. No one can doubt
that 'moderation' in their use by some tempts others to use which
soon becomes fatally immoderate. The Church has been robbed of
promising members thereby, over and over again. How can a Christian
man cling to a 'moderate' use of these things, and run the risk of
destroying by his example a brother for whom Christ died?




THE SIN OF SILENCE

   'For though I preach the Gospel, I have nothing to glory
   of: for necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me,
   if I preach not the Gospel! 17. For if I do this thing
   willingly, I have a reward.'--1 COR. ix. 16, 17.


The original reference of these words is to the Apostle's principle
and practice of not receiving for his support money from the
churches. Gifts he did accept; pay he did not. The exposition of his
reason is interesting, ingenuous, and chivalrous. He strongly asserts
his right, even while he as strongly declares that he will waive it.
The reason for his waiving it is that he desires to have somewhat in
his service beyond the strict line of his duty. His preaching itself,
with all its toils and miseries, was but part of his day's work,
which he was bidden to do, and for doing which he deserved no thanks
nor praise. But he would like to have a little bit of glad service
over and above what he is ordered to do, that, as he ingenuously
says, he may have 'somewhat to boast of.'

In this exposition of motives we have two great principles actuating
the Apostle--one, his profound sense of obligation, and the other his
desire, if it might be, to do more than he was bound to do, because
he loved his work so much. And though he is speaking here as an
apostle, and his example is not to be unconditionally transferred to
us, yet I think that the motives which actuated his conduct are
capable of unconditional application to ourselves.

There are three things here. There is the obligation of speech, there
is the penalty of silence, and there is the glad obedience which
transcends obligation.

I. First, mark the obligation of speech.

No doubt the Apostle had, in a special sense, a 'necessity laid upon'
him, which was first laid upon him on that road to Damascus, and
repeated many a time in his life. But though he differs from us in
the direct supernatural commission which was given to him, in the
width of the sphere in which he had to work, and in the splendour of
the gifts which were entrusted to his stewardship, he does not differ
from us in the reality of the obligation which was laid upon him.
Every Christian man is as truly bound as was Paul to preach the
Gospel. The commission does not depend upon apostolic dignity. Jesus
Christ, when He said, 'Go ye into all the world, and preach the
Gospel to every creature,' was not speaking to the eleven, but to all
generations of His Church. And whilst there are many other motives on
which we may rest the Christian duty of propagating the Christian
faith, I think that we shall be all the better if we bottom it upon
this, the distinct and definite commandment of Jesus Christ, the grip
of which encloses all who for themselves have found that the Lord is
gracious.

For that commandment is permanent. It is exactly contemporaneous with
the duration of the promise which is appended to it, and whosoever
suns himself in the light of the latter is bound by the precept of
the former. 'Lo! I am with you alway, even to the end of the world,'
defines the duration of the promise, and it defines also the duration
of the duty. Nay, even the promise is made conditional upon the
discharge of the duty enjoined. For it is to the Church 'going into
all the world, and preaching the Gospel to every creature,' that the
promise of an abiding presence is made.

Let us remember, too, that, just because this commission is given to
the whole Church, it is binding on every individual member of the
Church. There is a very common fallacy, not confined to this subject,
but extending over the whole field of Christian duty, by which things
that are obligatory on the community are shuffled off the shoulders
of the individual. But we have to remember that the whole Church is
nothing more than the sum total of all its members, and that nothing
is incumbent upon it which is not in their measure incumbent upon
each of them. Whatsoever Christ says to all, He says to each, and the
community has no duties which you and I have not.

Of course, there are diversities of forms of obedience to this
commandment; of course, the restrictions of locality and the other
obligations of life, come in to modify it; and it is not every man's
duty to wander over the whole world doing this work. But the direct
work of communicating to others who know it not the sweetness and the
power of Jesus Christ belongs to every Christian man. You cannot buy
yourselves out of the ranks, as they used to be able to do out of the
militia, by paying for a substitute. Both forms of service are
obligatory upon each of us. We all, if we know anything of Christ and
His love and His power, are bound, by the fact that we do know it, to
tell it to those whom we can reach. You have all got congregations if
you would look for them. There is not a Christian man or woman in
this world who has not somebody that he or she can speak to more
efficiently than anybody else can. You have your friends, your
relations, the people with whom you are brought into daily contact,
if you have no wider congregations. You cannot all stand up and
preach in the sense in which I do so. But this is not the meaning of
the word in the New Testament. It does not imply a pulpit, nor a set
discourse, nor a gathered multitude; it simply implies a herald's
task of proclaiming. Everybody who has found Jesus Christ can say, 'I
have found the Messiah,' and everybody who knows Him can say, 'Come
and hear, and I will tell what the Lord hath done for my soul.' Since
you can do it you are bound to do it; and if you are one of 'the dumb
dogs, lying down and loving to slumber,' of whom there are such
crowds paralysing the energies and weakening the witness of every
Church upon earth, then you are criminally and suicidally oblivious
of an obligation which is a joy and a privilege as much as a duty.

Oh, brethren! I do want to lay on the consciences of all you
Christian people this, that nothing can absolve you from the
obligation of personal, direct speech to some one of Christ and His
salvation. Unless you can say, 'I have not refrained my lips, O Lord!
Thou knowest,' there frowns over against you an unfulfilled duty, the
neglect of which is laming your spiritual activity, and drying up the
sources of your spiritual strength.

But, then, besides this direct effort, there are the other indirect
methods in which this commandment can be discharged, by sympathy and
help of all sorts, about which I need say no more here.

Jesus Christ's ideal of His Church was an active propaganda, an army
in which there were no non-combatants, even although some of the
combatants might be detailed to remain in the camp and look after the
stuff, and others of them might be in the forefront of the battle.
But is that ideal ever fulfilled in any of our churches? How many
amongst us there are who do absolutely nothing in the shape of
Christian work! Some of us seem to think that the voluntary principle
on which our Nonconformist churches are largely organised means, 'I
do not need to do anything unless I like. Inclination is the guide of
duty, and if I do not care to take any active part in the work of our
church, nobody has anything to say.' No man can force me, but if
Jesus Christ says to me, 'Go!' and I say, 'I had rather not,' Jesus
Christ and I have to settle accounts between us. The less _men_
control, the more stringent ought to be the control of Christ. And if
the principle of Christian obedience is a willing heart, then the
duty of a Christian is to see that the heart is willing.

A stringent obligation, not to be shuffled off by any of the excuses
that we make, is laid upon us all. It makes very short work of a
number of excuses. There is a great deal in the tone of this
generation which tends to chill the missionary spirit. We know more
about the heathen world, and familiarity diminishes horror. We have
taken up, many of us, milder and more merciful ideas about the
condition of those who die without knowing the name of Jesus Christ.
We have taken to the study of comparative religion as a science,
forgetting sometimes that the thing that we are studying as a science
is spreading a dark cloud of ignorance and apathy over millions of
men. And all these reasons somewhat sap the strength and cool the
fervour of a good many Christian people nowadays. Jesus Christ's
commandment remains just as it was.

Then some of us say, 'I prefer working at home!' Well, if you are
doing all that you can there, and really are enthusiastically devoted
to one phase of Christian service, the great principle of division of
labour comes in to warrant your not entering upon other fields which
others cultivate. But unless you are thus casting all your energies
into the work which you say that you prefer, there is no reason in it
why you should do nothing in the other direction. Jesus Christ still
says, 'Go ye into all the world.'

Then some of you say, 'Well, I do not much believe in your missionary
societies. There is a great deal of waste of money about them. A
number of things there are that one does not approve of. I have heard
stories about missionaries being very idle, very luxurious, and
taking too much pay, and doing too little work.' Well, be it so! Very
probably it is partly true; though I do not know that the people
whose testimony is so willingly accepted, to the detriment of our
brethren in foreign lands, are precisely the kind of people that
should talk much about self-sacrifice and luxurious living, or whose
estimate of Christian work is to be relied upon. I fancy many of
them, if they walked about the streets of an English town, would have
a somewhat similar report to give, as they have when they walk about
the streets of an Indian one. But be that as it may, does that
indictment draw a wet sponge across the commandment of Jesus Christ?
or can you chisel out of the stones of Sinai one of the words
written there, by reason of the imperfections of those who are
seeking to obey them? Surely not! Christ still says, 'Go ye into all
the world!'

I sometimes venture to think that the day will come when the
condition of being received into, and retained in, the communion of a
Christian church will be obedience to that commandment. Why, even
bees have the sense at a given time of the year to turn the drones
out of the hives, and sting them to death. I do not recommend the
last part of the process, but I am not sure but that it would be a
benefit to us all, both to those ejected and to those retained, that
we should get rid of that added weight that clogs every organised
community in this and other lands--the dead weight of idlers who say
that they are Christ's disciples. Whether it is a condition of church
membership or not, sure I am that it is a condition of fellowship
with Jesus Christ, and a condition, therefore, of health in the
Christian life, that it should be a life of active obedience to this
plain, imperative, permanent, and universal command.

II. Secondly, a word as to the penalty of silence.

'Woe is me if I preach not the Gospel.' I suppose Paul is thinking
mainly of a future issue, but not exclusively of that. At all events,
let me point you, in a word or two, to the plain penalties of silence
here, and to the awful penalties of silence hereafter.

'Woe is me if I preach not the Gospel.' If you are a dumb and idle
professor of Christ's truth, depend upon it that your dumb idleness
will rob you of much communion with Jesus Christ. There are many
Christians who would be ever so much happier, more joyous, and more
assured Christians if they would go and talk about Christ to other
people. Because they have locked up God's word in their hearts it
melts away unknown, and they lose more than they suspect of the
sweetness and buoyancy and assured confidence that might mark them,
for no other reason than because they seek to keep their morsel to
themselves. Like that mist that lies white and dull over the ground
on a winter's morning, which will be blown away with the least puff
of fresh air, there lie doleful dampnesses, in their sooty folds,
over many a Christian heart, shutting out the sun from the earth, and
a little whiff of wholesome activity in Christ's cause would clear
them all away, and the sun would shine down upon men again. If you
want to be a happy Christian, work for Jesus Christ. I do not lay
that down as a specific by itself. There are other things to be taken
in conjunction with it, but yet it remains true that the woe of a
languid Christianity attaches to the men who, being professing
Christians, are silent when they should speak, and idle when they
should work.

There is, further, the woe of the loss of sympathies, and the gain of
all the discomforts and miseries of a self-absorbed life. And there
is, further, the woe of the loss of one of the best ways of
confirming one's own faith in the truth--viz. that of seeking to
impart it to others. If you want to learn a thing, teach it. If you
want to grasp the principles of any science, try to explain it to
somebody who does not understand it. If you want to know where, in
these days of jangling and controversy, the true, vital centre of the
Gospel is, and what is the essential part of the revelation of God,
go and tell sinful men about Jesus Christ who died for them; and you
will find out that it is the Cross, and Him who died thereon, as
dying for the world, that is the power which can move men's hearts.
And so you will cleave with a closer grasp, in days of difficulty and
unsettlement, to that which is able to bring light into darkness and
to harmonise the discord of a troubled and sinful soul. And, further,
there is the woe of having none that can look to you and say, 'I owe
myself to thee.' Oh, brethren! there is no greater joy accessible to
a man than that of feeling that through his poor words Christ has
entered into a brother's heart. And you are throwing away all this
because you shut your mouths and neglect the plain commandment of
your Lord.

Ay! but that is not all. There is a future to be taken into account,
and I think that Christian people do far too little realise the
solemn truth that it is not all the same _then_ whether a man
has kept his Master's commandments or neglected them. I believe that
whilst a very imperfect faith saves a man, there is such a thing as
being 'saved, yet so as through fire,' and that there is such a thing
as having 'an abundant entrance ministered unto us into the
everlasting kingdom.' He whose life has been very slightly influenced
by Christian principle, and who has neglected plain, imperative
duties, will not stand on the same level of blessedness as the man
who has more completely yielded himself in life to the constraining
power of Christ's love, and has sought to keep all His commandments.

Heaven is not a dead level. Every man there will receive as much
blessedness as he is capable of, but capacities will vary, and the
principal factor in determining the capacity, which capacity
determines the blessedness, will be the thoroughness of obedience to
all the ordinances of Christ in the course of the life upon earth.
So, though we know, and therefore dare say, little about that future,
I do beseech you to take this to heart, that he who there can stand
before God, and say, 'Behold! I and the children whom God hath given
me' will wear a crown brighter than the starless ones of those who
saved themselves, and have brought none with them.

'Some on boards, and some on broken pieces of the ship, they all came
safe to land.' But the place where they stand depends on their
Christian life, and of that Christian life one main element is
obedience to the commandment which makes them the apostles and
missionaries of their Lord.

III. Lastly, note the glad obedience which transcends the limits of
obligation.

'If I do this thing willingly I have a reward.' Paul desired to bring
a little more than was required, in token of his love to his Master,
and of his thankful acceptance of the obligation. The artist who
loves his work will put more work into his picture than is absolutely
needed, and will linger over it, lavishing diligence and care upon
it, because he is in love with his task. The servant who seeks to do
as little as he can scrape through with without rebuke is actuated by
no high motives. The trader who barely puts as much into the scale as
will balance the weight in the other is grudging in his dealings; but
he who, with liberal hand, gives 'shaken down, pressed together, and
running over' measure, gives because he delights in the giving.

And so it is in the Christian life. There are many of us whose
question seems to be, 'How little can I get off with? how much can I
retain?'--many of us whose effort is to find out how much of the
world is consistent with the profession of Christianity, and to find
the minimum of effort, of love, of service, of gifts which may free
us from obligation.

And what does that mean? It means that we are slaves. It means that
if we durst we would give nothing, and do nothing. And what does that
mean? It means that we do not care for the Lord, and have no joy in
our work. And what does that mean? It means that our work deserves no
praise, and will get no reward. If we love Christ we shall be
anxious, if it were possible, to do more than He commands us, in
token of our loyalty to the King, and of our delight in the service.
Of course, in the highest view, nothing can be more than necessary.
Of course He has the right to all our work; but yet there are heights
of Christian consecration and self-sacrifice which a man will not be
blamed if he has not climbed, and will be praised if he has. What we
want, if I might venture to say so, is extravagance of service. Judas
may say, 'To what purpose is this waste?' but Jesus will say, He
'hath wrought a good work on Me,' and the fragrance of the ointment
will smell sweet through the centuries.

So, dear brethren, the upshot of the whole thing is, Do not let us do
our Christian work reluctantly, else it is only slave's work, and
there is no blessing in it, and no reward will come to us from it. Do
not let us ask, 'How little may I do?' but 'How much can I do?' Thus,
asking, we shall not offer as burnt offering to the Lord that which
doth cost us nothing. On His part He has given the commandment as a
sign of His love. The stewardship is a token that He trusts us, the
duty is an honour, the burden is a grace. On our parts let us seek
for the joy of service which is not contented with the bare amount of
the tribute that is demanded, but gives something over, if it were
possible, because of our love to Him. They who thus give to Jesus
Christ their all of love and effort and service will receive it all
back a hundredfold, for the Master is not going to be in debt to any
of His servants, and He says to them all, 'I will repay it, howbeit I
say not unto thee how thou owest unto Me even thine own self
besides.'




A SERVANT OF MEN

   'For though I be free from all men, yet have I made myself
   servant unto all, that I might gain the more. 20. And unto
   the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to
   them that are under the law, as under the law, that I might
   gain them that are under the law; 21. To them that are
   without law, as without law, (being not without law to
   God, but under the law to Christ,) that I might gain them
   that are without law. 22. To the weak became I as weak,
   that I might gain the weak: I am made all things to all
   men, that I might by all means save some. 23. And this I
   do for the gospel's sake, that I might be partaker thereof
   with you.'--1 COR. ix. 19-23.


Paul speaks much of himself, but he is not an egotist. When he says,
'I do so and so,' it is a gracious way of enjoining the same conduct
on his readers. He will lay no burden on them which he does not
himself carry. The leader who can say 'Come' is not likely to want
followers. So, in this section, the Apostle is really enjoining on
the Corinthians the conduct which he declares is his own.

The great principle incumbent on all Christians, with a view to the
salvation of others, is to go as far as one can without
untruthfulness in the direction of finding points of resemblance and
contact with those to whom we would commend the Gospel. There is a
base counterfeit of this apostolic example, which slurs over
distinctive beliefs, and weakly tries to please everybody by
differing from nobody. That trimming to catch all winds never gains
any. Mr. Facing-both-ways is not a powerful evangelist. The motive of
becoming all things to all men must be plainly disinterested, and the
assimilation must have love for the souls concerned and eagerness to
bring the truth to them, and them to the truth, legibly stamped upon
it, or it will be regarded, and rightly so, as mere cowardice or
dishonesty. And there must be no stretching the assimilation to the
length of either concealing truth or fraternising in evil. Love to my
neighbour can never lead to my joining him in wrongdoing.

But, while the limits of this assumption of the colour of our
surroundings are plainly marked, there is ample space within these
for the exercise of this eminently Christian grace. We must get near
people if we would help them. Especially must we identify ourselves
with them in sympathy, and seek to multiply points of assimilation,
if we would draw them to Jesus Christ. He Himself had to become man
that He might gain men, and His servants have to do likewise, in
their degree. The old story of the Christian teacher who voluntarily
became a slave, that he might tell of Christ to slaves, has in spirit
to be repeated by us all.

We can do no good by standing aloof on a height and flinging down the
Gospel to the people below. They must feel that we enter into their
circumstances, prejudices, ways of thinking, and the like, if our
words are to have power. That is true about all Christian teachers,
whether of old or young. You must be a boy among boys, and try to
show that you enter into the boy's nature, or you may lecture till
doomsday and do no good.

Paul instances three cases in which he had acted, and still continued
to do so, on this principle. He was a Jew, but after his conversion
he had to 'become a Jew' by a distinct act; that is, he had receded
so far from his old self, that he, if he had had only himself to
think of, would have given up all Jewish observances. But he felt it
his duty to conciliate prejudice as far as he could, and so, though
he would have fought to the death rather than given countenance to
the belief that circumcision was necessary, he had no scruple about
circumcising Timothy; and, though he believed that for Christians the
whole ancient ritual was abolished, he was quite willing, if it would
smooth away the prejudices of the 'many thousands of Jews who
believed,' to show, by his participation in the temple worship, that
he 'walked orderly, keeping the law.' If he was told 'You must,' his
answer could only be 'I will not'; but if it was a question of
conciliating, he was ready to go all lengths for that.

The category which he names next is not composed of different persons
from the first, but of the same persons regarded from a somewhat
different point of view. 'Them that are under the law' describes
Jews, not by their race, but by their religion; and Paul was willing
to take his place among them, as we have just observed. But he will
not do that so as to be misunderstood, wherefore he protests that in
doing so he is voluntarily abridging his freedom for a specific
purpose. He is not 'under the law'; for the very pith of his view of
the Christian's position is that he has nothing to do with that
Mosaic law in any of its parts, because Christ has made him free.

The second class to whom in his wide sympathies he is able to
assimilate himself, is the opposite of the former--the Gentiles who
are 'without law.' He did not preach on Mars' Hill as he did in the
synagogues. The many-sided Gospel had aspects fitted for the Gentiles
who had never heard of Moses, and the many-sided Apostle had links of
likeness to the Greek and the barbarian. But here, too, his
assimilation of himself to those whom he seeks to win is voluntary;
wherefore he protests that he is not without law, though he
recognises no longer the obligations of Moses' law, for he is 'under
[or, rather, "in"] law to Christ.'

'The weak' are those too scrupulous-conscienced Christians of whom he
has been speaking in chapter viii. and whose narrow views he exhorted
stronger brethren to respect, and to refrain from doing what they
could do without harming their own consciences, lest by doing it they
should induce a brother to do the same, whose conscience would prick
him for it. That is a lesson needed to-day as much as, or more than,
in Paul's time, for the widely different degrees of culture and
diversities of condition, training, and associations among Christians
now necessarily result in very diverse views of Christian conduct in
many matters. The grand principle laid down here should guide us all,
both in regard to fellow-Christians and others. Make yourself as like
them as you honestly can; restrict yourself of allowable acts, in
deference to even narrow prejudices; but let the motive of your
assimilating yourself to others be clearly their highest good, that
you may 'gain' them, not for yourself but for your Master.

Verse 23 lays down Paul's ruling principle, which both impelled him
to become all things to all men, with a view to their salvation, as
he has been saying, and urged him to effort and self-discipline, with
a view to his own, as he goes on to say. 'For the Gospel's sake'
seems to point backward; 'that I may be a joint partaker thereof
points forward. We have not only to preach the Gospel to others, but
to live on it and be saved by it ourselves.




HOW THE VICTOR RUNS

   'So run, that ye may obtain.'--1 COR. ix. 24.


'_So_ run.' Does that mean 'Run so that ye obtain?' Most people,
I suppose, superficially reading the words, attach that significance
to them, but the 'so' here carries a much greater weight of meaning
than that. It is a word of comparison. The Apostle would have the
Corinthians recall the picture which he has been putting before
them--a picture of a scene that was very familiar to them; for, as
most of us know, one of the most important of the Grecian games was
celebrated at intervals in the immediate neighbourhood of Corinth.
Many of the Corinthian converts had, no doubt, seen, or even taken
part in them. The previous portion of the verse in which our text
occurs appeals to the Corinthians' familiar knowledge of the arena
and the competitors, 'Know ye not that they which run in a race run
all, but one receiveth the prize?' He would have them picture the
eager racers, with every muscle strained, and the one victor starting
to the front; and then he says, 'Look at that panting conqueror. That
is how you should run. _So_ run--'meaning thereby not, 'Run so that
you may obtain the prize,' but 'Run so' as the victor does, 'in order
that you may obtain.' So, then, this victor is to be a lesson to us,
and we are to take a leaf out of his book. Let us see what he teaches
us.

I. The first thing is, the utmost tension and energy and strenuous
effort.

It is very remarkable that Paul should pick out these Grecian games
as containing for Christian people any lesson, for they were
honeycombed, through and through, with idolatry and all sorts of
immorality, so that no Jew ventured to go near them, and it was part
of the discipline of the early Christian Church that professing
Christians should have nothing to do with them in any shape.

And yet here, as in many other parts of his letters, Paul takes these
foul things as patterns for Christians. 'There is a soul of goodness
in things evil, if we would observantly distil it out.' It is very
much as if English preachers were to refer their people to a
racecourse, and say, 'Even there you may pick out lessons, and learn
something of the way in which Christian people ought to live.'

On the same principle the New Testament deals with that diabolical
business of fighting. It is taken as an emblem for the Christian
soldier, because, with all its devilishness, there is in it this, at
least, that men give themselves up absolutely to the will of their
commander, and are ready to fling away their lives if he lifts his
finger. That at least is grand and noble, and to be imitated on a
higher plane.

In like manner Paul takes these poor racers as teaching us a lesson.
Though the thing be all full of sin, we can get one valuable thought
out of it, and it is this--If people would work half as hard to gain
the highest object that a man can set before him, as hundreds of
people are ready to do in order to gain trivial and paltry objects,
there would be fewer stunted and half-dead Christians amongst us.
'That is the way to run,' says Paul, 'if you want to obtain.'

Look at the contrast that he hints at, between the prize that stirs
these racers' energies into such tremendous operation and the prize
which Christians profess to be pursuing. 'They do it to obtain a
corruptible crown'--a twist of pine branch out of the neighbouring
grove, worth half-a-farthing, and a little passing glory not worth
much more. They do it to obtain a corruptible crown; we do _not_ do
it, though we professedly have an incorruptible one as our aim and
object. If we contrast the relative values of the objects that men
pursue so eagerly, and the objects of the Christian course, surely we
ought to be smitten down with penitent consciousness of our own
unworthiness, if not of our own hypocrisy.

It is not even there that the lesson stops, because we Christian
people may be patterns and rebukes to ourselves. For, on the one side
of our nature we show what we can do when we are really in earnest
about getting something; and on the other side we show with how
little work we can be contented, when, at bottom, we do not much care
whether we get the prize or not. If you and I really believed that
that crown of glory which Paul speaks about might be ours, and would
be all sufficing for us if it were ours, as truly as we believe that
money is a good thing, there would not be such a difference between
the way in which we clutch at the one and the apathy which scarcely
cares to put out a hand for the other. The things that are seen and
temporal do get the larger portion of the energies and thoughts of
the average Christian man, and the things that are unseen and eternal
get only what is left. Sometimes ninety per cent. of the water of a
stream is taken away to drive a milldam or do work, and only ten per
cent. can be spared to trickle down the half-dry channel and do
nothing but reflect the bright sun and help the little flowers and
the grass to grow. So, the larger portion of most lives goes to drive
the mill-wheels, and there is very little left, in the case of many
of us, in order to help us towards God, and bring us closer into
communion with our Lord. 'Run' for the crown as eagerly as you 'run'
for your incomes, or for anything that you really, in your deepest
desires, want. Take yourselves for your own patterns and your own
rebukes. Your own lives may show you how you _can_ love, hope, work,
and deny yourselves when you have sufficient inducement, and their
flame should put to shame their frost, for the warmth is directed
towards trifles and the coldness towards the crown. If you would run
for the incorruptible prize of effort in the fashion in which others
and yourselves run for the corruptible, your whole lives would be
changed. Why! if Christian people in general really took half--half?
ay! a tenth part of--the honest, persistent pains to improve their
Christian character, and become more like Jesus Christ, which a
violinist will take to master his instrument, there would be a new
life for most of our Christian communities. Hours and hours of
patient practice are not too much for the one; how many moments do we
give to the other? 'So run, that ye obtain.'

II. The victorious runner sets Christians an example of rigid
self-control.

Every man that is striving for the mastery is 'temperate in all
things.' The discipline for runners and athletes was rigid. They had
ten months of spare diet--no wine--hard gymnastic exercises every
day, until not an ounce of superfluous flesh was upon their muscles,
before they were allowed to run in the arena. And, says Paul, that is
the example for us. They practise this rigid discipline and
abstinence by way of preparation for the race, and after it was run
they might dispense with the training. You and I have to practise
rigid abstinence as part of the race, as a continuous necessity.
_They_ did not abstain only from bad things, they did not only
avoid criminal acts of sensuous indulgence; but they abstained from
many perfectly legitimate things. So for us it is not enough to say,
'I draw the line there, at this or that vice, and I will have nothing
to do with these.' You will never make a growing Christian if
abstinence from palpable sins only is your standard. You must 'lay
aside' every sin, of course, but also 'every _weight_' Many
things are 'weights' that are not 'sins'; and if we are to run fast
we must run light, and if we are to do any good in this world we have
to live by rigid control and abstain from much that is perfectly
legitimate, because, if we do not, we shall fail in accomplishing the
highest purposes for which we are here. Not only in regard to the
gross sensual indulgences which these men had to avoid, but in regard
to a great deal of the outgoings of our interests and our hearts, we
have to apply the knife very closely and cut to the quick, if we
would have leisure and sympathy and affection left for loftier
objects. It is a very easy thing to be a Christian in one aspect,
inasmuch as a Christian at bottom is a man that is trusting to Jesus
Christ, and that is not hard to do. It is a very hard thing to be a
Christian in another aspect, because a real Christian is a man who,
by reason of his trusting Jesus Christ, has set his heel upon the
neck of the animal that is in him, and keeps the flesh well down, and
not only the flesh, but the desires of the mind as well as of the
flesh, and subordinates them all to the one aim of pleasing Him. 'No
man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life' if
his object is to please Him that has called him to be a soldier.
Unless we cut off a great many of the thorns, so to speak, by which
things catch hold of us as we pass them, we shall not make much
advance in the Christian life. Rigid self-control and abstinence from
else legitimate things that draw us away from Him are needful, if we
are so to run as the poor heathen racer teaches us.

III. The last grace that is suggested here, the last leaf to take out
of these racers' book, is definiteness and concentration of aim.

'I, therefore,' says the Apostle, 'so run not as uncertainly.' If the
runner is now heading that way and now this, making all manner of
loops upon his path, of course he will be left hopelessly in the
rear. It is the old fable of the Grecian mythology transplanted into
Christian soil. The runner who turned aside to pick up the golden
apple was disappointed of his hopes of the radiant fair. The ship, at
the helm of which is a steersman who has either a feeble hand or does
not understand his business, and which therefore keeps yawing from
side to side, with the bows pointing now this way and now that, is
not holding a course that will make the harbour first in the race.
The people that to-day are marching with their faces towards Zion,
and to-morrow making a loop-line to the world, will be a long time
before they reach their terminus. I believe there are few things more
lacking in the average Christian life of to-day than resolute,
conscious concentration upon an aim which is clearly and always
before us. Do you know what you are aiming at? That is the first
question. Have you a distinct theory of life's purpose that you can
put into half a dozen words, or have you not? In the one case, there
is some chance of attaining your object; in the other one, none.
Alas! we find many Christian people who do not set before themselves,
with emphasis and constancy, as their aim the doing of God's will,
and so sometimes they do it, when it happens to be easy, and
sometimes, when temptations are strong, they do not. It needs a
strong hand on the tiller to keep it steady when the wind is blowing
in puffs and gusts, and sometimes the sail bellies full and sometimes
it is almost empty. The various strengths of the temptations that
blow us out of our course are such that we shall never keep a
straight line of direction, which is the shortest line, and the only
one on which we shall 'obtain,' unless we know very distinctly where
we want to go, and have a good strong will that has learned to say
'No!' when the temptations come. 'Whom resist steadfast in the
faith.' 'I therefore so run, not as uncertainly,' taking one course
one day and another the next.

Now, that definite aim is one that can be equally pursued in all
varieties of life. 'This one thing I do' said one who did about as
many things as most people, but the different kinds of things that
Paul did were all, at bottom, one thing. And we, in all the varieties
of our circumstances, may keep this one clear aim before us, and
whether it be in this way or in that, we may be equally and at all
times seeking the better country, and bending all circumstances and
all duty to make us more like our Master and bring us closer to Him.

The Psalmist did not offer an impossible prayer when he said: 'One
thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after, that I may
dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the
beauty of the Lord and to enquire in His temple.' Was David in 'the
house of the Lord' when he was with his sheep in the wilderness, and
when he was in Saul's palace, and when he was living with wild beasts
in dens and caves of the earth, and when he was a fugitive, hunted
like a partridge upon the mountains? Was he always in the Lord's
house? Yes! At any rate he could be. All that we do may be doing His
will, and over a life, crowded with varying circumstances and yet
simplified and made blessed by unvarying obedience, we may write,
'This one thing I do.'

But we shall not keep this one aim clear before our eyes, unless we
habituate ourselves to the contemplation of the end. The runner,
according to Paul's vivid picture in another of his letters, forgets
the things that are behind, and stretches out towards the things that
are before. And just as a man runs with his body inclining forward,
and his eager hand nearer the prize than his body, and his eyesight
and his heart travelling ahead of them both to grasp it, so if we
want to live with the one worthy aim for ours, and to put all our
effort and faith into what deserves it all--the Christian race--we
must bring clear before us continually, or at least with the utmost
frequency, the prize of our high calling, the crown of righteousness.
Then we shall run so that we may, at the last, be able to finish our
course with joy, and dying to hope with all humility that there is
laid up for us a crown of righteousness.




'CONCERNING THE CROWN'

   'They do it to obtain a corruptible crown, but
   we are incorruptible.'--1 COR. ix. 25.


One of the most famous of the Greek athletic festivals was held close
by Corinth. Its prize was a pine-wreath from the neighbouring sacred
grove. The painful abstinence and training of ten months, and the
fierce struggle of ten minutes, had for their result a twist of green
leaves, that withered in a week, and a little fading fame that was
worth scarcely more, and lasted scarcely longer. The struggle and the
discipline were noble; the end was contemptible. And so it is with
all lives whose aims are lower than the highest. They are greater in
the powers they put forth than in the objects they compass, and the
question, 'What is it for?' is like a douche of cold water from the
cart that lays the clouds of dust in the ways.

So, says Paul, praising the effort and contemning the prize, 'They do
it to obtain a corruptible crown.' And yet there was a soul of
goodness in this evil thing. Though these festivals were indissolubly
intertwined with idolatry, and besmirched with much sensuous evil,
yet he deals with them as he does with war and with slavery; points
to the disguised nobility that lay beneath the hideousness, and holds
up even these low things as a pattern for Christian men.

But I do not mean here to speak so much about the general bearing of
this text as rather to deal with its designation of the aim and
reward of Christian energy, that 'incorruptible crown' of which my
text speaks. And in doing so I desire to take into account likewise
other places in Scripture in which the same metaphor occurs.

I. The crown.

Let me recall the other places where the same metaphor is employed.
We find the Apostle, in the immediate prospect of death, rising into
a calm rapture in which imprisonment and martyrdom lose their
terrors, as he thinks of the 'crown of righteousness' which the Lord
will give to him. The Epistle of James, again, assures the man who
endures temptation that 'the Lord will give him the crown of life
which He has promised to all them that love Him.' The Lord Himself
from heaven repeats that promise to the persecuted Church at Smyrna:
'Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life.'
The elders cast their crowns before the feet of Him that sitteth upon
the throne. The Apostle Peter, in his letter, stimulates the elders
upon earth to faithful discharge of their duty, by the hope that
thereby they shall 'receive a crown of righteousness that fadeth not
away.' So all these instances taken together with this of my text
enable us to gather two or three lessons.

It is extremely unlikely that all these instances of the occurrence
of the emblem carry with them reference, such as that in my text, to
the prize at the athletic festivals. For Peter and James, intense
Jews as they were, had probably never seen, and possibly never heard
of, the struggles at the Isthmus and at Olympus and elsewhere. The
Book of the Revelation draws its metaphors almost exclusively from
the circle of Jewish practices and things. So that we have to look in
other directions than the arena or the racecourse to explain these
other uses of the image. It is also extremely unlikely that in these
other passages the reference is to a crown as the emblem of
sovereignty, for that idea is expressed, as a rule, by another word
in Scripture, which we have Anglicised as 'diadem.' The 'crown' in
all these passages is a garland twisted out of some growth of the
field. In ancient usage roses were twined for revellers; pine-shoots
or olive branches for the victors in the games; while the laurel was
'the meed of mighty conquerors'; and plaited oak leaves were laid
upon the brows of citizens who had deserved well of their country,
and myrtle sprays crowned the fair locks of the bride.

And thus in these directions, and not towards the wrestling ground or
the throne of the monarch, must we look for the ideas suggested by
the emblem.

Now, if we gather together all these various uses of the word, there
emerge two broad ideas, that the 'crown' which is the Christian's aim
symbolises a state of triumphant repose and of festal enjoyment.
There are other aspects of that great and dim future which correspond
to other necessities of our nature, and I suppose some harm has been
done and some misconceptions have been induced, and some unreality
imported into the idea of the Christian future, by the too exclusive
prominence given to these two ideas--victorious rest after the
