 On Sunday last I endeavoured to bring before you the subject of that
 which Scripture calls the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. The two
 points on which we were trying to get clear notions were these: what
 is meant by being under the law, and what is meant by being free from
 the law? When the Bible says that a man led by the Spirit is not under
 the law, it does not mean that he is free because he may sin without
 being punished for it, but it means that he is free because being
 taught by God's Spirit to love what His law commands he is no longer
 conscious of acting from restraint. The law does not drive him,
 because the Spirit leads him.

 There is a state brethren, when we recognize God, but do not love God
 in Christ. It is that state when we admire what is excellent, but are
 not able to perform it. It is a state when the love of good comes to
 nothing, dying away in a mere desire. That is the state of nature,
 when we are under the law, and not converted to the love of Christ.
 And then there is another state, when God writes His law upon our
 hearts by love instead of fear. The one state is this, "I cannot do
 the things that I would"--the other state is this, "I will walk at
 liberty; for I seek Thy commandments."

 Just so far therefore, as a Christian is led by the Spirit, he is a
 conqueror. A Christian in full possession of his privileges is a man
 whose very step ought to have in it all the elasticity of triumph, and
 whose very look ought to have in it all the brightness of victory. And
 just so far as a Christian suffers sin to struggle in him and overcome
 his resolutions, just so far he is under the law. And that is the key
 to the whole doctrine of the New Testament. From first to last the
 great truth put forward is--The law can neither save you nor sanctify
 you. The gospel can do both; for it is rightly and emphatically called
 the perfect law of liberty.

 We proceed to-day to a further illustration of this subject--of
 Christian victory. In the verses which I have read out, the Apostle
 has evidently the same subject in his mind: slavery through the law:
 victory through the gospel. "The strength of sin," he says, "is the
 law." God giveth us the victory through Christ. And when we are
 familiar with St. Paul's trains of thinking, we find this idea coming
 in perpetually. It runs like a coloured thread through embroidery,
 appearing on the upper surface every now and then in a different
 shape--a leaf, it may be, or a flower; but the same thread still, if
 you only trace it back with your finger. And this was the golden
 recurring thread in the mind of Paul. Restraint and law cannot check
 sin; they only gall it and make it struggle and rebel. The love of God
 in Christ, that, and only that can give man the victory.

 But in this passage the idea of victory is brought to bear upon the
 most terrible of all a Christian's enemies. It is faith here
 conquering in death. And the apostle brings together all the
 believer's antagonists--the law's power, sin, and death the chief
 antagonist of all; and then, as it were on a conqueror's battle field,
 shouts over them the hymn of triumph--"Thanks be to God, which giveth
 us the victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ." We shall take up these
 two points to dwell upon.

    I. The awfulness which hangs round the dying hour.
   II. Faith conquering in death.

 That which makes it peculiarly terrible to die is asserted in this
 passage to be, guilt. We lay a stress upon this expression--the sting.
 It is not said that sin is the only bitterness, but it is the sting
 which contains in it the venom of a most exquisite torture. And in
 truth brethren, it is no mark of courage to speak lightly of human
 dying. We may do it in bravado, or in wantonness; but no man who
 thinks can call it a trifling thing to die. True thoughtfulness must
 shrink from death without Christ. There is a world of untold
 sensations crowded into that moment, when a man puts his hand to his
 forehead and feels the damp upon it which tells him his hour is come.
 He has been waiting for death all his life, and now it is come. It is
 all over--his chance is past, and his eternity is settled. None of us
 know, except by guess, what that sensation is. Myriads of human beings
 have felt it to whom life was dear; but they never spoke out their
 feelings, for such things are untold. And to every individual man
 throughout all eternity that sensation in its fulness can come but
 once. It is mockery brethren, for a man to speak lightly of that which
 he cannot know till it comes.

 Now the first cause which makes it a solemn thing to die, is the
 instinctive cleaving of every thing that lives to its own existence.
 That unutterable thing which we call our being--the idea of parting
 with it is agony. It is the first and the intensest desire of living
 things, to be. Enjoyment, blessedness, everything we long for, is
 wrapped up in being. Darkness and all that the spirit recoils from, is
 contained in this idea, not to be. It is in virtue of this
 unquenchable impulse that the world, in spite of all the misery that
 is in it, continues to struggle on. What are war, and trade, and
 labour, and professions? Are they all the result of struggling to be
 great? No, my brethren, they are the result of struggling _to be_. The
 first thing that men and nations labour for is existence. Reduce the
 nation or the man to their last resources, and only see what
 marvellous energy of contrivance the love of being arms them with.
 Read back the pauper's history at the end of seventy years--his
 strange sad history, in which scarcely a single day could ensure
 subsistence for the morrow--and yet learn what he has done these long
 years in the stern struggle with impossibility to hold his being where
 everything is against him, and to keep an existence, whose only
 conceivable charm is this, that it _is_ existence.

 Now it is with this intense passion for being, that the idea of death
 clashes. Let us search why it is we shrink from death. This reason
 brethren, we shall find, that it presents to us the idea of _not
 being_. Talk as we will of immortality, there is an obstinate feeling
 that we cannot master, that we end in death; and _that_ may be felt
 together with the firmest belief of a resurrection. Brethren, our
 faith tells us one thing, and our sensations tell us another. When we
 die, we are surrendering in truth all that with which we have
 associated existence. All that we know of life is connected with a
 shape, a form, a body of materialism; and now that that is palpably
 melting away into nothingness, the boldest heart may be excused a
 shudder, when there is forced upon it, in spite of itself, the idea of
 ceasing for ever.

 The second reason is not one of imagination at all, but most sober
 reality. It is a solemn thing to die, because it is the parting with
 all round which the heart's best affections have twined themselves.
 There are some men who have not the capacity for keen enjoyment. Their
 affections have nothing in them of intensity, and so they pass through
 life without ever so uniting themselves with what they meet, that
 there would be anything of pain in the severance. Of course, with them
 the bitterness of death does not attach so much to the idea of
 parting. But my brethren, how is it with human nature generally? Our
 feelings do not weaken as we go on in life; emotions are less shown,
 and we get a command over our features and our expressions; but the
 man's feelings are deeper than the boy's. It is length of time that
 makes attachment. We become wedded to the sights and sounds of this
 lovely world more closely as years go on.

 Young men, with nothing rooted deep, are prodigal of life. It is an
 adventure to them, rather than a misfortune, to leave their country
 for ever. With the old man it is like tearing his own heart from him.
 And so it was that when Lot quitted Sodom, the younger members of his
 family went on gladly. It is a touching truth; it was the aged one who
 looked behind to the home which had so many recollections connected
 with it. And therefore it is, that when men approach that period of
 existence when they must go, there is an instinctive lingering over
 things which they shall never see again. Every time the sun sets,
 every time the old man sees his children gathering round him, there is
 a filling of the eye with an emotion that we can understand. There is
 upon his soul the thought of parting, that strange wrench from all we
 love which makes death (say what moralists will of it) a bitter thing.

 Another pang which belongs to death, we find in the sensation of
 loneliness which attaches to it. Have we ever seen a ship preparing to
 sail with its load of pauper emigrants to a distant colony? If we have
 we know what that desolation is which comes from feeling unfriended on
 a new and untried excursion. All beyond the seas, to the ignorant poor
 man, is a strange land. They are going away from the helps and the
 friendships and the companionships of life, scarcely knowing what is
 before them. And it is in such a moment, when a man stands upon a
 deck, taking his last look of his fatherland, that there comes upon
 him a sensation new, strange, and inexpressibly miserable--the feeling
 of being alone in the world.

 Brethren, with all the bitterness of such a moment, it is but a feeble
 image when placed by the side of the loneliness of death. We die
 alone. We go on our dark mysterious journey for the first time in all
 our existence, without one to accompany us. Friends are beside our
 bed, they must stay behind. Grant that a Christian has something like
 familiarity with the Most High, _that_ breaks this solitary feeling;
 but what is it with the mass of men? It is a question full of
 loneliness to them. What is it they are to see? What are they to meet?
 Is it not true, that, to the larger number of this congregation, there
 is no one point in all eternity on which the eye can fix distinctly
 and rest gladly--nothing beyond the grave, except a dark space into
 which they must plunge alone?

 And yet my brethren, with all these ideas no doubt vividly before his
 mind, it was none of them that the apostle selected as the crowning
 bitterness of dying. It was not the thought of surrendering existence.
 It was not the parting from all bright and lovely things. It was not
 the shudder of sinking into the sepulchre alone. "The sting of death
 is _sin_."

 Now there are two ways in which this deep truth applies itself. There
 is something that appals in death when there are distinct separate
 acts of guilt resting on the memory; and there is something too in the
 possession of a guilty heart, which is quite another thing from acts
 of sin, that makes it an awful thing to die. There are some who carry
 about with them the dreadful secret of sin that has been done; guilt
 that has a name. A man has injured some one; he has made money, or got
 on by unfair means; he has been unchaste; he has done some of those
 thousand things of life which leave upon the heart the dark spot that
 will not come out. All these are sins which you can count up and
 number. And the recollection of things like these is that agony which
 we call remorse. Many of us have remembrances of this kind which are
 fatal to serenity. We shut them out, but it will not do. They bide
 their time, and then suddenly present themselves, together with the
 thought of a judgment-seat. When a guilty man begins to think of
 dying, it is like a vision of the Son of Man presenting itself and
 calling out the voices of all the unclean spirits in the man--"Art
 thou come to torment us before the time?"

 But my brethren, it is a mistake if we suppose that is the common way
 in which sin stings at the thought of death. Men who have lived the
 career of passionate life have distinct and accumulated acts of guilt
 before their eyes. But with most men it is not guilty acts, but
 guiltiness of heart that weighs the heaviest. Only take yesterday as a
 specimen of life. What was it with most of us? A day of sin. Was it
 sin palpable and dark, such as we shall remember painfully this day
 year? Nay my brethren, unkindness, petulance, wasted time,
 opportunities lost, frivolous conversation, _that_ was our chief
 guilt. And yet with all that trifling as it may be, when it comes to
 be the history of life, does it not leave behind a restless
 undefinable sense of fault, a vague idea of debt, but to what extent
 we know not, perhaps the more wretched just because it is uncertain?

 My Christian brethren, this is the sting of sinfulness, the wretched
 consciousness of an unclean heart. It is just this feeling, "God is
 not my friend; I am going on to the grave, and no _man_ can say aught
 against me, but my heart is not right; I want a river like that which
 the ancients fabled--the river of forgetfulness--that I might go down
 into it and bathe, and come up a new man. It is not so much what I
 have done; it is what I am. Who shall save me from myself?" Oh, it is
 a desolate thing to think of the coffin when that thought is in all
 its misery before the soul. It is the sting of death.

 And now let us bear one thing in mind, the sting of sin is not a
 constant pressure. It may be that we live many years in the world
 before a death in our own family forces the thought personally home.
 Many years before all those sensations which are so often the
 precursors of the tomb--the quick short cough, lassitude, emaciation,
 pain--come in startling suddenness upon us in our young vigour, and
 make us feel what it is to be here with death inevitable to ourselves.
 And when those things become habitual, habit makes delicacy the same
 forgetful thing as health, so that neither in sickness, nor in health,
 is the thought of death a constant pressure. It is only now and then;
 but so often as death is a reality, the sting of death is sin.

 Once more we remark, that all this power of sin to agonize, is traced
 by the Apostle to the law--"the strength of sin is the law;" by which
 he means to say that sin would not be so violent if it were not for
 the attempt of God's law to restrain it. It is the law which makes sin
 strong. And he does not mean particularly the law of Moses. He means
 any law, and all law. Law is what forbids and threatens; law bears
 gallingly on those who want to break it. And St. Paul declares this,
 that no law, not even God's law, can make men righteous in heart,
 unless the Spirit has taught men's hearts to acquiesce in the law. It
 can only force out into rebellion the sin that is in them.

 It is so, brethren, with a nation's law. The voice of the nation must
 go along with it. It must be the expression of their own feeling, and
 then they will have it obeyed. But if it is only the law of a
 government, a law which is against the whole spirit of the people,
 there is first the murmur of a nation's disapprobation, and then there
 is transgression, and then, if the law be vindicated with a high hand,
 the next step is the bursting that law asunder in national revolution.
 And so it is with God's law. It will never control a man long who does
 not from his heart love it. First comes a sensation of restraint, and
 then comes a murmuring of the heart; and last, there comes the rising
 of passion in its giant might, made desperate by restraint. That is
 the law giving strength to sin.

 And therefore brethren, if all we know of God be this, that He has
 made laws, and that it is terrible to break them; if all our idea of
 religion be this, that it is a thing of commands and hindrances--Thou
 shalt, and thou shalt not; we are under the law, and there is no help
 for it. We _must_ shrink from the encounter with death.


 We pass to our second subject--Faith conquering in death.

 And, before we enter upon this topic, there are two general remarks
 that we have to make. The first is, The elevating power of faith.
 There is nothing in all this world that ever led man on to real
 victory but faith. Faith is that looking forward to a future with
 something like certainty, that raises man above the narrow feelings of
 the present. Even in this life he is a greater man, a man of more
 elevated character, who is steadily pursuing a plan that requires some
 years to accomplish, than he who is living by the day. Look forward
 but ten years, and plan for it, live for it; there is something of
 manhood, something of courage required to conquer the thousand things
 that stand in your way. And therefore it is, that faith, and nothing
 but faith, gives victory in death. It is that elevation of character
 which we get from looking steadily and for ever forward, till eternity
 becomes a real home to us, that enables us to look down upon the last
 struggle, and the funeral, and the grave, not as the great end of all,
 but only as something that stands between us and the end. We are
 conquerors of death when we are able to look beyond it.

 Our second remark is for the purpose of fixing special attention upon
 this, that ours is not merely to be victory, it is to be victory
 through Christ "Thanks be to God which giveth us the victory through
 our Lord Jesus Christ." Victory brethren, mere victory over death is
 no unearthly thing. You may get it by infidelity. Only let a man sin
 long enough, and desperately enough to shut judgment altogether out of
 his creed, and then you have a man who can bid defiance to the grave.
 It was so that our country's greatest infidel historian met death. He
 quitted the world without parade and without display. If we want a
 specimen of victory apart from Christ, we have it on his death-bed. He
 left all this strange world of restlessness, calmly, like an unreal
 show that must go to pieces, and he himself an unreality departing
 from it. A sceptic can be a conqueror in death.

 Or again, mere manhood may give us a victory. He who has only learned
 not to be afraid to die, has not learned much. We have steel and nerve
 enough in our hearts to dare anything. And after all, it is a triumph
 so common as scarcely to deserve the name. Felons die on the scaffold
 like men; soldiers can be hired by tens of thousands, for a few pence
 a day, to front death in its worst form. Every minute that we live
 sixty of the human race are passing away, and the greater part with
 courage--the weak, and the timid, as well as the resolute. Courage is
 a very different thing from the Christian's victory.

 Once more brethren, necessity can make man conqueror over death. We
 can make up our minds to anything when it once becomes inevitable. It
 is the agony of suspense that makes danger dreadful. History can tell
 us that men can look with desperate calmness upon hell itself when
 once it has become a certainty. And it is this after all, that
 commonly makes the dying hour so quiet a thing. It is more dreadful in
 the distance than in the reality. When a man feels that there is no
 help, and he must go, he lays him down to die, as quietly as a tired
 traveller wraps himself in his cloak to sleep. It is quite another
 thing from all this that Paul meant by victory.

 In the first place, it is the prerogative of a Christian to be
 conqueror over Doubt. Brethren, do we all know what doubt means?
 Perchance not. There are some men who have never believed enough to
 doubt. There are some who have never thrown their hopes with such
 earnestness on the world to come, as to feel anxiety for fear it
 should not all be true. But every one who knows what Faith is, knows
 too, what is the desolation of Doubt. We pray till we begin to ask, Is
