_I answer that,_ Baptism cannot be reiterated.

First, because Baptism is a spiritual regeneration; inasmuch as a man
dies to the old life, and begins to lead the new life. Whence it is
written (John 3:5): "Unless a man be born again of water and the Holy
Ghost, He cannot see [Vulg.: 'enter into'] the kingdom of God." Now
one man can be begotten but once. Wherefore Baptism cannot be
reiterated, just as neither can carnal generation. Hence Augustine
says on John 3:4: "'Can he enter a second time into his mother's womb
and be born again': So thou," says he, "must understand the birth of
the Spirit, as Nicodemus understood the birth of the flesh . . . . As
there is no return to the womb, so neither is there to Baptism."

Secondly, because "we are baptized in Christ's death," by which we
die unto sin and rise again unto "newness of life" (cf. Rom. 6:3, 4).
Now "Christ died" but "once" (Rom. 6:10). Wherefore neither should
Baptism be reiterated. For this reason (Heb. 6:6) is it said against
some who wished to be baptized again: "Crucifying again to themselves
the Son of God"; on which the gloss observes: "Christ's one death
hallowed the one Baptism."

Thirdly, because Baptism imprints a character, which is indelible,
and is conferred with a certain consecration. Wherefore, just as
other consecrations are not reiterated in the Church, so neither is
Baptism. This is the view expressed by Augustine, who says (Contra
Epist. Parmen. ii) that "the military character is not renewed": and
that "the sacrament of Christ is not less enduring than this bodily
mark, since we see that not even apostates are deprived of Baptism,
since when they repent and return they are not baptized anew."

Fourthly, because Baptism is conferred principally as a remedy
against original sin. Wherefore, just as original sin is not renewed,
so neither is Baptism reiterated, for as it is written (Rom. 5:18),
"as by the offense of one, unto all men to condemnation, so also by
the justice of one, unto all men to justification of life."

Reply Obj. 1: Baptism derives its efficacy from Christ's Passion, as
stated above (A. 2, ad 1). Wherefore, just as subsequent sins do not
cancel the virtue of Christ's Passion, so neither do they cancel
Baptism, so as to call for its repetition. On the other hand the sin
which hindered the effect of Baptism is blotted out on being
submitted to Penance.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says on John 1:33: "'And I knew Him not':
Behold; after John had baptized, Baptism was administered; after a
murderer has baptized, it is not administered: because John gave his
own Baptism; the murderer, Christ's; for that sacrament is so sacred,
that not even a murderer's administration contaminates it."

Reply Obj. 3: The Paulianists and Cataphrygians used not to baptize
in the name of the Trinity. Wherefore Gregory, writing to the Bishop
Quiricus, says: "Those heretics who are not baptized in the name of
the Trinity, such as the Bonosians and Cataphrygians" (who were of
the same mind as the Paulianists), "since the former believe not that
Christ is God" (holding Him to be a mere man), "while the latter,"
i.e. the Cataphrygians, "are so perverse as to deem a mere man," viz.
Montanus, "to be the Holy Ghost: all these are baptized when they
come to holy Church, for the baptism which they received while in
that state of error was no Baptism at all, not being conferred in the
name of the Trinity." On the other hand, as set down in De Eccles.
Dogm. xxii: "Those heretics who have been baptized in the confession
of the name of the Trinity are to be received as already baptized
when they come to the Catholic Faith."

Reply Obj. 4: According to the Decretal of Alexander III: "Those
about whose Baptism there is a doubt are to be baptized with these
words prefixed to the form: 'If thou art baptized, I do not rebaptize
thee; but if thou art not baptized, I baptize thee,' etc.: for that
does not appear to be repeated, which is not known to have been done."

Reply Obj. 5: Both sacraments, viz. Baptism and the Eucharist, are a
representation of our Lord's death and Passion, but not in the same
way. For Baptism is a commemoration of Christ's death in so far as
man dies with Christ, that he may be born again into a new life. But
the Eucharist is a commemoration of Christ's death, in so far as the
suffering Christ Himself is offered to us as the Paschal banquet,
according to 1 Cor. 5:7, 8: "Christ our pasch is sacrificed;
therefore let us feast." And forasmuch as man is born once, whereas
he eats many times, so is Baptism given once, but the Eucharist
frequently.
_______________________

TENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 66, Art. 10]

Whether the Church Observes a Suitable Rite in Baptizing?

Objection 1: It seems that the Church observes an unsuitable rite in
baptizing. For as Chrysostom (Chromatius, in Matth. 3:15) says: "The
waters of Baptism would never avail to purge the sins of them that
believe, had they not been hallowed by the touch of our Lord's body."
Now this took place at Christ's Baptism, which is commemorated in the
Feast of the Epiphany. Therefore solemn Baptism should be celebrated
at the Feast of the Epiphany rather than on the eves of Easter and
Whitsunday.

Obj. 2: Further, it seems that several matters should not be used in
the same sacrament. But water is used for washing in Baptism.
Therefore it is unfitting that the person baptized should be anointed
thrice with holy oil first on the breast, and then between the
shoulders, and a third time with chrism on the top of the head.

Obj. 3: Further, "in Christ Jesus . . . there is neither male nor
female" (Gal. 3:23) . . . "neither Barbarian nor Scythian" (Col.
3:11), nor, in like manner, any other such like distinctions. Much
less, therefore can a difference of clothing have any efficacy in the
Faith of Christ. It is consequently unfitting to bestow a white
garment on those who have been baptized.

Obj. 4: Further, Baptism can be celebrated without such like
ceremonies. Therefore it seems that those mentioned above are
superfluous; and consequently that they are unsuitably inserted by
the Church in the baptismal rite.

_On the contrary,_ The Church is ruled by the Holy Ghost, Who does
nothing inordinate.

_I answer that,_ In the sacrament of Baptism something is done which
is essential to the sacrament, and something which belongs to a
certain solemnity of the sacrament. Essential indeed, to the
sacrament are both the form which designates the principal cause of
the sacrament; and the minister who is the instrumental cause; and
the use of the matter, namely, washing with water, which designates
the principal sacramental effect. But all the other things which the
Church observes in the baptismal rite, belong rather to a certain
solemnity of the sacrament.

And these, indeed, are used in conjunction with the sacrament for
three reasons. First, in order to arouse the devotion of the
faithful, and their reverence for the sacrament. For if there were
nothing done but a mere washing with water, without any solemnity,
some might easily think it to be an ordinary washing.

Secondly, for the instruction of the faithful. Because simple and
unlettered folk need to be taught by some sensible signs, for
instance, pictures and the like. And in this way by means of the
sacramental ceremonies they are either instructed, or urged to seek
the signification of such like sensible signs. And consequently,
since, besides the principal sacramental effect, other things should
be known about Baptism, it was fitting that these also should be
represented by some outward signs.

Thirdly, because the power of the devil is restrained, by prayers,
blessings, and the like, from hindering the sacramental effect.

Reply Obj. 1: Christ was baptized on the Epiphany with the Baptism of
John, as stated above (Q. 39, A. 2), with which baptism, indeed, the
faithful are not baptized, rather are they baptized with Christ's
Baptism. This has its efficacy from the Passion of Christ, according
to Rom. 6:3: "We who are baptized in Christ Jesus, are baptized in
His death"; and in the Holy Ghost, according to John 3:5: "Unless a
man be born again of water and the Holy Ghost." Therefore it is that
solemn Baptism is held in the Church, both on Easter Eve, when we
commemorate our Lord's burial and resurrection; for which reason our
Lord gave His disciples the commandment concerning Baptism as related
by Matthew (28:19): and on Whitsun-eve, when the celebration of the
Feast of the Holy Ghost begins; for which reason the apostles are
said to have baptized three thousand on the very day of Pentecost
when they had received the Holy Ghost.

Reply Obj. 2: The use of water in Baptism is part of the substance of
the sacrament; but the use of oil or chrism is part of the solemnity.
For the candidate is first of all anointed with Holy oil on the
breast and between the shoulders, as "one who wrestles for God," to
use Ambrose's expression (De Sacram. i): thus are prize-fighters wont
to besmear themselves with oil. Or, as Innocent III says in a
decretal on the Holy Unction: "The candidate is anointed on the
breast, in order to receive the gift of the Holy Ghost, to cast off
error and ignorance, and to acknowledge the true faith, since 'the
just man liveth by faith'; while he is anointed between the
shoulders, that he may be clothed with the grace of the Holy Ghost,
lay aside indifference and sloth, and become active in good works; so
that the sacrament of faith may purify the thoughts of his heart, and
strengthen his shoulders for the burden of labor." But after Baptism,
as Rabanus says (De Sacram. iii), "he is forthwith anointed on the
head by the priest with Holy Chrism, who proceeds at once to offer up
a prayer that the neophyte may have a share in Christ's kingdom, and
be called a Christian after Christ." Or, as Ambrose says (De Sacram.
iii), his head is anointed, because "the senses of a wise man are in
his head" (Eccl 2:14): to wit, that he may "be ready to satisfy
everyone that asketh" him to give "a reason of his faith" (cf. 1 Pet.
3:15; Innocent III, Decretal on Holy Unction).

Reply Obj. 3: This white garment is given, not as though it were
unlawful for the neophyte to use others: but as a sign of the
glorious resurrection, unto which men are born again by Baptism; and
in order to designate the purity of life, to which he will be bound
after being baptized, according to Rom. 6:4: "That we may walk in
newness of life."

Reply Obj. 4: Although those things that belong to the solemnity of
a sacrament are not essential to it, yet are they not superfluous,
since they pertain to the sacrament's wellbeing, as stated above.
_______________________

ELEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 66, Art. 11]

Whether Three Kinds of Baptism Are Fittingly Described--viz. Baptism
of Water, of Blood, and of the Spirit?

Objection 1: It seems that the three kinds of Baptism are not
fittingly described as Baptism of Water, of Blood, and of the Spirit,
i.e. of the Holy Ghost. Because the Apostle says (Eph. 4:5): "One
Faith, one Baptism." Now there is but one Faith. Therefore there
should not be three Baptisms.

Obj. 2: Further, Baptism is a sacrament, as we have made clear above
(Q. 65, A. 1). Now none but Baptism of Water is a sacrament.
Therefore we should not reckon two other Baptisms.

Obj. 3: Further, Damascene (De Fide Orth. iv) distinguishes several
other kinds of Baptism. Therefore we should admit more than three
Baptisms.

_On the contrary,_ on Heb. 6:2, "Of the doctrine of Baptisms," the
gloss says: "He uses the plural, because there is Baptism of Water,
of Repentance, and of Blood."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 62, A. 5), Baptism of Water has
its efficacy from Christ's Passion, to which a man is conformed by
Baptism, and also from the Holy Ghost, as first cause. Now although
the effect depends on the first cause, the cause far surpasses the
effect, nor does it depend on it. Consequently, a man may, without
Baptism of Water, receive the sacramental effect from Christ's
Passion, in so far as he is conformed to Christ by suffering for Him.
Hence it is written (Apoc. 7:14): "These are they who are come out of
great tribulation, and have washed their robes and have made them
white in the blood of the Lamb." In like manner a man receives the
effect of Baptism by the power of the Holy Ghost, not only without
Baptism of Water, but also without Baptism of Blood: forasmuch as his
heart is moved by the Holy Ghost to believe in and love God and to
repent of his sins: wherefore this is also called Baptism of
Repentance. Of this it is written (Isa. 4:4): "If the Lord shall wash
away the filth of the daughters of Zion, and shall wash away the
blood of Jerusalem out of the midst thereof, by the spirit of
judgment, and by the spirit of burning." Thus, therefore, each of
these other Baptisms is called Baptism, forasmuch as it takes the
place of Baptism. Wherefore Augustine says (De Unico Baptismo
Parvulorum iv): "The Blessed Cyprian argues with considerable reason
from the thief to whom, though not baptized, it was said: 'Today
shalt thou be with Me in Paradise' that suffering can take the place
of Baptism. Having weighed this in my mind again and again, I
perceive that not only can suffering for the name of Christ supply
for what was lacking in Baptism, but even faith and conversion of
heart, if perchance on account of the stress of the times the
celebration of the mystery of Baptism is not practicable."

Reply Obj. 1: The other two Baptisms are included in the Baptism of
Water, which derives its efficacy, both from Christ's Passion and
from the Holy Ghost. Consequently for this reason the unity of
Baptism is not destroyed.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated above (Q. 60, A. 1), a sacrament is a kind
of sign. The other two, however, are like the Baptism of Water, not,
indeed, in the nature of sign, but in the baptismal effect.
Consequently they are not sacraments.

Reply Obj. 3: Damascene enumerates certain figurative Baptisms. For
instance, "the Deluge" was a figure of our Baptism, in respect of the
salvation of the faithful in the Church; since then "a few . . .
souls were saved in the ark [Vulg.: 'by water']," according to 1 Pet.
3:20. He also mentions "the crossing of the Red Sea": which was a
figure of our Baptism, in respect of our delivery from the bondage of
sin; hence the Apostle says (1 Cor. 10:2) that "all . . . were
baptized in the cloud and in the sea." And again he mentions "the
various washings which were customary under the Old Law," which were
figures of our Baptism, as to the cleansing from sins: also "the
Baptism of John," which prepared the way for our Baptism.
_______________________

TWELFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 66, Art. 12]

Whether the Baptism of Blood Is the Most Excellent of These?

Objection 1: It seems that the Baptism of Blood is not the most
excellent of these three. For the Baptism of Water impresses a
character; which the Baptism of Blood cannot do. Therefore the
Baptism of Blood is not more excellent than the Baptism of Water.

Obj. 2: Further, the Baptism of Blood is of no avail without the
Baptism of the Spirit, which is by charity; for it is written (1 Cor.
13:3): "If I should deliver my body to be burned, and have not
charity, it profiteth me nothing." But the Baptism of the Spirit
avails without the Baptism of Blood; for not only the martyrs are
saved. Therefore the Baptism of Blood is not the most excellent.

Obj. 3: Further, just as the Baptism of Water derives its efficacy
from Christ's Passion, to which, as stated above (A. 11), the Baptism
of Blood corresponds, so Christ's Passion derives its efficacy from
the Holy Ghost, according to Heb. 9:14: "The Blood of Christ, Who by
the Holy Ghost offered Himself unspotted unto God, shall cleanse our
conscience from dead works," etc. Therefore the Baptism of the Spirit
is more excellent than the Baptism of Blood. Therefore the Baptism of
Blood is not the most excellent.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine (Ad Fortunatum) speaking of the
comparison between Baptisms says: "The newly baptized confesses his
faith in the presence of the priest: the martyr in the presence of
the persecutor. The former is sprinkled with water, after he has
confessed; the latter with his blood. The former receives the Holy
Ghost by the imposition of the bishop's hands; the latter is made the
temple of the Holy Ghost."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 11), the shedding of blood for
Christ's sake, and the inward operation of the Holy Ghost, are called
baptisms, in so far as they produce the effect of the Baptism of
Water. Now the Baptism of Water derives its efficacy from Christ's
Passion and from the Holy Ghost, as already stated (A. 11). These two
causes act in each of these three Baptisms; most excellently,
however, in the Baptism of Blood. For Christ's Passion acts in the
Baptism of Water by way of a figurative representation; in the
Baptism of the Spirit or of Repentance, by way of desire; but in the
Baptism of Blood, by way of imitating the (Divine) act. In like
manner, too, the power of the Holy Ghost acts in the Baptism of Water
through a certain hidden power; in the Baptism of Repentance by
moving the heart; but in the Baptism of Blood by the highest degree
of fervor of dilection and love, according to John 15:13: "Greater
love than this no man hath that a man lay down his life for his
friends."

Reply Obj. 1: A character is both reality and a sacrament. And we do
not say that the Baptism of Blood is more excellent, considering the
nature of a sacrament; but considering the sacramental effect.

Reply Obj. 2: The shedding of blood is not in the nature of a Baptism
if it be without charity. Hence it is clear that the Baptism of Blood
includes the Baptism of the Spirit, but not conversely. And from this
it is proved to be more perfect.

Reply Obj. 3: The Baptism owes its pre-eminence not only to Christ's
Passion, but also to the Holy Ghost, as stated above.
_______________________

QUESTION 67

OF THE MINISTERS BY WHOM THE SACRAMENT OF BAPTISM IS CONFERRED
(In Eight Articles)

We have now to consider the ministers by whom the sacrament of
Baptism is conferred. And concerning this there are eight points of
inquiry:

(1) Whether it belongs to a deacon to baptize?

(2) Whether this belongs to a priest, or to a bishop only?

(3) Whether a layman can confer the sacrament of Baptism?

(4) Whether a woman can do this?

(5) Whether an unbaptized person can baptize?

(6) Whether several can at the same time baptize one and the same
person?

(7) Whether it is essential that someone should raise the person
baptized from the sacred font?

(8) Whether he who raises someone from the sacred font is bound to
instruct him?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 67, Art. 1]

Whether It Is Part of a Deacon's Duty to Baptize?

Objection 1: It seems that it is part of a deacon's duty to baptize.
Because the duties of preaching and of baptizing were enjoined by our
Lord at the same time, according to Matt. 28:19: "Going . . . teach
ye all nations, baptizing them," etc. But it is part of a deacon's
duty to preach the gospel. Therefore it seems that it is also part of
a deacon's duty to baptize.

Obj. 2: Further, according to Dionysius (Eccl. Hier. v) to "cleanse"
is part of the deacon's duty. But cleansing from sins is effected
specially by Baptism, according to Eph. 5:26: "Cleansing it by the
laver of water in the word of life." Therefore it seems that it
belongs to a deacon to baptize.

Obj. 3: Further, it is told of Blessed Laurence, who was a deacon,
that he baptized many. Therefore it seems that it belongs to deacons
to baptize.

_On the contrary,_ Pope Gelasius I says (the passage is to be found
in the Decrees, dist. 93): "We order the deacons to keep within their
own province"; and further on: "Without bishop or priest they must
not dare to baptize, except in cases of extreme urgency, when the
aforesaid are a long way off."

_I answer that,_ Just as the properties and duties of the heavenly
orders are gathered from their names, as Dionysius says (Coel. Hier.
vi), so can we gather, from the names of the ecclesiastical orders,
what belongs to each order. Now "deacons" are so called from being
"ministers"; because, to wit, it is not in the deacon's province to
be the chief and official celebrant in conferring a sacrament, but to
minister to others, his elders, in the sacramental dispensations. And
so it does not belong to a deacon to confer the sacrament of Baptism
officially as it were; but to assist and serve his elders in the
bestowal of this and other sacraments. Hence Isidore says (Epist. ad
Ludifred.): "It is a deacon's duty to assist and serve the priests,
in all the rites of Christ's sacraments, viz. those of Baptism, of
the Chrism, of the Paten and Chalice."

Reply Obj. 1: It is the deacon's duty to read the Gospel in church,
and to preach it as one catechizing; hence Dionysius says (Eccl.
Hier. v) that a deacon's office involves power over the unclean among
whom he includes the catechumens. But to teach, i.e. to expound the
Gospel, is the proper office of a bishop, whose action is "to
perfect," as Dionysius teaches (Eccl. Hier. v); and "to perfect" is
the same as "to teach." Consequently, it does not follow that the
office of baptizing belongs to deacons.

Reply Obj. 2: As Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. ii), Baptism has a power
not only of "cleansing" but also of "enlightening." Consequently, it
is outside the province of the deacon whose duty it is to cleanse
only: viz. either by driving away the unclean, or by preparing them
for the reception of a sacrament.

Reply Obj. 3: Because Baptism is a necessary sacrament, deacons are
allowed to baptize in cases of urgency when their elders are not at
hand; as appears from the authority of Gelasius quoted above. And it
was thus that Blessed Laurence, being but a deacon, baptized.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 67, Art. 2]

Whether to Baptize Is Part of the Priestly Office, or Proper to That
of Bishops?

Objection 1: It seems that to baptize is not part of the priestly
office, but proper to that of bishops. Because, as stated above (A.
1, Obj. 1), the duties of teaching and baptizing are enjoined in the
same precept (Matt. 28:19). But to teach, which is "to perfect,"
belongs to the office of bishop, as Dionysius declares (Eccl. Hier.
v, vi). Therefore to baptize also belongs to the episcopal office.

Obj. 2: Further, by Baptism a man is admitted to the body of the
Christian people: and to do this seems consistent with no other than
the princely office. Now the bishops hold the position of princes in
the Church, as the gloss observes on Luke 10:1: indeed, they even
take the place of the apostles, of whom it is written (Ps. 44:17):
"Thou shalt make them princes over all the earth." Therefore it seems
that to baptize belongs exclusively to the office of bishops.

Obj. 3: Further, Isidore says (Epist. ad Ludifred.) that "it belongs
to the bishop to consecrate churches, to anoint altars, to consecrate
(_conficere_) the chrism; he it is that confers the ecclesiastical
orders, and blesses the consecrated virgins." But the sacrament of
Baptism is greater than all these. Therefore much more reason is
there why to baptize should belong exclusively to the episcopal
office.

_On the contrary,_ Isidore says (De Officiis. ii): "It is certain
that Baptism was entrusted to priests alone."

_I answer that,_ Priests are consecrated for the purpose of
celebrating the sacrament of Christ's Body, as stated above (Q. 65,
A. 3). Now that is the sacrament of ecclesiastical unity, according
to the Apostle (1 Cor. 10:17): "We, being many, are one bread, one
body, all that partake of one bread and one chalice." Moreover, by
Baptism a man becomes a participator in ecclesiastical unity,
wherefore also he receives the right to approach our Lord's Table.
Consequently, just as it belongs to a priest to consecrate the
Eucharist, which is the principal purpose of the priesthood, so it is
the proper office of a priest to baptize: since it seems to belong to
one and the same, to produce the whole and to dispose the part in the
whole.

Reply Obj. 1: Our Lord enjoined on the apostles, whose place is taken
by the bishops, both duties, namely, of teaching and of baptizing,
but in different ways. Because Christ committed to them the duty of
teaching, that they might exercise it themselves as being the most
important duty of all: wherefore the apostles themselves said (Acts
6:2): "It is not reason that we should leave the word of God and
serve tables." On the other hand, He entrusted the apostles with the
office of baptizing, to be exercised vicariously; wherefore the
Apostle says (1 Cor. 1:17): "Christ sent me not to baptize, but to
preach the Gospel." And the reason for this was that the merit and
wisdom of the minister have no bearing on the baptismal effect, as
they have in teaching, as may be seen from what we have stated above
(Q. 64, A. 1, ad 2; AA. 5, 9). A proof of this is found also in the
fact that our Lord Himself did not baptize, but His disciples, as
John relates (4:2). Nor does it follow from this that bishops cannot
baptize; since what a lower power can do, that can also a higher
power. Wherefore also the Apostle says (1 Cor. 1:14, 16) that he had
baptized some.

Reply Obj. 2: In every commonwealth minor affairs are entrusted to
lower officials, while greater affairs are restricted to higher
officials; according to Ex. 18:22: "When any great matter soever
shall fall out, let them refer it to thee, and let them judge the
lesser matters only." Consequently it belongs to the lower officials
of the state to decide matters concerning the lower orders; while to
the highest it belongs to set in order those matters that regard the
higher orders of the state. Now by Baptism a man attains only to the
lowest rank among the Christian people: and consequently it belongs
to the lesser officials of the Church to baptize, namely, the
priests, who hold the place of the seventy-two disciples of Christ,
as the gloss says in the passage quoted from Luke 10.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 65, A. 3), the sacrament of Baptism
holds the first place in the order of necessity; but in the order of
perfection there are other greater sacraments which are reserved to
bishops.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 67, Art. 3]

Whether a Layman Can Baptize?

Objection 1: It seems that a layman cannot baptize. Because, as
stated above (A. 2), to baptize belongs properly to the priestly
order. But those things which belong to an order cannot be entrusted
to one that is not ordained. Therefore it seems that a layman, who
has no orders, cannot baptize.

Obj. 2: Further, it is a greater thing to baptize, than to perform
the other sacramental rites of Baptism, such as to catechize, to
exorcize, and to bless the baptismal water. But these things cannot
be done by laymen, but only by priests. Therefore it seems that much
less can laymen baptize.

Obj. 3: Further, just as Baptism is a necessary sacrament, so is
Penance. But a layman cannot absolve in the tribunal of Penance.
Neither, therefore, can he baptize.

_On the contrary,_ Pope Gelasius I and Isidore say that "it is often
permissible for Christian laymen to baptize, in cases of urgent
necessity."

_I answer that,_ It is due to the mercy of Him "Who will have all men
to be saved" (1 Tim. 2:4) that in those things which are necessary
for salvation, man can easily find the remedy. Now the most necessary
among all the sacraments is Baptism, which is man's regeneration unto
spiritual life: since for children there is no substitute, while
adults cannot otherwise than by Baptism receive a full remission both
of guilt and of its punishment. Consequently, lest man should have to
go without so necessary a remedy, it was ordained, both that the
matter of Baptism should be something common that is easily
obtainable by all, i.e. water; and that the minister of Baptism
should be anyone, even not in orders, lest from lack of being
baptized, man should suffer loss of his salvation.

Reply Obj. 1: To baptize belongs to the priestly order by reason of a
certain appropriateness and solemnity; but this is not essential to
the sacrament. Consequently, if a layman were to baptize even outside
a case of urgency; he would sin, yet he would confer the sacrament;
nor would the person thus baptized have to be baptized again.

Reply Obj. 2: These sacramental rites of Baptism belong to the
solemnity of, and are not essential to, Baptism. And therefore they
neither should nor can be done by a layman, but only by a priest,
whose office it is to baptize solemnly.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 65, AA. 3, 4), Penance is not so
necessary as Baptism; since contrition can supply the defect of the
priestly absolution which does not free from the whole punishment,
nor again is it given to children. Therefore the comparison with
Baptism does not stand, because its effect cannot be supplied by
anything else.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 67, Art. 4]

Whether a Woman Can Baptize?

Objection 1: It seems that a woman cannot baptize. For we read in the
acts of the Council of Carthage (iv): "However learned and holy a
woman may be, she must not presume to teach men in the church, or to
baptize." But in no case is a woman allowed to teach in church,
according to 1 Cor. 14:35: "It is a shame for a woman to speak in the
church." Therefore it seems that neither is a woman in any
circumstances permitted to baptize.

Obj. 2: Further, to baptize belongs to those having authority.
wherefore baptism should be conferred by priests having charge of
souls. But women are not qualified for this; according to 1 Tim.
2:12: "I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to use authority over man,
but to be subject to him [Vulg.: 'but to be in silence']." Therefore
a woman cannot baptize.

Obj. 3: Further, in the spiritual regeneration water seems to hold
the place of the mother's womb, as Augustine says on John 3:4, "Can"
a man "enter a second time into his mother's womb, and be born
again?" While he who baptizes seems to hold rather the position of
father. But this is unfitting for a woman. Therefore a woman cannot
baptize.

_On the contrary,_ Pope Urban II says (Decreta xxx): "In reply to the
questions asked by your beatitude, we consider that the following
answer should be given: that the baptism is valid when, in cases of
necessity, a woman baptizes a child in the name of the Trinity."

_I answer that,_ Christ is the chief Baptizer, according to John
1:33: "He upon Whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and
remaining upon Him, He it is that baptizeth." For it is written in
Col. 3 (cf. Gal. 3:28), that in Christ there is neither male nor
female. Consequently, just as a layman can baptize, as Christ's
minister, so can a woman.

But since "the head of the woman is the man," and "the head of . . .
man, is Christ" (1 Cor. 11:3), a woman should not baptize if a man be
available for the purpose; just as neither should a layman in the
presence of a cleric, nor a cleric in the presence of a priest. The
last, however, can baptize in the presence of a bishop, because it is
part of the priestly office.

Reply Obj. 1: Just as a woman is not suffered to teach in public, but
is allowed to instruct and admonish privately; so she is not
permitted to baptize publicly and solemnly, and yet she can baptize
in a case of urgency.

Reply Obj. 2: When Baptism is celebrated solemnly and with due form,
it should be conferred by a priest having charge of souls, or by one
representing him. But this is not required in cases of urgency, when
a woman may baptize.

Reply Obj. 3: In carnal generation male and female co-operate
according to the power of their proper nature; wherefore the female
cannot be the active, but only the passive, principle of generation.
But in spiritual generation they do not act, either of them, by their
proper power, but only instrumentally by the power of Christ.
Consequently, on the same grounds either man or woman can baptize in
a case of urgency.

If, however, a woman were to baptize without any urgency for so
doing, there would be no need of rebaptism: as we have said in regard
to laymen (A. 3, ad 1). But the baptizer herself would sin, as also
those who took part with her therein, either by receiving Baptism
from her, or by bringing someone to her to be baptized.
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 67, Art. 5]

Whether One That Is Not Baptized Can Confer the Sacrament of Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that one that is not baptized cannot confer the
sacrament of Baptism. For "none gives what he has not." But a
non-baptized person has not the sacrament of Baptism. Therefore he
cannot give it.

Obj. 2: Further, a man confers the sacrament of Baptism inasmuch as
he is a minister of the Church. But one that is not baptized, belongs
nowise to the Church, i.e. neither really nor sacramentally.
Therefore he cannot confer the sacrament of Baptism.

Obj. 3: Further, it is more to confer a sacrament than to receive it.
But one that is not baptized, cannot receive the other sacraments.
Much less, therefore, can he confer any sacrament.

_On the contrary,_ Isidore says: "The Roman Pontiff does not consider
it to be the man who baptizes, but that the Holy Ghost confers the
grace of Baptism, though he that baptizes be a pagan." But he who is
baptized, is not called a pagan. Therefore he who is not baptized can
confer the sacrament of Baptism.

_I answer that,_ Augustine left this question without deciding it.
For he says (Contra Ep. Parmen. ii): "This is indeed another
question, whether even those can baptize who were never Christians;
nor should anything be rashly asserted hereupon, without the
authority of a sacred council such as suffices for so great a
matter." But afterwards it was decided by the Church that the
unbaptized, whether Jews or pagans, can confer the sacrament of
Baptism, provided they baptize in the form of the Church. Wherefore
Pope Nicolas I replies to the questions propounded by the Bulgars:
"You say that many in your country have been baptized by someone,
whether Christian or pagan you know not. If these were baptized in
the name of the Trinity, they must not be rebaptized." But if the
form of the Church be not observed, the sacrament of Baptism is not
conferred. And thus is to be explained what Gregory II [*Gregory III]
writes to Bishop Boniface: "Those whom you assert to have been
baptized by pagans," namely, with a form not recognized by the
Church, "we command you to rebaptize in the name of the Trinity." And
the reason of this is that, just as on the part of the matter, as far
as the essentials of the sacrament are concerned, any water will
suffice, so, on the part of the minister, any man is competent.
Consequently, an unbaptized person can baptize in a case of urgency.
So that two unbaptized persons may baptize one another, one baptizing
the other and being afterwards baptized by him: and each would
receive not only the sacrament but also the reality of the sacrament.
But if this were done outside a case of urgency, each would sin
grievously, both the baptizer and the baptized, and thus the
baptismal effect would be frustrated, although the sacrament itself
would not be invalidated.

Reply Obj. 1: The man who baptizes offers but his outward
ministration; whereas Christ it is Who baptizes inwardly, Who can use
all men to whatever purpose He wills. Consequently, the unbaptized
can baptize: because, as Pope Nicolas I says, "the Baptism is not
theirs," i.e. the baptizers', "but His," i.e. Christ's.

Reply Obj. 2: He who is not baptized, though he belongs not to the
Church either in reality or sacramentally, can nevertheless belong to
her in intention and by similarity of action, namely, in so far as he
intends to do what the Church does, and in baptizing observes the
Church's form, and thus acts as the minister of Christ, Who did not
confine His power to those that are baptized, as neither did He to
the sacraments.

Reply Obj. 3: The other sacraments are not so necessary as Baptism.
And therefore it is allowable that an unbaptized person should
baptize rather than that he should receive other sacraments.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 67, Art. 6]

Whether Several Can Baptize at the Same Time?

Objection 1: It seems that several can baptize at the same time. For
unity is contained in multitude, but not _vice versa._ Wherefore it
seems that many can do whatever one can but not _vice versa:_ thus
many draw a ship which one could draw. But one man can baptize.
Therefore several, too, can baptize one at the same time.

Obj. 2: Further, it is more difficult for one agent to act on many
things, than for many to act at the same time on one. But one man can
baptize several at the same time. Much more, therefore, can many
baptize one at the same time.

Obj. 3: Further, Baptism is a sacrament of the greatest necessity.
Now in certain cases it seems necessary for several to baptize one at
the same time; for instance, suppose a child to be in danger of
death, and two persons present, one of whom is dumb, and the other
without hands or arms; for then the mutilated person would have to
pronounce the words, and the dumb person would have to perform the
act of baptizing. Therefore it seems that several can baptize one at
the same time.

_On the contrary,_ Where there is one agent there is one action. If,
therefore, several were to baptize one, it seems to follow that there
would be several baptisms: and this is contrary to Eph. 4:5: "one
Faith, one Baptism."

_I answer that,_ The Sacrament of Baptism derives its power
principally from its form, which the Apostle calls "the word of life"
(Eph. 5:26). Consequently, if several were to baptize one at the same
time, we must consider what form they would use. For were they to
say: "We baptize thee in the name of the Father and of the Son and of
the Holy Ghost," some maintain that the sacrament of Baptism would
not be conferred, because the form of the Church would not be
observed, i.e. "I baptize thee in the name of the Father and of the
Son and of the Holy Ghost." But this reasoning is disproved by the
form observed in the Greek Church. For they might say: "The servant
of God, N . . ., is baptized in the name of the Father and of the Son
and of the Holy Ghost," under which form the Greeks receive the
sacrament of Baptism: and yet this form differs far more from the
form that we use, than does this: "We baptize thee."

The point to be observed, however, is this, that by this form, "We
baptize thee," the intention expressed is that several concur in
conferring one Baptism: and this seems contrary to the notion of a
minister; for a man does not baptize save as a minister of Christ,
and as standing in His place; wherefore just as there is one Christ,
so should there be one minister to represent Christ. Hence the
Apostle says pointedly (Eph. 4:5): "one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism." Consequently, an intention which is in opposition to this
seems to annul the sacrament of Baptism.

On the other hand, if each were to say: "I baptize thee in the name
of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost," each would
signify his intention as though he were conferring Baptism
independently of the other. This might occur in the case where both
were striving to baptize someone; and then it is clear that whichever
pronounced the words first would confer the sacrament of Baptism;
while the other, however great his right to baptize, if he presume to
utter the words, would be liable to be punished as a rebaptizer. If,
however, they were to pronounce the words absolutely at the same
time, and dipped or sprinkled the man together, they should be
punished for baptizing in an improper manner, but not for
rebaptizing: because each would intend to baptize an unbaptized
person, and each, so far as he is concerned, would baptize. Nor would
they confer several sacraments: but the one Christ baptizing inwardly
would confer one sacrament by means of both together.

Reply Obj. 1: This argument avails in those agents that act by their
own power. But men do not baptize by their own, but by Christ's
power, Who, since He is one, perfects His work by means of one
minister.

Reply Obj. 2: In a case of necessity one could baptize several at the
same time under this form: "I baptize ye": for instance, if they were
threatened by a falling house, or by the sword or something of the
kind, so as not to allow of the delay involved by baptizing them
singly. Nor would this cause a change in the Church's form, since the
plural is nothing but the singular doubled: especially as we find the
plural expressed in Matt. 28:19: "Baptizing them," etc. Nor is there
parity between the baptizer and the baptized; since Christ, the
baptizer in chief, is one: while many are made one in Christ by
Baptism.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 66, A. 1), the integrity of Baptism
consists in the form of words and the use of the matter.
Consequently, neither he who only pronounces the words, baptizes, nor
he who dips. Wherefore if one pronounces the words and the other
dips, no form of words can be fitting. For neither could he say: "I
baptize thee": since he dips not, and therefore baptizes not. Nor
could they say: "We baptize thee": since neither baptizes. For if of
two men, one write one part of a book, and the other write the other,
it would not be a proper form of speech to say: "We wrote this book,"
but the figure of synecdoche in which the whole is put for the part.
_______________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 67, Art. 7]

Whether in Baptism It Is Necessary for Someone to Raise the Baptized
from the Sacred Font?

Objection 1: It seems that in Baptism it is not necessary for someone
to raise the baptized from the sacred font. For our Baptism is
consecrated by Christ's Baptism and is conformed thereto. But Christ
when baptized was not raised by anyone from the font, but according
to Matt. 3:16, "Jesus being baptized, forthwith came out of the
water." Therefore it seems that neither when others are baptized
should anyone raise the baptized from the sacred font.

Obj. 2: Further, Baptism is a spiritual regeneration, as stated above
(A. 3). But in carnal generation nothing else is required but the
active principle, i.e. the father, and the passive principle, i.e.
the mother. Since, then, in Baptism he that baptizes takes the place
of the father, while the very water of Baptism takes the place of the
mother, as Augustine says in a sermon on the Epiphany (cxxxv); it
seems that there is no further need for someone to raise the baptized
from the sacred font.

Obj. 3: Further, nothing ridiculous should be observed in the
sacraments of the Church. But it seems ridiculous that after being
baptized, adults who can stand up of themselves and leave the sacred
font, should be held up by another. Therefore there seems no need for
anyone, especially in the Baptism of adults, to raise the baptized
from the sacred font.

_On the contrary,_ Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. ii) that "the priests
taking the baptized hand him over to his sponsor and guide."

_I answer that,_ The spiritual regeneration, which takes place in
Baptism, is in a certain manner likened to carnal generation:
wherefore it is written (1 Pet. 2:2): "As new-born babes, endowed
with reason desire milk [Vulg.: 'desire reasonable milk'] without
guile." Now, in carnal generation the new-born child needs
nourishment and guidance: wherefore, in spiritual generation also,
someone is needed to undertake the office of nurse and tutor by
forming and instructing one who is yet a novice in the Faith,
concerning things pertaining to Christian faith and mode of life,
which the clergy have not the leisure to do through being busy with
watching over the people generally: because little children and
novices need more than ordinary care. Consequently someone is needed
to receive the baptized from the sacred font as though for the
purpose of instructing and guiding them. It is to this that Dionysius
refers (Eccl. Hier. xi) saying: "It occurred to our heavenly guides,"
i.e. the Apostles, "and they decided, that infants should be taken
charge of thus: that the parents of the child should hand it over to
some instructor versed in holy things, who would thenceforth take
charge of the child, and be to it a spiritual father and a guide in
the road of salvation."

Reply Obj. 1: Christ was baptized not that He might be regenerated,
but that He might regenerate others: wherefore after His Baptism He
needed no tutor like other children.

Reply Obj. 2: In carnal generation nothing is essential besides a
father and a mother: yet to ease the latter in her travail, there is
need for a midwife; and for the child to be suitably brought up there
is need for a nurse and a tutor: while their place is taken in
Baptism by him who raises the child from the sacred font.
Consequently this is not essential to the sacrament, and in a case of
necessity one alone can baptize with water.

Reply Obj. 3: It is not on account of bodily weakness that the
baptized is raised from the sacred font by the godparent, but on
account of spiritual weakness, as stated above.
_______________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 67, Art. 8]

Whether He Who Raises Anyone from the Sacred Font Is Bound to
Instruct Him?

Objection 1: It seems that he who raises anyone from the sacred font
is not bound to instruct him. For none but those who are themselves
instructed can give instruction. But even the uneducated and
ill-instructed are allowed to raise people from the sacred font.
Therefore he who raises a baptized person from the font is not bound
to instruct him.

Obj. 2: Further, a son is instructed by his father better than by a
stranger: for, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. viii), a son receives
from his father, "being, food, and education." If, therefore,
godparents are bound to instruct their godchildren, it would be
fitting for the carnal father, rather than another, to be the
godparent of his own child. And yet this seems to be forbidden, as
may be seen in the Decretals (xxx, qu. 1, Cap. Pervenit and Dictum
est).

Obj. 3: Further, it is better for several to instruct than for one
only. If, therefore, godparents are bound to instruct their
godchildren, it would be better to have several godparents than only
one. Yet this is forbidden in a decree of Pope Leo, who says: "A
child should not have more than one godparent, be this a man or a
woman."

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says in a sermon for Easter (clxviii):
"In the first place I admonish you, both men and women, who have
raised children in Baptism, that ye stand before God as sureties for
those whom you have been seen to raise from the sacred font."

_I answer that,_ Every man is bound to fulfil those duties which he
has undertaken to perform. Now it has been stated above (A. 7) that
godparents take upon themselves the duties of a tutor. Consequently
they are bound to watch over their godchildren when there is need for
them to do so: for instance when and where children are brought up
among unbelievers. But if they are brought up among Catholic
Christians, the godparents may well be excused from this
responsibility, since it may be presumed that the children will be
carefully instructed by their parents. If, however, they perceive in
any way that the contrary is the case, they would be bound, as far as
they are able, to see to the spiritual welfare of their godchildren.

Reply Obj. 1: Where the danger is imminent, the godparent, as
Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. vii), should be someone "versed in holy
things." But where the danger is not imminent, by reason of the
children being brought up among Catholics, anyone is admitted to this
position, because the things pertaining to the Christian rule of life
and faith are known openly by all. Nevertheless an unbaptized person
cannot be a godparent, as was decreed in the Council of Mainz,
although an unbaptized person: because the person baptizing is
essential to the sacrament, wherefore as the godparent is not, as
stated above (A. 7, ad 2).

Reply Obj. 2: Just as spiritual generation is distinct from carnal
generation, so is spiritual education distinct from that of the body;
according to Heb. 12:9: "Moreover we have had fathers of our flesh
for instructors, and we reverenced them: shall we not much more obey
the Father of Spirits, and live?" Therefore the spiritual father
should be distinct from the carnal father, unless necessity demanded
otherwise.

Reply Obj. 3: Education would be full of confusion if there were more
than one head instructor. Wherefore there should be one principal
sponsor in Baptism: but others can be allowed as assistants.
_______________________

QUESTION 68

OF THOSE WHO RECEIVE BAPTISM
(In Twelve Articles)

We have now to consider those who receive Baptism; concerning which
there are twelve points of inquiry:

(1) Whether all are bound to receive Baptism?

(2) Whether a man can be saved without Baptism?

(3) Whether Baptism should be deferred?

(4) Whether sinners should be baptized?

(5) Whether works of satisfaction should be enjoined on sinners that
have been baptized?

(6) Whether Confession of sins is necessary?

(7) Whether an intention is required on the part of the one baptized?

(8) Whether faith is necessary?

(9) Whether infants should be baptized?

(10) Whether the children of Jews should be baptized against the will
of their parents?

(11) Whether anyone should be baptized in the mother's womb?

(12) Whether madmen and imbeciles should be baptized?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 68, Art. 1]

Whether All Are Bound to Receive Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that not all are bound to receive Baptism. For
Christ did not narrow man's road to salvation. But before Christ's
coming men could be saved without Baptism: therefore also after
Christ's coming.

Obj. 2: Further, Baptism seems to have been instituted principally as
a remedy for original sin. Now, since a man who is baptized is
without original sin, it seems that he cannot transmit it to his
children. Therefore it seems that the children of those who have been
baptized, should not themselves be baptized.

Obj. 3: Further, Baptism is given in order that a man may, through
grace, be cleansed from sin. But those who are sanctified in the
womb, obtain this without Baptism. Therefore they are not bound to
receive Baptism.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (John 3:5): "Unless a man be born
again of water and the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom
of God." Again it is stated in De Eccl. Dogm. xli, that "we believe
the way of salvation to be open to those only who are baptized."

_I answer that,_ Men are bound to that without which they cannot
obtain salvation. Now it is manifest that no one can obtain salvation
but through Christ; wherefore the Apostle says (Rom. 5:18): "As by
the offense of one unto all men unto condemnation; so also by the
justice of one, unto all men unto justification of life." But for
this end is Baptism conferred on a man, that being regenerated
thereby, he may be incorporated in Christ, by becoming His member:
wherefore it is written (Gal. 3:27): "As many of you as have been
baptized in Christ, have put on Christ." Consequently it is manifest
that all are bound to be baptized: and that without Baptism there is
no salvation for men.

Reply Obj. 1: At no time, not even before the coming of Christ, could
men be saved unless they became members of Christ: because, as it is
written (Acts 4:12), "there is no other name under heaven given to
men, whereby we must be saved." But before Christ's coming, men were
incorporated in Christ by faith in His future coming: of which faith
circumcision was the "seal," as the Apostle calls it (Rom. 4:11):
whereas before circumcision was instituted, men were incorporated in
Christ by "faith alone," as Gregory says (Moral. iv), together with
the offering of sacrifices, by means of which the Fathers of old made
profession of their faith. Again, since Christ's coming, men are
incorporated in Christ by faith; according to Eph. 3:17: "That Christ
may dwell by faith in your hearts." But faith in a thing already
present is manifested by a sign different from that by which it was
manifested when that thing was yet in the future: just as we use
other parts of the verb, to signify the present, the past, and the
future. Consequently although the sacrament itself of Baptism was not
always necessary for salvation, yet faith, of which Baptism is the
sacrament, was always necessary.

Reply Obj. 2: As we have stated in the I-II, Q. 81, A. 3, ad 2, those
who are baptized are renewed in spirit by Baptism, while their body
remains subject to the oldness of sin, according to Rom. 8:10: "The
body, indeed, is dead because of sin, but the spirit liveth because
of justification." Wherefore Augustine (Contra Julian. vi) proves
that "not everything that is in man is baptized." Now it is manifest
that in carnal generation man does not beget in respect of his soul,
but in respect of his body. Consequently the children of those who
are baptized are born with original sin; wherefore they need to be
baptized.

Reply Obj. 3: Those who are sanctified in the womb, receive indeed
grace which cleanses them from original sin, but they do not
therefore receive the character, by which they are conformed to
Christ. Consequently, if any were to be sanctified in the womb now,
they would need to be baptized, in order to be conformed to Christ's
other members by receiving the character.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 68, Art. 2]

Whether a Man Can Be Saved Without Baptism?

Objection 1: It seems that no man can be saved without Baptism. For
our Lord said (John 3:5): "Unless a man be born again of water and
the Holy Ghost, he cannot enter the kingdom of God." But those alone
are saved who enter God's kingdom. Therefore none can be saved
without Baptism, by which a man is born again of water and the Holy
Ghost.

Obj. 2: Further, in the book De Eccl. Dogm. xli, it is written: "We
believe that no catechumen, though he die in his good works, will
have eternal life, except he suffer martyrdom, which contains all the
sacramental virtue of Baptism." But if it were possible for anyone to
be saved without Baptism, this would be the case specially with
catechumens who are credited with good works, for they seem to have
the "faith that worketh by charity" (Gal. 5:6). Therefore it seems
that none can be saved without Baptism.

Obj. 3: Further, as stated above (A. 1; Q. 65, A. 4), the sacrament
of Baptism is necessary for salvation. Now that is necessary "without
which something cannot be" (Metaph. v). Therefore it seems that none
can obtain salvation without Baptism.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Super Levit. lxxxiv) that "some
have received the invisible sanctification without visible
sacraments, and to their profit; but though it is possible to have
the visible sanctification, consisting in a visible sacrament,
without the invisible sanctification, it will be to no profit."
Since, therefore, the sacrament of Baptism pertains to the visible
sanctification, it seems that a man can obtain salvation without the
sacrament of Baptism, by means of the invisible sanctification.

_I answer that,_ The sacrament of Baptism may be wanting to someone
in two ways. First, both in reality and in desire; as is the case
with those who neither are baptized, nor wished to be baptized: which
clearly indicates contempt of the sacrament, in regard to those who
have the use of the free-will. Consequently those to whom Baptism is
wanting thus, cannot obtain salvation: since neither sacramentally
nor mentally are they incorporated in Christ, through Whom alone can
salvation be obtained.

Secondly, the sacrament of Baptism may be wanting to anyone in
reality but not in desire: for instance, when a man wishes to be
baptized, but by some ill-chance he is forestalled by death before
receiving Baptism. And such a man can obtain salvation without being
actually baptized, on account of his desire for Baptism, which desire
is the outcome of "faith that worketh by charity," whereby God, Whose
power is not tied to visible sacraments, sanctifies man inwardly.
Hence Ambrose says of Valentinian, who died while yet a catechumen:
"I lost him whom I was to regenerate: but he did not lose the grace
he prayed for."

Reply Obj. 1: As it is written (1 Kings 16:7), "man seeth those
things that appear, but the Lord beholdeth the heart." Now a man who
desires to be "born again of water and the Holy Ghost" by Baptism, is
regenerated in heart though not in body. Thus the Apostle says (Rom.
2:29) that "the circumcision is that of the heart, in the spirit, not
in the letter; whose praise is not of men but of God."

Reply Obj. 2: No man obtains eternal life unless he be free from all
guilt and debt of punishment. Now this plenary absolution is given
when a man receives Baptism, or suffers martyrdom: for which reason
is it stated that martyrdom "contains all the sacramental virtue of
Baptism," i.e. as to the full deliverance from guilt and punishment.
Suppose, therefore, a catechumen to have the desire for Baptism (else
he could not be said to die in his good works, which cannot be
without "faith that worketh by charity"), such a one, were he to die,
would not forthwith come to eternal life, but would suffer punishment
for his past sins, "but he himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire"
as is stated 1 Cor. 3:15.

Reply Obj. 3: The sacrament of Baptism is said to be necessary for
salvation in so far as man cannot be saved without, at least, Baptism
of desire; "which, with God, counts for the deed" (Augustine, Enarr.
in Ps. 57).
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 68, Art. 3]

Whether Baptism Should Be Deferred?

Objection 1: It seems that Baptism should be deferred. For Pope Leo
says (Epist. xvi): "Two seasons," i.e. Easter and Whitsuntide, "are
fixed by the Roman Pontiff for the celebration of Baptism. Wherefore
we admonish your Beatitude not to add any other days to this custom."
Therefore it seems that Baptism should be conferred not at once, but
delayed until the aforesaid seasons.

Obj. 2: Further, we read in the decrees of the Council of Agde (Can.
xxxiv): "If Jews whose bad faith often 'returns to the vomit,' wish
to submit to the Law of the Catholic Church, let them for eight
months enter the porch of the church with the catechumens; and if
they are found to come in good faith then at last they may deserve
the grace of Baptism." Therefore men should not be baptized at once,
and Baptism should be deferred for a certain fixed time.

Obj. 3: Further, as we read in Isa. 27:9, "this is all the fruit,
that the sin . . . should be taken away." Now sin seems to be taken
away, or at any rate lessened, if Baptism be deferred. First, because
those who sin after Baptism, sin more grievously, according to Heb.
10:29: "How much more, do you think, he deserveth worse punishments,
who hath . . . esteemed the blood of the testament," i.e. Baptism,
"unclean, by which he was sanctified?" Secondly, because Baptism
takes away past, but not future, sins: wherefore the more it is
deferred, the more sins it takes away. Therefore it seems that
Baptism should be deferred for a long time.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Ecclus. 5:8): "Delay not to be
converted to the Lord, and defer it not from day to day." But the
perfect conversion to God is of those who are regenerated in Christ
by Baptism. Therefore Baptism should not be deferred from day to day.

_I answer that,_ In this matter we must make a distinction and see
whether those who are to be baptized are children or adults. For if
they be children, Baptism should not be deferred. First, because in
them we do not look for better instruction or fuller conversion.
Secondly, because of the danger of death, for no other remedy is
available for them besides the sacrament of Baptism.

On the other hand, adults have a remedy in the mere desire for
Baptism, as stated above (A. 2). And therefore Baptism should not be
conferred on adults as soon as they are converted, but it should be
deferred until some fixed time. First, as a safeguard to the Church,
lest she be deceived through baptizing those who come to her under
false pretenses, according to 1 John 4:1: "Believe not every spirit,
but try the spirits, if they be of God." And those who approach
Baptism are put to this test, when their faith and morals are
subjected to proof for a space of time. Secondly, this is needful as
being useful for those who are baptized; for they require a certain
space of time in order to be fully instructed in the faith, and to be
drilled in those things that pertain to the Christian mode of life.
Thirdly, a certain reverence for the sacrament demands a delay
whereby men are admitted to Baptism at the principal festivities,
viz. of Easter and Pentecost, the result being that they receive the
sacrament with greater devotion.

There are, however, two reasons for forgoing this delay. First, when
those who are to be baptized appear to be perfectly instructed in the
faith and ready for Baptism; thus, Philip baptized the Eunuch at once
(Acts 8); and Peter, Cornelius and those who were with him (Acts 10).
Secondly, by reason of sickness or some kind of danger of death.
Wherefore Pope Leo says (Epist. xvi): "Those who are threatened by
death, sickness, siege, persecution, or shipwreck, should be baptized
at any time." Yet if a man is forestalled by death, so as to have no
time to receive the sacrament, while he awaits the season appointed
by the Church, he is saved, yet "so as by fire," as stated above (A.
2, ad 2). Nevertheless he sins if he defer being baptized beyond the
time appointed by the Church, except this be for an unavoidable cause
and with the permission of the authorities of the Church. But even
this sin, with his other sins, can be washed away by his subsequent
contrition, which takes the place of Baptism, as stated above (Q. 66,
A. 11).

Reply Obj. 1: This decree of Pope Leo, concerning the celebration of
Baptism at two seasons, is to be understood "with the exception of
the danger of death" (which is always to be feared in children) as
stated above.

Reply Obj. 2: This decree concerning the Jews was for a safeguard to
the Church, lest they corrupt the faith of simple people, if they be
not fully converted. Nevertheless, as the same passage reads further
on, "if within the appointed time they are threatened with danger of
sickness, they should be baptized."

Reply Obj. 3: Baptism, by the grace which it bestows, removes not
only past sins, but hinders the commission of future sins. Now this
is the point to be considered--that men may not sin: it is a
secondary consideration that their sins be less grievous, or that
their sins be washed away, according to 1 John 2:1, 2: "My little
children, these things I write to you, that you may not sin. But if
any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
just; and He is the propitiation for our sins."
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 68, Art. 4]

Whether Sinners Should Be Baptized?

Objection 1: It seems that sinners should be baptized. For it is
written (Zech. 13:1): "In that day there shall be a fountain open to
the House of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem: for the
washing of the sinner and of the unclean woman": and this is to be
understood of the fountain of Baptism. Therefore it seems that the
sacrament of Baptism should be offered even to sinners.

Obj. 2: Further, our Lord said (Matt. 9:12): "They that are in health
need not a physician, but they that are ill." But they that are ill
are sinners. Therefore since Baptism is the remedy of Christ the
physician of our souls, it seems that this sacrament should be
offered to sinners.

Obj. 3: Further, no assistance should be withdrawn from sinners. But
sinners who have been baptized derive spiritual assistance from the
very character of Baptism, since it is a disposition to grace.
Therefore it seems that the sacrament of Baptism should be offered to
sinners.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Serm. clxix): "He Who created thee
without thee, will not justify thee without thee." But since a
sinner's will is ill-disposed, he does not co-operate with God.
Therefore it is useless to employ Baptism as a means of justification.

_I answer that,_ A man may be said to be a sinner in two ways. First,
on account of the stain and the debt of punishment incurred in the
past: and on sinners in this sense the sacrament of Baptism should be
conferred, since it is instituted specially for this purpose, that by
it the uncleanness of sin may be washed away, according to Eph. 5:26:
"Cleansing it by the laver of water in the word of life."

Secondly, a man may be called a sinner because he wills to sin and
purposes to remain in sin: and on sinners in this sense the sacrament
of Baptism should not be conferred. First, indeed, because by Baptism
men are incorporated in Christ, according to Gal. 3:27: "As many of
you as have been baptized in Christ, have put on Christ." Now so long
as a man wills to sin, he cannot be united to Christ, according to 2
Cor. 6:14: "What participation hath justice with injustice?"
Wherefore Augustine says in his book on Penance (Serm. cccli) that
"no man who has the use of free-will can begin the new life, except
he repent of his former life." Secondly, because there should be
nothing useless in the works of Christ and of the Church. Now that is
useless which does not reach the end to which it is ordained; and, on
the other hand, no one having the will to sin can, at the same time,
be cleansed from sin, which is the purpose of Baptism; for this would
be to combine two contradictory things. Thirdly, because there should
be no falsehood in the sacramental signs. Now a sign is false if it
does not correspond with the thing signified. But the very fact that
a man presents himself to be cleansed by Baptism, signifies that he
prepares himself for the inward cleansing: while this cannot be the
case with one who purposes to remain in sin. Therefore it is manifest
that on such a man the sacrament of Baptism is not to be conferred.

Reply Obj. 1: The words quoted are to be understood of those sinners
whose will is set on renouncing sin.

Reply Obj. 2: The physician of souls, i.e. Christ, works in two ways.
First, inwardly, by Himself: and thus He prepares man's will so that
it wills good and hates evil. Secondly, He works through ministers,
by the outward application of the sacraments: and in this way His
work consists in perfecting what was begun outwardly. Therefore the
sacrament of Baptism is not to be conferred save on those in whom
there appears some sign of their interior conversion: just as neither
is bodily medicine given to a sick man, unless he show some sign of
life.

Reply Obj. 3: Baptism is the sacrament of faith. Now dead faith does
not suffice for salvation; nor is it the foundation, but living faith
alone, "that worketh by charity" (Gal. 5:6), as Augustine says (De
Fide et oper.). Neither, therefore, can the sacrament of Baptism give
salvation to a man whose will is set on sinning, and hence expels the
form of faith. Moreover, the impression of the baptismal character
cannot dispose a man for grace as long as he retains the will to sin;
for "God compels no man to be virtuous," as Damascene says (De Fide
Orth. ii).
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 68, Art. 5]

Whether Works of Satisfaction Should Be Enjoined on Sinners That Have
Been Baptized?

Objection 1: It seems that works of satisfaction should be enjoined
on sinners that have been baptized. For God's justice seems to demand
that a man should be punished for every sin of his, according to
Eccles. 12:14: "All things that are done, God will bring into
judgment." But works of satisfaction are enjoined on sinners in
punishment of past sins. Therefore it seems that works of
satisfaction should be enjoined on sinners that have been baptized.

Obj. 2: Further, by means of works of satisfaction sinners recently
converted are drilled into righteousness, and are made to avoid the
occasions of sin: "for satisfaction consists in extirpating the
causes of vice, and closing the doors to sin" (De Eccl. Dogm. iv).
But this is most necessary in the case of those who have been
baptized recently. Therefore it seems that works of satisfaction
should be enjoined on sinners.

Obj. 3: Further, man owes satisfaction to God not less than to his
neighbor. But if those who were recently baptized have injured their
neighbor, they should be told to make reparation to God by works of
penance.

_On the contrary,_ Ambrose commenting on Rom. 11:29: "The gifts and
the calling of God are without repentance," says: "The grace of God
requires neither sighs nor groans in Baptism, nor indeed any work at
all, but faith alone; and remits all, gratis."

_I answer that,_ As the Apostle says (Rom. 6:3, 4), "all we who are
baptized in Christ Jesus, are baptized in His death: for we are
buried together with Him, by Baptism unto death"; which is to say
that by Baptism man is incorporated in the very death of Christ. Now
it is manifest from what has been said above (Q. 48, AA. 2, 4; Q. 49,
A. 3) that Christ's death satisfied sufficiently for sins, "not for
ours only, but also for those of the whole world," according to 1
John 2:2. Consequently no kind of satisfaction should be enjoined on
one who is being baptized, for any sins whatever: and this would be
to dishonor the Passion and death of Christ, as being insufficient
for the plenary satisfaction for the sins of those who were to be
baptized.

Reply Obj. 1: As Augustine says in his book on Infant Baptism (De
Pecc. Merit. et Remiss. i), "the effect of Baptism is to make those,
who are baptized, to be incorporated in Christ as His members."
Wherefore the very pains of Christ were satisfactory for the sins of
those who were to be baptized; just as the pain of one member can be
satisfactory for the sin of another member. Hence it is written (Isa.
53:4): "Surely He hath borne our infirmities and carried our sorrows."

Reply Obj. 2: Those who have been lately baptized should be drilled
into righteousness, not by penal, but by "easy works, so as to
advance to perfection by taking exercise, as infants by taking milk,"
as a gloss says on Ps. 130:2: "As a child that is weaned is towards
his mother." For this reason did our Lord excuse His disciples from
fasting when they were recently converted, as we read in Matt. 9:14,
15: and the same is written 1 Pet. 2:2: "As new-born babes
desire . . . milk . . . that thereby you may grow unto salvation."

Reply Obj. 3: To restore what has been ill taken from one's neighbor,
and to make satisfaction for wrong done to him, is to cease from sin:
for the very fact of retaining what belongs to another and of not
being reconciled to one's neighbor, is a sin. Wherefore those who are
baptized should be enjoined to make satisfaction to their neighbor,
as also to desist from sin. But they are not to be enjoined to suffer
any punishment for past sins.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 68, Art. 6]

Whether Sinners Who Are Going to Be Baptized Are Bound to Confess
Their Sins?

Objection 1: It seems that sinners who are going to be baptized are
bound to confess their sins. For it is written (Matt. 3:6) that many
"were baptized" by John "in the Jordan confessing their sins." But
Christ's Baptism is more perfect than John's. Therefore it seems that
there is yet greater reason why they who are about to receive
Christ's Baptism should confess their sins.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Prov. 28:13): "He that hideth his
sins, shall not prosper; but he that shall confess and forsake them,
shall obtain mercy." Now for this is a man baptized, that he may
obtain mercy for his sins. Therefore those who are going to be
baptized should confess their sins.

Obj. 3: Further, Penance is required before Baptism, according to
Acts 2:38: "Do penance and be baptized every one of you." But
confession is a part of Penance. Therefore it seems that confession
of sins should take place before Baptism.

_On the contrary,_ Confession of sins should be sorrowful: thus
Augustine says (De Vera et Falsa Poenit. xiv): "All these
circumstances should be taken into account and deplored." Now, as
Ambrose says on Rom. 11:29, "the grace of God requires neither sighs
nor groans in Baptism." Therefore confession of sins should not be
required of those who are going to be baptized.

_I answer that,_ Confession of sins is twofold. One is made inwardly
to God: and such confession of sins is required before Baptism: in
other words, man should call his sins to mind and sorrow for them;
since "he cannot begin the new life, except he repent of his former
life," as Augustine says in his book on Penance (Serm. cccli). The
other is the outward confession of sins, which is made to a priest;
and such confession is not required before Baptism. First, because
this confession, since it is directed to the person of the minister,
belongs to the sacrament of Penance, which is not required before
Baptism, which is the door of all the sacraments. Secondly, because
the reason why a man makes outward confession to a priest, is that
the priest may absolve him from his sins, and bind him to works of
satisfaction, which should not be enjoined on the baptized, as stated
above (A. 5). Moreover those who are being baptized do not need to be
released from their sins by the keys of the Church, since all are
forgiven them in Baptism. Thirdly, because the very act of confession
made to a man is penal, by reason of the shame it inflicts on the one
confessing: whereas no exterior punishment is enjoined on a man who
is being baptized.

Therefore no special confession of sins is required of those who are
being baptized; but that general confession suffices which they make
when in accordance with the Church's ritual they "renounce Satan and
all his works." And in this sense a gloss explains Matt. 3:6, saying
that in John's Baptism "those who are going to be baptized learn that
they should confess their sins and promise to amend their life."

If, however, any persons about to be baptized, wish, out of devotion,
to confess their sins, their confession should be heard; not for the
purpose of enjoining them to do satisfaction, but in order to
instruct them in the spiritual life as a remedy against their vicious
habits.

Reply Obj. 1: Sins were not forgiven in John's Baptism, which,
however, was the Baptism of Penance. Consequently it was fitting that
those who went to receive that Baptism, should confess their sins, so
that they should receive a penance in proportion to their sins. But
Christ's Baptism is without outward penance, as Ambrose says (on Rom.
11:29); and therefore there is no comparison.

Reply Obj. 2: It is enough that the baptized make inward confession
to God, and also an outward general confession, for them to "prosper
and obtain mercy": and they need no special outward confession, as
stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: Confession is a part of sacramental Penance, which is
not required before Baptism, as stated above: but the inward virtue
of Penance is required.
_______________________

SEVENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 68, Art. 7]

Whether the Intention of Receiving the Sacrament of Baptism Is
Required on the Part of the One Baptized?

Objection 1: It seems that the intention of receiving the sacrament
of Baptism is not required on the part of the one baptized. For the
one baptized is, as it were, "patient" in the sacrament. But an
intention is required not on the part of the patient but on the part
of the agent. Therefore it seems that the intention of receiving
Baptism is not required on the part of the one baptized.

Obj. 2: Further, if what is necessary for Baptism be omitted, the
Baptism must be repeated; for instance, if the invocation of the
Trinity be omitted, as stated above (Q. 66, A. 9, ad 3). But it does
not seem that a man should be rebaptized through not having had the
intention of receiving Baptism: else, since his intention cannot be
proved, anyone might ask to be baptized again on account of his lack
of intention. Therefore it seems that no intention is required on the
part of the one baptized, in order that he receive the sacrament.

Obj. 3: Further, Baptism is given as a remedy for original sin. But
original sin is contracted without the intention of the person born.
Therefore, seemingly, Baptism requires no intention on the part of
the person baptized.

_On the contrary,_ According to the Church's ritual, those who are to
be baptized ask of the Church that they may receive Baptism: and thus
they express their intention of receiving the sacrament.

_I answer that,_ By Baptism a man dies to the old life of sin, and
begins a certain newness of life, according to Rom. 6:4: "We are
buried together with" Christ "by Baptism into death; that, as Christ
is risen from the dead . . . so we also may walk in newness of life."
Consequently, just as, according to Augustine (Serm. cccli), he who
has the use of free-will, must, in order to die to the old life,
"will to repent of his former life"; so must he, of his own will,
intend to lead a new life, the beginning of which is precisely the
receiving of the sacrament. Therefore on the part of the one
baptized, it is necessary for him to have the will or intention of
receiving the sacrament.

Reply Obj. 1: When a man is justified by Baptism, his passiveness is
not violent but voluntary: wherefore it is necessary for him to
intend to receive that which is given him.

Reply Obj. 2: If an adult lack the intention of receiving the
sacrament, he must be rebaptized. But if there be doubt about this,
the form to be used should be: "If thou art not baptized, I baptize
thee."

Reply Obj. 3: Baptism is a remedy not only against original, but also
against actual sins, which are caused by our will and intention.
_______________________

EIGHTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 68, Art. 8]

Whether Faith Is Required on the Part of the One Baptized?

Objection 1: It seems that faith is required on the part of the one
baptized. For the sacrament of Baptism was instituted by Christ. But
Christ, in giving the form of Baptism, makes faith to precede Baptism
(Mk. 16:16): "He that believeth and is baptized, shall be saved."
Therefore it seems that without faith there can be no sacrament of
Baptism.

Obj. 2: Further, nothing useless is done in the sacraments of the
Church. But according to the Church's ritual, the man who comes to be
baptized is asked concerning his faith: "Dost thou believe in God the
Father Almighty?" Therefore it seems that faith is required for
Baptism.

Obj. 3: Further, the intention of receiving the sacrament is required
for Baptism. But this cannot be without right faith, since Baptism is
the sacrament of right faith: for thereby men "are incorporated in
Christ," as Augustine says in his book on Infant Baptism (De Pecc.
Merit. et Remiss. i); and this cannot be without right faith,
according to Eph. 3:17: "That Christ may dwell by faith in your
hearts." Therefore it seems that a man who has not right faith cannot
receive the sacrament of Baptism.

Obj. 4: Further, unbelief is a most grievous sin, as we have shown in
the Second Part (II-II, Q. 10, A. 3). But those who remain in sin
should not be baptized: therefore neither should those who remain in
unbelief.

_On the contrary,_ Gregory writing to the bishop Quiricus says: "We
have learned from the ancient tradition of the Fathers that when
heretics, baptized in the name of the Trinity, come back to Holy
Church, they are to be welcomed to her bosom, either with the
anointing of chrism, or the imposition of hands, or the mere
profession of faith." But such would not be the case if faith were
necessary for a man to receive Baptism.

_I answer that,_ As appears from what has been said above (Q. 63, A.
6; Q. 66, A. 9) Baptism produces a twofold effect in the soul, viz.
the character and grace. Therefore in two ways may a thing be
necessary for Baptism. First, as something without which grace, which
is the ultimate effect of the sacrament, cannot be had. And thus
right faith is necessary for Baptism, because, as it appears from
Rom. 3:22, the justice of God is by faith of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, something is required of necessity for Baptism, because
without it the baptismal character cannot be imprinted. And thus
right faith is not necessary in the one baptized any more than in the
one who baptizes: provided the other conditions are fulfilled which
are essential to the sacrament. For the sacrament is not perfected by
the righteousness of the minister or of the recipient of Baptism, but
by the power of God.

Reply Obj. 1: Our Lord is speaking there of Baptism as bringing us to
salvation by giving us sanctifying grace: which of course cannot be
without right faith: wherefore He says pointedly: "He that believeth
and is baptized, shall be saved."

Reply Obj. 2: The Church's intention in baptizing men is that they
may be cleansed from sin, according to Isa. 27:9: "This is all the
fruit, that the sin . . . should be taken away." And therefore, as
far as she is concerned, she does not intend to give Baptism save to
those who have right faith, without which there is no remission of
sins. And for this reason she asks those who come to be baptized
whether they believe. If, on the contrary, anyone, without right
faith, receive Baptism outside the Church, he does not receive it
unto salvation. Hence Augustine says (De Baptism. contr. Donat. iv):
"From the Church being compared to Paradise we learn that men can
receive her Baptism even outside her fold, but that elsewhere none
can receive or keep the salvation of the blessed."

Reply Obj. 3: Even he who has not right faith on other points, can
have right faith about the sacrament of Baptism: and so he is not
hindered from having the intention of receiving that sacrament. Yet
even if he think not aright concerning this sacrament, it is enough,
for the receiving of the sacrament, that he should have a general
intention of receiving Baptism, according as Christ instituted, and
as the Church bestows it.

Reply Obj. 4: Just as the sacrament of Baptism is not to be conferred
on a man who is unwilling to give up his other sins, so neither
should it be given to one who is unwilling to renounce his unbelief.
Yet each receives the sacrament if it be conferred on him, though not
unto salvation.
_______________________

NINTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 68, Art. 9]

Whether Children Should Be Baptized?

Objection 1: It seems that children should not be baptized. For the
intention to receive the sacrament is required in one who is being
baptized, as stated above (A. 7). But children cannot have such an
intention, since they have not the use of free-will. Therefore it
seems that they cannot receive the sacrament of Baptism.

Obj. 2: Further, Baptism is the sacrament of faith, as stated above
(Q. 39, A. 5; Q. 66, A. 1, ad 1). But children have not faith, which
demands an act of the will on the part of the believer, as Augustine
says (Super Joan. xxvi). Nor can it be said that their salvation is
implied in the faith of their parents; since the latter are sometimes
unbelievers, and their unbelief would conduce rather to the damnation
of their children. Therefore it seems that children cannot be
baptized.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (1 Pet. 3:21) that "Baptism saveth"
men; "not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, but the
examination of a good conscience towards God." But children have no
conscience, either good or bad, since they have not the use of
reason: nor can they be fittingly examined, since they understand
not. Therefore children should not be baptized.

_On the contrary,_ Dionysius says (Eccl. Hier. iii): "Our heavenly
guides," i.e. the Apostles, "approved of infants being admitted to
Baptism."

_I answer that,_ As the Apostle says (Rom. 5:17), "if by one man's
offense death reigned through one," namely Adam, "much more they who
receive abundance of grace, and of the gift, and of justice, shall
reign in life through one, Jesus Christ." Now children contract
original sin from the sin of Adam; which is made clear by the fact
that they are under the ban of death, which "passed upon all" on
account of the sin of the first man, as the Apostle says in the same
passage (Rom. 5:12). Much more, therefore, can children receive grace
through Christ, so as to reign in eternal life. But our Lord Himself
said (John 3:5): "Unless a man be born again of water and the Holy
Ghost, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." Consequently it
became necessary to baptize children, that, as in birth they incurred
damnation through Adam so in a second birth they might obtain
salvation through Christ. Moreover it was fitting that children
should receive Baptism, in order that being reared from childhood in
things pertaining to the Christian mode of life, they may the more
easily persevere therein; according to Prov. 22:5: "A young man
according to his way, even when he is old, he will not depart from
it." This reason is also given by Dionysius (Eccl. Hier. iii).

Reply Obj. 1: The spiritual regeneration effected by Baptism is
somewhat like carnal birth, in this respect, that as the child while
in the mother's womb receives nourishment not independently, but
through the nourishment of its mother, so also children before the
use of reason, being as it were in the womb of their mother the
Church, receive salvation not by their own act, but by the act of the
Church. Hence Augustine says (De Pecc. Merit. et Remiss. i): "The
Church, our mother, offers her maternal mouth for her children, that
they may imbibe the sacred mysteries: for they cannot as yet with
their own hearts believe unto justice, nor with their own mouths
confess unto salvation . . . And if they are rightly said to believe,
because in a certain fashion they make profession of faith by the
words of their sponsors, why should they not also be said to repent,
since by the words of those same sponsors they evidence their
renunciation of the devil and this world?" For the same reason they
can be said to intend, not by their own act of intention, since at
times they struggle and cry; but by the act of those who bring them
to be baptized.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says, writing to Boniface (Cont. duas Ep.
Pelag. i), "in the Church of our Saviour little children believe
through others, just as they contracted from others those sins which
are remitted in Baptism." Nor is it a hindrance to their salvation if
their parents be unbelievers, because, as Augustine says, writing to
the same Boniface (Ep. xcviii), "little children are offered that
they may receive grace in their souls, not so much from the hands of
those that carry them (yet from these too, if they be good and
faithful) as from the whole company of the saints and the faithful.
For they are rightly considered to be offered by those who are
pleased at their being offered, and by whose charity they are united
in communion with the Holy Ghost." And the unbelief of their own
parents, even if after Baptism these strive to infect them with the
worship of demons, hurts not the children. For as Augustine says
(Cont. duas Ep. Pelag. i) "when once the child has been begotten by
the will of others, he cannot subsequently be held by the bonds of
another's sin so long as he consent not with his will, according to"
Ezech. 18:4: "'As the soul of the Father, so also the soul of the son
is mine; the soul that sinneth, the same shall die.' Yet he
contracted from Adam that which was loosed by the grace of this
sacrament, because as yet he was not endowed with a separate
existence." But the faith of one, indeed of the whole Church, profits
the child through the operation of the Holy Ghost, Who unites the
Church together, and communicates the goods of one member to another.

Reply Obj. 3: Just as a child, when he is being baptized, believes
not by himself but by others, so is he examined not by himself but
through others, and these in answer confess the Church's faith in the
child's stead, who is aggregated to this faith by the sacrament of
faith. And the child acquires a good conscience in himself, not
indeed as to the act, but as to the habit, by sanctifying grace.
_______________________

TENTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 68, Art. 10]

Whether Children of Jews or Other Unbelievers Should Be Baptized
Against the Will of Their Parents?

Objection 1: It seems that children of Jews or other unbelievers
should be baptized against the will of their parents. For it is a
matter of greater urgency to rescue a man from the danger of eternal
death than from the danger of temporal death. But one ought to rescue
a child that is threatened by the danger of temporal death, even if
its parents through malice try to prevent its being rescued.
Therefore much more reason is there for rescuing the children of
unbelievers from the danger of eternal death, even against their
