one is to God, the more conscious is he of his sinfulness and the less
likely to boast of his own moral attainments. The more one acknowledges
his unworthiness, the better is he prepared to serve his Master and his
fellow men. The pride of Pharisaism on the part of nations, as well as in
the lives of individuals, stands in the way of helpfulness and brotherhood
and the favor of God. What is needed to-day is universal repentance, a
manifestation of the humble and the contrite heart; "For every one that
exalteth himself shall be humbled; but he that humbleth himself shall be
exalted."



5. Jesus Receiving Little Children. Ch. 18:15-17


    15 And they were bringing unto him also their babes, that he
    should touch them: but when the disciples saw it, they rebuked
    them. 16 But Jesus called them unto him saying, Suffer the little
    children to come unto me, and forbid them not: for to such
    belongeth the kingdom of God. 17 Verily I say unto you, Whosoever
    shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall
    in no wise enter therein.


This charming picture of Jesus blessing little children is sketched by
Matthew and Mark as well as by Luke. Its attractiveness has given it a
place on the canvas of many an artist. Its symbolic message is being
accepted by the modern Church, "They were bringing unto him also their
babes." The parents were probably carrying these children in their arms.
They realized that not only the lepers and the infirm needed the touch of
Christ, but that the power of the Master would bring blessing to the
children as well.

This touch may properly picture that personal relation and spiritual
contact with Christ which to-day, with equal eagerness, should be sought
for their children by all parents. "When the disciples saw it, they
rebuked them." They seemed to have felt that children were too
insignificant to be allowed to interfere with the work or to demand the
attention of Christ. At this present time there are many things which tend
to keep parents from bringing their children to the Master: custom and
carelessness and indifference and fear and diffidence; even friends seem
to play the part of those "disciples" and to conspire to prevent and
rebuke those who really long to see their children brought into a
sanctifying relationship to the Lord. No problem of to-day is more
important than the removal of such barriers and obstacles. The Christian
nurture of children is the supreme need of the times. "But Jesus called
them unto him, saying, Suffer the little children to come unto me, and
forbid them not." This reply of the Master has cast an unfading halo about
the faces of all children. Their innocence and their need made a special
appeal to the Master. Should it not affect us in like manner, and should
we not feel that no work is more Christlike and none more blessed than the
care of these little ones whom our Lord so truly loves? We are the real
servants of our Master only as we feel the appeal of childhood and as we
seek to supply to children their physical and mental and spiritual needs.

"For to such belongeth the kingdom of God." It is theirs by right. It
belongs not only to those particular children whom Jesus was then
blessing, not only to all children in general, but to all of whatever age
who are childlike in their trust and dependence and purity. All those who
are intrusted to the care of the Master and who accept his saving grace
will find a place in his Kingdom.

As the crowds gazed in wonder and sympathy on this tender scene, our Lord
added this word of warning, "Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of
God as a little child, he shall in no wise enter therein."



6. The Rich Ruler. Ch. 18:18-30


    18 And a certain ruler asked him, saying, Good Teacher, what shall
    I do to inherit eternal life? 19 And Jesus said unto him, Why
    callest thou me good? none is good, save one, _even_ God. 20 Thou
    knowest the commandments, Do not commit adultery, Do not kill, Do
    not steal, Do not bear false witness, Honor thy father and mother.
    21 And he said, All these things have I observed from my youth up.
    22 And when Jesus heard it, he said unto him, One thing thou
    lackest yet: sell all that thou hast, and distribute unto the
    poor, and thou shalt have treasure in heaven: and come, follow me.
    23 But when he heard these things, he became exceedingly
    sorrowful; for he was very rich. 24 And Jesus seeing him said, How
    hardly shall they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God!
    25 For it is easier for a camel to enter in through a needle's
    eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God. 26 And
    they that heard it said, Then who can be saved? 27 But he said,
    The things which are impossible with men are possible with God. 28
    And Peter said, Lo, we have left our own, and followed thee. 29
    And he said unto them, Verily I say unto you, There is no man that
    hath left house, or wife, or brethren or parents, or children, for
    the kingdom of God's sake, 30 who shall not receive manifold more
    in this time, and in the world to come eternal life.


In contrast with the penitent publican and with the loving trust of little
children which Luke has been depicting, there steps upon the scene a young
man, rich, upright, morally earnest, but apparently unconscious of the
sinful greed which threatened his soul and of that trust in riches which
might prevent his entering the Kingdom of God. In spite of his riches, his
youth, his position, and his power, his heart was not satisfied. He had
come to Jesus with the question, "Good Teacher, what shall I do to inherit
eternal life?" Jesus at once rebuked him, "Why callest thou me good? none
is good, save one, even God." By this reproof Jesus was neither defending
his own divinity nor denying his sinlessness. He wished to convince the
young man of his moral need. He intimated that the thoughtless use of the
word "good," addressed to one whom he regarded as a human teacher, was a
proof that the young man had a superficial view of goodness. Judged by a
divine standard the young inquirer could not claim to be good, nor can any
man regard himself as righteous in the light of divine holiness.

In order to awaken the conscience and to disturb the complacent
self-righteousness of the young inquirer, Jesus now tested him in the
light of the commandments in which God has revealed his holy will. The
youth at once replied, "All these things have I observed from my youth
up." Jesus now applied the deep probe which showed that the man had never
observed the spirit of the Law, even though he believed that he had kept
the letter. Jesus disclosed the real selfishness of the heart as he
proposed a supreme test: "One thing thou lackest yet: sell all that thou
hast, and distribute unto the poor, and thou shalt have treasure in
heaven: and come, follow me." In this sentence Jesus convicted the man of
having broken the Law, the essential requirement of which was to love his
neighbor as himself.

Jesus promised an eternal recompense for sacrifice, and he offers by his
personal companionship the influence and power which will make the keeping
of the Law more possible and complete. No one can claim to be righteous
when judged by the commandments as interpreted by Christ. Our only hope is
to come to him for guidance and help. He will lay bare the secret
selfishness of our hearts, and will develop the spirit of love and service
which forms the essence of eternal life, and in heaven he will ultimately
recompense his followers for every loss.

Jesus does not demand that all who obey him must literally leave their
worldly possessions. In his command to the rich ruler he was dealing with
a specific case. He does demand, however, that each one shall give up
anything which prevents open, honest discipleship and fellowship with
himself. In the case of this inquirer the obstacle was his wealth. It was
impossible for him to retain it and yet to follow Christ. The Master made
plain to him that his goodness had been superficial and inadequate. He
showed him that love of money was the canker which had been hidden in his
soul. He plainly placed before him the necessity of choosing between his
wealth and the eternal life which Jesus alone can give. No wonder that
when the young ruler heard the stern requirements and realized for the
first time that he was controlled by his wealth, "He became exceeding
sorrowful; for he was very rich." He kept his wealth and he rejected his
Saviour. He saw the possibility of eternal life, but he was not willing to
pay the price. He retained his riches, but he lost his soul.

As Jesus looked upon him in pity, he startled his disciples by the
statement of a truth which the scene had illustrated: "How hardly shall
they that have riches enter into the kingdom of God!" This was
particularly surprising to the Jews. They imagined that wealth was a
positive proof of divine favor. What then did Jesus mean? He did not
intend to teach that wealth is sinful or that private property is a social
wrong. He meant that riches may possibly keep their possessor from
Christian discipleship and that one who seeks to satisfy himself with such
wealth as keeps him from Christ can never enter the Kingdom of God. Jesus
even added a pardonable hyperbole, "It is easier for a camel to enter in
through a needle's eye, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
God." One who would enter that Kingdom must become as a little child; he
must abandon all trust in self, and be willing to sacrifice anything which
prevents his becoming an obedient servant of Christ. When the disciples
heard this, they were astonished and asked, "Then who can be saved?" Our
Lord replied, "The things which are impossible with men are possible with
God." It does require resolution and decision and sacrifice, but God is
ready to supply all needed grace. His spirit can strengthen those who turn
to him in their conscious need and with a real desire for a higher life.

As the rich man moved away sorrowfully in his costly robes, Peter looked
upon him with apparent scorn, and turned to Jesus with the self-complacent
remark, "Lo, we have left our own, and followed thee." The reply of Jesus
was not intended to encourage men to follow him in hope of gain. His
salvation is a matter of grace. We are not to think that by any sacrifice
of worldly goods we can purchase eternal life. However, the tender words
of the Master do remind us that a rich recompense will be received for all
that we may surrender in becoming his disciples. Even in this present time
one receives a hundredfold reward, not in literal kind but in experiences
which now satisfy the soul and "in the world to come eternal life."



7. Jesus Again Foretelling His Death. Ch. 18:31-34


    31 And he took unto him the twelve, and said unto them, Behold, we
    go up to Jerusalem, and all the things that are written through
    the prophets shall be accomplished unto the Son of man. 32 For he
    shall be delivered up unto the Gentiles, and shall be mocked, and
    shamefully treated, and spit upon: 33 and they shall scourge and
    kill him: and the third day he shall rise again. 34 And they
    understood none of these things; and this saying was hid from
    them, and they perceived not the things that were said.


As Jesus moved southward through Perea, nearing the end of his last
journey to Jerusalem, he was accompanied by admiring multitudes, but his
own heart was heavy with the knowledge of the suffering that awaited him
and he clearly saw before him the outline of the cross. Many of his
followers to-day share his experience in part; even in surroundings which
all observers envy, their hearts are crushed by secret sorrows and by the
knowledge of approaching pain.

Those who then were nearest to him were quite unconscious of his thoughts
or his need of sympathy. Then for the third time Jesus clearly predicted
his approaching death. He declared that his sufferings were to be in
accordance with written prophecy and now more clearly than ever he
described the details of all the anguish he must endure. He was to be
"delivered up unto the Gentiles" and therefore to be crucified, and with
all the sickening accompaniments of mockery and spitting and scourging, he
was to be killed.

Such a clear vision of what awaited him enhances for us the revelation of
his matchless heroism as he moved forward with unfaltering tread, giving
an inspiring example to each one who may be asked to take up the cross and
come after him.

Such knowledge reveals one who consciously was more than man, such a
confidence that he was fulfilling the prophecies of the inspired
Scriptures shows that he regarded himself as the Saviour of the world.
Such a willingness to suffer demonstrates the fact that he believed his
atoning death to be an essential part of his redeeming work.

The grave, however, was by no means his goal. With absolute definiteness
he declared that on the third day he would rise again. This vision of
triumph was in part the explanation of his courage. It was in virtue of
such a resurrection victory that he could be the Saviour of mankind.

His disciples, however, understood none of these things; with threefold
emphasis Luke describes their dullness of apprehension. They did not
believe that his death was necessary and for them the resurrection was not
even a dream. Their lack of expectation only made them more credible
witnesses of that resurrection when it did occur. However, would not a
clearer vision, unclouded by false notions of their own, have enabled them
to understand their Master and to bring some cheer to his lonely soul; and
does he not always desire his followers to accept his predictions with
implicit faith and to rest upon his promises with triumphant hope?



8. The Blind Man at Jericho. Ch. 18:35-43


    35 And it came to pass, as he drew nigh unto Jericho, a certain
    blind man sat by the way side begging: 36 and hearing a multitude
    going by, he inquired what this meant. 37 And they told him, that
    Jesus of Nazareth passeth by. 38 And he cried, saying, Jesus, thou
    son of David, have mercy on me. 39 And they that went before
    rebuked him, that he should hold his peace: but he cried out the
    more a great deal, Thou son of David, have mercy on me. 40 And
    Jesus stood, and commanded him to be brought unto him: and when he
    was come near, he asked him, 41 What wilt thou that I should do
    unto thee? And he said, Lord, that I may receive my sight. 42 And
    Jesus said unto him, Receive thy sight: thy faith hath made thee
    whole. 43 And immediately he received his sight, and followed him,
    glorifying God: and all the people, when they saw it, gave praise
    unto God.


As for the last time Jesus was journeying through Jericho, he healed a
blind man whom Mark in his record names Bartimaeus. This miracle was a
proof of divine power and an expression of human sympathy, but it was also
a parable of the ability which Jesus alone has of giving sight to the
morally blind and of imparting that spiritual vision which is absolutely
necessary if men are to live in right relations to one another and to God.
In certain minor details Luke's account differs from those of Matthew and
Mark. The former mentions two blind men and agrees with Mark in stating
that the miracle occurred as Jesus was leaving the city. Possibly Mark and
Luke refer to the best known of the two men and Luke may designate the
older of the two towns which bore the name of Jericho. All agree, however,
in picturing the pitiful condition of the helpless man who because of his
blindness was reduced to beggary and was a true symbol of the misery to
which one is brought by the lack of spiritual sight.

Then there is the picture of the obstacles to be overcome, of the doubts
and difficulties that lie in the way of those who seek to come under the
healing influence of our Lord. "They that went before rebuked him, that he
should hold his peace." Often do those who yearn for light and healing
hear words which dishearten and suggestions which lead to hopelessness and
despair!

Again there is the picture of eager determination and of unshaken faith.
"He cried out the more a great deal, Thou son of David, have mercy on me."
He had been told that "Jesus of Nazareth" was passing by. He, however,
called him "Jesus, thou son of David." He recognized the Prophet of
Nazareth as the promised Messiah, the Saviour of the world, and when
rebuked for crying to him for mercy, he continued steadfast in his faith
and his confident trust that Jesus would sympathize and heal.

Lastly, there is the picture of complete relief. The blind man was not
disappointed. Jesus said unto him, "Receive thy sight: thy faith hath made
thee whole." How many likewise have found Christ able and willing to give
them spiritual vision! Their eyes have been opened to behold things unseen
and eternal and they have been enabled to follow the Master with joyful
footsteps as they journey toward the celestial city where they will see
the King in his beauty and will be like him when they "see him even as he
is."

Such miracles of grace rejoice the hearts not only of those who are
healed; they occasion gratitude and joy to countless others also as they
are assured of the sympathy and grace and divine power of the Saviour. As
Luke here states, "All the people, when they saw it, gave praise unto
God."



9. The Conversion of Zacchaeus. Ch. 19:1-10


