the lateness of the Atharva as a collection, says, "This would not
necessarily imply that the main body of the Atharva hymns were
not already in existence when the compilation of the Rig-Veda took
place".(1) The Atharva refers to some poets of the Rig (as certain
hymnists in the Rig also do) as earlier men. If in the Rig (as Weber
says) "there breathes a lively natural feeling, a warm love of nature,
while in the Atharva, on the contrary, there predominates an anxious
apprehension of evil spirits and their magical powers," it by no means
follows that this apprehension is of later origin than the lively
feeling for Nature. Rather the reverse. There appears to be no doubt(2)
that the style and language of the Atharva are later than those of
the Rig. Roth, who recognises the change, in language and style, yet
considers the Atharva "part of the old literature".(3) He concludes that
the Atharva contains many pieces which, "both by their style and ideas,
are shown to be contemporary with the older hymns of the Rig-Veda".
In religion, according to Muir,(4) the Atharva shows progress in the
direction of monotheism in its celebration of Brahman, but it also
introduces serpent-worship.


(1) Journal of the American Oriental Society. iv. 253.

(2) Muir, ii. 446.

(3) Ibid., ii. 448.

(4) Ibid., ii. 451.


As to the Atharva, then, we are free to suppose, if we like, that the
dark magic, the evil spirits, the incantations, are old parts of Indian,
as of all other popular beliefs, though they come later into literature
than the poetry about Ushas and the morality of Varuna. The same remarks
apply to our third source of information, the Brahmanas. These are
indubitably comments on the sacred texts very much more modern in form
than the texts themselves. But it does not follow, and this is most
important for our purpose, that the myths in the Brahmanas are all later
than the Vedic myths or corruptions of the Veda. Muir remarks,(1) "The
Rig-Veda, though the oldest collection, does not necessarily contain
everything that is of the greatest age in Indian thought or tradition.
We know, for example, that certain legends, bearing the impress of
the highest antiquity, such as that of the deluge, appear first in the
Brahmanas." We are especially interested in this criticism, because most
of the myths which we profess to explain as survivals of savagery are
narrated in the Brahmanas. If these are necessarily late corruptions of
Vedic ideas, because the collection of the Brahmanas is far more modern
than that of the Veda, our argument is instantly disproved. But if ideas
of an earlier stratum of thought than the Vedic stratum may appear in
a later collection, as ideas of an earlier stratum of thought than
the Homeric appear in poetry and prose far later than Homer, then our
contention is legitimate. It will be shown in effect that a number of
myths of the Brahmanas correspond in character and incident with the
myths of savages, such as Cahrocs and Ahts. Our explanation is, that
these tales partly survived, in the minds perhaps of conservative local
priesthoods, from the savage stage of thought, or were borrowed from
aborigines in that stage, or were moulded in more recent times on
surviving examples of that wild early fancy.


(1) Muir, iv. 450.


In the age of the Brahmanas the people have spread southwards from the
basin of the Indus to that of the Ganges. The old sacred texts have
begun to be scarcely comprehensible. The priesthood has become much more
strictly defined and more rigorously constituted. Absurd as it may seem,
the Vedic metres, like the Gayatri, have been personified, and appear as
active heroines of stories presumably older than this personification.
The Asuras have descended from the rank of gods to that of the heavenly
opposition to Indra's government; they are now a kind of fiends, and the
Brahmanas are occupied with long stories about the war in heaven,
itself a very ancient conception. Varuna becomes cruel on occasion, and
hostile. Prajapati becomes the great mythical hero, and inherits the
wildest myths of the savage heroic beasts and birds.

The priests are now Brahmans, a hereditary divine caste, who possess all
the vast and puerile knowledge of ritual and sacrificial minutiae. As
life in the opera is a series of songs, so life in the Brahmanas is a
sequence of sacrifices. Sacrifice makes the sun rise and set, and the
rivers run this way or that.

The study of Indian myth is obstructed, as has been shown, by the
difficulty of determining the relative dates of the various legends, but
there are a myriad of other obstacles to the study of Indian mythology.
A poet of the Vedas says, "The chanters of hymns go about enveloped in
mist, and unsatisfied with idle talk".(1) The ancient hymns are still
"enveloped in mist," owing to the difficulty of their language and the
variety of modern renderings and interpretations. The heretics of
Vedic religion, the opponents of the orthodox commentators in ages
comparatively recent, used to complain that the Vedas were simply
nonsense, and their authors "knaves and buffoons". There are moments
when the modern student of Vedic myths is inclined to echo this petulant
complaint. For example, it is difficult enough to find in the Rig-Veda
anything like a categoric account of the gods, and a description of
their personal appearance. But in Rig-Veda, viii. 29, 1, we read of one
god, "a youth, brown, now hostile, now friendly; a golden lustre
invests him". Who is this youth? "Soma as the moon," according to the
commentators. M. Langlois thinks the sun is meant. Dr. Aufrecht thinks
the troop of Maruts (spirits of the storm), to whom, he remarks, the
epithet "dark-brown, tawny" is as applicable as it is to their master,
Rudra. This is rather confusing, and a mythological inquirer would like
to know for certain whether he is reading about the sun or soma, the
moon, or the winds.


(1) Rig-Veda, x. 82, 7, but compare Bergaigne, op. cit., iii. 72,
"enveloppes de nuees et de murmures".


To take another example; we open Mr. Max Muller's translation of the
Rig-Veda at random, say at page 49. In the second verse of the hymn
to the Maruts, Mr. Muller translates, "They who were born together,
self-luminous, with the spotted deer (the clouds), the spears, the
daggers, the glittering ornaments. I hear their whips almost close by,
as they crack them in their hands; they gain splendour on their way."
Now Wilson translates this passage, "Who, borne by spotted deer, were
born self-luminous, with weapons, war-cries and decorations. I hear the
cracking of their whips in their hands, wonderfully inspiring courage in
the fight." Benfey has, "Who with stags and spears, and with thunder and
lightning, self-luminous, were born. Hard by rings the crack of their
whip as it sounds in their hands; bright fare they down in storm."
Langlois translates, "Just born are they, self-luminous. Mark ye their
arms, their decorations, their car drawn by deer? Hear ye their clamour?
Listen! 'tis the noise of the whip they hold in their hands, the sound
that stirs up courage in the battle." This is an ordinary example of the
diversities of Vedic translation. It is sufficiently puzzling, nor is
the matter made more transparent by the variety of opinion as to the
meaning of the "deer" along with which the Maruts are said (by some of
the translators) to have been born. This is just the sort of passage
on which a controversy affecting the whole nature of Vedic mythological
ideas might be raised. According to a text in the Yajur Veda, gods, and
men, and beasts, and other matters were created from various portions of
the frame of a divine being named Prajapati.(1) The god Agni, Brahmans
and the goat were born from the mouth of Prajapati. From his breast and
arms came the god Indra (sometimes spoken of as a ram), the sheep, and
of men the Rajanya. Cows and gods called Visvadevas were born together
from his middle. Are we to understand the words "they who were born
together with the spotted deer" to refer to a myth of this kind--a myth
representing the Maruts and deer as having been born at the same birth,
as Agni came with the goat, and Indra with the sheep? This is just the
point on which the Indian commentators were divided.(2) Sayana, the old
commentator, says, "The legendary school takes them for deer with white
spots; the etymological school, for the many-coloured lines of
clouds". The modern legendary (or anthropological) and etymological (or
philological) students of mythology are often as much at variance in
their attempts to interpret the traditions of India.


(1) Muir, Sanskrit Texts, 2nd edit., i. 16.

(2) Max Muller, Rig-Veda Sanhita, trans., vol. i. p. 59.


Another famous, and almost comic, example of the difficulty of Vedic
interpretation is well known. In Rig-Veda, x. 16, 4, there is a funeral
hymn. Agni, the fire-god, is supplicated either to roast a goat or to
warm the soul of the dead and convey it to paradise. Whether the soul
is to be thus comforted or the goat is to be grilled, is a question that
has mightily puzzled Vedic doctors.(1) Professor Muller and M. Langlois
are all for "the immortal soul", the goat has advocates, or had
advocates, in Aufrecht, Ludwig and Roth. More important difficulties
of interpretation are illustrated by the attitude of M. Bergaigne in
La Religion Vedique, and his controversy with the great German
lexicographers. The study of mythology at one time made the Vedas its
starting-point. But perhaps it would be wise to begin from something
more intelligible, something less perplexed by difficulties of language
and diversities of interpretation.


(1) Muir, v. 217.


In attempting to criticise the various Aryan myths, we shall be guided,
on the whole, by the character of the myths themselves. Pure and
elevated conceptions we shall be inclined to assign to a pure and
elevated condition of thought (though such conceptions do, recognisably,
occur in the lowest known religious strata), and we shall make no
difficulty about believing that Rishis and singers capable of noble
conceptions existed in an age very remote in time, in a society which
had many of the features of a lofty and simple civilisation. But we
shall not, therefore, assume that the hymns of these Rishis are in any
sense "primitive," or throw much light on the infancy of the human mind,
or on the "origin" of religious and heroic myths. Impure, childish
and barbaric conceptions, on the other hand, we shall be inclined to
attribute to an impure, childish, and barbaric condition of thought; and
we shall again make no difficulty about believing that ideas originally
conceived when that stage of thought was general have been retained and
handed down to a far later period. This view of the possible, or rather
probable, antiquity of many of the myths preserved in the Brahmanas
is strengthened, if it needed strengthening, by the opinion of Dr.
Weber.(1) "We must indeed assume generally with regard to many of those
legends (in the Brahmanas of the Rig-Veda) that they had already gained
a rounded independent shape in tradition before they were incorporated
into the Brahmanas; and of this we have frequent evidence in the
DISTINCTLY ARCHAIC CHARACTER OF THEIR LANGUAGE, compared with that of
the rest of the text."


(1) History of Indian Literature, English trans., p. 47.


We have now briefly stated the nature and probable relative antiquity of
the evidence which is at the disposal of Vedic mythologists. The chief
lesson we would enforce is the necessity of suspending the judgment when
the Vedas are represented as examples of primitive and comparatively
pure and simple natural religion. They are not primitive; they are
highly differentiated, highly complex, extremely enigmatic expressions
of fairly advanced and very peculiar religious thought. They are not
morally so very pure as has been maintained, and their purity, such as
it is, seems the result of conscious reticence and wary selection rather
than of primeval innocence. Yet the bards or editors have by no means
wholly excluded very ancient myths of a thoroughly savage character.
These will be chiefly exposed in the chapter on "Indo-Aryan Myths of the
Beginnings of Things," which follows.



CHAPTER VIII. INDIAN MYTHS OF THE ORIGIN OF THE WORLD AND OF MAN.

Comparison of Vedic and savage myths--The metaphysical Vedic account of
the beginning of things--Opposite and savage fable of world made out
of fragments of a man--Discussion of this hymn--Absurdities of
Brahmanas--Prajapati, a Vedic Unkulunkulu or Qat--Evolutionary
myths--Marriage of heaven and earth--Myths of Puranas, their savage
parallels--Most savage myths are repeated in Brahmanas.


In discussing the savage myths of the origin of the world and of man, we
observed that they were as inconsistent as they were fanciful. Among the
fancies embodied in the myths was noted the theory that the world,
or various parts of it, had been formed out of the body of some
huge non-natural being, a god, or giant, or a member of some ancient
mysterious race. We also noted the myths of the original union of heaven
and earth, and their violent separation as displayed in the tales
of Greeks and Maoris, to which may be added the Acagchemem nation
in California.(1) Another feature of savage cosmogonies, illustrated
especially in some early Slavonic myths, in Australian legends, and in
the faith of the American races, was the creation of the world, or the
recovery of a drowned world by animals, as the raven, the dove and
the coyote. The hatching of all things out of an egg was another rude
conception, chiefly noted among the Finns. The Indian form occurs in the
Satapatha Brahmana.(2) The preservation of the human race in the Deluge,
or the creation of the race after the Deluge, was yet another detail
of savage mythology; and for many of these fancies we seemed to find a
satisfactory origin in the exceedingly credulous and confused state of
savage philosophy and savage imagination.


(1) Bancroft, v. 162.

(2) Sacred Books of the East, i. 216.


The question now to be asked is, do the traditions of the Aryans of
India supply us with myths so closely resembling the myths of Nootkas,
Maoris and Australians that we may provisionally explain them as
stories originally due to the invention of savages? This question may
be answered in the affirmative. The Vedas, the Epics and the Puranas
contain a large store of various cosmogonic traditions as inconsistent
as the parallel myths of savages. We have an Aryan Ilmarinen, Tvashtri,
who, like the Finnish smith, forged "the iron vault of hollow heaven"
and the ball of earth.(1) Again, the earth is said to have sprung, as
in some Mangaian fables, "from a being called Uttanapad".(2) Again,
Brahmanaspati, "blew the gods forth like a blacksmith," and the gods had
a hand in the making of things. In contrast with these childish pieces
of anthropomorphism, we have the famous and sublime speculations of an
often-quoted hymn.(3) It is thus that the poet dreams of the days before
being and non-being began:--


(1) Muir, v. 354.

(2) Rig-Veda, x. 72, 4.

(3) Ibid., x. 126.


"There was then neither non-entity nor entity; there was no atmosphere
nor sky above. What enveloped (all)?... Was it water, the profound
abyss? Death was not then, nor immortality: there was no distinction of
day or night. That One breathed calmly, self-supported; then was nothing
different from it, or above it. In the beginning darkness existed,
enveloped in darkness. All this was undistinguishable water. That One
which lay void and wrapped in nothingness was developed by the power
of fervour. Desire first arose in It, which was the primal germ of mind
(and which) sages, searching with their intellect, have discovered to be
the bond which connects entity with non-entity. The ray (or cord) which
stretched across these (worlds), was it below or was it above? There
were there impregnating powers and mighty forces, a self-supporting
principle beneath and energy aloft. Who knows? who here can declare
whence has sprung, whence this creation? The gods are subsequent to the
development of this (universe); who then knows whence it arose? From
what this creation arose, and whether (any one) made it or not, he who
in the highest heaven is its ruler, he verily knows, or (even) he does
not know."(1)


(1) Muir, Sanskrit Texts, 2nd edit., v. 357.


Here there is a Vedic hymn of the origin of things, from a book, it is
true, supposed to be late, which is almost, if not absolutely, free from
mythological ideas. The "self-supporting principle beneath and energy
aloft" may refer, as Dr. Muir suggests, to the father, heaven above, and
the mother, earth beneath. The "bond between entity and non-entity" is
sought in a favourite idea of the Indian philosophers, that of tapas or
"fervour". The other speculations remind us, though they are much more
restrained and temperate in character, of the metaphysical chants of the
New Zealand priests, of the Zunis, of Popol Vuh, and so on. These belong
to very early culture.

What is the relative age of this hymn? If it could be proved to be the
oldest in the Veda, it would demonstrate no more than this, that in time
exceedingly remote the Aryans of India possessed a philosopher, perhaps
a school of philosophers, who applied the minds to abstract speculations
on the origin of things. It could not prove that mythological
speculations had not preceded the attempts of a purer philosophy. But
the date cannot be ascertained. Mr. Max Muller cannot go farther than
the suggestion that the hymn is an expression of the perennis quaedam
philosophia of Leibnitz. We are also warned that a hymn is not
necessarily modern because it is philosophical.(1) Certainly that
is true; the Zunis, Maoris, and Mangaians exhibit amazing powers of
abstract thought. We are not concerned to show that this hymn is late;
but it seems almost superfluous to remark that ideas like those which it
contains can scarcely be accepted as expressing man's earliest theory
of the origin of all things. We turn from such ideas to those which the
Aryans of India have in common with black men and red men, with far-off
Finns and Scandinavians, Chaldaeans, Haidahs, Cherokees, Murri and
Maori, Mangaians and Egyptians.


(1) History of Sanskrit Literature, p. 568.


The next Vedic account of creation which we propose to consider is as
remote as possible in character from the sublime philosophic poem. In
the Purusha Sukta, the ninetieth hymn of the tenth book of the Rig-Veda
Sanhita, we have a description of the creation of all things out of the
severed limbs of a magnified non-natural man, Purusha. This conception
is of course that which occurs in the Norse myths of the rent body
of Ymir. Borr's sons took the body of the Giant Ymir and of his flesh
formed the earth, of his blood seas and waters, of his bones mountains,
of his teeth rocks and stones, of his hair all manner of plants, of his
skull the firmament, of his brains the clouds, and so forth. In Chaldean
story, Bel cuts in twain the magnified non-natural woman Omorca,
and converts the halves of her body into heaven and earth. Among the
Iroquois in North America, Chokanipok was the giant whose limbs, bones
and blood furnished the raw material of many natural objects; while
in Mangaia portions of Ru, in Egypt of Set and Osiris, in Greece of
Dionysus Zagreus were used in creating various things, such as stones,
plants and metals. The same ideas precisely are found in the ninetieth
hymn of the tenth book of the Rig-Veda. Yet it is a singular thing that,
in all the discussions as to the antiquity and significance of this
hymn which have come under our notice, there has not been one single
reference made to parallel legends among Aryan or non-Aryan peoples. In
accordance with the general principles which guide us in this work, we
are inclined to regard any ideas which are at once rude in character
and widely distributed, both among civilised and uncivilised races, as
extremely old, whatever may be the age of the literary form in which
they are presented. But the current of learned opinions as to the date
of the Purusha Sukta, the Vedic hymn about the sacrifice of Purusha
and the creation of the world out of fragments of his body, runs in the
opposite direction. The hymn is not regarded as very ancient by most
Sanskrit scholars. We shall now quote the hymn, which contains the data
on which any theory as to its age must be founded:--(1)


(1) Rig-Veda, x. 90; Muir, Sanskrit Texts, 2nd edit., i. 9.


"Purusha has a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet. On
every side enveloping the earth, he overpassed (it) by a space of ten
fingers. Purusha himself is this whole (universe), whatever is and
whatever shall be.... When the gods performed a sacrifice with Purusha
as the oblation, the spring was its butter, the summer its fuel, and the
autumn its (accompanying) offering. This victim, Purusha, born in the
beginning, they immolated on the sacrificial grass. With him the gods,
the Sadhyas, and the Rishis sacrificed. From that universal sacrifice
were provided curds and butter. It formed those aerial (creatures) and
