comforts?

7. The fifth ground of comfort is that the apostle calls the cross of the
faithful, "the sufferings of Christ." And that 1. Because all the faithful
are the spiritual members of the Lord Jesus Christ. Now, as the head feels
all the pains of every member of the body, by a certain sympathy arising
from its union with them; so Christ, who is our Head, feels all the
crosses and sufferings of every member. 2. Because Christ dwells in his
faithful servants, and is vitally united to them; therefore, also, he
suffers in his members, sharing in all their sufferings, banishments, and
persecutions, as he witnessed by a voice from heaven, "Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me?" Acts 9:4. 3. Because we are born anew of Christ, and
he is our "everlasting Father." Isa. 9:6. Now we know, that the heart of a
father has a very tender sense of the sufferings of his child. Therefore,
the sufferings of all believers are the sufferings of the Lord Jesus
Christ. And if it be so, canst thou think any affliction so great that it
cannot be made easy and tolerable by this consideration, that Christ is
thy Head, and thou art his member; that he is united to thee, dwells in
thee, and suffers in thee, regarding all thy sufferings as his own; that
he is thy Father, and feels in himself all the crosses, pains, and
afflictions that are laid upon thee?

8. The sixth ground of consolation, the Apostle deduces from Jesus Christ,
the spring and foundation of all comfort, in these words: "Our consolation
aboundeth by Christ." As sin is the fountain of all misery; so is Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, the spring and fountain of all joy and comfort.
Now as the power of Christ is greater than the power of sin; so is the
comfort that proceedeth from him greater and more powerful than any misery
that can arise from sin; according to the words of St. Paul, "Where sin
abounded grace did much more abound." Rom. 5:20. "For it pleased the
Father, that in Christ should all fulness dwell." Col. 1:19. Him,
therefore, the prophet Isaiah (Isa. 61:1) describes as sent from God to
comfort all that mourn. Whence it follows, that the comforts flowing from
Christ, are greater than any crosses and sorrows which we endure.

9. The seventh comfort which the Apostle mentions, is the glory of Christ:
hence he says, "As ye are partakers of his sufferings, so shall ye be also
of the consolation." This glory we know to be so great, that he is
glorious, not only with respect to his own Person, in a manner
incommunicable to his body, which is the Church; but also that he, as the
Head of the Church, was exalted to glory for that very end, that all the
members of his body might be partakers with him. Hence St. Paul calls him,
"The head of the church which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth
all in all." Ephes. 1:22, 23. And now, what calamity, what cross, what
affliction can be so bitter, as not to be sweetened by the consolation
arising from such future glory? Wherefore St. Paul does not "reckon the
sufferings of this present time to be worthy to be compared with the glory
that shall be revealed in us." Rom. 8:18.

10. It now remains that we speak of the five means, by which we may be
partakers of these comforts.

11. The first is, _true repentance and knowledge of sin_. Without this,
the soul is not capable of comfort; according to that saying of Christ,
"They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick." Matt.
9:12. On the other hand, a soul that has a true sense of sin, understands
that sin has cast it into so many miseries and calamities, and therefore
murmurs not against God, but abhors itself and its own iniquities (Lam.
3:39); and confesses that God is just in all that he has brought upon it.
For as sin, like a general contagion, has infected the whole mass of
mankind; so also the sentence of misery and affliction in this moral
state, has passed upon all, for that all have sinned. And whoever, like
the prophet Daniel (Dan. 9:7, 16), confesses his sin, shall find
consolation descending upon him from heaven like an angel, as in the case
of Daniel, ch. 9:21.

12. The second means, is _faith_, which hangs upon Jesus Christ, as the
infant upon the mother's bosom. It rests entirely in the paternal
affection of the God of all consolation. It holds fast by Jesus Christ, as
Jacob did by the angel, saying, "I will not let thee go, except thou bless
me." Gen. 32:26. It is faith which in Christ Jesus overcometh sin, death,
the world, the devil, and all misery. For "all things are possible to him
that believeth." Mark 9:23. And he that believeth shall see the glory of
God. John 11:40.

13. The third means, is _prayer_, which is a conversation with God. As it
is a relief and a refreshment to an afflicted soul, to communicate its
sorrows and troubles to a faithful friend: so are our hearts refreshed and
comforted, by conversing with God in prayer. "When I cried, thou
answeredst me, and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul." Psalm
138:3. Prayer offered up in the name of Jesus Christ, is like Jacob's
ladder (Gen. 28:12), on which the soul ascends from earth to heaven; as
soon as the prayer ascends, an angel, that is, divine consolation,
descends upon it. Thus it was in the agony of our blessed Lord; for when
he prayed more earnestly, lo! an angel descended from heaven to strengthen
him. Luke 22:43. And we may assure ourselves, that whensoever we pray
according to His will, we shall be strengthened according to His promise.

14. The fourth means of obtaining divine consolation is, _praising God_,
which is always attended with comfort and spiritual joy. He that is daily
employed in the praises of God, lives the life of an angel; for they, we
know, continually "behold the face of the Father which is in heaven"
(Matt. 18:10), and sing his praises. This is their highest joy, this is
the bread of angels. Whence it appears, that praising and glorifying God
must afford the most exalted joy and comfort to a devout soul. Hence David
says, "I will bless the Lord at all times: his praise shall continually be
in my mouth. My soul shall make her boast in the Lord; the humble shall
hear thereof, and be glad." Psalm 34:1, 2. In this place David joins the
praise of God and spiritual joy together; teaching us thereby, that the
one is the fruit of the other, because they are most intimately connected.

15. The last sure and certain means of receiving divine consolation, is a
diligent reading, hearing, and meditating on the Word of God. "For
whatsoever things were written, were written for our learning, that we
through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope." Rom.
15:4.

16. From the Word of God as the true fountain of consolation, are to be
drawn all the above-mentioned arguments and grounds of comfort; namely,
joy and quiet of mind under all kinds of crosses and afflictions. Hence
also we must learn how these comforts are to be obtained, namely, by true
repentance, a living faith, ardent prayer, and continually praising God.




Chapter XLIX.


The Truth Of God And The Certainty Of His Promises, Ought To Dispose Us To
                                Patience.


    _I will look unto the Lord; I will wait for the God of my
    salvation; my God will hear me. Rejoice not against me, O mine
    enemy: when I fall, I shall arise; when I sit in darkness, the
    Lord shall be a light unto me. I will bear the indignation of the
    Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause,
    and execute judgment for me: he will bring me forth to the light,
    and I shall behold his righteousness. Then she that is mine enemy
    shall see it, and shame shall cover her which said unto me, Where
    is the Lord thy God?_--MICAH 7:7-10.


We read in the prophet Jeremiah (chap. 9:4, etc.), that before the
Babylonish captivity and the destruction of the temple, besides the
idolatry that brought that desolation upon them, treachery, lying,
falsehood, hatred, and envy prevailed to a high degree; and that charity
was quite cold and dead amongst them. For wheresoever these abominations
prevail, there, it is plain, God is not; and that he has forsaken not only
the city or the kingdom, but also the hearts of those that dwell there;
and when God forsakes us, destruction quickly finds us. So says the
prophet (Jer. 9:4-8): "Take ye heed every one of his neighbor, and trust
ye not in any brother: for every brother will utterly supplant, and every
neighbor will walk with slanders. They weary themselves to commit
iniquity. Their tongue is as an arrow shot out, it speaketh deceit; one
speaketh peaceably to his neighbor with his mouth, but in heart he layeth
his wait."

2. Here we may see the wretched state of Jerusalem, and what flagrant
iniquities they were which hastened its ruin. Treachery and iniquity did
so abound, that there was neither truth nor honesty left among the people.
Their only aim was to cheat and defraud one another; and their hearts
being thus set upon iniquity, they brought on themselves ruin and
destruction.

3. Something similar to this, is the complaint of the prophet Micah: "Woe
is me! for I am as when they have gathered the summer fruits, as the grape
gleanings of the vintage; there is no cluster to eat; my soul desired the
first ripe fruit. The good man is perished out of the earth; and there is
none upright among men: they all lie in wait for blood. They do evil with
both hands earnestly. Trust ye not in a friend." Micah 7:1, 2, 3, 5. When
a people or nation are come to this pass, they are industriously digging a
pit, into which they design to rush boldly, and with their eyes open.
Would to God this were not the case in our own times! We, too, deeply
share in their guilt, and we must expect to share in their punishments.
For our destruction is of ourselves. O that we could at last awake,
renounce our past errors, put off our carnal minds that are at enmity
against God, and love the truth and peace. If we do not so, we are
condemned already, and cannot receive help.

4. But in order that upright and good men may not be too much discouraged
in this sad and dangerous state of things, we must consider by what means
the holy men of old supported themselves in such a state of universal
corruption. The prophet Micah (Micah 7:7, etc.), pointing out, as it were,
with his finger the fountain of true consolation, says, "Therefore I will
look unto the Lord: I will wait for the God of my salvation!" That is his
first comfort. The second is, "My God will hear me." The third is,
"Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy. When I fall, I shall arise." The
fourth is, "When I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me."
The fifth is, "I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and execute judgment for me."
The sixth is, "He will bring me forth to the light, and I shall behold his
righteousness." The seventh is, "Then she that is mine enemy shall see it,
and shame shall cover her."

5. First, he says, "I will look unto the Lord: I will wait for the God of
my salvation." In these words is contained the doctrine of faith and hope,
which are, as it were, the two watchful, never-sleeping eyes of the soul,
by which it constantly looks towards God in the greatest dangers and
necessities; the greater the calamity, the stronger ought to be our faith,
the more vigorous our hope. Then it is that we should call to mind the
words which we repeat at the beginning of the Apostles' Creed: "I believe
in God the Father Almighty, Maker of heaven and earth;" that is, I believe
that there is no misery or calamity so great, but God can and will deliver
me out of it. Let us learn, therefore, to turn away our eyes from temporal
suffering, not regarding it, but God "who worketh salvation in the midst
of the earth" (Ps. 74:12), and who alone can and will deliver us according
to Psalm 123: "Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwellest in the
heavens. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their
masters, and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress; so our
eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until that he have mercy upon us. Have
mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us; for we are exceedingly filled
with contempt. Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those
that are at ease, and with the contempt of the proud."

6. Moreover, as it is the way of God to help us, not at the time appointed
by us, but in his own due time; so it is not enough for us to say, "I will
look unto the Lord;" but we must add, "and wait for the God of my
salvation." For faith, hope, and patience, have an entire relation to, and
mutual dependence upon each other; as we may see in Psalm 27; in the
beginning of which, David, looking up to God, says, "The Lord is my light
and my salvation; whom shall I fear? The Lord is the strength of my life,
of whom shall I be afraid?" He concludes his prayer with these words: "I
believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living. Wait
on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart:
wait, I say, on the Lord." Ps. 27:1, 14. So Psalm 130:5, 6: "I wait for
the Lord, my soul doth wait; and in his word do I hope. My soul waiteth
for the Lord more than they that watch for the morning." "For the vision
is yet for an appointed time, but at the end it shall speak, and not lie:
though it tarry, wait for it; because it will surely come, it will not
tarry." Habak. 2:3. But if the sorrowing soul shall say: "Alas, I have
waited a great while!" let her know that it is necessary it should be so,
in order that her faith, hope, and patience, may be tried and approved in
the sight of God. We never please God more, than when with patience and
humility we wait for the accomplishment of his promises, and receive with
submission all his determinations concerning us.--Everything has a certain
beginning; so has everything an appointed end; and whosoever does not wait
for that, labors in vain. As the grain is exposed to all the vicissitudes
of wind and weather, before it comes to maturity, and, whenever it becomes
ripe, is the sweeter and better upon that account: so is it with the
cross. He that bears it with patience, and waits for the end of it, shall
reap "the peaceable fruit of righteousness." Heb. 12:11. For St. Paul
affirms, "that hope maketh not ashamed" (Rom. 5:5); for when it is founded
upon divine grace, as upon a firm rock, it continues immovable in
adversity. Hence it is said, "Let none that wait on thee be ashamed."
Psalm 25:3. "They looked unto him and were lightened; and their faces were
not ashamed." Ps. 34:5. "In thee, O Lord, do I put my trust; let me never
be ashamed." Ps. 31:1. "The expectation of the poor shall not perish
forever." Ps. 9:18.

7. The second consolation is, that God will certainly hear our prayers:
"The Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping. The Lord hath heard my
supplication; the Lord will receive my prayer." Ps. 6:8, 9. "In my
distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God: he heard my voice
out of his temple, and my cry came before him, even into his ears." Ps.
18:6. "This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out of
all his troubles. The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his
ears are open unto their cry." Ps. 34:6, 15. "Because he hath set his love
upon me, therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high, because he
hath known my name. He shall call upon me, and I will answer him; I will
be with him in trouble; I will deliver him, and honor him." Ps. 91:14, 15.
"O thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come. By terrible
things in righteousness wilt thou answer us, O God of our salvation; who
art the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them that are afar
off upon the sea." Ps. 65:2, 5. But if thou shalt say in thine heart, "All
these were men eminent for holiness, faith, and dependence upon God; but
as for me, I am not worthy to be compared with them," I answer, out of
Rom. 3:23--"All have sinned, and come short of the glory of God;" but are
heard and accepted through grace, by repentance and faith. "The Lord is
nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon him in truth.
He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their
cry, and will save them." Ps. 145:18, 19. "He will regard the prayer of
the destitute, and not despise their prayer. This shall be written for the
generations to come." Ps. 102:17, 18.

8. The third consolation is contained in these words: "Rejoice not against
me, O mine enemy! when I fall, I shall arise." Though the world, according
to the perverse spirit that governs it, rejoice at the sufferings of good
men (John 16:20), yet shall they at last be confounded, and the righteous
be comforted. Hence we are told, "The Lord will not cast off forever: but
though he cause grief, yet will he have compassion, according to the
multitude of his mercies. For he doth not afflict willingly, nor grieve
the children of men." Lam. 3:31, 32, 33. "God is faithful, who will not
suffer you to be tempted above that ye are able; but will with the
temptation also make a way to escape, that ye may be able to bear it." 1
Cor. 10:13. The same God that laid the burden on you, will in due time
take it off, comfort you, and deliver you from death. "Thou hast turned
for me my mourning into dancing; thou hast put off my sackcloth, and
girded me with gladness." Ps. 30:11. "The Lord upholdeth all that fall;
and raiseth up all those that be bowed down." Psalm 145:14. "In a little
wrath, I hid my face from thee for a moment; but with everlasting kindness
will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer." Isa. 54:8. "It is
of the Lord's mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions
fail not. They are new every morning." Lam. 3:22, 23.

9. The fourth consolation is contained in these words: "When I sit in
darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me." By _darkness_, he means a
state of affliction; which is darkness, indeed, wherein a man can neither
see nor be seen by his friends with the least glimpse of worldly comfort.
The sufferer sits in the very region of shame and sorrow, the valley of
the shadow of death, exposed to the violence and assaults of evil spirits
and wicked men. But dark and dismal as it is, the Lord himself will
enlighten it; the light of whose countenance shines most of all in the
dismal darkness of worldly affliction. There he appears to comfort the
disconsolate, and cheer, with the brightness of his presence, the desolate
and desponding soul. Thus it is said, "Light is sown for the righteous,
and gladness for the upright in heart." Ps. 97:11. "Unto the upright there
ariseth light in the darkness; he is gracious, and full of compassion, and
righteous." Ps. 112:4.

10. The fifth consolation is this: "I will bear the indignation of the
Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and
execute judgment for me." Let the afflicted person think on this, and
remember that though from those that afflict him he may have deserved
better usage; yet from the hand of God, he has deserved a great deal
worse. Whatever befalls us, is by the permission of God. Upon this
account, the evils that we suffer from wicked men, are called in this
verse, "the indignation of the Lord." Blessed is he that beareth this
affliction with patience, and receiveth it no otherwise than as coming
from God himself. "Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and
teachest him out of thy law; that thou mayest give him rest from the days
of adversity, until the pit be digged for the wicked." Ps. 94:12, 13. "It
is good for a man that he sit alone and keep silence, because he hath
borne the yoke upon him. He putteth his mouth in the dust, if so be there
may be hope. He giveth his cheek to him that smiteth him; he is filled
full with reproach." Lam. 3:27-30. This was truly the case of David, who
might properly say, "I will bear the anger of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him." For thus he speaks, when he commanded Zadok to carry
back the ark of God. "If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, he
will bring me again, and show me both it and his habitation. But if he
thus say, I have no delight in thee; behold here am I, let him do to me as
seemeth good unto him." 2 Sam. 15:25, 26. And when Shimei cursed him, he
humbly acknowledges the appointment and permission of God, saying, "Let
him alone, and let him curse; for the Lord hath bidden him." 2 Sam. 16:11.
"Fret not (therefore) thyself because of evil-doers. Put thy trust in
God." Psalm 37:1, 5.

11. The sixth consolation is, "He will bring me forth to the light, and I
shall behold his righteousness." This is a figure of speech taken from the
condition of a man that has long lain in darkness, and been as a dead man
out of mind; or of one taken out of a dark and deep prison into the light
and open air. For as these, having been long confined to darkness and
misery, are exceedingly refreshed with the cheerful light of the sun and
the splendor of the heavens; so after the patient bearing of the cross,
the light of God's countenance breaks forth, and the beams of divine
consolation strike powerfully upon the soul, filling it with glory and joy
unspeakable. Ps. 50:2. Did not Joseph thus break through the shades of
darkness and misery, like the bright sun out of a cloud? Gen. 41:38. And
did not God bring king David out of the region of misery into a state of
joy and happiness? So also at the resurrection of the dead shall our
bodies be brought out of their dark prisons, and we shall rejoice in the
everlasting light and glory of God.

12. The seventh consolation is, "Then she that is mine enemy shall see it,
and shame shall cover her." This is the proper punishment of wicked men
who rejoice at the affliction of others, that they shall be covered with
confusion. The time will certainly come, when the mockers shall be struck
with unavoidable shame, and shall be convinced by their own consciences,
of the wrong which they have done to others. This was Shimei's case, who
could not but blush and be confounded in the presence of David and
Solomon. 2 Sam. 19:19; 1 Kings 2:44. "It is a righteous thing with God to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you: and to you who are
troubled, rest." 2 Thess. 1:6, 7. "I rejoiced not at the destruction of
him that hated me, nor lifted up myself when evil found him. Neither have
I suffered my mouth to sin, by wishing a curse to his soul." Job 31:29,
30. "Love your enemies; bless them that curse you; do good to them that
hate you; and pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute you:
that ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he
maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain upon
the just and the unjust." Matt. 5:44, 45.




Chapter L.


Showing How Hope Is Tested In Seasons Of Adversity; It Maketh Not Ashamed.


    _Thou shalt know that I am the Lord; for they shall not be ashamed
    that wait for me._--ISA. 49:23.


As _faith_ is nothing else but a fixed and steady assurance by which the
devout Christian depends perfectly and entirely on the favor and mercy of
God promised in Christ Jesus (Heb. 11:1), so _hope_ is a continued and
patient waiting for the accomplishment of that promise which is the object
of faith, and is nothing else but a patient, constant, and persevering
faith.

2. Of this hope St. Paul says, that it "maketh not ashamed" (Rom. 5:5):
being, as well as faith itself, founded upon a firm, immovable, and
eternal basis. And this is God himself, who never faileth those that wait
for him; and for the same reason, the peace, joy, rest, glory, and
confidence imparted by hope are eternal. On this foundation, he who hopes
stands fixed and secure amidst all the crosses and calamities of life; and
though the rains descend, the floods come, and the boisterous winds blow
upon him, he is fearless and unmoved, knowing that "his house is built
upon a rock." Matt. 7:25.

3. And as hope is built upon an immovable foundation, and the things of
this world are fleeting and uncertain; therefore its rest, its joy, its
entire dependence, are in God alone, despising the riches, pleasures,
honors, and glories of the world. "They that trust in the Lord, shall be
as mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abideth forever. As the
mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord is round about his
people." Ps. 125:1, 2.

4. On the other hand, they whose hopes are founded on the transitory
riches, honors, and pleasures of this world, are perpetually exposed to
all the fears, cares, and calamities of life; lie at the mercy of every
blast of inconstant fortune, by which they are tossed to and fro; and
depend upon the uncertain will of the world for every quiet moment they
enjoy.

5. This can never be learned but under the discipline of the cross. For
such is the nature of affliction, that it searches and discovers the
inmost recesses of the soul; and shows us whether the hope that is in us
be true or false. By this touchstone, we often find that our hopes have
not been so much fixed upon God himself, as upon the favors and blessings
he bestows; that we have built upon the sand, and idolized the creature,
instead of worshipping the Creator. For so great is the blindness of our
nature, that we often rest in the creatures, instead of raising our minds
from them to the Creator, as he designed. For with this intent God bestows
on man so many and great blessings, that by the gifts he may be drawn to
the Giver; and learn to know, love, fear, reverence, and hope in God
alone. But so great is the corruption of our nature, that we are not
disposed to serve God for nought; and we worship him not for his own sake,
but for the sake of what he bestows.

6. Upon this account, it is necessary that God should sometimes visit us
with crosses and afflictions, and deprive us of his good things which we
have abused; that so we may learn to praise, and glorify, and depend on
him alone. Nay, we sometimes proceed so far, as to trust in ourselves, and
entirely depend on our own power and abilities; then it is that God in
mere mercy interposes; and, that we may not grow too proud, breaks us in
pieces, humbles, and confounds us, and so empties us of ourselves, that we
may be filled with all the fulness of God. This we cannot be, without
being first emptied of all that arrogance, pride, and self-conceit, which
stand in perfect opposition to the grace of God.

7. Hence hope is a _militant_ virtue, fighting against all that confidence
in ourselves, all that self-exaltation upon the score of our own gifts,
merit, righteousness, prosperity, honors, and riches, in which the natural
man places all his confidence. The business of hope is to oppose and
conquer all these delusions of the devil, and to seek rest and peace in
God alone.

8. Hence it follows, that hope, like faith and charity, has God only for
its object. Whosoever aims at any other mark, or places his hope on any
other being, is destitute of any well-founded hope. As all created beings
when out of God are nothing; it follows that the hope reposed in them is
also nothing. So then, these three virtues, faith, hope, and charity, are
in the highest sense spiritual, admitting of no earthly mixture, but are
fixed entirely on God, who is their eternal and invisible basis. To this
refers that passage of St. Paul, "Hope that is seen, is not hope; for what
a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for?" Rom. 8:24. Whosoever, therefore,
places his hope upon anything that is visible, has not the invisible God
for his support, but rests upon a shadow; and when the visible world,
which is his basis, shall sink into nothing, by consequence his hope, that
was built upon it, must sink and perish with it.

9. Consider this, O man, and by carefully comparing time with eternity,
persuade thyself to entertain a true and saving hope, and to be led into a
state of firm and lasting peace. Eternity is unchangeable, ever constant,
always the same; but time is nothing but change and revolution. The
brightest day declines and ends in darkness, weeks are swallowed up in
months, and months in years; the opening spring and fruitful summer sink,
by degrees, into a desolate winter; and not only so, but all the
elementary bodies are in a state of change, always shifting from one
appearance to another; not to mention the continual motions of the
heavens. So that this world cannot be the region of rest. For whatsoever
is subject to time, is continually passing, and vanishing; in a word, "All
is vanity" (Eccles. 1:2), and we shall never rest but in eternity. And
though all men, both good and bad, long for peace and tranquillity; yet
they, and they only, shall find it, who have learned to lose and resign
themselves in Christ, the eternal rest of the soul. And this is not so
much the work of labor and study, as of quietness and hope. Isa. 30:15.

10. Moreover, the Christian's hope must be tried, not only by the loss of
temporal things, but also by the withholding of the communications of
divine grace and favor (as commonly happens in great temptations); that
seeing ourselves deprived even of those most excellent and spiritual
blessings, on which we depend, our hope may arrive at the highest pitch of
purity and sincerity, and rest on God alone. In such a case "we must hope,
even against hope" (Rom. 4:18), as we read that Abraham did. Here a man
must, with his blessed Redeemer, be deserted and forsaken, not only by
man, but by God himself. And this is properly "to be conformed to the
image of the Son of God." Rom. 8:29. This is the truest test or probation
of the Christian's hope.

11. For, whereas, in other afflictions, our patience, humility, devotion,
and charity, are principally exercised; in these spiritual trials of the
conscience, our hope is eminently proved and tried, whether it be sincere
or not. In this probation, though a man be perfectly despoiled of all his
grace, yet shall he at last triumph in that "hope which maketh not
ashamed." And though the soul that is thus tried, be sometimes ready to
fall into impatience, murmuring, blasphemy, or the like; yet there
remains, as it were, some gentle breath of hope, arising from the ground
of the heart, by the power of the divine Spirit, which contradicts and
opposes those unholy suggestions. When this combat is over, all his
transgressions are forgiven, and his sins are covered and he himself is
like "a brand plucked out of the fire" (Zech. 3:2); "or like a piece of an
ear taken out of the mouth of the lion." Amos 3:12. Now this impatience
being involuntary, and being opposed with sighs and groans unutterable, is
by no means to be called despair; considering withal, that this is the
sharpest conflict, the severest trial of the Christian's hope; and these
are the "unutterable groanings" which St. Paul mentions. Rom. 8:26.

12. They that undergo these trials, are the greatest saints, and are
nearer to God than those who repose all their hope and confidence in
themselves. The pride of such men, in vainly arrogating any perfections to
themselves, makes them in the highest degree blasphemers against God;
whereas the disciples of the cross are his dearest children, as we may see
in the examples of Job and David: for by being thus stripped of
themselves, they are purified as gold in the refiner's fire; and being
thus cleansed from all their dross of pride and vainglory, they shine in
the glory of the divine image, like a beautiful jewel set in the purest
gold; so that nothing remains of which the proud man can boast.

13. By such trials as these, a man is taught to put his trust in nothing
but in God alone. For when affliction has taken everything else from us,
God alone cannot be taken from us. Yea, affliction is so far from
separating us from God, that it rather brings us to God, restoring us to
God, and God to us. It is hope, therefore, that preserves us in
calamities, so that we are not consumed, and, therefore, it "maketh us not
ashamed." Rom. 5:5. But as the soul came out from God, so must she return
thither again, void of all love of the creatures; and when a man passes
out of himself and all the creatures, whither can he go, or where can he
rest, but in the hands of his God, who comprehendeth and upholdeth the
world, and all that is therein? Isaiah 40:12. Whosoever, therefore, bids
farewell to the world, and is divested of all love of himself and the
creatures, having his heart fixed on no earthly thing, but being perfectly
free and at liberty, resigning himself and all his concerns into the hands
of God, and being content under every dispensation of providence--he may be
truly said to rest in God. But those who are entangled in the love of
themselves and the creatures, being slaves to their own wills, resting in
them, and not submitting to the will of God, must perish in the end.




Chapter LI.


                Comfort For Those That Are Weak In Faith.


    _A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking flax shall he
    not quench._--ISAIAH 42:3.


In this verse the holy prophet comforts those that are weak in faith by
two beautiful similitudes, excellently adapted to the purpose. For as a
bruised reed (to which he first alludes) must be handled very gently, lest
it be entirely broken to pieces; and as the smoking flax, when once it has
taken fire, must be continually encouraged by a gentle breath, for fear of
blowing it out; so our blessed Redeemer, who knows our infirmities, treats
us with great gentleness, reviving from time to time the spark of faith
within us, with the soft and gentle breath of his Spirit, that we may not
be discouraged by our manifold infirmities, but be enlivened and
strengthened under them. Isaiah 57:15. And because this weakness of faith
is a very grievous temptation, to which all Christians are more or less
exposed; therefore has the Holy Spirit, in the Word of God, furnished us
with very strong consolations against it, which ought to be deeply rooted
in our mind, that we may have them in readiness, and apply them with
success in the sad hour of temptation.

2. (1) We must carefully remember, that faith is not of ourselves, but is
the gift and work of God; "This is the work of God, that ye believe on him
whom he hath sent." "No man can come to me, except the Father which hath
sent me, draw him." John 6:29, 44. "Who believe, according to the working
of his mighty power." Ephes. 1:19. "By grace are ye saved through faith;
and that not of yourselves; it is the gift of God: not of works, lest any
man should boast." Ephes. 2:8. "Let us run with patience the race that is
set before us, looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith."
Heb. 12:1, 2. "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy
Ghost, which is given unto us." Rom. 5:5. "We have the first fruits of the
Spirit, which helpeth our infirmities." Rom. 8:23, 26. Now, since faith is
the work of God, and not our own, it follows, that it is not in our power
to have it in such measures and proportions as we please. And whereas he
has promised to save us by faith, it follows, that he knows how strong our
faith ought to be, for the obtaining that great end, and will strengthen
it accordingly. Therefore this was the answer of God to St. Paul: "My
grace is sufficient for thee." 2 Cor. 12:9. "A man can receive nothing,
except it be given him from heaven." John 3:27.

3. (2) Whilst we are in this life, we must not expect to arrive at the
highest pitch of perfection. This God permits, with a design to cure that
natural pride and vanity of spirit to which the best of us are subject, by
the daily sense of our great and manifold infirmities. To this we may
refer the words addressed by St. Paul to the Philippians, "Not as though I
had already attained, either were already perfect; but I follow after, if
that I may apprehend that, for which also I am apprehended of Christ
Jesus." Phil. 3:12. As if he had said, "Though I am not yet so strong in
faith, as to be able to apprehend him as I ought, yet I am apprehended in
him; that is, I am in Christ Jesus by faith." Let us, considering these
things, bear patiently the infirmities of our nature, till we can attain
to perfection.

4. (3) God does not despise or reject our weak faith, but cherishes,
strengthens, and improves it, and at last crowns it with a blessed
conclusion. In this sense we are to understand and apply those golden
passages that follow: "A bruised reed shall he not break, and the smoking
flax shall he not quench." Isaiah 43:3. "Thou hast been a strength to the
poor, a strength to the needy in his distress, a refuge from the storm, a
shadow from the heat." Isaiah 25:4. "Strengthen ye the weak hands, and
confirm the feeble knees. Say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be
strong, fear not; behold, your God will come and save you." Isaiah 35:3,
4. "He giveth power to the faint; and to them that have no might, he
increaseth strength." Isaiah 40:29. "The Lord God hath given me the tongue
of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season to him
that is weary." Isaiah 50:4. "I revive the spirit of the humble, and the
heart of the contrite ones." Isaiah 57:15. "The Lord hath sent me to
preach good tidings unto the meek, to bind up the brokenhearted," and to
comfort all that mourn. Isaiah 61:1. In this sense we may understand that
passage in Exod. 34:26. "Thou shalt not seethe a kid in his mother's
milk;" that is, thou shalt not grieve the tender, weak faith of a babe in
Christ. A strong and vigorous faith can bear anything, can pass through
the flames of fire, and the floods of water; but a young, tender faith,
must be softly and gently treated, like a bruised reed, which is in
continual danger of being broken to pieces. "I have satiated the weary
soul, and I have replenished every sorrowful soul." Jer. 31:25. They that
labor under the weakness of faith, are the poor in spirit, to whom the
blessing is promised, "Blessed are the poor in spirit." Matt. 5:3. They
that feel the weakness of their faith, are sick in spirit: and to them
must be applied for their consolation, that passage in St. Matthew, "They
that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick." Matt. 9:12.
"Him that is weak in the faith receive ye, but not to doubtful
disputations." Rom. 14:1. "To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain
the weak." 1 Cor. 9:22. "I will bind up that which was broken, and will
strengthen that which was sick." Ezek. 34:16. "Him that cometh to me, I
will in no wise cast out." John 6:37. On these promises, full of divine
consolation, let all who are weak in faith entirely depend, and satisfy
themselves that God is faithful and true (Psalm 33:4), and will not fail
in his promises. To this head also we refer the instances of those that
have been weak in faith. Such was the man (Mark 9:23, 24), who, when our
Lord said, "If thou canst believe, all things are possible to him that
believeth;" answered with tears, "Lord, I believe; help thou mine
unbelief!" The nobleman. John 4:47. The disciples in the ship. Matt. 8:24.
St. Peter sinking in the sea, when our Lord stretched out his hand and
supported him. Matt. 14:31. Therefore, says St. Paul, "Comfort the
feeble-minded, support the weak, be patient towards all men." 1 Thess.
5:14.

5. (4) God has, indeed, the greatest concern for those that are weak in
faith. Our Lord himself tells us, "They that be (strong and) whole need
not a physician, but they that are sick (and weak)." Matt. 9:12. The
shepherd leaves his ninety and nine sheep in the wilderness, and goes
seeking that which was lost, until he find it (Luke 15:4); and as tender
mothers show the most attention to their weak and sickly children; so does
our Heavenly Father to those that are weak in faith.

6. (5) But if thou say in thy heart that thou perceivest scarcely a grain
of faith in thyself, then I would ask, Dost thou sincerely desire to have
faith? If thou dost, all is well; fear not. For since it is God that
worketh in us "to will," it follows, that whosoever finds in himself that
good will and desire, finds in himself the work of God. Hence let him be
encouraged and assured that he who has given us _the will_, will also give
us the power _to do_. Phil. 1:6; 2:13.

7. (6) God is so compassionate to devout prayers and desires, that he
never disappoints the hopes of those that trust in him. "Lord, thou hast
heard the desire of the humble: thou wilt prepare their heart, thou wilt
cause thine ear to hear." Ps. 10:17; 9:18. Wherefore, thy faith is as
great as thy desire of obtaining it. "For God trieth the hearts and
reins." Ps. 7:9. "Because he hath set his love upon me, therefore will I
deliver him." Ps. 91:14.

8. (7) It is therefore better to glory in the weakness, than in the
strength of our faith. For it is the will of God concerning us, that we
fall not into spiritual pride. "My strength is made perfect in weakness.
Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in my infirmities, that the
power of Christ may rest upon me." 2 Cor. 12:9. Let this be thy comfort
when thou laborest under weakness of faith.

9. (8) Faith, though it be ever so weak, is still faith. For our salvation
depends not upon the worthiness of our faith, whether it be strong or
weak, but upon Jesus Christ, on whom it lays hold. As, therefore, a
precious jewel may be held by the hands of a little infant as well as of a
strong man, so a weak faith may as well lay hold on the merits of Christ
Jesus (the true Christian's only hope and treasure), as that which is much
stronger, and by consequence, both be capable of the same righteousness
and blessedness. And as the apple of the eye, small and delicate as it is,
can perceive not only the light and splendor of the meridian sun, but even
the sun itself, though so many times larger than the earth, so does the
eye of faith, though weak and infirm, perceive and feel the Sun of
righteousness (Mal. 4:2), the Lord Jesus Christ, with all the bright rays
of his spiritual gifts and graces.

10. (9) Such is the nature of faith, that it is sometimes stronger and
sometimes weaker; and sometimes the light thereof seems to be darkness.
This has been attested by the examples of almost all the saints,
particularly David, and Abraham, who is called "the father of the
faithful" (Rom. 4:11; Gal. 3:7); and yet (Gen. 12:11) he was afraid that
the Egyptians would put him to death on account of Sarah, his wife, and
this, too, after he had received the promise. Moses also, at the water of
Meribah, betrayed a want of faith. Numb. 20:10-13; Exod. 17:7. David's
faith was sometimes so strong as to raise him, as it were, up to heaven;
and then again so weak as to leave him to sink, as it were, into hell, and
make him complain to God that "he was cut off from before His eyes." Ps.
31:23. Whence it follows, that we must not conclude because a man's faith
is weak, that therefore he has none at all; or that they who are
contending against the weakness of faith, are therefore forsaken by God.
We know that fire is often hidden under ashes, though neither light nor
heat appear; we know that the trees are alive, though in winter they are
stripped of their leaves: so we may in like manner conclude, that those
people may have faith towards God, in whom we do not at all times discern
signs or tokens of it. For the Spirit of the Lord is like the wind, that
bloweth when and whither it pleases. John 3:8.

11. (10) He that complains of the weakness of his faith, shows plainly,
that faith is striving and struggling within him, and a _striving faith_
is a true faith; for there is a continual struggle in every man between
faith and unbelief. He is perpetually assaulted by temptations to
unbelief, so that his life is one continued combat; and he is obliged to
be as watchful, as though he were in the midst of drawn swords, and
expected every moment to be cut in pieces. Here is the trial of the
Christian's faith; here is the exercise of his patience, to unite his
earthly heart with Christ; to make the barren soil of his soul fit to
receive the heavenly seed; to make the darkness of corrupt nature capable
of the divine light. The flesh is continually inclining to the broad way
of the world, and endeavoring to tyrannize over the spirit; the darkness
is no sooner scattered, than it endeavors to recover its ground, and
spread itself again over the face of the soul. This is what all the saints
have confessed and lamented, and it is a most certain token of the
presence of true faith. On the other hand, where there is no faith at all,
there is no cause found for striving. Here let the languishing soul call
to mind that comfortable assurance given us, that "God will not suffer us
to be tempted above that we are able; but will with the temptation also
make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it." 1 Cor. 10:13. "God
giveth power to the faint, and to them that have no might he increaseth
strength." Isa. 40:29.

12. (11) Let us be assured, that whensoever, in our greatest infirmities,
we can but think upon Jesus Christ, he will be with us, and dwell in us by
faith. Thus it is said, "In all places where I record my name, I will come
unto thee, and I will bless thee." Exod. 20:24. For we cannot so much as
think upon God, without his special presence and assistance. Moreover,
being engrafted into Christ, as branches into the living vine (John 15:1,
etc.), we truly live in him, and draw life and nourishment from him. "Our
life," and the strength of our faith, are "hid with Christ in God" (Col.
3:3); and the Holy Spirit witnesseth the same in our hearts, by the joy,
peace, and comfort, which he produces there. Rom. 8:16. As in the Old
Testament, there was no Prophet who heard not God speaking in him; so
under the Gospel, there is no Christian but hears Christ speaking in him,
and, from time to time tastes the unction of the Holy Spirit. And so
strong is this union of our faith with Christ, that all the power of death
and hell cannot dissolve it; because Christ, who is the life and root of
our faith, is immortal. Though thou hast not always so lively a perception
of this in thy heart, yet "greater is he that is in thee, than he that is
in the world." 1 John 4:4.

13. (12) When we are weak in faith, let us look up unto Christ Jesus our
Redeemer, and merciful High Priest, who offered up himself for us on the
cross, and is praying that our faith may be strengthened; as he did for
St. Peter, "I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not" (Luke 22:32);
to whom also he stretched out his almighty and saving hand, when he
thought himself sinking into the sea. Matt. 14:31. And he saith, "Holy
Father, keep them through thine own name; neither pray I for these alone,
(the Apostles), but for them also which shall believe on me through their
word." John 17:11, 20. So also we are told, "We have not a high priest
which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in
all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Who is at the right
hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us." Heb. 2:17; 4:15; Rom.
8:34. This intercession ought to be our comfort when our faith is weak and
languishing; from whence we should, by a lively and steadfast faith,
expect a blessing.

14. (13) Our next support is, the divine mercy, which is inexpressibly
great, as infinite as God himself. Of this let no man despair. This mercy
of his anticipates us, waits for us, supports us, and endures forever. And
this he never denies to any one. Come then, ye that complain of the
weakness of your faith, cast yourselves into the protecting arms of divine
love, which will never leave you nor forsake you.

15. (14) God, who has wrought the beginning of faith in us, has graciously
promised, that he will "perform it until the day of Jesus Christ" (Phil.
1:6); that he will "stablish, strengthen, settle us" (1 Pet. 5:10); and
that we shall be "kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation,
receiving the end of our faith, even the salvation of our souls." 1 Pet.
1:5, 9. This is the end that God proposed to our faith, when he first gave
us the beginning of it. Faith being, therefore, the operation and work of
God, must be perfected by its divine Author. For this cause the Epistle to
the Hebrews (Heb. 12:2) calls the blessed Jesus, not only the _Author_,
but also, the _Finisher_ of our faith. And Christ himself tells us: "No
man shall pluck my sheep out of my hand." John 10:28.

16. (15) To this end he has given us various means whereby our faith may
be strengthened and preserved, namely, the Word, the Sacraments, and
prayer. "Lord, increase our faith" (Luke 17:5), said the disciples. "Lord,
help thou mine unbelief." Mark 9:24. Moreover, God has promised "his Holy
Spirit to them that ask him." Luke 11:13. "The Spirit also helpeth our
infirmities." Rom. 5:5; 8:26. In a word, this is the end and design of
Christianity, that we may grow and be perfected in faith.

17. (16) Lastly. Our faith is founded on God's eternal love to us, "Whom
he did predestinate, them he also justified." Rom. 8:30. But we are
justified by faith alone in Christ Jesus. Rom. 3:28. "God hath chosen us
to salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the
truth." 2 Thess. 2:13. Come then, comfort thyself with these promises;
sink not under the weakness of thy faith! When thy faith seems to be at
its lowest ebb, then is thy Saviour nearer to thee than thou thinkest.
This was the case with the disciples; when they looked upon themselves as
lost in the tempest, then Christ was at hand to save them. Matt. 8:24-26.
Let us also be persuaded, that our Redeemer and Saviour is never so near
us, as when we think ourselves in most danger.




Chapter LII.


     Comforting Instructions For Those That Are Laboring Under Great
                          Temptations In Spirit.


    _I have chosen thee in the furnace of affliction._--ISA. 48:10.


It is an undoubted truth that all spiritual sorrow proceeds from God. For
"the Lord killeth, and maketh alive: he bringeth down to the grave, and
bringeth up." 1 Sam. 2:6, 7. By the "grave" in this place, is meant such a
state of spiritual afflictions as, like the grave, is void of all light
and comfort. The soul that is thrust down into this prison, looks upon
itself as dying and pining away; as hated, despised, and persecuted by
every creature of God. In this disconsolate state, the poor man cries out
with holy David, "My soul refused to be comforted." Ps. 77:2. And well it
might, when both the Scripture and God himself were withholden from him.
This is that "grave" into which God brings the soul. Here it finds no
comfort but in silence and resignation, in those unutterable sighs and
groans which proceed from the ground of the heart; for so great is its
distress, that it cannot so much as think upon God, or the promises
contained in his holy Word. Faith grows weak, hope languishes, and the
whole man is feeble, withered like grass (Ps. 38:8, 9; 102:3), and ready
to perish, were he not inwardly supported by the secret Word and power of
God.

2. In this grave or shadow of death, we find our Lord Jesus Christ, when
"his soul was exceeding sorrowful even unto death; and in his agony his
sweat was, as it were, great drops of blood." Matt. 26:38; Luke 22:44. In
this state a man undergoes greater afflictions than in death itself. Yea,
here a man wishes for death, and longs to find a grave where he may rest
from his unspeakable labors and sufferings. Job. 7:15. Thus we find Job
repeatedly wishing for death. And our blessed Lord himself, under the
agonies of death, cried out, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me!"
Matt. 27:46. He complains that he was forsaken of God, though He was
continually present with him, and preserved him under all his trouble. But
now, what can be more wonderful than that Christ himself should complain
for want of comfort, considering his intimate union with God? For he was
both God and man. Yet God had so withdrawn his consolations from him, that
his _human nature_ was left desolate and comfortless. Now if the blessed
Jesus, who was united to the eternal Godhead and anointed with the
heavenly oil of gladness, endured a conflict so bitter, surely sinful man
has no reason to wonder, when he is brought under the same fiery trial, as
if some strange thing had happened unto him. 1 Pet. 4:12.

3. We suffer nothing but what our blessed Master suffered before us; and
certainly nothing is more reasonable than that the members should suffer
with the Head.

4. This, therefore, is a kind of trial whether thou art truly a member of
Christ, and a partaker of his sufferings. Rev. 1:9. Such seems to have
been Hezekiah's case when he complained--"Like a crane or a swallow, so did
I chatter: I did mourn as a dove." Isa. 38:14. And Job's--"I cry unto thee,
and thou dost not hear me: I stand up, and thou regardest me not." Job
7:3; 30:20. And so again, "If I had called, and he had answered me; yet
would I not believe that he had hearkened unto my voice." Job 9:16. Such
were the complaints of holy David (Ps. 6; 13; 38; 88). In these scriptures
we may see how wonderfully all the saints and servants of God have been
purified in this furnace of affliction. This was the ground of that warmth
of feeling which we meet with in the words of Job and the holy Psalmist.
Sometimes they are so much bereft of hope, that they could not think it
possible that God should ever show mercy to them; at other times, they are
full of hope and confidence, and believe that "their Redeemer liveth" (Job
19:25), as Job expresses it. Yet the carnal man has no understanding of
such sufferings, or of the complaints arising from them. This we find by
the example of Job's friends, who, not understanding what was the true
state of his distressed and afflicted soul, reproved him as one that had
lost patience, and that charged God foolishly. When a man is come into
this state, he falls into such a degree of unbelief that he is not
conscious of the least trace of faith remaining in his soul. All the
powers of faith being, as it were, collected in the centre of the soul,
seem to the man to be _lost_; though they still operate in secret, and
breathe in sighs and groanings unutterable. This absence of faith is a
kind of torture to the soul. Therefore the man cannot believe that God
will be merciful to him, but cries out, "O how willingly would I believe,
if it would but please God to give me the power!" And in the height of
this conflict, the Scriptures themselves afford him no comfort. This is
that crisis of the soul when God, by humbling us, shows us how unworthy
and vile we are in ourselves; yea, that of ourselves we are _nothing_, but
that all our sufficiency is of God; so that thence we may learn not to
trust in ourselves. Nevertheless, the poor soul occasionally perceives
some distant gleams of light breaking through the thick darkness, which
administer comfort and support, and preserve it from desperation.

5. Now, though it may happen that a man in the bitterness of his soul
grows impatient, and is tempted to fret against God, yet let him remember
that God is merciful. He knows whereof we are made; he sees the struggle
of our souls under the fiery trial, when he sets his hand to cleanse us
from our impurities. In a word, the most holy and best beloved children of
God, are they that have passed through this furnace of affliction; as we
may see by the examples of Job (Job 42:2, etc.), of David, and Jeremiah.
Jer. 20:12, etc. These learned faith in the school, and under the
discipline of the cross; whilst the delicate Christian who flees from the
cross, and expects to learn it amidst the enjoyments of the world, will
find himself miserably deceived in the end. But further,

6. (2) Let us call to mind that noble saying of Jeremiah, "The Lord will
not cast off forever; but though he cause grief, yet will he have
compassion according to the multitude of his mercies. For he doth not
afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men." Lam. 3:30, 31, 33.
Whence them mayest learn, that though the Lord suffer thee to be afflicted
for a season, yet he will not cast thee off forever. Perhaps, however,
thou wilt say, that the evil thoughts with which thou art troubled, are
not from God, but from Satan. Now, though it cannot be denied that they
are suggested to us by Satan; yet it is also true, that Satan can do
nothing but by God's permission. In this case, look unto Jesus, whom our
heavenly Father suffered to be tempted by the same adversary. The fiery
darts (Eph. 6:16) which the Evil One cast at our blessed Saviour, came
indeed from him, and not from God; but it was God that gave him permission
to assault as he did. And though our blessed Lord bore all this, yet he
still continued to be the dearly beloved Son of God, nor could the tempter
with all his art and power do him the least harm. Matt. 4:1, etc. Hear
this, O afflicted soul, and believe that thou also shalt be safe and
unhurt amid all the fiery darts of the wicked one. Remember the case of
Job, when, by God's permission, the devil so afflicted him internally and
externally, that he cursed the day of his birth; yet was God still with
him, and we find him thus expressing himself to God: "These things hast
thou hid in thine heart: I know that this is with thee." Job 10:13.

7. Having thus discovered the _origin_ of this spiritual affliction, let
us next inquire into the _reasons_ why God sends it upon us.

8. First, then, it is certain that the true inward taste of the Word of
God, is accompanied with unspeakable joy, peace, and comfort, vastly
surpassing any enjoyments of this life. This is the true joy of our souls,
a foretaste of eternal life, arising from the true and living knowledge of
Christ Jesus; by which we discover the heart of God full of the most
tender compassions, and an ardent and eternal love towards lost mankind.
Now, so corrupt and perverse is human nature, that it is too apt to be
exalted above measure, by the abundance of these divine manifestations,
and to make them occasions of spiritual pride; and the man who is thus
visited and comforted from above, will be apt to think highly of himself,
to overvalue his sanctity, and to think meanly of the rest of the world,
who are strangers to these consolations; and thus, forsaking the fountain
of living waters, whence all the streams of blessing flow, and to which,
with all humility, they ought to be ascribed; the man grows vain and
arrogant, and sets himself up in the place of God. This perverseness of
soul, as it is directly contrary to true penitence, and to the appointed
way of salvation, so it is very hateful to God. This causes him to
withdraw his consolations from us, and to hide himself in thick darkness;
so that though we call and cry, and search ever so diligently, we shall
not be able to find Him. This is a deplorable state, when we are hanging,
as it were, between heaven and hell, oppressed and afflicted on every
side, not knowing whither to fly for relief or comfort; having no certain
evidence whether we believe or not, whether we hope or not, whether God be
angry with us or not, whether we are in a state of life or of death. This
is that darkness and desolation which we find described in Psalm 88; of
which the Psalmist speaks also in Ps. 31:22. "I said in my haste, I am cut
off from before thine eyes. Nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my
supplications when I cried unto thee."

9. Now, although nothing is more bitter to us than to be so long deprived
of the comforts of the divine presence; yet even this deprivation itself
is more profitable to the soul, than all the enjoyments and glories of the
world. By this, as by a fiery trial, we are taught humility, repentance,
contempt of the world, and the true value of all its favors and
enjoyments; that these are dangerous, transitory, and perishing, and can
give no solid comfort to the distressed soul. And though the soul in this
state is encompassed with perplexities and fears, so that it can hardly
lift up itself to God, yet there is left a kind of deep and secret sorrow,
venting itself in holy sighs, and devout aspirations towards God, and a
longing for his favor. Hence we may learn how great a good God is to the
