suffer in his pilgrimage, how unclean spirits would attack him, and by
what means he could withstand them. Then the fifteen men left the knight
alone, and soon all sorts of demons and ghosts and spirits surrounded
him, and he was led on from one torture and trial to another by
different companies of fiends. (In the original Latin legend there were
four fields of punishment.) Finally Owain came to a magic bridge which
appeared safe and wide, but when he reached the middle of it all the
fiends and demons and unclean spirits raised so horrible a yell that he
almost fell into the chasm below. He, however, reached the other shore,
and the power of the devils ceased. Before him was a celestial city, and
the perfumed air which was wafted from it was so ravishing that he
forgot all his pains and sorrows. A procession came to Owain and,
welcoming him, led him into the paradise where Adam and Eve dwelt before
they had eaten the apple. Food was offered to the knight, and when he
had eaten of it he had no desire to return to earth, but he was told
that it was necessary to live out his natural life in the world and to
leave his flesh and bones behind him before beginning the heavenly
existence. So he began his return journey to the cave's entrance by a
short and pleasant way. He again passed the fifteen men clad in white,
who revealed what things the future had in store for him; and reaching
the door safely, waited there till morning. Then he was taken out,
congratulated, and invited to remain with the priests for fifteen
days.[544]

Here we have clearly enough many of the essential features of the
underworld: there is the mystic bridge which when crossed guarantees the
traveller against evil spirits, just as in Ireland a peasant believes
himself safe when fairies are pursuing him if he can only cross a bridge
or stream. The celestial city is both like the Christian Heaven and the
_Sidhe_ world. The eating of angel food by Owain has an effect quite
like that of eating food in Fairyland; but Owain, by Christian
influence, is sent back on earth to die 'that death which the King of
Heaven and Earth hath ordained,' as Patrick said of the prince whom he
saved from the _Sidhe_-folk.[545]

A curious story, in which King Arthur himself is made to visit St.
Patrick's Purgatory, published during the sixteenth century by a learned
Frenchman, Stephanus Forcatulus, shows how real a relation there is
between Purgatory and the Greek or Roman Hades. Arthur, it is said,
leaving the light behind him, descended into the cave by a rough and
steep road. 'For they say that this cave is an entrance to the shades,
or at least to purgatory, where poor sinners may get their offences
washed out, and return again rejoicing to the light of day.' But
Forcatulus adds that 'I have learnt from certain serious commentaries of
Merlin, that Gawain, his master of horse, called Arthur back, and
dissuaded him from examining further the horrid cave in which was heard
the sound of falling water which emitted a sulphureous smell, and of
voices lamenting as it were for the loss of their bodies'.[546]


PURGATORIAL AND INITIATORY RITES

Judging from the above data and from the great mass of similar data
available, the religious rites connected with St. Patrick's Purgatory
are to be anthropologically interpreted in the light of what is known
about ancient and modern initiatory ceremonies, similarly conducted. As
has already been stated, the original Purgatory which was in a cave on
Saints' Island is to-day typified by 'Prison Chapel' on Station Island;
and in this 'Prison Chapel', as formerly in the cave, pilgrims, after
having fasted and performed the necessary preparatory penances, are
required to pass the night. Among the Greeks, neophytes seeking
initiation, after similar preparation, entered the cave-shrine recently
discovered at Eleusis, the site of the Great Mysteries, and therein, in
the _sanctum sanctorum_, entered into communion with the god and goddess
of the lower world;[547] whereas in the original Purgatory Sir Owain and
Arthur are described as having come into contact with the Hades-world
and its beings. In the state cult at Acharaca, Greece, there was another
cavern-temple in which initiations were conducted.[547] The oracle of
Zeus Trophonius was situated in a subterranean chamber, into which,
after various preparatory rites, including the invocation of Agamedes,
neophytes descended to receive in a very mysterious manner the divine
revelations which were afterwards interpreted for them. So awe-inspiring
were the descent into the cave and the sights therein seen that it was
popularly believed that no one who visited the cave ever smiled again;
and persons of grave and serious aspect were proverbially said to have
been in the cave of Trophonius.[548]

The worship of Mithras, the Persian god of created light and all earthly
wisdom, who in time became identified with the sun, was conducted in
natural and artificial caves found in every part of the Roman Empire
where his cult flourished until superseded by Christianity; and in these
caves very elaborate initiations of seven degrees were carried out. The
cave itself signified the lower world, into which during the ordeals of
initiation the neophyte was supposed to enter while out of the physical
body, that the soul might be purged by many trials.[549] In Mexico the
cavern of Chalchatongo led to the plains of paradise, evidently through
initiations; and Mictlan, a subterranean temple, similarly led to the
Aztec land of the dead.[550]

Among the most widespread and characteristic features of contemporary
primitive races we find highly developed mysteries (puberty
institutions) of the same essential character as these ancient
mysteries. They are to uncivilized youth what the Greek Mysteries were
to Greek youth, and what colleges and universities are to the youth of
Europe and America, though perhaps more successful than these last as
places of moral and religious instruction. These mysteries vary from
tribe to tribe, though in almost all of them there is what corresponds
to the Death Rite in Freemasonry; that is to say, there is either a
symbolical presentation of death in a sacred drama--as there was among
the Greeks in their complete initiatory rites--or a state of actual
trance imposed upon each neophyte by the priestly initiators. The
_sanctum sanctorum_ of these primitive mysteries is sometimes in a
natural or artificial cavern (as was the rule with respect to the
Ancient Mysteries and St. Patrick's Purgatory on Saints' Island);
sometimes in a structure specially prepared to exclude the light; or
else the neophytes are symbolically or literally buried in an
underground place to be resurrected greatly purified and
strengthened.[551] And the mystic purification at the sea-shore and
spiritual re-birth sought in the cave at Eleusis by the highly cultured
Athenians and their fellow Greeks, or among other cultured and
uncultured ancient and modern peoples through some corresponding
initiation ceremony, find their parallel in the purification and
spiritual re-birth still sought in the Christian Purgatory, now 'Prison
Chapel', and in the lake waters, amid the solitude of sacred Lough Derg,
Ireland, by thousands of earnest pilgrims from all parts of the
world.[552]

There is a correspondence between this conclusion and what was said
about the initiatory aspects of the Aengus Cult; and should we try to
connect the Purgatory with some particular sun-cult of a character
parallel to that of the Aengus Cult we should probably have to name Lug,
the great Irish sun-god, because of the significant fact that the
purgatorial rites on Station Island come to an end on the Festival of
the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, the 15th of August, a date which
apparently coincides sufficiently to represent, as it probably does, the
ancient August Lugnasadh, the 1st of August, a day sacred to the sun-god
Lug, as the name indicates.[553]

If we are to class together the original Purgatory, New Grange,
Gavrinis, and other Celtic underground places, as centres of the highest
religious practices in the past, we should expect to discover that many
similar structures or natural caverns existed in pagan Ireland, as
indeed we find they did. Thus in different Irish manuscripts various
caves are mentioned,[554] and most of them, so far as they can be
localized, are traditionally places of supernatural marvels, and often
(as in the case of the last one enumerated, the Cave of Cruachan) are
directly related to the under-world.[555] Another of these caves is
described as being under a church, which circumstance suggests that the
church was dedicated over an underground place originally sacred to
pagan worship, and, as we may safely assume, to pagan mysteries.

The curious custom among early Irish Christians, of retiring for a time
to a cave, seems to show the lasting into historical times of the pagan
cave-ritual now surviving at Lough Derg only. The custom seems to have
been common among the saints of Britain and of Scotland;[556] and in
Stokes's _Tripartite Life of Patrick_ (p. 242) there is a very
significant reference to it. In the _Mabinogion_ story of _Kulhwch and
Olwen_ there seems to be another traditional echo of the times when
caves were used for religious rites or worship, in the author's
reference to the cave of the witch Orddu as being 'on the confines of
Hell'. A cave was thus popularly supposed to lead to Hades or an
underworld of fairies, demons, and spirits; again just as in St.
Patrick's Purgatory. Purely Celtic instances of this kind might be
greatly multiplied.


PAGAN ORIGIN OF PURGATORIAL DOCTRINE

The metrical romance of _Orfeo and Herodys_ in Ritson's _Collection of
Metrical Romances_[557] illustrates how in Britain (and Britain--even
England--is more Celtic than Saxon) the Grecian Hell or Hades was looked
on as identical with the Celtic Fairyland. This is quite unusual; and
for us is highly significant. It shows that in Britain, at the time the
romance was written, there was no essential difference between the
underworld of fairies and the underworld of shades. Pluto's realm and
the realm where fairy kings and fairy queens held high revelry were the
same. The difference is this: Hades was an Egyptian and in turn a Greek
conception, while Fairyland was a Celtic conception; they differ as the
imagination at work on a philosophical doctrine differs among the three
peoples, and not otherwise. And, as Wright has shown, the origin of
Purgatory in the Roman Church is very obscure. As to the location of
Purgatory, Roman theology confesses it has nothing certain to say.[558]
The natural conclusion, as we suggested in our study of Re-birth, would
seem to be that the Irish doctrine of the Otherworld in all its aspects,
but especially as the underground world of the _Sidhe_ or fairy-folk,
was combined with the pagan Graeco-Roman doctrine of Hades in St.
Patrick's Purgatory, and hence gave rise to the modern Christian
doctrine of Purgatory.


CHRISTIAN RITES IN HONOUR OF THE DEPARTED

We may now readily pass from an examination of world-wide rites
concerned with death and re-birth, which are based on an ancient
sun-cult, to an examination of their shadows in the theology of
Christianity, where they are commonly known as the rites in honour of
the departed. It seems to be clear at the outset that the Christian
Fete in Commemoration of the Dead, according to its history, is an
adaptation from paganism; and with so many Irish ecclesiastics, or else
their disciples, educated in the Celtic monasteries of Britain and
Ireland, having influence in the Church during the early centuries,
there is a strong probability that the Feast of _Samain_ had something
to do with shaping the modern feast, as we have suggested in the
preceding chapter; for both feasts originally fell on the first of
November. Roman Catholic writers record that it was St. Odilon, Abbot of
Cluny, who instituted in 998 in all his congregations the Fete in
Commemoration of the Dead, and fixed its anniversary on the first of
November; and that this fete was quickly adopted by all the churches of
the East.[559] To-day in the Roman Church both the first and second of
November are holy days devoted to those who have passed out of this
life. The first day, the Fete of All the Saints (_La Toussaint_), is
said to have originated thus: the Roman Pantheon--Pantheon meaning the
residence of all the gods--was dedicated to Jupiter the Avenger, and
when Christianity triumphed the pagan images were overthrown, and there
was thereupon originally established, in place of the cult of all the
gods, the Fete of all the Saints.[560] Why _La Toussaint_ should have
become a feast of the dead would be difficult to say unless we admit the
ancient Celtic feast of the dead as having amalgamated with it. This we
believe is what took place; for if the Fete in Commemoration of the Dead
was, as some authorities hold, established by St. Odilon to fall on the
first of November, in direct accord with _Samain_ or Halloween, then at
some later period it was displaced by _La Toussaint_, for now it is
celebrated on the second of November.

Likewise prayers and masses for the dead, which annually receive
emphasis on the first two days of November, seem to have had their
origin in pre-Christian cults. According to Mosheim, in his _Histoire
ecclesiastique_,[561] the usage of celebrating the Sacrament at the
tombs of martyrs and at funerals was introduced during the fourth
century; and from this usage the masses for the saints and for the dead
originated in the eighth century. Prior to the fourth century we find
the newly converted Christians in all parts of Celtic Europe, and in
many countries non-Celtic, still rendering a cult to ancestral spirits,
making food offerings at the tombs of heroes, and strictly observing the
very ancient November feast, or its equivalent, in honour of the dead
and fairies. Then, very gradually, in the course of four centuries, the
character of the Christian cults and feasts of the saints and of the
dead seems to have been determined. The following citation will serve to
illustrate the nature of Irish Christian rites in honour of the
dead:--In the _Lebar Brecc_[562] we read: 'There is nothing which one
does on behalf of the soul of him who has died that doth not help it,
both prayer on knees, and abstinence, and singing requiems, and frequent
blessings. Sons are bound to do penance for their deceased parents. A
full year, now, was Maedoc of Ferns, with his whole community, on water
and bread, after loosing from hell the soul of Brandub son of Echaid.'

According to St. Augustine, the souls of the dead are solaced by the
piety of their living friends when this expresses itself through
sacrifice made by the Church;[563] St. Ephrem commanded his friends not
to forget him after death, but to give proofs of their charity in
offering for the repose of his soul alms, prayers, and sacrifices,
especially on the thirtieth day;[563] Constantine the Great wished to be
interred under the Church of the Apostles in order that his soul might
be benefited by the prayers offered to the saints, by the mystic
sacrifice, and by the holy communion.[563] Such prayers and sacrifices
for the dead were offered by the Church sometimes during thirty and even
forty days, those offered on the third, the seventh, and the thirtieth
days being the most solemn.[564] The history of the venerable Bede, the
letters of St. Boniface, and of St. Lul prove that even in the ancient
Anglican church prayers were offered up for the souls of the dead;[565]
and a council of bishops held at Canterbury in 816 ordered that
immediately after the death of a bishop there shall be made for him
prayers and alms.[565] At Oxford, in 1437, All Souls College was
founded, chiefly as a place in which to offer prayers on behalf of the
souls of all those who were killed in the French wars of the fifteenth
century.


CONCLUSION

As seems to be evident from this and the two preceding chapters, all
these fetes, rites, or observances of Christianity have a relation more
or less direct to paganism, and thus to ancient Celtic cults and
sacrifice offered to the dead, to spirits, and to the Tuatha De Danann
or Fairies. And the same set of ideas which operated among the Celts to
create their Fairy-Mythology--ideas arising out of a belief in or
knowledge of the one universal Realm of Spirit and its various orders of
invisible inhabitants--gave the Egyptians, the Indians, the Greeks, the
Romans, the Teutons, the Mexicans, the Peruvians, and all nations their
respective mythologies and religions; and we moderns are literally 'the
heirs of all the ages'.




SECTION IV

MODERN SCIENCE AND THE FAIRY FAITH; AND CONCLUSIONS[566]




CHAPTER XI

SCIENCE AND FAIRIES

     'Puzzling and weird occurrences have been vouched for among all
     nations and in every age. It is possible to relegate a good many
     asserted occurrences to the domain of superstition, but it is not
     possible thus to eliminate all.'--SIR OLIVER LODGE.

     Method of Examination: Exoteric and Esoteric Aspects--The
     X-quantity--Scientific Attitudes toward the Animistic Hypothesis:
     Materialistic Theory; Pathological Theory; Delusion and Imposture
     Theory--Problems of Consciousness: Dreams; Supernormal Lapse of
     Time--Psychical Research and Fairies: Myers's Researches--Present
     Position of Psychical Research--Psychical Research and Anthropology
     in relation to Fairy-Faith, according to a special contribution
     from Mr. Andrew Lang--Final Testing of the X-quantity--Conclusion:
     the Celtic belief in Fairies and in Fairyland is scientific.


METHOD OF EXAMINATION

The promise made in the Introduction to examine the Why of the belief in
fairies must now be fulfilled by calling in the aid of modern science.
To adduce parallels when studying a religion or a mythology is worth
doing, in order to show the fundamental bond which unites all systems of
belief in things called spiritual; but it is more important to try to
understand why there should be such parallels and such a unifying
principle behind them. Perhaps there has been too much of a tendency
among students of folk-lore, and of anthropology as a whole, to be
content to do no more than to discover that the Eskimos in Greenland
hold a belief in spirits parallel to a belief in spirits held in Central
Africa, or that the Greek Pantheon (and possibly the Celtic one as well)
consists of goddesses which are apparently pre-Aryan and of gods which
are apparently Aryan. We, too, have drawn many parallels between the
Celtic Fairy-Faith and the various fairy-faiths throughout the world;
but now we should attempt to find out why there are animistic beliefs at
all.

This chapter, then, will confine itself to a scientific examination of
the more popular or, as it may be called, the exoteric aspect of the
Fairy-Faith, which has come to us directly from the masses of the Celtic
peoples. The following chapter, which is corollary to the present one,
will deal especially with the mystical aspect or, as this may be called
by contrast, the esoteric aspect of the same belief, which, in turn, has
come to us from learned mystics and seers, who form, in proportion, but
a very small minority of the modern Celts. Each of these complementary
aspects of the Celtic religion undoubtedly has its origin in the
remotest antiquity. This is probably more readily seen with respect to
the former than to the latter. The latter has been esoteric always, and
in our opinion shows an unbroken tradition (if only a very incomplete
one) from druidic times; and it depends less upon written records,
because the Druids had none, than upon oral transmission from age to
age. Both aspects of the Fairy-Faith have in modern times absorbed many
ideas from non-Celtic systems of religion and mystical thought. As Mr.
Jenner has suggested in his Introduction for Cornwall, and as certain
details in chapter ii clearly indicate, systems of modern theosophy have
had a marked influence in this respect; but it is impossible for us
to-day to say what parts of the Fairy-Faith are purely Celtic and what
are not so, because comparative studies prove that mysticism is
fundamentally the same in all ages and among all peoples. It is
psychologically true, also, that there must always exist some sort of
affinity between two sets of thought in order for them to coalesce.
Hence, if modern mysticism (derived from Oriental or other sources) has,
as we believe, affected Celtic mysticism as handed down from the dim
druidic ages, it is merely because the two occupy a common psychical
territory. We must therefore be content to examine scientifically the
Fairy-Faith as it now presents itself.

The analysis of evidence in chapter iii indicates clearly that there is
in the exoteric part of the modern Celtic belief in fairies considerable
degeneration from what must have been in pagan times a widespread and
highly developed animistic creed. In the esoteric part of it there will
be observed, instead of such degeneracy, a surprisingly elaborate system
of the most subtle speculation, which parallels that of East Indian
systems of metaphysics. If the belief be looked at in this comprehensive
manner, it seems to be clear that to some extent at least, as has been
pointed out already (pp. 99, 257), the Fairy-Faith in its purest form
originated amongst the most highly educated and scientific Celts of
ancient times rather than among their unlearned fellows. The two aspects
of the belief form an harmonious whole as they will be presented in this
Section IV. Chapter xi depends mostly upon the evidence set forth in
chapter ii. Chapter xii depends mostly upon the evidence set forth in
chapter vii.

In chapter iii we examined anthropologically the modern; and (both there
and in parts of chapters following) the historical and ancient belief in
fairies in Celtic countries, and found it to be in essence animistic.
Folk-imagination, social psychology, anthropomorphism generally,
adequately explained by far the greater mass of the evidence presented;
but the animistic background of the belief in question presented
problems which the strictly anthropological sciences are unable to
solve. The point has now been reached when these problems must be
presented to physiology and to psychology for solution. If they can be
completely solved by purely rational and physical data, then the
Fairy-Faith as a whole will have to be cast aside as worthless in the
eyes of science.

In our generation, however, such a casting aside is not to be the fate
of the folk-religion of the Celts: the following phenomena recorded in
chapter ii and elsewhere throughout our study, and designated as the x-
or unknown quantity of the Fairy-Faith, cannot at the present time be
satisfactorily explained by science: (1) Collective hallucinations and
veridical hallucinations; (2) objects moving without contact; (3) raps
and noises called 'supernatural'; (4) telepathy; (5) seership and
visions; (6) dream and trance states manifesting supernormal knowledge;
(7) 'mediumship' or 'spirit-possession'. Independently of our own Celtic
data in their support, the first class of phenomena are supported by an
enormous mass of good data scientifically collected; the second and
third class are less well supported; telepathy is almost generally
accepted as now being established; the last three classes are
hypothetically accepted by many authorities in pathology, psychology,
and psychical research.


SCIENTIFIC ATTITUDES TOWARDS THE ANIMISTIC HYPOTHESIS

Assertions similar to ours, that phenomena like these are incapable of
being explained away by any known laws of orthodox science, have helped
to bring about a marked division in the ranks of scientific workers. On
one hand there are those scientists who deny the existence of anything
not capable of being mathematically tested, weighed, dissected, or
otherwise analysed in laboratories; on the other hand, there are their
colleagues who, often in spite of previous bias toward materialism, have
arrived at a personal conviction that an animistic view of man is more
in harmony with their scientific experience than any other. Both schools
include men eminent in all branches of biological sciences.

Midway between these contending schools are the psycho-physicists who
maintain that man is a twofold being composed of a psychical and
physical part. Some of them are inclined to favour animism, others are
unwilling to regard the psychical part of man as separable from the
physical part. So the world of science is divided.

Under such chaotic conditions of science it is our right to accept one
view or another, or to reject all views and use scientific data
independently. There can be no final court of appeal in matters where
opinion is thus divided, save the experience of coming generations. We
are therefore content to state our own position and leave it to the
future for rejection or acceptance, as the case may be. To attempt a
critical examination of the thousand and one theories occupying the
modern arena of scientific controversy about the essential nature of man
is altogether beyond the scope of this work. We must, nevertheless,
blaze a rough footpath through the jungle of scientific theories, and,
at the outset, put on record our opposition to that school of scientific
workers who deny to man a supersensuous constitution. Their theory, if
carried out to its logical conclusion, is now essentially no different
from Feuerbach's theory at a time when science was far less developed
than it is to-day. He held that 'the object of sense, or the sensuous,
alone is really true, and therefore truth, reality, and the sensible are
one'.[567] To say that we know reality through sensual perception is an
error, as all schools of scientists must nowadays admit. Nature is for
ever illuding the senses; she masquerades in disguise until science
tears away her mask. We must always adjust the senses to the world
itself: where there are only vibrations in ether, man sees light; and in
atmospheric vibrations he hears sound. We only know things through the
way in which our senses react upon them. We sum up the world-problem by
saying: 'consciousness does not exhaust its object, the world.'[567]
Perceptibility and reality thus not being coincident, man and the
universe remain an unsolved problem, despite the noisy shoutings of the
materialist in his hermetically sealed and light-excluding case called
sensual perceptions. Science admits that all her explanations of the
universe are mere products of human understanding and perceptions by the
physical senses: the universe of science is wholly a universe of
phenomena, and behind phenomena, as no scientist would dare deny, there
must be the noumena, the ultimate causes of all things, as to which
science as yet offers no comprehensive hypothesis, much less an answer.
To consider the materialistic hypothesis as adequate to account for the
residuum or x-quantity of the Fairy-Faith would not even be reasonable,
and, incontestably, would not be scientific.

When scientists holding to the non-animistic view of life are driven
from their now for the most part abandoned fortress built by German
scientists of the last century, of whom Feuerbach was a type, they, in
opposing the animists, occupy a more modernly equipped fortress called
the Pathological Theory. This theory is that 'mediumship', telepathy,
hallucinations, or the voluntary and involuntary exercise of any
so-called 'psychical' faculties on the part of men and women, with the
resulting phenomena, can be explained as due to abnormal and
hence--according to its point of view--diseased states of the human
organism, or to some derangement of bodily functions, leading to
delusions resembling those of insanity, which by a sort of hypnosis
telepathically induced may even affect researchers and lead them into
erroneous conclusions. All scientists are in agreement with the
Pathological Theory in so far as it rejects as unworthy of serious
consideration all apparitions and abnormal phenomena save those observed
by sane and healthy percipients under ordinary conditions. And,
accordingly, whenever there can be shown in our percipients a diseased
mental or psychical state, we must eliminate their testimony without
argument. But since we have endeavoured to present no testimony from
Celtic percipients who are not physically and psychically normal, the
Pathological Theory at best can affect the x-quantity merely
hypothetically.

The following admission in regard to visual and auditory hallucinations
is here worth noting as coming from so thorough an exponent of
materialistic psychology as M. Theodule Ribot:--'There must exist
anatomical and physiological causes which would solve the problem, but
unfortunately they are hidden from us.' Of these hidden causes, which
he thinks create all psychical states of mind or consciousness called by
him 'disease of personality', M. Ribot says:--'Our ignorance of the
causes stops us short. The psychologist is here like the physician who
has to deal with a disease in which he can make out only the symptoms.
What physiological influences are they which thus alter the general tone
of the organism, consequently of the coenaesthesis, consequently too of
the memory? Is it some condition of the vascular system? Or some
inhibitory action, some arrest of function? We cannot say.'[568] And
after six years of most careful experimentation, M. Charles Richet,
Professor of Physiology in the Faculty of Medicine in Paris, reached
this conclusion:--'There exists in certain persons at certain moments a
faculty of acquiring knowledge which has no _rapport_ with our normal
faculties of that kind.'[569] We seem to have here the last words of
science touching the Pathological Theory.

When driven from their pathological stronghold, and they maintain that
they have not been driven from it, the non-animists always find a safe
way to cover their retreat by setting up the charge that all psychical
phenomena are fraudulent or else due to delusion on the part of
observers. In reply, psychical researchers readily admit that there is a
large percentage of mere trickery, delusion, and imposture in observed
'spirit' phenomena; some of which is deliberate on the part of the
'medium' and some of which is apparently not consciously induced.
Nevertheless, such investigators are not at all willing to say that
there is nothing more than this. The Delusion and Imposture Theory will
account for a very respectable proportion of these phenomena, but not
for all of them, and theoretically we shall admit its application to the
parallel phenomena attributed to fairies; though it must be acknowledged
that 'fairy' phenomena are for the most part spontaneously exhibited
rather than as in 'Spiritualism' set up through holding _seances_.
Further, there are comparatively few 'charmers' or 'wise men'--the fairy
'mediums' among the Celts--who ever make money out of their ability to
deal with the 'good people', or _Tylwyth Teg_; whence the margin of
encouragement for fraudulent production of 'fairy' phenomena is
extremely limited when compared with 'Spiritualism'.

After twenty-five years of experimentation, more or less continuous,
with 'mediums', during which every conceivable test for the detection of
fraud on their part was applied, William James put his conclusions on
record in these words:--'When imposture has been checked off as far as
possible, when chance coincidence has been allowed for, when
opportunities for normal knowledge on the part of the subject have been
noted, and skill in "fishing" and following clues unwittingly furnished
by the voice or face of bystanders have been counted in, those who have
the fullest acquaintance with the phenomena admit that in good mediums
_there is a residuum of knowledge displayed_ [italics are James's own]
that can only be called supernormal: the medium taps some source of
information not open to ordinary people.'[570] Mr. Andrew Lang, one of
the bravest of psychical researchers in England, not only would agree
with William James in this, but, having carefully examined the Delusion
and Imposture Theory from the more commanding point of view of an
anthropologist, would go further and include classical spiritualistic
phenomena as well as those existing among contemporary uncultured races.
He says:--'Meanwhile, the extraordinary similarity of savage and
classical spiritualistic rites, with the corresponding similarity of
alleged modern phenomena, raises problems which it is more easy to state
than to solve. For example, such occurrences as "rappings", as the
movement of untouched objects, as the lights of the _seance_ room, are
all easily feigned. But that ignorant modern knaves should feign
precisely the same raps, lights, and movements as the most remote and
unsophisticated barbarians, and as the educated Platonists of the
fourth century after Christ, and that many of the other phenomena should
be identical in each case, is certainly noteworthy.'[571] Evidently,
then, there is a large proportion of psychical and 'fairy' phenomena
which remain unexplained even after the Delusion and Imposture Theory
has been applied to such phenomena, and in all such cases we must look
further for a scientific explanation.


PROBLEMS OF CONSCIOUSNESS

Our chief investigations will at first be directed more especially to
the problems common both to psychology and to psychical research,
namely, dream and trance states, hallucinations, and possessions, in
order to show what bearings, if any, they have in the eyes of science
upon parallel phenomena said to be due to fairies, and set forth in
chapter ii and anthropologically examined in chapter iii.

_Dreams_

The popular opinion that dreams are nonsense is quite overthrown by
definite psychological facts. When during sleep our sensory organs are
exposed to external irritants the impressions physically produced are
transmitted to the brain by the nervous system and react in dreams as
they would in the waking state, except that the reactions in the two
states of consciousness--the dream state and the waking state--differ in
proportion as the two states differ; but in both the Ego is the real
percipient.[572] Such stimuli as arise from after-theatre dinners,
wine-parties, and so forth, produce a well-known type of dreams; and the
same stimuli at the same period of time would produce an equal effect,
though an altered one, to suit the altered psycho-physical conditions,
if the waking state were active rather than the dream state, just as
would all dreams which arise from pathological disturbances in disease,
or abnormal physiological functions. This is evident from dreams of a
morbid and sensual type, which directly affect the physical organism and
its functions as parallel waking-states would. In all such dreams of the
lower order, animal and purely physical tendencies, which are directly
due to the state of the body, act very freely: an imperfectly balanced,
temporarily deranged, or diseased organism must correspondingly respond
to its driving forces. And it is clear from comparative study of
phenomena that these lower kinds of dream states express only the lower
or animal consciousness, which in most individuals is the predominant or
only consciousness even in the waking life; and not the higher
consciousness of the Ego or subconsciousness which may be expressed in
somnambulism, for 'in somnambulism there awakes an inner, second
Ego',[573] which is the Subliminal Self of Myers. Dr. G. F. Stout urges
against Myers's theory of the Subliminal Self that 'the usual
incoherence of dreams is an objection to regarding them as
manifestations of a stream of thought equal or superior in systematic
complexity and continuity to that of the waking self',[574] which
objection Myers also observed. But if we regard all dreams which are of
the lower order as being due to the imperfect response of the body to
its driving forces because of various bad physical conditions in the
body, and recognize that these driving forces depend ultimately on the
subconsciousness, the difficulty seems to be met by observing that under
such conditions there is no real mergence of the normal consciousness
into the subconsciousness. Hence ordinary dreams are within the ordinary
spectrum of consciousness; but extra-ordinary dreams pass beyond the
ordinary spectrum into the truly supernormal state of consciousness.

As all this indicates, dreams are of many classes: those of the lowest
type, which we have explained as due to bad physiological conditions in
the animal-man; those which are readily explainable as distorted
reflections of waking actions, often based on some stray thought or
suggestion of the day and then comparable to post-hypnotic suggestions.
Other dreams are demonstrably entirely outside the range of ordinary
mental or physical disturbances, actions, reflections, or suggestions of
the waking life, and seem thus 'to have a wider purview, and to indicate
that the record of external events which is kept within us is far fuller
than we know'.[575] In some dreams there is reasoning as well as memory,
and mathematicians have been known to solve problems in sleep: an
American inventor known to the writer's mother asserted that he had
dreamt out the details of a certain ice-manufacturing process which
proved successful when tested; through self-suggestion set up in the
waking state, R. L. Stevenson, upon entering the dream state, secured
details for his imaginary romances.[576] Dr. Stout himself, in
criticizing Myers's 'Subliminal Self', admits that 'in some very rare
instances, a man has achieved, while dreaming, intellectual performances
equalling or perhaps surpassing the best of which he was capable in
waking life';[577] and there are many authentic cases of dream
experiences which cannot possibly be explained as revivals of facts
fallen out of the range of the ordinary memory or consciousness. We seem
to be led to some hypothesis like this: in dreaming there is mental
activity which in the waking state is either functionless or else below
the psycho-physical threshold of sensibility; because much that is
subconscious in the non-dream state is in the dream state fully
conscious. And we probably do not remember one quarter of our dreams:
they belong to a mainly different order of consciousness.

Professor Freud's view of dreams coincides pretty generally with this
view. He holds that the subconsciousness is the storehouse out of which
dream contents are drawn and acted upon by the dream mind. Very much
distortion of the subconscious material takes place in the process, due
to what he calls the 'endopsychic censor'. In the waking state this
censor is always on the alert to keep out of consciousness all
subconscious processes or deposits, but in sleep the censor is less
alert, and allows some subconscious content to escape over into the
ordinary consciousness. The result is a dream distorted out of all
recognition of its origin. Such a dream seems to occupy a position
midway between what we have classed as the lowest or animal-mind dream
and the highest or subliminal dream. It possibly shows an harmonious
psycho-physical condition of the dream life, whereas the lowest type of
dream shows the preponderance of the physical or animal, and the highest
type of dream shows the preponderance of the psychical elements in man.
Further, it may be designated as the normal dream, and the other two
types respectively as the physically abnormal and the psychically
abnormal.

Professor Freud detects other marked processes in the dream state, all
of which help to illustrate the part of the Fairy-Faith dependent upon
dreaming experiences. (1) There is condensation of details frequently in
a proportion so great as one for ten and one for twenty; (2)
displacement of details, or 'a transvaluation of all values'; (3) much
dramatization; (4) regression, a retrograde movement of abstract mental
processes toward their primary conceptions; and (5) secondary
elaboration, an attempt to rationalize all dream-material.[578] Also,
Professor Freud discovered from his analysis of thousands of dreams that
the subconsciousness makes use of a sort of symbolism:--'This symbolism
in part varies with the individual, but in part is of a typical nature,
and seems to be identical with the symbolism which we suppose to lie
behind our myths and legends. It is not impossible that these latter
creations of the people may find their explanation from the study of
dreams.'[579] Such processes, taken as a whole, show that man possesses
a twofold consciousness, the ordinary consciousness and the
subconsciousness. And we have every reason to believe that subconscious
activities go on continually, in waking and in sleeping.

By experiments on his own perfectly healthy children, Wienholt proved
that there are natural forces existing whose stimulations are never
perceived in waking life: he made passes over the face and neck of his
son with an iron key at the distance of half an inch without touching
him, whereupon the boy began to rub those parts and manifested
uneasiness. Wienholt likewise experimented on his other children with
lead, zinc, gold, and other metals, and in most cases the children
'averted the parts so treated, rubbed them, or drew the clothes over
them'.[580] Therefore, in sleep the consciousness perceives objects
without physical contact; and this not inconceivably might suggest,
inversely, that in sleep the human consciousness can affect objects
without physical contact, as it is said fairies and the dead can, and in
the way psychical researchers know that objects can be affected.

We have on record an account of a most remarkable dream quite the same
in character as dreams wherein certain Celts believe they have met the
dead or fairies. Professor Hilprecht had a broken Assyrian cylinder in
cuneiform which he could not decipher; but in a dream an Assyrian priest
in ancient garb appeared to him and deciphered the inscription. Of this
dream Myers observed:--'We seem to have reached the utmost intensity of
sleep faculty within the limits of our ordinary spectrum.'[581]

We may sum up the results of our examination of dreams by saying that
scientific analysis of the dream life _in its higher ranges_ proves that
our Ego is not wholly embraced in self-consciousness, that the Ego
exceeds the self-consciousness. Instead of a continuity of
consciousness which constitutes self-consciousness we have parallel
states of consciousness for the one subject, the Ego. Our study of the
Celtic theory of re-birth, in the following chapter, will further
explain this subtle aspect of the dream psychology.

When such a conclusion is applied to the Fairy-Faith, the various
dream-like or trance-like states during which ancient and contemporary
Celts testify to having been in Fairyland are seen to be scientifically
plausible. In this aspect then, Fairyland, stripped of all its literary
and imaginative glamour and of its social psychology, in the eyes of
science resolves itself into a reality, because it is one of the states
of consciousness co-ordinate with the ordinary consciousness. This
statement will be confirmed by a brief examination of what is called
'supernatural lapse of time', and which is invariably connected with
Fairyland.

_'Supernatural' Lapse of Time_

It has already been made clear that in the dream or somnambulic state
there are invariably modifications of time and space relations; and
these give rise to what has been termed the 'supernatural lapse of
time'. Two conditions are possible: either a few minutes of waking-state
time equal long periods in the non-waking state; or else, as is usually
the case in the Fairy-Faith, the reverse is true.

The first condition, which we shall examine first, occasionally appears
in the Fairy-Faith through such a statement as this:--'Sometimes one may
thus go to Faerie for an hour or two' (p. 39). Similarly, as physicians
well know, patients under narcotics will experience events extending
over long periods of time within a few minutes of normal time. De
Quincey, the famous opium-eater, records dreams of ten to sixty years'
supernatural duration, and some quite beyond all limits of the waking
experience. Fechner records a case of a woman who was nearly drowned and
then resuscitated after two minutes of unconsciousness, and who in that
time lived over again all her past life.[582] Another even more
remarkable case than this last concerns Admiral Beaufort, who, having
fallen into the water, was unconscious also for two minutes, and yet he
says that not only during that short space of time did he travel over
every incident of his life with the details of 'every minute and
collateral feature', but that there crowded into his imagination 'many
trifling events which had long been forgotten'.[583]

We shall now present examples to illustrate the second condition. Hoehne
was in an unbroken magnetic sleep from the first of January to the tenth
of May, and when he came out of it he was overcome with surprise to see
that spring had arrived, he having lain down--as he believed--only the
day before.[584] Had Hoehne been an Irishman, he might very reasonably
have explained the situation by saying that he had been with the fairies
for what seemed only a night. The Seeress of Prevorst, in a similar
sleep, passed through a period of six years and five months, and then
awoke as from a one-night sleep with no memory of what she did during
that time; but some time afterwards memory of the period came to her so
completely that she recalled all its details.[585] Old people, and some
young people too, among the Celts, who go to Fairyland for varying
periods of time, sometimes extending over weeks (as in a case I knew in
West Ireland), have just such dreams or trance-states as this. Another
example follows:--Chardel, in fleeing from the Revolution, took ship
from Brittany and was obliged to induce somnambulism on his wife in
order to overcome her horror of the sea. When the couple landed in
America and Chardel awakened his wife, she had no recollection whatever
of the Atlantic voyage, and believed herself still in Brittany.[586]

Both Helmholtz and Fechner show[587] that the functions of the nervous
system are associated with a definite time-measure, so it follows that
consciousness in an organic body like man's depends upon the nervous
