431:21  I am Coated Tongue. I am covered with a foul fur,
        placed on me the night of the liver-attack. Morbid Secre-
        tion hypnotized the prisoner and took control of his mind,
431:24  making him despondent.

        Another witness takes the stand and testifies:-

        I am Sallow Skin. I have been dry, hot, and chilled by
431:27  turns since the night of the liver-attack. I have lost my
        healthy hue and become unsightly, although nothing on my
        part has occasioned this change. I practise daily ablutions
431:30  and perform my functions as usual, but I am robbed of my
        good looks.

432:1   The next witness testifies: -

        I am Nerve, the State Commissioner for Mortal Man.
432:3   I am intimately acquainted with the plaintiff, Personal
        Sense, and know him to be truthful and upright, whereas
        Mortal Man, the prisoner at the bar, is capable of false-
432:6   hood. I was witness to the crime of liver-complaint. I
        knew the prisoner would commit it, for I convey messages
        from my residence in matter, alias brain, to body.

432:9   Another witness is called for by the Court of Error
        and says: -

        I am Mortality, Governor of the Province of Body, in
432:12  which Mortal Man resides. In this province there is a stat-
        ute regarding disease, - namely, that he upon whose per-
        son disease is found shall be treated as a criminal and
432:15  punished with death.

        The Judge asks if by doing good to his neighbor, it is
        possible for man to become diseased, transgress the laws,
432:18  and merit punishment, and Governor Mortality replies in
        the affirmative.

        Another witness takes the stand and testifies: -

432:21  I am Death. I was called for, shortly after the report of
        the crime, by the officer of the Board of Health, who pro-
        tested that the prisoner had abused him, and that my pres-
432:24  ence was required to confirm his testimony. One of the
        prisoner's friends, Materia Medica, was present when I
        arrived, endeavoring to assist the prisoner to escape from
432:27  the hands of justice, /alias /nature's so-called law; but my
        appearance with a message from the Board of Health
        changed the purpose of Materia Medica, and he decided at
432:30  once that the prisoner should die.

                     Judge Medicine charges the jury

433:1   The testimony for the plaintiff, Personal Sense, being
        closed, Judge Medicine arises, and with great solemnity
433:3   addresses the jury of Mortal Minds. He an-
        alyzes the offence, reviews the testimony, and
        explains the law relating to liver-complaint.
433:6   His conclusion is, that laws of nature render disease
        homicidal. In compliance with a stern duty, his Honor,
        Judge Medicine, urges the jury not to allow their judg-
433:9   ment to be warped by the irrational, unchristian sugges-
        tions of Christian Science. The jury must regard in such
        cases only the evidence of Personal Sense against Mortal
433:12  Man.

        As the Judge proceeds, the prisoner grows restless. His
        sallow face blanches with fear, and a look of despair and
433:15  death settles upon it. The case is given to the jury. A
        brief consultation ensues, and the jury returns a verdict
        of "Guilty of liver-complaint in the first degree."

                          Mortal Man sentenced

433:18  Judge Medicine then proceeds to pronounce the solemn
        sentence of death upon the prisoner. Because he has
        loved his neighbor as himself, Mortal Man has
433:21  been guilty of benevolence in the first degree,
        and this has led him into the commission of the second
        crime, liver-complaint, which material laws condemn as
433:24  homicide. For this crime Mortal Man is sentenced to
        be tortured until he is dead. "May God have mercy on
        your soul," is the Judge's solemn peroration.

433:27  The prisoner is then remanded to his cell (sick-bed),
        and Scholastic Theology is sent for to prepare the fright-
        ened sense of Life, God, - which sense must be immortal,
433:30  - for /death/.

                       Appeal to a higher tribunal

        Ah! but Christ, Truth, the spirit of Life and the
        friend of Mortal Man, can open wide those prison doors
434:1   and set the captive free. Swift on the wings of divine
        Love, there comes a despatch: "Delay the execution;
434:3   the prisoner is not guilty." Consternation fills
        the prison-yard. Some exclaim, "It is con-
        trary to law and justice." Others say,
434:6   "The law of Christ supersedes /our/ laws; let us follow
        Christ."

                           Counsel for defence

        After much debate and opposition, permission is ob-
434:9   tained for a trial in the Court of Spirit, where Christian
        Science is allowed to appear as counsel for
        the unfortunate prisoner. Witnesses, judges
434:12  and jurors, who were at the previous Court of Error,
        are now summoned to appear before the bar of Justice
        and eternal Truth.

434:15  When the case for Mortal Man /versus/ Personal Sense
        is opened, Mortal Man's counsel regards the prisoner
        with the utmost tenderness. The counsel's earnest,
434:18  solemn eyes, kindling with hope and triumph, look up-
        ward. Then Christian Science turns suddenly to the
        supreme tribunal, and opens the argument for the
434:21  defence: -

        The prisoner at the bar has been unjustly sentenced.
        His trial was a tragedy, and is morally illegal. Mortal
434:24  Man has had no proper counsel in the case. All the test-
        mony has been on the side of Personal Sense, and we shall
        unearth this foul conspiracy against the liberty and life of
434:27  Man. The only valid testimony in the case shows the
        alleged crime never to have been committed. The pris-
        oner is not proved "worthy of death, or of bonds."

434:30  Your Honor, the lower court has sentenced Mortal Man
        to die, but God made Man immortal and amenable to
        Spirit only. Denying justice to the body, that court com-
435:1   mended man's immortal Spirit to heavenly mercy, - Spirit
        which is God Himself and Man's only lawgiver! Who or
435:3   what has sinned? Has the body or has Mortal Mind
        committed a criminal deed? Counsellor False Belief has
        argued that the body should die, while Reverend Theology
435:6   would console conscious Mortal Mind, which alone is capa-
        ble of sin and suffering. The body committed no offence.
        Mortal Man, in obedience to higher law, helped his fellow-
435:9   man, an act which should result in good to himself as well
        as to others.

        The law of our Supreme Court decrees that whosoever
435:12  /sinneth/ shall die; but good deeds are immortal, bringing
        joy instead of grief, pleasure instead of pain, and life
        instead of death. If liver-complaint was committed by
435:15  trampling on Laws of Health, this was a good deed, for the
        agent of those laws is an outlaw, a destroyer of Mortal
        Man's liberty and rights. Laws of Health should be sen-
435:18  tenced to die.

        Watching beside the couch of pain in the exercise of a
        love that "is the fulfilling of the law," - doing "unto
435:21  others as ye would that they should do unto you," - this
        is no infringement of law, for no demand, human or divine,
        renders it just to punish a man for acting justly. If mor-
435:24  tals sin, our Supreme Judge in equity decides what penalty
        is due for the sin, and Mortal Man can suffer only for his
        sin. For naught else can he be punished, according to the
435:27  law of Spirit, God.

        Then what jurisdiction had his Honor, Judge Medicine,
        in this case? To him I might say, in Bible language, "Sit-
435:30  test thou to judge . . . after the law, and commandest . . .
        to be smitten contrary to the law?" The only jurisdiction
        to which the prisoner can submit is that of Truth, Life, and
435:33  Love. If they condemn him not, neither shall Judge Medi-
        cine condemn him; and I ask that the prisoner be restored
        to the liberty of which he has been unjustly deprived.

436:1   The principal witness (the officer of the Health-laws)
        deposed that he was an eye-witness to the good deeds for
436:3   which Mortal Man is under sentence of death. After be-
        traying him into the hands of your law, the Health-agent
        disappeared, to reappear however at the trial as a witness
436:6   against Mortal Man and in the interest of Personal Sense,
        a murderer. Your Supreme Court must find the pris-
        oner on the night of the alleged offence to have been acting
436:9   within the limits of the divine law, and in obedience
        thereto. Upon this statute hangs all the law and testimony.
        Giving a cup of cold water in Christ's name, is a Christian
436:12  service. Laying down his life for a good deed, Mortal Man
        should find it again. Such acts bear their own justifica-
        tion, and are under the protection of the Most High.

436:15  Prior to the night of his arrest, the prisoner summoned
        two professed friends, Materia Medica and Physiology, to
        prevent his committing liver-complaint, and thus save him
436:18  from arrest. But they brought with them Fear, the sheriff,
        to precipitate the result which they were called to prevent.
        It was Fear who handcuffed Mortal Man and would now
436:21  punish him. You have left Mortal Man no alternative.
        He must obey your law, fear its consequences, and be pun-
        ished for his fear. His friends struggled hard to rescue the
436:24  prisoner from the penalty they considered justly due, but
        they were compelled to let him be taken into custody, tried,
        and condemned. Thereupon Judge Medicine sat in judg-
436:27  ment on the case, and substantially charged the jury, twelve
        Mortal Minds, to find the prisoner guilty. His Honor sen-
        tenced Mortal Man to die for the very deeds which the di-
436:30  vine law compels man to commit. Thus the Court of Error
        construed obedience to the law of divine Love as disobedi-
        ence to the law of Life. Claiming to protect Mortal Man
436:33  in right-doing, that court pronounced a sentence of death
        for doing right.

        One of the principal witnesses, Nerve, testified that he
437:1   was a ruler of Body, in which province Mortal Man resides.
        He also testified that he was on intimate terms with the
437:3   plaintiff, and knew Personal Sense to be truthful; that he
        knew Man, and that Man was made in the image of God,
        but was a criminal. This is a foul aspersion on man's
437:6   Maker. It blots the fair escutcheon of omnipotence. It in-
        dicates malice aforethought, a determination to condemn
        Man in the interest of Personal Sense. At the bar of Truth,
437:9   in the presence of divine Justice, before the Judge of our
        higher tribunal, the Supreme Court of Spirit, and before
        its jurors, the Spiritual Senses, I proclaim this witness,
437:12  Nerve, to be destitute of intelligence and truth and to be
        a false witness.

        Man self-destroyed; the testimony of matter respected;
437:15  Spirit not allowed a hearing; Soul a criminal though
        recommended to mercy; the helpless innocent body tor-
        tured, - these are the terrible records of your Court of
437:18  Error, and I ask that the Supreme Court of Spirit reverse
        this decision.

        Here the opposing counsel, False Belief, called Chris-
437:21  tian Science to order for contempt of court. Various
        notables - Materia Medica, Anatomy, Physiology, Scho-
        lastic Theology, and Jurisprudence - rose to the ques-
437:24  tion of expelling Christian Science from the bar, for such
        high-handed illegality. They declared that Christian Sci-
        ence was overthrowing the judicial proceedings of a regu-
437:27  larly constituted court.

        But Judge Justice of the Supreme Court of Spirit over-
        ruled their motions on the ground that unjust usages
437:30  were not allowed at the bar of Truth, which ranks above
        the lower Court of Error.

        The attorney, Christian Science, then read from the
437:33  supreme statute-book, the Bible, certain extracts on the
438:1   Rights of Man, remarking, that the Bible was better au-
        thority than Blackstone: -

438:3   Let us make man in our image, after our likeness; and
        let them have dominion.

        Behold, I give unto you power . . . over all the power
438:6   of the enemy: and nothing shall by any means hurt you.

        If a man keep my saying, he shall never see death.

        Then Christian Science proved the witness, Nerve, to
438:9   be a perjurer. Instead of being a ruler in the Province
        of Body, in which Mortal Man was reported to reside,
        Nerve was an insubordinate citizen, putting in false
438:12  claims to office and bearing false witness against Man.
        Turning suddenly to Personal Sense, by this time silent,
        Christian Science continued: -

438:15  I ask your arrest in the name of Almighty God on three
        distinct charges of crime, to wit: perjury, treason, and con-
        spiracy against the rights and life of man.

438:18  Then Christian Science continued:

        Another witness, equally inadequate, said that on the
        night of the crime a garment of foul fur was spread over
438:21  him by Morbid Secretion, while the facts in the case show
        that this fur is a foreign substance, imported by False Be-
        lief, the attorney for Personal Sense, who is in partnership
438:24  with Error and smuggles Error's goods into market with-
        out the inspection of Soul's government officers. When
        the Court of Truth summoned Furred Tongue for examina-
438:27  tion, he disappeared and was never heard of more.

        Morbid Secretion is not an importer or dealer in fur, but
        we have heard Materia Medica explain how this fur is
438:30  manufactured, and we know Morbid Secretion to be on
        friendly terms with the firm of Personal Sense, Error, &
439:1   Co., receiving pay from them and introducing their goods
        into the market. Also, be it known that False Belief, the
439:3   counsel for the plaintiff, Personal Sense, is a buyer for this
        firm. He manufactures for it, keeps a furnishing store,
        and advertises largely for his employers.

439:6   Death testified that he was absent from the Province of
        Body, when a message came from False Belief, command-
        ing him to take part in the homicide. At this request
439:9   Death repaired to the spot where the liver-complaint was
        in process, frightening away Materia Medica, who was then
        manacling the prisoner in the attempt to save him. True,
439:12  Materia Medica was a misguided participant in the misdeed
        for which the Health-officer had Mortal Man in custody,
        though Mortal Man was innocent.

439:15  Christian Science turned from the abashed witnesses,
        his words flashing as lightning in the perturbed faces
        of these worthies, Scholastic Theology, Materia Medica,
439:18  Physiology, the blind Hypnotism, and the masked Per-
        sonal Sense, and said: -

        God will smite you, O whited walls, for injuring in your
439:21  ignorance the unfortunate Mortal Man who sought your
        aid in his struggles against liver-complaint and Death.
        You came to his rescue, only to fasten upon him an offence
439:24  of which he was innocent. You aided and abetted Fear
        and Health-laws. You betrayed Mortal Man, meanwhile
        declaring Disease to be God's servant and the righteous
439:27  executor of His laws. Our higher statutes declare you all,
        witnesses, jurors, and judges, to be offenders, awaiting the
        sentence which General Progress and Divine Love will
439:30  pronounce.

        We send our best detectives to whatever locality is re-
        ported to be haunted by Disease, but on visiting the spot,
439:33  they learn that Disease was never there, for he could not
440:1   possibly elude their search. Your Material Court of Errors,
        when it condemned Mortal Man on the ground of hygienic
440:3   disobedience, was manipulated by the oleaginous machina-
        tions of the counsel, False Belief, whom Truth arraigns
        before the supreme bar of Spirit to answer for his crime.
440:6   Morbid Secretion is taught how to make sleep befool reason
        before sacrificing mortals to their false gods.

        Mortal Minds were deceived by your attorney, False Be-
440:9   lief, and were influenced to give a verdict delivering Mortal
        Man to Death. Good deeds are transformed into crimes,
        to which you attach penalties; but no warping of justice
440:12  can render disobedience to the so-called laws of Matter
        disobedience to God, or an act of homicide. Even penal
        law holds homicide, under stress of circumstances, to be
440:15  justifiable. Now what greater justification can any deed
        have, than that it is for the good of one's neighbor? Where-
        fore, then, in the name of outraged justice, do you sentence
440:18  Mortal Man for ministering to the wants of his fellow-man
        in obedience to divine law? You cannot trample upon the
        decree of the Supreme Bench. Mortal Man has his appeal
440:21  to Spirit, God, who sentences only for sin.

        The false and unjust beliefs of your human mental legis-
        lators compel them to enact wicked laws of sickness and so
440:24  forth, and then render obedience to these laws punishable
        as crime. In the presence of the Supreme Lawgiver, stand-
        ing at the bar of Truth, and in accordance with the divine
440:27  statutes, I repudiate the false testimony of Personal. Sense.
        I ask that he be forbidden to enter against Mortal Man
        any more suits to be tried at the Court of Material Error.
440:30  I appeal to the just and equitable decisions of divine Spirit
        to restore to Mortal Man the rights of which he has been
        deprived.

                       Charge of the Chief Justice

440:33  Here the counsel for the defence closed, and the Chief
        Justice of the Supreme Court, with benign and imposing
441:1   presence, comprehending and defining all law and evi-
        dence, explained from his statute-book, the
441:3   Bible, that any so-called law, which under-
        takes to punish aught but sin, is null and void.

        He also decided that the plaintiff, Personal Sense, be
441:6   not permitted to enter any suits at the bar of Soul, but
        be enjoined to keep perpetual silence, and in case of
        temptation, to give heavy bonds for good behavior. He
441:9   concluded his charge thus: -

        The plea of False Belief we deem unworthy of a hearing.
        Let what False Belief utters, now and forever, fall into
441:12  oblivion, "unknelled, uncoffined, and unknown." Accord-
        ing to our statute, Material Law is a liar who cannot bear
        witness against Mortal Man, neither can Fear arrest Mortal
441:15  Man nor can Disease cast him into prison. Our law refuses
        to recognize Man as sick or dying, but holds him to be for-
        ever in the image and likeness of his Maker. Reversing the
441:18  testimony of Personal Sense and the decrees of the Court of
        Error in favor of Matter, Spirit decides in favor of Man
        and against Matter. We further recommend that Materia
441:21  Medica adopt Christian Science and that Health-laws,
        Mesmerism, Hypnotism, Oriental Witchcraft, and Esoteric
        Magic be publicly executed at the hands of our sheriff,
441:24  Progress.

        The Supreme Bench decides in favor of intelligence, that
        no law outside of divine Mind can punish or reward Mortal
441:27  Man. Your personal jurors in the Court of Error are
        myths. Your attorney, False Belief, is an impostor, per-
        suading Mortal Minds to return a verdict contrary to law
441:30  and gospel. The plaintiff, Personal Sense, is recorded in
        our Book of books as a liar. Our great Teacher of mental
        jurisprudence speaks of him also as "a murderer from the
441:33  beginning." We have no trials for sickness before the tri-
442:1   bunal of divine Spirit. There, Man is adjudged innocent
        of transgressing physical laws, because there are no such
442:3   laws. Our statute is spiritual, our Government is divine.
        "Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?"

                             Divine verdict

        The Jury of Spiritual Senses agreed at once upon a
442:6   verdict, and there resounded throughout the vast audience-
        chamber of Spirit the cry, Not guilty. Then
        the prisoner rose up regenerated, strong, free.
442:9   We noticed, as he shook hands with his counsel, Chris-
        tian Science, that all sallowness and debility had dis-
        appeared. His form was erect and commanding, his
442:12  countenance beaming with health and happiness. Divine
        Love had cast out fear. Mortal Man, no longer sick
        and in prison, walked forth, his feet "beautiful upon the
442:15  mountains," as of one "that bringeth good tidings."

                       Christ the great physician

        Neither animal magnetism nor hypnotism enters into
        the practice of Christian Science, in which truth cannot
442:18  be reversed, but the reverse of error is true.
        An improved belief cannot retrograde. When
        Christ changes a belief of sin or of sickness into
442:21  a better belief, then belief melts into spiritual understand-
        ing, and sin, disease, and death disappear. Christ, Truth,
        gives mortals temporary food and clothing until the ma-
442:24  terial, transformed with the ideal, disappears, and man
        is clothed and fed spiritually. St. Paul says, "Work
        out your own salvation with fear and trembling:" Jesus
442:27  said, "Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good
        pleasure to give you the kingdom." This truth is
        Christian Science.

442:30  Christian Scientists, be a law to yourselves that mental
        malpractice cannot harm you either when asleep or when
        awake.




        CHAPTER XIII - TEACHING CHRISTIAN SCIENCE

        Give instruction to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser:
        teach a just man, and he will increase in learning. - PROVERBS.

                            Study of medicine

443:1   WHEN the discoverer of Christian Science is con-
        sulted by her followers as to the propriety, advan-
443:3   tage, and consistency of systematic medical
        study, she tries to show them that under ordi-
        nary circumstances a resort to faith in corporeal means
443:6   tends to deter those, who make such a compromise, from
        entire confidence in omnipotent Mind as really possessing
        all power. While a course of medical study is at times
443:9   severely condemned by some Scientists, she feels, as she
        always has felt, that all are privileged to work out their
        own salvation according to their light, and that our motto
443:12  should be the Master's counsel, "Judge not, that ye be
        not judged."

                            Failure's lessons

        If patients fail to experience the healing power of
443:15  Christian Science, and think they can be benefited by
        certain ordinary physical methods of medical
        treatment, then the Mind-physician should
443:18  give up such cases, and leave invalids free to resort to
        whatever other systems they fancy will afford relief.
        Thus such invalids may learn the value of the apostolic
443:21  precept: "Reprove, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering
        and doctrine." If the sick find these material expedients
444:1   unsatisfactory, and they receive no help from them, these
        very failures may open their blind eyes. In some way,
444:3   sooner or later, all must rise superior to materiality, and
        suffering is oft the divine agent in this elevation. "All
        things work together for good to them that love God," is
444:6   the dictum of Scripture.

                           Refuge and strength

        If Christian Scientists ever fail to receive aid from
        other Scientists, - their brethren upon whom they may
444:9   call, - God will still guide them into the right
        use of temporary and eternal means. Step by
        step will those who trust Him find that "God is our refuge
444:12  and strength, a very present help in trouble."

                        Charity to those opposed

        Students are advised by the author to be charitable
        and kind, not only towards differing forms of religion
444:15  and medicine, but to those who hold these dif-
        fering opinions. Let us be faithful in pointing
        the way through Christ, as we understand it,
444:18  but let us also be careful always to "judge righteous judg-
        ment," and never to condemn rashly. "Whosoever shall
        smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also."
444:21  That is, Fear not that he will smite thee again for thy for-
        bearance. If ecclesiastical sects or medical schools turn
        a deaf ear to the teachings of Christian Science, then part
444:24  from these opponents as did Abraham when he parted
        from Lot, and say in thy heart: "Let there be no strife, I
        pray thee, between me and thee, and between My herd-
444:27  men and thy herdmen; for we be brethren." Immortals,
        or God's children in divine Science, are one harmonious
        family; but mortals, or the "children of men" in material
444:30  sense, are discordant and ofttimes false brethren.

                      Conforming to explicit rules

        The teacher must make clear to students the Science
        of healing, especially its ethics, - that all is Mind, and
445:1   that the Scientist must conform to God's requirements.
        Also the teacher must thoroughly fit his students to defend
445:3   themselves against sin, and to guard against the
        attacks of the would-be /mental assassin/, who
        attempts to kill morally and physically. No
445:6   hypothesis as to the existence of another power should
        interpose a doubt or fear to hinder the demonstration of
        Christian Science. Unfold the latent energies and capac-
445:9   ities for good in your pupil. Teach the great possibilities
        of man endued with divine Science. Teach the dangerous
        possibility of dwarfing the spiritual understanding and
445:12  demonstration of Truth by sin, or by recourse to material
        means for healing. Teach the meekness and might of life
        "hid with Christ in God," and there will be no desire for
445:15  other healing methods. You render the divine law of
        healing obscure and void, when you weigh the human in
        the scale with the divine, or limit in any direction of
445:18  thought the omnipresence and omnipotence of God.

                              Divine energy

        Christian Science silences human will, quiets fear with
        Truth and Love, and illustrates the unlabored motion
445:21  of the divine energy in healing the sick. Self-
        seeking, envy, passion, pride, hatred, and
        revenge are cast out by the divine Mind which heals
445:24  disease. The human will which maketh and worketh a lie,
        hiding the divine Principle of harmony, is destructive to
        health, and is the cause of disease rather than its cure.

                            Blight of avarice

445:27  There is great danger in teaching Mind-healing indis-
        criminately, thus disregarding the morals of the student
        and caring only for the fees. Recalling Jeffer-
445:30  son's words about slavery, "I tremble, when I
        remember that God is just," the author trembles whenever
        she sees a man, for the petty consideration of money,
446:1   teaching his slight knowledge of Mind-power, - per-
        haps communicating his own bad morals, and in this way
446:3   dealing pitilessly with a community unprepared for self-
        defence.

        A thorough perusal of the author's publications heals
446:6   sickness. If patients sometimes seem worse while read-
        ing this book, the change may either arise from the alarm
        of the physician, or it may mark the crisis of the disease.
446:9   Perseverance in the perusal of the book has generally
        completely healed such cases.

                        Exclusion of malpractice

        Whoever practises the Science the author teaches,
446:12  through which Mind pours light and healing upon this
        generation, can practise on no one from sin-
        ister or malicious motives without destroying
446:15  his own power to heal and his own health. Good must
        dominate in the thoughts of the healer, or his demon-
        stration is protracted, dangerous, and impossible in Sci-
446:18  ence. A wrong motive involves defeat. In the Science
        of Mind-healing, it is imperative to be honest, for victory
        rests on the side of immutable right. To understand
446:21  God strengthens hope, enthrones faith in Truth, and
        verifies Jesus' word: "Lo, I am with you alway, even
        unto the end of the world."

                            Iniquity overcome

446:24  Resisting evil, you overcome it and prove its nothing-
        ness. Not human platitudes, but divine beatitudes, re-
        flect the spiritual light and might which heal
446:27  the sick. The exercise of will brings on a
        hypnotic state, detrimental to health and integrity of
        thought. This must therefore be watched and guarded
446:30  against. Covering iniquity will prevent prosperity and the
        ultimate triumph of any cause. Ignorance of the error
        to be eradicated oftentimes subjects you to its abuse.

                       No trespass on human rights

447:1   The heavenly law is broken by trespassing upon
        man's individual right of self-government. We have no
447:3   authority in Christian Science and no moral
        right to attempt to influence the thoughts of
        others, except it be to benefit them. In men-
447:6   tal practice you must not forget that erring human opin-
        ions, conflicting selfish motives, and ignorant attempts
        to do good may render you incapable of knowing or
447:9   judging accurately the need of your fellow-men. There-
        fore the rule is, heal the sick when called upon for aid,
        and save the victims of the mental assassins.

                   Expose sin without believing in it

447:12  Ignorance, subtlety, or false charity does not for-
        ever conceal error; evil will in time disclose and pun-
        ish itself. The recuperative action of the
447:15  system, when mentally sustained by Truth,
        goes on naturally. When sin or sickness -
        the reverse of harmony - seems true to material sense,
447:18  impart without frightening or discouraging the pa-
        tient the truth and spiritual understanding, which de-
        stroy disease. Expose and denounce the claims of
447:21  evil and disease in all their forms, but realize no
        reality in them. A sinner is not reformed merely
        by assuring him that he cannot be a sinner because
447:24  there is no sin. To put down the claim of sin,
        you must detect it, remove the mask, point out the
        illusion, and thus get the victory over sin and so prove
447:27  its unreality. The sick are not healed merely by
        declaring there is no sickness, but by knowing that
        there is none.

                             Wicked evasions

447:30  A sinner is afraid to cast the first stone. He may
        say, as a subterfuge, that evil is unreal, but to know it,
        he must demonstrate his statement. To assume that
448:1   there are no claims of evil and yet to indulge them, is
        a moral offence. Blindness and self-righteousness cling
448:3   fast to iniquity. When the Publican's wail
        went out to the great heart of Love, it won his
        humble desire. Evil which obtains in the bodily senses,
448:6   but which the heart condemns, has no foundation; but if
        evil is uncondemned, it is undenied and nurtured. Under
        such circumstances, to say that there is no evil, is an evil
448:9   in itself. When needed tell the truth concerning the lie.
        Evasion of Truth cripples integrity, and casts thee down
        from the pinnacle.

                          Truth's grand results

448:12  Christian Science rises above the evidence of the cor-
        poreal senses; but if you have not risen above sin your-
        self, do not congratulate yourself upon your
448:15  blindness to evil or upon the good you know
        and /do/ not. A dishonest position is far from Christianly
        scientific. "He that covereth his sins shall not prosper:
448:18  but whoso confesseth and forsaketh them shall have
        mercy." Try to leave on every student's mind the strong
        impress of divine Science, a high sense of the moral and
448:21  spiritual qualifications requisite for healing, well knowing
        it to be impossible for error, evil, and hate to accomplish
        the grand results of Truth and Love. The reception or
448:24  pursuit of instructions opposite to absolute Christian
        Science must always hinder scientific demonstration.

                       Adherence to righteousness

        If the student adheres strictly to the teachings of Chris-
448:27  tian Science and ventures not to break its rules, he can-
        not fail of success in healing. It is Christian
        Science to do right, and nothing short of right-
448:30  doing has any claim to the name. To talk the right and
        live the wrong is foolish deceit, doing one's self the most
        harm. Fettered by sin yourself, it is difficult to free
449:1   another from the fetters of disease. With your own wrists
        manacled, it is hard to break another's chains. A little
449:3   leaven causes the whole mass to ferment. A grain of
        Christian Science does wonders for mortals, so omnip-
        otent is Truth, but more of Christian Science must be
449:6   gained in order to continue in well doing.

                        Right adjusts the balance

        The wrong done another reacts most heavily against
        one's self. Right adjusts the balance sooner or later.
449:9   Think it "easier for a camel to go through
        the eye of a needle," than for you to benefit
        yourself by injuring others. Man's moral mercury, ris-
449:12  ing or falling, registers his healing ability and fitness to
        teach. You should practise well what you know, and
        you will then advance in proportion to your honesty
449:15  and fidelity, - qualities which insure success in this
        Science; but it requires a higher understanding to teach
        this subject properly and correctly than it does to heal
449:18  the most difficult case.

                         Inoculation of thought

        The baneful effect of evil associates is less seen than
        felt. The inoculation of evil human thoughts ought to
449:21  be understood and guarded against. The
        first impression, made on a mind which is
        attracted or repelled according to personal merit or de-
449:24  merit, is a good detective of individual character. Cer-
        tain minds meet only to separate through simultaneous
        repulsion. They are enemies without the preliminary
449:27  offence. The impure are at peace with the impure.
        Only virtue is a rebuke to vice. A proper teacher of Chris-
        tian Science improves the health and the morals of his
449:30  student if the student practises what he is taught, and
        unless this result follows, the teacher is a Scientist only
        in name.

                       Three classes of neophytes

450:1   There is a large class of thinkers whose bigotry and
        conceit twist every fact to suit themselves. Their creed
450:3   teaches belief in a mysterious, supernatural
        God, and in a natural, all-powerful devil. An-
        other class, still more unfortunate, are so depraved that
450:6   they appear to be innocent. They utter a falsehood,
        while looking you blandly in the face, and they never
        fail to stab their benefactor in the back. A third class
450:9   of thinkers build with solid masonry. They are sincere,
        generous, noble, and are therefore open to the approach
        and recognition of Truth. To teach Christian Science
450:12  to such as these is no task. They do not incline long-
        ingly to error, whine over the demands of Truth, nor
        play the traitor for place and power.

                          Touchstone of Science

450:15  Some people yield slowly to the touch of Truth. Few
        yield without a struggle, and many are reluctant to ac-
        knowledge that they have yielded; but un-
450:18  less this admission is made, evil will boast
        itself above good. The Christian Scientist has enlisted
        to lessen evil, disease, and death; and he will overcome
450:21  them by understanding their nothingness and the allness
        of God, or good. Sickness to him is no less a temptation
        than is sin, and he heals them both by understanding
450:24  God's power over them. The Christian Scientist knows
        that they are errors of belief, which Truth can and will
        destroy.

                        False claims annihilated

450:27  Who, that has felt the perilous beliefs in life, substance,
        and intelligence separated from God, can say that there
        is no error of belief? Knowing the claim of
450:30  animal magnetism, that all evil combines in
        the belief of life, substance, and intelligence in matter,
        electricity, animal nature, and organic life, who will deny
451:1   that these are the errors which Truth must and will an-
        nihilate? Christian Scientists must live under the con-
451:3   stant pressure of the apostolic command to come out from
        the material world and be separate. They must re-
        nounce aggression, oppression and the pride of power.
451:6   Christianity, with the crown of Love upon her brow,
        must be their queen of life.

                           Treasure in heaven

        Students of Christian Science, who start with its letter
451:9   and think to succeed without the spirit, will either make
        shipwreck of their faith or be turned sadly
        awry. They must not only seek, but strive,
451:12  to enter the narrow path of Life, for "wide is the gate,
        and broad is the way, that leadeth to destruction, and
        many there be which go in thereat." Man walks in the
451:15  direction towards which he looks, and where his treasure
        is, there will his heart be also. If our hopes and affec-
        tions are spiritual, they come from above, not from be-
451:18  neath, and they bear as of old the fruits of the Spirit.

                         Obligations of teachers

        Every Christian Scientist, every conscientious teacher
        of the Science of Mind-healing, knows that human will
451:21  is not Christian Science, and he must recog-
        nize this in order to defend himself from the
        influence of human will. He feels morally obligated to
451:24  open the eyes of his students that they may perceive the
        nature and methods of error of every sort, especially any
        subtle degree of evil, deceived and deceiving. All mental
451:27  malpractice arises from ignorance or malice aforethought.
        It is the injurious action of one mortal mind controlling
        another from wrong motives, and it is practised either
451:30  with a mistaken or a wicked purpose.

                          Indispensable defence

        Show your student that mental malpractice tends to
        blast moral sense, health, and the human life. Instruct
452:1   him how to bar the door of his thought against this
        seeming power, - a task not difficult, when one under-
452:3   stands that evil has in reality no power.
        Incorrect reasoning leads to practical error.
        The wrong thought should be arrested before it has a
452:6   chance to manifest itself.

                           Egotistic darkness

        Walking in the light, we are accustomed to the light
        and require it; we cannot see in darkness. But eyes ac-
452:9   customed to darkness are pained by the light.
        When outgrowing the old, you should not fear
        to put on the new. Your advancing course may pro-
452:12  voke envy, but it will also attract respect. When error
        confronts you, withhold not the rebuke or the explana-
        tion which destroys error. Never breathe an immoral
452:15  atmosphere, unless in the attempt to purify it. Better is
        the frugal intellectual repast with contentment and virtue,
        than the luxury of learning with egotism and vice.

                        Unwarranted expectations

452:18  Right is radical. The teacher must know the truth
        himself. He must live it and love it, or he cannot impart
        it to others. We soil our garments with con-
452:21  servatism, and afterwards we must wash them
        clean. When the spiritual sense of Truth unfolds its
        harmonies, you take no risks in the policy of error. Ex-
452:24  pect to heal simply by repeating the author's words, by
        right talking and wrong acting, and you will be disap-
        pointed. Such a practice does not demonstrate the
452:27  Science by which divine Mind heals the sick.

                           Reliable authority

        Acting from sinful motives destroys your power of
        healing from the right motive. On the other hand, if
452:30  you had the inclination or power to practise
        wrongly and then should adopt Christian
        Science, the wrong power would be destroyed. You do
453:1   not deny the mathematician's right to distinguish the cor-
        rect from the incorrect among the examples on the black-
453:3   board, nor disbelieve the musician when he distinguishes
        concord from discord. In like manner it should be granted
        that the author understands what she is saying.

                            Winning the field

453:6   Right and wrong, truth and error, will be at strife in
        the minds of students, until victory rests on the side of
        invincible truth. Mental chemicalization fol-
453:9   lows the explanation of Truth, and a higher
        basis is thus won; but with some individuals the morbid
        moral or physical symptoms constantly reappear. I
453:12  have never witnessed so decided effects from the use of
        material remedies as from the use of spiritual.

                          Knowledge and honesty

        Teach your student that he must know himself be-
453:15  fore he can know others and minister to human needs.
        Honesty is spiritual power. Dishonesty is
        human weakness, which forfeits divine help.
453:18  You uncover sin, not in order to injure, but in order
        to bless the corporeal man; and a right motive has
        its reward. Hidden sin is spiritual wickedness in high
453:21  places. The masquerader in this Science thanks God
        that there is no evil, yet serves evil in the name of
        good.

                         Metaphysical treatment

453:24  You should treat sickness mentally just as you would
        sin, except that you must not tell the patient that he is
        sick nor give names to diseases, for such a
453:27  course increases fear, the foundation of dis-
        ease, and impresses more deeply the wrong mind-picture.
        A Christian Scientist's medicine is Mind, the divine Truth
453:30  that makes man free. A Christian Scientist never recom-
        mends material hygiene, never manipulates. He does
        not trespass on the rights of mind nor can he practise
454:1   animal magnetism or hypnotism. It need not be added
        that the use of tobacco or intoxicating drinks is not in
454:3   harmony with Christian Science.

                            Impotence of hate

        Teach your students the omnipotence of Truth, which
        illustrates the impotence of error. The understanding,
454:6   even in a degree, of the divine All-power de-
        stroys fear, and plants the feet in the true path,
        - the path which leads to the house built without hands
454:9   "eternal in the heavens." Human hate has no legiti-
        mate mandate and no kingdom. Love is enthroned.
        That evil or matter has neither intelligence nor power,
454:12  is the doctrine of absolute Christian Science, and this is
        the great truth which strips all disguise from error.

                           Love the incentive

        He, who understands in sufficient degree the Princi-
454:15  ple of Mind-healing, points out to his student error as
        well as truth, the wrong as well as the right
        practice. Love for God and man is the true
454:18  incentive in both healing and teaching. Love inspires,
        illumines, designates, and leads the way. Right motives
        give pinions to thought, and strength and freedom to
454:21  speech and action. Love is priestess at the altar of
        Truth. Wait patiently for divine Love to move upon the
        waters of mortal mind, and form the perfect concept.
454:24  Patience must "have her perfect work."

                         Continuity of interest

        Do not dismiss students at the close of a class term,
        feeling that you have no more to do for them. Let your
454:27  loving care and counsel support all their feeble
        footsteps, until your students tread firmly in
        the straight and narrow way. The superiority of spir-
454:30  itual power over sensuous is the central point of Chris-
        tian Science. Remember that the letter and mental
        argument are only human auxiliaries to aid in bringing
