perform the outward works of the Law, yet we do not ascribe to free
will these spiritual matters, namely, truly to fear God, truly to
believe God, truly to be confident and hold that God regards us,
hears us, forgives us, etc. These are the true works of the First
Table, which the heart cannot render without the Holy Ghost, as Paul
says, 1 Cor. 2, 14: The natural man, i.e., man using only natural
strength, receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God [That is a
person who is not enlightened by the Spirit of God does not, by his
natural reason, receive anything of God's will and divine matters.]
And this can be decided if men consider what their hearts believe
concerning God's will, whether they are truly confident that they are
regarded and heard by God.  Even for saints to retain this faith [and,
as Peter says (1 Ep. 1, 8), to risk and commit himself entirely to
God, whom he does not see, to love Christ, and esteem Him highly,
whom he does not see] is difficult, so far is it from existing in the
godless.  But it is conceived, as we have said above, when terrified
hearts hear the Gospel and receive consolation [when we are born anew
of the Holy Ghost].

Therefore such a distribution is of advantage in which civil
righteousness is ascribed to the free will and spiritual
righteousness to the governing of the Holy Ghost in the regenerate.
For thus the outward discipline is retained, because all men ought to
know equally, both that God requires this civil righteousness [God
will not tolerate indecent, wild, reckless conduct], and that, in a
measure, we can afford it.  And yet a distinction is shown between
human and spiritual righteousness, between philosophical doctrine and
the doctrine of the Holy Ghost and it can be understood for what
there is need of the Holy Ghost.  Nor has this distribution been
invented by us, but Scripture most clearly teaches it.  Augustine
also treats of it, and recently it has been well treated of by
William of Paris, but it has been wickedly suppressed by those who
have dreamt that men can obey God's Law without the Holy Ghost, but
that the Holy Ghost is given in order that, in addition, it may be
considered meritorious.




Part 24


Article XIX: _Of the Cause of Sin._

The Nineteenth Article the adversaries receive, in which we confess
that, although God only and alone has framed all nature, and
preserves all things which exist, yet [He is not the cause of sin,
but] the cause of sin is the will in the devil and men turning itself
away from God, according to the saying of Christ concerning the devil,
John 8, 44: When he speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his own.




Part 25


Article XX: _Of Good Works._

In the Twentieth Article they distinctly lay down these words, namely,
that they reject and condemn our statement that men do not merit the
remission of sins by good works.  [Mark this well!] They clearly
declare that they reject and condemn this article.  What is to be
said on a subject so manifest?  Here the framers of the _Confutation_
openly show by what spirit they are led.  For what in the Church is
more certain than that the remission of sins occurs freely for
Christ's sake, that Christ, and not our works, is the propitiation
for sins, as Peter says, Acts 10, 43: To Him give all the prophets
witness that through His name, whosoever believeth on Him, shall
receive remission of sins?  [This strong testimony of all the holy
prophets may duly be called a decree of the catholic Christian Church.
For even a single prophet is very highly esteemed by God and a
treasure worth the whole world.] To this Church of the prophets we
would rather assent than to these abandoned writers of the
Confutation, who so impudently blaspheme Christ.  For although there
were writers who held that after the remission of sins men are just
before God, not by faith, but by works themselves, yet they did not
hold this, namely, that the remission of sins itself occurs on
account of our works, and not freely for Christ's sake.

Therefore the blasphemy of ascribing Christ's honor to our works is
not to be endured.  These theologians are now entirely without shame
if they dare to bring such an opinion into the Church.  Nor do we
doubt that His Most Excellent Imperial Majesty and very many of the
princes would not have allowed this passage to remain in the
_Confutation_ if they had been admonished of it.  Here we could cite
infinite testimonies from Scripture and from the Fathers [that this
article is certainly divine and true, and this is the sacred and
divine truth.  For there is hardly a syllable, hardly a leaf in the
Bible, in the principal books of the Holy Scriptures where this is
not clearly stated.] But also above we have said enough on this
subject.  And there is no need of more testimonies for one who knows
why Christ has been given to us, who knows that Christ is the
propitiation for our sins.  [God-fearing, pious hearts that know well
why Christ has been given, who for all the possessions and kingdoms
of the world would not be without Christ as our only Treasure, our
only Mediator and Redeemer must here be shocked and terrified that
God's holy Word and Truth should be so openly despised and condemned
by poor men.] Isaiah says, 53, 6: The Lord hath laid on Him the
iniquities of us all.  The adversaries, on the other hand, [accuse
Isaiah and the entire Bible of lying and teach that God lays our
iniquities not on Christ, but on our [beggarly] works.  Neither are
we disposed to mention here the sort of works [rosaries, pilgrimages,
and the like] which they teach.  We see that a horrible decree has
been prepared against us, which would terrify us still more if we
were contending concerning doubtful or trifling subjects.  Now, since
our consciences understand that by the adversaries the manifest truth
is condemned, whose defense is necessary for the Church and increases
the glory of Christ, we easily despise the terrors of the world, and
with a strong spirit will bear whatever is to be suffered for the
glory of Christ and the advantage of the Church.  Who would not
rejoice to die in the confession of such articles as that we obtain
the remission of sins by faith freely for Christ's sake, that we do
not merit the remission of sins by our works?  [Experience shows--and
the monks themselves must admit it--that] The consciences of the
pious will have no sufficiently sure consolation against the terrors
of sin and of death, and against the devil soliciting to despair [and
who in a moment blows away all our works like dust], if they do not
know that they ought to be confident that they have the remission of
sins freely for Christ's sake.  This faith sustains and quickens
hearts in that most violent conflict with despair [in the great agony
of death, in the great anguish, when no creature can help, yea, when
we must depart from this entire visible creation into another state
and world, and must die].

Therefore the cause is one which is worthy that for its sake we
should refuse no danger.  Whosoever you are that has assented to our
Confession, "do not yield to the wicked, but, on the contrary, go
forward the more boldly," when the adversaries endeavor, by means of
terrors and tortures and punishments, to drive away from you that
consolation which has been tendered to the entire Church in this
article of ours [but with all cheerfulness rely confidently and
gladly on God and the Lord Jesus, and joyfully confess this manifest
truth in opposition to the tyranny, wrath, threatening, and terrors
of all the world, yea, in opposition to the daily murders and
persecution of tyrants.  For who would suffer to have taken from him
this great, yea, everlasting consolation on which the entire
salvation of the whole Christian Church depends?  Any one who picks
up the Bible and reads it earnestly will soon observe that this
doctrine has its foundation everywhere in the Bible].  Testimonies of
Scripture will not be wanting to one seeking them, which will
establish his mind.  For Paul at the top of his voice, as the saying
is, cries out, Rom. 3, 24 f., and 4, 16, that sins are freely
remitted for Christ's sake.  It is of faith, he says, that it might
be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure.  That is, if the
promise would depend upon our works, it would not be sure.  If
remission of sins would be given on account of our works, when would
we know that we had obtained it, when would a terrified conscience
find a work which it would consider sufficient to appease God's
wrath?  But we spoke of the entire matter above.  Thence let the
reader derive testimonies.  For the unworthy treatment of the subject
has forced from us the present, not discussion, but complaint that on
this topic they have distinctly recorded themselves as disapproving
of this article of ours, that we obtain remission of sins not on
account of our works, but by faith and freely on account of Christ.

The adversaries also add testimonies to their own condemnation, and
it is worth while to recite several of them.  They quote from Peter,
2. Ep. 1, 10: Give diligence to make your calling sure, etc..  Now
you see, reader, that our adversaries have not wasted labor in
learning logic, but have the art of inferring from the Scriptures
whatever pleases them [whether it is in harmony with the Scriptures
or out of harmony; whether it is correctly or incorrectly concluded.
For they conclude thus:] "Make your calling sure by good works."
Therefore works merit the remission of sins.  A very agreeable mode
of reasoning, if one would argue thus concerning a person sentenced
to capital punishment, whose punishment has been remitted: "The
magistrate commands that hereafter you abstain from that which
belongs to another.  Therefore you have merited the remission of the
penalty, because you are now abstaining from what belongs to another."
Thus to argue is to make a cause out of that which is not a cause.
For Peter speaks of works following the remission of sins, and
teaches why they should be done, namely, that the calling may be sure,
i.e., lest they may fall from their calling if they sin again.  Do
good works that you may persevere in your calling, that you [do not
fall away again, grow cold and] may not lose the gifts of your
calling, which were given you before, and not on account of works
that follow, and which now are retained by faith, for faith does not
remain in those who lose the Holy Ghost, who reject repentance, just
as we have said above (p. 253) that faith exists in repentance.

They add other testimonies cohering no better.  Lastly they say that
this opinion was condemned a thousand years before, in the time of
Augustine.  This also is quite false.  For the Church of Christ
always held that the remission of sins is obtained freely.  Yea, the
Pelagians were condemned, who contended that grace is given on
account of our works.  Besides, we have above shown sufficiently that
we hold that good works ought necessarily to follow faith.  For we do
not make void the Law, says Paul, Rom. 3, 31; yea, we establish the
Law, because when by faith we have received the Holy Ghost, the
fulfilling of the Law necessarily follows, by which love, patience,
chastity, and other fruits of the Spirit gradually grow.




Part 26


The Twenty-first Article they absolutely condemn, because we do not
require the invocation of saints.  Nor on any topic do they speak
more eloquently and with more prolixity.  Nevertheless they do not
effect anything else than that the saints should be honored; likewise,
that the saints who live pray for others; as though, indeed, the
invocation of dead saints were on that account necessary.  They cite
Cyprian, because he asked Cornelius while yet alive to pray for his
brothers when departing.  By this example they prove the invocation
of the dead.  They quote also Jerome against Vigilantius.  "On this
field" [in this matter], they say, "eleven hundred years ago, Jerome
overcame Vigilantius." Thus the adversaries triumph, as though the
war were already ended.  Nor do those asses see that in Jerome,
against Vigilantius, there is not a syllable concerning invocation.
He speaks concerning honors for the saints, not concerning invocation.
Neither have the rest of the ancient writers before Gregory made
mention of invocation.  Certainly this invocation, with these
opinions which the adversaries now teach concerning the application
of merits, has not the testimonies of the ancient writers.

Our Confession approves honors to the saints.  For here a threefold
honor is to be approved.  The first is thanksgiving.  For we ought to
give thanks to God because He has shown examples of mercy, because He
has shown that He wishes to save men; because He has given teachers
or other gifts to the Church.  And these gifts, as they are the
greatest, should be amplified, and the saints themselves should be
praised, who have faithfully used these gifts, just as Christ praises
faithful business-men, Matt. 25, 21. 23. The second service is the
strengthening of our faith when we see the denial forgiven Peter we
also are encouraged to believe the more that grace truly superabounds
over sin, Rom. 5, 20. The third honor is the imitation, first, of
faith, then of the other virtues which every one should imitate
according to his calling.  These true honors the adversaries do not
require.  They dispute only concerning invocation, which, even though
it would have no danger, nevertheless is not necessary.

Besides, we also grant that the angels pray for us.  For there is a
testimony in Zech. 1, 12, where an angel prays: O Lord of hosts, how
long wilt Thou not have mercy on Jerusalem?  Although concerning the
saints we concede that, just as, when alive, they pray for the Church
universal in general, so in heaven they pray for the Church in
general, albeit no testimony concerning the praying of the dead is
extant in the Scriptures, except the dream taken from the Second Book
of Maccabees, 15, 14.

Moreover, even supposing that the saints pray for the Church ever so
much, yet it does not follow that they are to be invoked; although
our Confession affirms only this, that Scripture does not teach the
invocation of the saints, or that we are to ask the saints for aid.
But since neither a command, nor a promise, nor an example can be
produced from the Scriptures concerning the invocation of saints, it
follows that conscience can have nothing concerning this invocation
that is certain.  And since prayer ought to be made from faith, how
do we know that God approves this invocation?  Whence do we know
without the testimony of Scripture that the saints perceive the
prayers of each one?  Some plainly ascribe divinity to the saints
namely, that they discern the silent thoughts of the minds in us.
They dispute concerning morning and evening knowledge, perhaps
because they doubt whether they hear us in the morning or the evening.
They invent these things, not in order to treat the saints with
honor, but to defend lucrative services.  Nothing can be produced by
the adversaries against this reasoning, that, since invocation does
not have a testimony from God's Word, it cannot be affirmed that the
saints understand our invocation, or, even if they understand it,
that God approves it.  Therefore the adversaries ought not to force
us to an uncertain matter, because a prayer without faith is not
prayer.  For when they cite the example of the Church, it is evident
that this is a new custom in the Church; for although the old prayers
make mention of the saints, yet they do not invoke the saints.
Although also this new invocation in the Church is dissimilar to the
invocation of individuals.

Again, the adversaries not only require invocation in the worship of
the saints, but also apply the merits of the saints to others, and
make of the saints not only intercessors, but also propitiators.
This is in no way to be endured.  For here the honor belonging only
to Christ is altogether transferred to the saints.  For they make
them mediators and propitiators, and although they make a distinction
between mediators of intercession and mediators [the Mediator] of
redemption, yet they plainly make of the saints mediators of
redemption.  But even that they are mediators of intercession they
declare without testimony of Scripture, which, be it said ever so
reverently, nevertheless obscures Christ's office, and transfers the
confidence of mercy due Christ to the saints.  For men imagine that
Christ is more severe and the saints more easily appeased, and they
trust rather to the mercy of the saints than to the mercy of Christ,
and fleeing from Christ [as from a tyrant], they seek the saints.
Thus they actually make of them mediators of redemption.

Therefore we shall show that they truly make of the saints, not only
intercessors, but propitiators, i.e., mediators of redemption.  Here
we do not as yet recite the abuses of the common people [how manifest
idolatry is practiced at pilgrimages].  We are still speaking of the
opinions of the Doctors.  As regards the rest, even the inexperienced
[common people] can judge.

In a propitiator these two things concur.  In the first place, there
ought to be a word of God from which we may certainly know that God
wishes to pity, and hearken to, those calling upon Him through this
propitiator.  There is such a promise concerning Christ, John 16 23:
Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in My name, He will give it you.
Concerning the saints there is no such promise.  Therefore
consciences cannot be firmly confident that by the invocation of
saints we are heard.  This invocation, therefore, is not made from
faith.  Then we have also the command to call upon Christ, according
to Matt. 11, 28: Come unto Me, all ye that labor, etc., which
certainly is said also to us.  And Isaiah says, 11,10: In that day
there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an ensign to
the people; to it shall the Gentiles seek.  And Ps. 45, 12: Even the
rich among the people shall entreat Thy favor.  And Ps. 72, 11. 16:
Yea, all kings shall fall down before Him.  And shortly after: Prayer
also shall be made for Him continually.  And in John 6, 23 Christ
says: That all men should honor the Son even as they honor the Father.
And Paul, 2 Thess. 2, 16. 17, says, praying: Now our Lord Jesus
Christ Himself, and God, even our Father,... comfort your hearts and
stablish you.  [All these passages refer to Christ.] But concerning
the invocation of saints, what commandment, what example can the
adversaries produce from the Scriptures?  The second matter in a
propitiator is, that his merits have been presented as those which
make satisfaction for others, which are bestowed by divine imputation
on others, in order that through these, just as by their own merits,
they may be accounted righteous.  As when any friend pays a debt for
a friend, the debtor is freed by the merit of another, as though it
were by his own.  Thus the merits of Christ are bestowed upon us, in
order that, when we believe in Him, we may be accounted righteous by
our confidence in Christ's merits as though we had merits of our own.

And from both, namely, from the promise and the bestowment of merits,
confidence in mercy arises [upon both parts must a Christian prayer
be founded].  Such confidence in the divine promise, and likewise in
the merits of Christ, ought to be brought forward when we pray.  For
we ought to be truly confident, both that for Christ's sake we are
heard, and that by His merits we have a reconciled Father.

Here the adversaries first bid us invoke the saints, although they
have neither God's promise, nor a command, nor an example from
Scripture.  And yet they cause greater confidence in the mercy of the
saints to be conceived than in that of Christ, although Christ bade
us come to Him and not to the saints.  Secondly, they apply the
merits of the saints, just as the merits of Christ, to others, they
bid us trust in the merits of the saints as though we were accounted
righteous on account of the merits of the saints, in like manner as
we are accounted righteous by the merits of Christ.  Here we
fabricate nothing.  In indulgences they say that they apply the
merits of the saints [as satisfactions for our sins].  And Gabriel,
the interpreter of the canon of the Mass, confidently declares:
According to the order instituted by God we should betake ourselves
to the aid of the saints, in order that we may be saved by their
merits and vows.  These are the words of Gabriel.  And nevertheless
in the books and sermons of the adversaries still more absurd things
are read here and there.  What is it to make propitiators if this is
not?  They are altogether made equal to Christ if we must trust that
we are saved by their merits.

But where has this arrangement, to which he refers when he says that
we ought to resort to the aid of the saints, been instituted by God?
Let him produce an example or command from the Scriptures.  Perhaps
they derive this arrangement from the courts of kings, where friends
must be employed as intercessors.  But if a king has appointed a
certain intercessor, he will not desire that eases be brought to him
through others.  Thus, since Christ has been appointed Intercessor
and High Priest, why do we seek others?  [What can the adversaries
