
The great guru taught his disciples to avoid theoretical discussion
of the scriptures. "He only is wise who devotes himself to realizing,
not reading only, the ancient revelations," he said. "Solve all
your problems through meditation. {FN35-14} Exchange unprofitable
religious speculations for actual God-contact. Clear your mind of
dogmatic theological debris; let in the fresh, healing waters of
direct perception. Attune yourself to the active inner Guidance;
the Divine Voice has the answer to every dilemma of life. Though
man's ingenuity for getting himself into trouble appears to be
endless, the Infinite Succor is no less resourceful."

[Illustration: LAHIRI MAHASAYA, Disciple of Babaji and Guru of Sri
Yukteswar--see lahiri.jpg]

The master's omnipresence was demonstrated one day before a group
of disciples who were listening to his exposition of the BHAGAVAD
GITA.  As he was explaining the meaning of KUTASTHA CHAITANYA or
the Christ Consciousness in all vibratory creation, Lahiri Mahasaya
suddenly gasped and cried out:

"I am drowning in the bodies of many souls off the coast of Japan!"

The next morning the chelas read a newspaper account of the death
of many people whose ship had foundered the preceding day near
Japan.

The distant disciples of Lahiri Mahasaya were often made aware of
his enfolding presence. "I am ever with those who practice KRIYA,"
he said consolingly to chelas who could not remain near him. "I
will guide you to the Cosmic Home through your enlarging perceptions."

Swami Satyananda was told by a devotee that, unable to go to Benares,
the man had nevertheless received precise KRIYA initiation in a
dream.  Lahiri Mahasaya had appeared to instruct the chela in answer
to his prayers.

If a disciple neglected any of his worldly obligations, the master
would gently correct and discipline him.

"Lahiri Mahasaya's words were mild and healing, even when he was
forced to speak openly of a chela's faults," Sri Yukteswar once
told me. He added ruefully, "No disciple ever fled from our master's
barbs." I could not help laughing, but I truthfully assured Sri
Yukteswar that, sharp or not, his every word was music to my ears.

Lahiri Mahasaya carefully graded KRIYA into four progressive
initiations. {FN35-15} He bestowed the three higher techniques only
after the devotee had manifested definite spiritual progress. One
day a certain chela, convinced that his worth was not being duly
evaluated, gave voice to his discontent.

"Master," he said, "surely I am ready now for the second initiation."

At this moment the door opened to admit a humble disciple, Brinda
Bhagat. He was a Benares postman.

"Brinda, sit by me here." The great guru smiled at him affectionately.
"Tell me, are you ready for the second technique of KRIYA?"

The little postman folded his hands in supplication. "Gurudeva," he
said in alarm, "no more initiations, please! How can I assimilate
any higher teachings? I have come today to ask your blessings,
because the first divine KRIYA has filled me with such intoxication
that I cannot deliver my letters!"

"Already Brinda swims in the sea of Spirit." At these words from
Lahiri Mahasaya, his other disciple hung his head.

"Master," he said, "I see I have been a poor workman, finding fault
with my tools."

The postman, who was an uneducated man, later developed his insight
through KRIYA to such an extent that scholars occasionally sought
his interpretation on involved scriptural points. Innocent alike of
sin and syntax, little Brinda won renown in the domain of learned
pundits.

Besides the numerous Benares disciples of Lahiri Mahasaya, hundreds
came to him from distant parts of India. He himself traveled to Bengal
on several occasions, visiting at the homes of the fathers-in-law
of his two sons. Thus blessed by his presence, Bengal became
honeycombed with small KRIYA groups. Particularly in the districts
of Krishnagar and Bishnupur, many silent devotees to this day have
kept the invisible current of spiritual meditation flowing.

Among many saints who received KRIYA from Lahiri Mahasaya may be
mentioned the illustrious Swami Vhaskarananda Saraswati of Benares,
and the Deogarh ascetic of high stature, Balananda Brahmachari.
For a time Lahiri Mahasaya served as private tutor to the son of
Maharaja Iswari Narayan Sinha Bahadur of Benares. Recognizing the
master's spiritual attainment, the maharaja, as well as his son,
sought KRIYA initiation, as did the Maharaja Jotindra Mohan Thakur.

A number of Lahiri Mahasaya's disciples with influential worldly
position were desirous of expanding the KRIYA circle by publicity.
The guru refused his permission. One chela, the royal physician
to the Lord of Benares, started an organized effort to spread the
master's name as "Kashi Baba" (Exalted One of Benares). {FN35-16}
Again the guru forbade it.

"Let the fragrance of the KRIYA flower be wafted naturally, without
any display," he said. "Its seeds will take root in the soil of
spiritually fertile hearts."

Although the great master did not adopt the system of preaching
through the modern medium of an organization, or through the
printing press, he knew that the power of his message would rise
like a resistless flood, inundating by its own force the banks of
human minds. The changed and purified lives of devotees were the
simple guarantees of the deathless vitality of KRIYA.

In 1886, twenty-five years after his Ranikhet initiation, Lahiri
Mahasaya was retired on a pension. {FN35-17} With his availability
in the daytime, disciples sought him out in ever-increasing numbers.
The great guru now sat in silence most of the time, locked in the
tranquil lotus posture. He seldom left his little parlor, even
for a walk or to visit other parts of the house. A quiet stream of
chelas arrived, almost ceaselessly, for a DARSHAN (holy sight) of
the guru.

To the awe of all beholders, Lahiri Mahasaya's habitual physiological
state exhibited the superhuman features of breathlessness, sleeplessness,
cessation of pulse and heartbeat, calm eyes unblinking for hours,
and a profound aura of peace. No visitors departed without upliftment
of spirit; all knew they had received the silent blessing of a true
man of God.

The master now permitted his disciple, Panchanon Bhattacharya, to
open an "Arya Mission Institution" in Calcutta. Here the saintly
disciple spread the message of KRIYA YOGA, and prepared for public
benefit certain yogic herbal {FN35-18} medicines.

In accordance with ancient custom, the master gave to people in
general a NEEM {FN35-19} oil for the cure of various diseases. When
the guru requested a disciple to distil the oil, he could easily
accomplish the task. If anyone else tried, he would encounter strange
difficulties, finding that the medicinal oil had almost evaporated
after going through the required distilling processes. Evidently
the master's blessing was a necessary ingredient.

[Illustration:--lmwriting.jpg]

Lahiri Mahasaya's handwriting and signature, in Bengali script,
are shown above. The lines occur in a letter to a chela; the great
master interprets a Sanskrit verse as follows: "He who has attained
a state of calmness wherein his eyelids do not blink, has achieved
SAMBHABI MUDRA."

(SIGNED) "SRI SHYAMA CHARAN DEVA SHARMAN"

The Arya Mission Institution undertook the publication of many
of the guru's scriptural commentaries. Like Jesus and other great
prophets, Lahiri Mahasaya himself wrote no books, but his penetrating
interpretations were recorded and arranged by various disciples.
Some of these voluntary amanuenses were more discerning than others
in correctly conveying the profound insight of the guru; yet, on
the whole, their efforts were successful. Through their zeal, the
world possesses unparalleled commentaries by Lahiri Mahasaya on
twenty-six ancient scriptures.

Sri Ananda Mohan Lahiri, a grandson of the master, has written an
interesting booklet on KRIYA. "The text of the BHAGAVAD GITA is a
part of the great epic, the MAHABHARATA, which possesses several
knot-points (VYAS-KUTAS)," Sri Ananda wrote. "Keep those knot-points
unquestioned, and we find nothing but mythical stories of a peculiar
and easily-misunderstood type. Keep those knot-points unexplained,
and we have lost a science which the East has preserved with
superhuman patience after a quest of thousands of years of experiment.
{FN35-20} It was the commentaries of Lahiri Mahasaya which brought
to light, clear of allegories, the very science of religion that
had been so cleverly put out of sight in the riddle of scriptural
letters and imagery. No longer a mere unintelligible jugglery of
words, the otherwise unmeaning formulas of Vedic worship have been
proved by the master to be full of scientific significance. . . .

"We know that man is usually helpless against the insurgent sway
of evil passions, but these are rendered powerless and man finds no
motive in their indulgence when there dawns on him a consciousness
of superior and lasting bliss through KRIYA. Here the give-up, the
negation of the lower passions, synchronizes with a take-up, the
assertion of a beatitude. Without such a course, hundreds of moral
maxims which run in mere negatives are useless to us.

"Our eagerness for worldly activity kills in us the sense of
spiritual awe. We cannot comprehend the Great Life behind all names
and forms, just because science brings home to us how we can use
the powers of nature; this familiarity has bred a contempt for her
ultimate secrets.  Our relation with nature is one of practical
business. We tease her, so to speak, to know how she can be used
to serve our purposes; we make use of her energies, whose Source
yet remains unknown. In science our relation with nature is one
that exists between a man and his servant, or in a philosophical
sense she is like a captive in the witness box. We cross-examine
her, challenge her, and minutely weigh her evidence in human scales
which cannot measure her hidden values.  On the other hand, when
the self is in communion with a higher power, nature automatically
obeys, without stress or strain, the will of man.  This effortless
command over nature is called 'miraculous' by the uncomprehending
materialist.

"The life of Lahiri Mahasaya set an example which changed the
erroneous notion that yoga is a mysterious practice. Every man may
find a way through KRIYA to understand his proper relation with
nature, and to feel spiritual reverence for all phenomena, whether
mystical or of everyday occurrence, in spite of the matter-of-factness
of physical science. {FN35-21} We must bear in mind that what was
mystical a thousand years ago is no longer so, and what is mysterious
now may become lawfully intelligible a hundred years hence. It is the
Infinite, the Ocean of Power, that is at the back of all manifestations.

"The law of KRIYA YOGA is eternal. It is true like mathematics;
like the simple rules of addition and subtraction, the law of KRIYA
can never be destroyed. Burn to ashes all the books on mathematics,
the logically-minded will always rediscover such truths; destroy
all the sacred books on yoga, its fundamental laws will come out
whenever there appears a true yogi who comprises within himself
pure devotion and consequently pure knowledge."

Just as Babaji is among the greatest of avatars, a MAHAVATAR, and
Sri Yukteswar a JNANAVATAR or Incarnation of Wisdom, so Lahiri
Mahasaya may justly be called YOGAVATAR, or Incarnation of Yoga.
By the standards of both qualitative and quantitative good, he
elevated the spiritual level of society. In his power to raise his
close disciples to Christlike stature and in his wide dissemination
of truth among the masses, Lahiri Mahasaya ranks among the saviors
of mankind.

His uniqueness as a prophet lies in his practical stress on
a definite method, KRIYA, opening for the first time the doors of
yoga freedom to all men. Apart from the miracles of his own life,
surely the YOGAVATAR reached the zenith of all wonders in reducing
the ancient complexities of yoga to an effective simplicity not
beyond the ordinary grasp.

In reference to miracles, Lahiri Mahasaya often said, "The operation
of subtle laws which are unknown to people in general should not
be publicly discussed or published without due discrimination."
If in these pages I have appeared to flout his cautionary words,
it is because he has given me an inward reassurance. Also, in
recording the lives of Babaji, Lahiri Mahasaya, and Sri Yukteswar,
I have thought it advisable to omit many true miraculous stories,
which could hardly have been included without writing, also, an
explanatory volume of abstruse philosophy.

New hope for new men! "Divine union," the YOGAVATAR proclaimed, "is
possible through self-effort, and is not dependent on theological
beliefs or on the arbitrary will of a Cosmic Dictator."

Through use of the KRIYA key, persons who cannot bring themselves
to believe in the divinity of any man will behold at last the full
divinity of their own selves.

{FN35-1} MATTHEW 3:15.

{FN35-2} Many Biblical passages reveal that the law of reincarnation
was understood and accepted. Reincarnational cycles are a more
reasonable explanation for the different states of evolution in
which mankind is found, than the common Western theory which assumes
that something (consciousness of egoity) came out of nothing, existed
with varying degrees of lustihood for thirty or ninety years, and
then returned to the original void. The inconceivable nature of
such a void is a problem to delight the heart of a medieval Schoolman.

{FN35-3} MALACHI 4:5.

{FN35-4} "Before him," i.e., "before the Lord."

{FN35-5} LUKE 1:13-17.

{FN35-6} MATTHEW 17:12-13.

{FN35-7} MATTHEW 11:13-14.

{FN35-8} JOHN 1:21.

{FN35-9} II KINGS 2:9-14.

{FN35-10} MATTHEW 17:3.

{FN35-11} MATTHEW 27:46-49.

{FN35-12} "How many sorts of death are in our bodies! Nothing is
therein but death."-MARTIN LUTHER, IN "TABLE-TALK."

{FN35-13} The chief prayer of the Mohammedans, usually repeated
four or five times daily.

{FN35-14} "Seek truth in meditation, not in moldy books. Look in
the sky to find the moon, not in the pond."-PERSIAN PROVERB.

{FN35-15} As KRIYA YOGA is capable of many subdivisions, Lahiri
Mahasaya wisely sifted out four steps which he discerned to be
those which contained the essential marrow, and which were of the
highest value in actual practice.

{FN35-16} Other titles bestowed on Lahiri Mahasaya by his disciples
were YOGIBAR (greatest of yogis), YOGIRAJ (king of yogis), and MUNIBAR
(greatest of saints), to which I have added YOGAVATAR (incarnation
of yoga).

{FN35-17} He had given, altogether, thirty-five years of service
in one department of the government.

{FN35-18} Vast herbal knowledge is found in ancient Sanskrit treatises.
Himalayan herbs were employed in a rejuvenation treatment which
aroused the attention of the world in 1938 when the method was
used on Pundit Madan Mohan Malaviya, 77-year-old Vice-Chancellor
of Benares Hindu University. To a remarkable extent, the noted
scholar regained in 45 days his health, strength, memory, normal
eyesight; indications of a third set of teeth appeared, while all
wrinkles vanished. The herbal treatment, known as KAYA KALPA, is
one of 80 rejuvenation methods outlined in Hindu AYURVEDA or medical
science. Pundit Malaviya underwent the treatment at the hands of
Sri Kalpacharya Swami Beshundasji, who claims 1766 as his birth
year. He possesses documents proving him to be more than 100 years
old; ASSOCIATED PRESS reporters remarked that he looked about 40.

Ancient Hindu treatises divided medical science into 8 branches:
SALYA (surgery); SALAKYA (diseases above the neck); KAYACHIKITSA
(medicine proper); BHUTAVIDYA (mental diseases); KAUMARA (care
of infancy); AGADA (toxicology); RASAYANA (longevity); VAGIKARANA
(tonics). Vedic physicians used delicate surgical instruments,
employed plastic surgery, understood medical methods to counteract
the effects of poison gas, performed Caesarean sections and brain
operations, were skilled in dynamization of drugs. Hippocrates,
famous physician of the 5th century B.C., borrowed much of his
materia medica from Hindu sources.

{FN35-19} The East Indian margosa tree. Its medicinal values have
now become recognized in the West, where the bitter NEEM bark is
used as a tonic, and the oil from seeds and fruit has been found
of utmost worth in the treatment of leprosy and other diseases.

{FN35-20} "A number of seals recently excavated from archaeological
sites of the Indus valley, datable in the third millennium B.C.,
show figures seated in meditative postures now used in the system
of Yoga, and warrant the inference that even at that time some of
the rudiments of Yoga were already known. We may not unreasonably
draw the conclusion that systematic introspection with the aid of
studied methods has been practiced in India for five thousand years.
. . .  India has developed certain valuable religious attitudes of
mind and ethical notions which are unique, at least in the wideness
of their application to life. One of these has been a tolerance in
questions of intellectual belief-doctrine-that is amazing to the
West, where for many centuries heresy-hunting was common, and bloody
wars between nations over sectarian rivalries were frequent."-Extracts
from an article by Professor W. Norman Brown in the May, 1939
issue of the BULLETIN of the American Council of Learned Societies,
Washington, D.C.

{FN35-21} One thinks here of Carlyle's observation in SARTOR RESARTUS:
"The man who cannot wonder, who does not habitually wonder (and
worship), were he president of innumerable Royal Societies and
carried . . . the epitome of all laboratories and observatories,
with their results, in his single head,-is but a pair of spectacles
behind which there is no eye."



CHAPTER: 36

BABAJI'S INTEREST IN THE WEST

"Master, did you ever meet Babaji?"

It was a calm summer night in Serampore; the large stars of the
tropics gleamed over our heads as I sat by Sri Yukteswar's side on
the second-story balcony of the hermitage.

"Yes." Master smiled at my direct question; his eyes lit with
reverence. "Three times I have been blessed by the sight of the
deathless guru. Our first meeting was in Allahabad at a KUMBHA
MELA."

The religious fairs held in India since time immemorial are known
as KUMBHA MELAS; they have kept spiritual goals in constant sight
of the multitude. Devout Hindus gather by the millions every six
years to meet thousands of sadhus, yogis, swamis, and ascetics of
all kinds.  Many are hermits who never leave their secluded haunts
except to attend the MELAS and bestow their blessings on worldly
men and women.

"I was not a swami at the time I met Babaji," Sri Yukteswar went on.
"But I had already received KRIYA initiation from Lahiri Mahasaya.
He encouraged me to attend the MELA which was convening in January,
1894 at Allahabad. It was my first experience of a KUMBHA; I felt
slightly dazed by the clamor and surge of the crowd. In my searching
gazes around I saw no illumined face of a master. Passing a bridge
on the bank of the Ganges, I noticed an acquaintance standing
near-by, his begging bowl extended.

"'Oh, this fair is nothing but a chaos of noise and beggars,'
I thought in disillusionment. 'I wonder if Western scientists,
patiently enlarging the realms of knowledge for the practical good
of mankind, are not more pleasing to God than these idlers who
profess religion but concentrate on alms.'

"My smouldering reflections on social reform were interrupted by
the voice of a tall sannyasi who halted before me.

"'Sir,' he said, 'a saint is calling you.'

"'Who is he?'

"'Come and see for yourself.'

"Hesitantly following this laconic advice, I soon found myself
near a tree whose branches were sheltering a guru with an attractive
group of disciples. The master, a bright unusual figure, with
sparkling dark eyes, rose at my approach and embraced me.

"'Welcome, Swamiji,' he said affectionately.

"'Sir,' I replied emphatically, 'I am NOT a swami.'

"'Those on whom I am divinely directed to bestow the title
of "swami" never cast it off.' The saint addressed me simply, but
deep conviction of truth rang in his words; I was engulfed in an
instant wave of spiritual blessing. Smiling at my sudden elevation
into the ancient monastic order, {FN36-1} I bowed at the feet of
the obviously great and angelic being in human form who had thus
honored me.

"Babaji-for it was indeed he-motioned me to a seat near him under
the tree. He was strong and young, and looked like Lahiri Mahasaya;
yet the resemblance did not strike me, even though I had often
heard of the extraordinary similarities in the appearance of the
two masters.  Babaji possesses a power by which he can prevent any
specific thought from arising in a person's mind. Evidently the
great guru wished me to be perfectly natural in his presence, not
overawed by knowledge of his identity.

"'What do you think of the KUMBHA MELA?'

"'I was greatly disappointed, sir.' I added hastily, 'Up until the
time I met you. Somehow saints and this commotion don't seem to
belong together.'

"'Child,' the master said, though apparently I was nearly twice
his own age, 'for the faults of the many, judge not the whole.
Everything on earth is of mixed character, like a mingling of sand
and sugar. Be like the wise ant which seizes only the sugar, and
leaves the sand untouched. Though many sadhus here still wander in
delusion, yet the MELA is blessed by a few men of God-realization.'

"In view of my own meeting with this exalted master, I quickly
agreed with his observation.

"'Sir,' I commented, 'I have been thinking of the scientific
men of the West, greater by far in intelligence than most people
congregated here, living in distant Europe and America, professing
different creeds, and ignorant of the real values of such MELAS
as the present one. They are the men who could benefit greatly by
meetings with India's masters. But, although high in intellectual
attainments, many Westerners are wedded to rank materialism. Others,
famous in science and philosophy, do not recognize the essential
unity in religion.  Their creeds serve as insurmountable barriers
that threaten to separate them from us forever.'

"'I saw that you are interested in the West, as well as the East.'
Babaji's face beamed with approval. 'I felt the pangs of your heart,
broad enough for all men, whether Oriental or Occidental. That is
why I summoned you here.

"'East and West must establish a golden middle path of activity
and spirituality combined,' he continued. 'India has much to learn
from the West in material development; in return, India can teach
the universal methods by which the West will be able to base its
religious beliefs on the unshakable foundations of yogic science.

"'You, Swamiji, have a part to play in the coming harmonious exchange
between Orient and Occident. Some years hence I shall send you
a disciple whom you can train for yoga dissemination in the West.
The vibrations there of many spiritually seeking souls come floodlike
to me. I perceive potential saints in America and Europe, waiting
to be awakened.'"

At this point in his story, Sri Yukteswar turned his gaze fully on
mine.

"My son," he said, smiling in the moonlight, "you are the disciple
that, years ago, Babaji promised to send me."

I was happy to learn that Babaji had directed my steps to Sri
Yukteswar, yet it was hard for me to visualize myself in the remote
West, away from my beloved guru and the simple hermitage peace.

"Babaji then spoke of the BHAGAVAD GITA," Sri Yukteswar went on.
"To my astonishment, he indicated by a few words of praise that he
was aware of the fact that I had written interpretations on various
GITA chapters.

"'At my request, Swamiji, please undertake another task,' the great
master said. 'Will you not write a short book on the underlying
basic unity between the Christian and Hindu scriptures? Show by
parallel references that the inspired sons of God have spoken the
same truths, now obscured by men's sectarian differences.'

"'Maharaj,' {FN36-2} I answered diffidently, 'what a command! Shall
I be able to fulfill it?'

"Babaji laughed softly. 'My son, why do you doubt?' he said
reassuringly. 'Indeed, Whose work is all this, and Who is the
Doer of all actions? Whatever the Lord has made me say is bound to
materialize as truth.'

"I deemed myself empowered by the blessings of the saint, and agreed
to write the book. Feeling reluctantly that the parting-hour had
arrived, I rose from my leafy seat.

"'Do you know Lahiri?' {FN36-3} the master inquired. 'He is a
great soul, isn't he? Tell him of our meeting.' He then gave me a
message for Lahiri Mahasaya.

"After I had bowed humbly in farewell, the saint smiled benignly.
'When your book is finished, I shall pay you a visit,' he promised.
'Good-by for the present.'

"I left Allahabad the following day and entrained for Benares.
Reaching my guru's home, I poured out the story of the wonderful
saint at the KUMBHA MELA.

"'Oh, didn't you recognize him?' Lahiri Mahasaya's eyes were dancing
with laughter. 'I see you couldn't, for he prevented you. He is my
incomparable guru, the celestial Babaji!'

"'Babaji!' I repeated, awestruck. 'The Yogi-Christ Babaji! The
invisible-visible savior Babaji! Oh, if I could just recall the
past and be once more in his presence, to show my devotion at his
lotus feet!'

"'Never mind,' Lahiri Mahasaya said consolingly. 'He has promised
to see you again.'

"'Gurudeva, the divine master asked me to give you a message. "Tell
Lahiri," he said, "that the stored-up power for this life now runs
low; it is nearly finished."'

"At my utterance of these enigmatic words, Lahiri Mahasaya's figure
trembled as though touched by a lightning current. In an instant
everything about him fell silent; his smiling countenance turned
incredibly stern. Like a wooden statue, somber and immovable in
its seat, his body became colorless. I was alarmed and bewildered.
Never in my life had I seen this joyous soul manifest such awful
gravity.  The other disciples present stared apprehensively.

"Three hours passed in utter silence. Then Lahiri Mahasaya resumed
his natural, cheerful demeanor, and spoke affectionately to each
of the chelas. Everyone sighed in relief.

"I realized by my master's reaction that Babaji's message had been
an unmistakable signal by which Lahiri Mahasaya understood that his
body would soon be untenanted. His awesome silence proved that
my guru had instantly controlled his being, cut his last cord
of attachment to the material world, and fled to his ever-living
identity in Spirit.  Babaji's remark had been his way of saying:
'I shall be ever with you.'

"Though Babaji and Lahiri Mahasaya were omniscient, and had
no need of communicating with each other through me or any other
intermediary, the great ones often condescend to play a part in the
human drama.  Occasionally they transmit their prophecies through
messengers in an ordinary way, that the final fulfillment of their
words may infuse greater divine faith in a wide circle of men who
later learn the story.

"I soon left Benares, and set to work in Serampore on the scriptural
writings requested by Babaji," Sri Yukteswar continued. "No sooner
had I begun my task than I was able to compose a poem dedicated to
the deathless guru. The melodious lines flowed effortlessly from
my pen, though never before had I attempted Sanskrit poetry.

"In the quiet of night I busied myself over a comparison of the
Bible and the scriptures of SANATAN DHARMA. {FN36-4} Quoting the
words of the blessed Lord Jesus, I showed that his teachings were
in essence one with the revelations of the VEDAS. To my relief,
my book was finished in a short time; I realized that this speedy
blessing was due to the grace of my PARAM-GURU-MAHARAJ. {FN36-5}
The chapters first appeared in the SADHUSAMBAD journal; later they
were privately printed as a book by one of my Kidderpore disciples.

"The morning after I had concluded my literary efforts," Master
continued, "I went to the Rai Ghat here to bathe in the Ganges.
The ghat was deserted; I stood still for awhile, enjoying the sunny
peace.  After a dip in the sparkling waters, I started for home.
The only sound in the silence was that of my Ganges-drenched cloth,
swish-swashing with every step. As I passed beyond the site of the
large banyan tree near the river bank, a strong impulse urged me
to look back. There, under the shade of the banyan, and surrounded
by a few disciples, sat the great Babaji!

"'Greetings, Swamiji!' The beautiful voice of the master rang
out to assure me I was not dreaming. 'I see you have successfully
completed your book. As I promised, I am here to thank you.'

"With a fast-beating heart, I prostrated myself fully at his feet.
'Param-guruji,' I said imploringly, 'will you and your chelas not
honor my near-by home with your presence?'

"The supreme guru smilingly declined. 'No, child,' he said, 'we are
people who like the shelter of trees; this spot is quite comfortable.'

"'Please tarry awhile, Master.' I gazed entreatingly at him. 'I
shall be back at once with some special sweetmeats.'

"When I returned in a few minutes with a dish of delicacies, lo! the
lordly banyan no longer sheltered the celestial troupe. I searched
all around the ghat, but in my heart I knew the little band had
already fled on etheric wings.

"I was deeply hurt. 'Even if we meet again, I would not care to talk
to him,' I assured myself. 'He was unkind to leave me so suddenly.'
This was a wrath of love, of course, and nothing more.

"A few months later I visited Lahiri Mahasaya in Benares. As I
entered his little parlor, my guru smiled in greeting.

"'Welcome, Yukteswar,' he said. 'Did you just meet Babaji at the
threshold of my room?'

"'Why, no,' I answered in surprise.

"'Come here.' Lahiri Mahasaya touched me gently on the forehead;
at once I beheld, near the door, the form of Babaji, blooming like
a perfect lotus.

"I remembered my old hurt, and did not bow. Lahiri Mahasaya looked
at me in astonishment.

"The divine guru gazed at me with fathomless eyes. 'You are annoyed
with me.'

"'Sir, why shouldn't I be?' I answered. 'Out of the air you came
with your magic group, and into the thin air you vanished.'

"'I told you I would see you, but didn't say how long I would remain.'
Babaji laughed softly. 'You were full of excitement. I assure you
that I was fairly extinguished in the ether by the gust of your
restlessness.'

"I was instantly satisfied by this unflattering explanation. I
knelt at his feet; the supreme guru patted me kindly on the shoulder.

"'Child, you must meditate more,' he said. 'Your gaze is not yet
faultless-you could not see me hiding behind the sunlight.' With
these words in the voice of a celestial flute, Babaji disappeared
into the hidden radiance.

"That was one of my last visits to Benares to see my guru," Sri
Yukteswar concluded. "Even as Babaji had foretold at the KUMBHA
MELA, the householder-incarnation of Lahiri Mahasaya was drawing
to a close.  During the summer of 1895 his stalwart body developed
a small boil on the back. He protested against lancing; he was working
out in his own flesh the evil karma of some of his disciples. Finally
a few chelas became very insistent; the master replied cryptically:

"'The body has to find a cause to go; I will be agreeable to whatever
you want to do.'

"A short time later the incomparable guru gave up his body in
Benares.  No longer need I seek him out in his little parlor; I
find every day of my life blessed by his omnipresent guidance."

Years later, from the lips of Swami Keshabananda, {FN36-6} an
advanced disciple, I heard many wonderful details about the passing
of Lahiri Mahasaya.
