(Jatugriha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Meanwhile the Pandavas got into their cars, yoking
thereto some fine horses endued with the speed of wind. While they were on
the point of entering their cars, they touched, in great sorrow, the feet
of Bhishma, of king Dhritarashtra, of the illustrious Drona, of Kripa, of
Vidura and of the other elders of the Kuru race. Then saluting with
reverence all the older men, and embracing their equals, receiving the
farewell of even the children, and taking leave of all the venerable
ladies in their household, and walking round them respectfully, and
bidding farewell unto all the citizens, the Pandavas, ever mindful of
their vows, set out for Varanavata. And Vidura of great wisdom and the
other bulls among the Kurus and the citizens also, from great affliction,
followed those tigers among men to some distance. And some amongst the
citizens and the country people, who followed the Pandavas, afflicted
beyond measure at beholding the sons of Pandu in such distress, began to
say aloud, "King Dhritarashtra of wicked soul seeth no things with the
same eye. The Kuru monarch casteth not his eye on virtue. Neither the
sinless Yudhishthira, nor Bhima the foremost of mighty men, nor Dhananjaya
the (youngest) son of Kunti, will ever be guilty (of the sin of waging a
rebellious war). When these will remain quiet, how shall the illustrious
son of Madri do anything? Having inherited the kingdom from their father,
Dhritarashtra could not bear them. How is that Bhishma who suffers the
exile of the Pandavas to that wretched place, sanctions this act of great
injustice? Vichitravirya, the son of Santanu, and the royal sage Pandu of
Kuru's race both cherished us of old with fatherly care. But now that
Pandu that tiger among men, hath ascended to heaven, Dhritarashtra cannot
bear with these princes his children. We who do not sanction this exile
shall all go, leaving this excellent town and our own homes, where
Yudhishthira will go."

"'Unto those distressed citizens talking in this way, the virtuous
Yudhishthira, himself afflicted with sorrow, reflecting for a few moments
said, "The king is our father, worthy of regard, our spiritual guide, and
our superior. To carry out with unsuspicious hearts whatever he biddeth,
is indeed, our duty. Ye are our friends. Walking round us and making us
happy by your blessings, return ye to your abodes. When the time cometh
for anything to be done for us by you, then, indeed, accomplish all that
is agreeable and beneficial to us." Thus addressed, the citizens walked
round the Pandavas and blessed them with their blessings and returned to
their respective abodes.

"'And after the citizens had ceased following the Pandavas, Vidura,
conversant with all the dictates of morality, desirous of awakening the
eldest of the Pandavas (to a sense of his dangers), addressed him in these
words. The learned Vidura, conversant with the jargon (of the Mlechchhas),
addressed the learned Yudhishthira who also was conversant with the same
jargon, in the words of the Mlechchha tongue, so as to be unintelligible
to all except Yudhishthira. He said, "He that knoweth the schemes his foes
contrive in accordance with the dictates of political science, should,
knowing them, act in such a way as to avoid all danger. He that knoweth
that there are sharp weapons capable of cutting the body though not made
of steel, and understandeth also the means of warding them off, can never
be injured by foes. He liveth who protecteth himself by the knowledge that
neither the consumer of straw and wood nor the drier of the dew burneth
the inmates of a hole in the deep woods. The blind man seeth not his way:
the blind man hath no knowledge of direction. He that hath no firmness
never acquireth prosperity. Remembering this, be upon your guard. The man
who taketh a weapon not made of steel (i.e., an inflammable abode) given
him by his foes, can escape from fire by making his abode like unto that
of a jackal (having many outlets). By wandering a man may acquire the
knowledge of ways, and by the stars he can ascertain the direction, and he
that keepeth his five (senses) under control can never be oppressed by his
enemies."

"'Thus addressed, Pandu's son, Yudhishthira the just replied unto Vidura,
that foremost of all learned men, saying, "I have understood thee." Then
Vidura, having instructed the Pandavas and followed them (thus far),
walked around them and bidding them farewell returned to his own abode.
When the citizens and Bhishma and Vidura had all ceased following, Kunti
approached Yudhishthira and said, "The words that Kshattri said unto thee
in the midst of many people so indistinctly as if he did not say anything,
and thy reply also to him in similar words and voice, we have not
understood. If it is not improper for us to know them I should then like
to hear everything that had passed between him and thee."

"'Yudhishthira replied, "The virtuous Vidura said unto me that we should
know that the mansion (for our accommodation at Varanavata) hath been
built of inflammable materials. He said unto me, 'The path of escape too
shall not be unknown to thee,'--and further,--'Those that can control
their senses can acquire the sovereignty of the whole world.'--The reply
that I gave unto Vidura was, 'I have understood thee.'"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'The Pandavas set out on the eighth day of the
month of Phalguna when the star Rohini was in the ascendant, and arriving
at they beheld the town and the people.'"


SECTION CXLVIII

(Jatugriha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Then all the citizens (of Varanavata) on hearing that
the son of Pandu had come, were filled with joy at the tidings, speedily
came out of Varanavata, in vehicles of various kinds numbering by
thousands, taking with them every auspicious article as directed by the
Sastras, for receiving those foremost of men. And the people of Varanavata,
approaching the sons of Kunti blessed them by uttering the Jaya and stood
surrounding them. That tiger among men, viz., the virtuous Yudhishthira
thus surrounded by them looked resplendent like him having the thunderbolt
in his hands (viz., Indra) in the midst of the celestials. And those
sinless ones, welcomed by the citizens and welcoming the citizens in
return, then entered the populous town of Varanavata decked with every
ornament. Entering the town those heroes first went, O monarch, to the
abodes of Brahmanas engaged in their proper duties. Those foremost of men
then went to the abodes of the officials of the town, and then of the
Sutas and the Vaisyas and then to those of even the Sudras. O bull of
Bharata's race, thus adored by the citizens, the Pandavas at last went
with Purochana going before them, to the palace that had been built for
them. Purochana then began to place before them food and drink and beds
and carpets, all of the first and most agreeable order. The Pandavas
attired in costly robes, continued to live there, adored by Purochana and
the people having their homes in Varanavata.

"'After the Pandavas had thus lived for ten nights, Purochana spoke to them
of the mansion (he had built) called "The Blessed Home," but in reality
the cursed house. Then those tigers among men, attired in costly dress,
entered that mansion at the instance of Purochana like Guhyakas entering
the palace (of Siva) on the Kailasa mount. The foremost of all virtuous
men, Yudhishthira, inspecting the house, said unto Bhima that it was
really built of inflammable materials. Smelling the scent of fat mixed
with clarified butter and preparations of lac, he said unto Bhima, "O
chastiser of foes, this house is truly built of inflammable materials!
Indeed, it is apparent that such is the case! The enemy, it is evident, by
the aid of trusted artists well-skilled in the construction of houses,
have finely built this mansion, after procuring hemp, resin, heath, straw,
and bamboos, all soaked in clarified butter. This wicked wretch, Purochana,
acting under the instruction of Duryodhana, stayeth here with the object
of burning me to death when he seeth me trustful. But, O son of Pritha,
Vidura of great intelligence, knew of this danger, and, therefore, hath
warned me of it beforehand. Knowing it all, that youngest uncle of ours,
ever wishing our good from affection hath told us that this house, so full
of danger, hath been constructed by the wretches under Duryodhana acting
in secrecy."

"'Hearing this, Bhima replied, "If, sir, you know this house to be so
inflammable, it would then be well for us to return thither where we had
taken up our quarters first." Yudhishthira replied, "It seems to me that
we should rather continue to live here in seeming unsuspiciousness but all
the while with caution and our senses wide awake and seeking for some
certain means of escape. If Purochana findeth from our countenances that
we have fathomed designs, acting with haste he may suddenly burn us to
death. Indeed, Purochana careth little for obloquy or sin. The wretch
stayeth here acting under the instruction of Duryodhana. If we are burnt
to death, will our grandfather Bhishma be angry? Why will he, by showing
his wrath, make the Kauravas angry with him? Or, perhaps, our grandfather
Bhishma and the other bull of Kuru's race, regarding indignation at such a
sinful act to be virtuous, may become wrathful. If however, from fear of
being burnt, we fly from here, Duryodhana, ambitious of sovereignty will
certainly compass our death by means of spies. While we have no rank and
power, Duryodhana hath both; while we have no friends and allies,
Duryodhana hath both; while we are without wealth, Duryodhana hath at his
command a full treasury. Will he not, therefore, certainly destroy us by
adopting adequate means? Let us, therefore, by deceiving this wretch
(Purochana) and that other wretch Duryodhana, pass our days, disguising
ourselves at times. Let us also lead a hunting life, wandering over the
earth. We shall then, if we have to escape our enemies, be familiar with
all paths. We shall also, this very day, cause a subterranean passage to
be dug in our chamber in great secrecy. If we act in this way, concealing
what we do from all, fire shall never be able to consume us. We shall live
here, actively doing everything for our safety but with such privacy that
neither Purochana nor any of the citizens of Varanavata may know what we
are after."'"


SECTION CXLIX

(Jatugriha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana continued, 'A friend of Vidura's, well-skilled in mining,
coming unto the Pandavas, addressed them in secret, saying, "I have been
sent by Vidura and am a skilful miner. I am to serve the Pandavas. Tell me
what I am to do for ye. From the trust he reposeth in me Vidura hath said
unto me, 'Go thou unto the Pandavas and accomplish thou their good.' What
shall I do for you? Purochana will set fire to the door of thy house on
the fourteenth night of this dark fortnight. To burn to death those tigers
among men, the Pandavas, with their mother, is the design of that wicked
wretch, the son of Dhritarashtra. O son of Pandu, Vidura also told thee
something in the Mlechchha tongue to which thou also didst reply in same
language. I state these particulars as my credentials." Hearing these
words, Yudhishthira, the truthful son of Kunti replied, "O amiable one, I
now know thee as a dear and trusted friend of Vidura, true and ever
devoted to him. There is nothing that the learned Vidura doth not know. As
his, so ours art thou. Make no difference between him and us. We are as
much thine as his. O, protect us as the learned Vidura ever protecteth us.
I know that this house, so inflammable, hath been contrived for me by
Purochana at the command of Dhritarashtra's son. That wicked wretch
commanding wealth and allies pursueth us without intermission. O, save us
with a little exertion from the impending conflagration. If we are burnt
to death here, Duryodhana's most cherished desire will be satisfied. Here
is that wretch's well-furnished arsenal. This large mansion hath been
built abutting the high ramparts of the arsenal without any outlet. But
this unholy contrivance of Duryodhana was known to Vidura from the first,
and he it was who enlightened us beforehand. The danger of which Kshattri
had foreknowledge is now at our door. Save us from it without Purochana's
knowledge thereof." On hearing these words, the miner said, "So be it,"
and carefully beginning his work of excavation, made a large subterranean
passage. And the mouth of that passage was in the centre of that house,
and it was on a level with the floor and closed up with planks. The mouth
was so covered from fear of Purochana, that wicked wretch who kept a
constant watch at the door of the house. The Pandavas used to sleep within
their chambers with arms ready for use, while, during the day, they went a-
hunting from forest to forest. Thus, O king, they lived (in that mansion)
very guardedly, deceiving Purochana by a show of trustfulness and
contentment while in reality they were trustless and discontented. Nor did
the citizens of Varanavata know anything about these plans of the Pandavas.
In fact, none else knew of them except Vidura's friend, that good miner.'"


SECTION CL

(Jatugriha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Seeing the Pandavas living there cheerfully and
without suspicion for a full year, Purochana became exceedingly glad. And
beholding Purochana so very glad, Yudhishthira, the virtuous son of Kunti,
addressing Bhima and Arjuna and the twins (Nakula and Sahadeva) said, "The
cruel-hearted wretch hath been well-deceived. I think the time is come for
our escape. Setting fire to the arsenal and burning Purochana to death and
letting his body lie here, let us, six persons, fly hence unobserved by
all!"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then on the occasion of an almsgiving, O king,
Kunti fed on a certain night a large number of Brahmanas. There came also
a number of ladies who while eating and drinking, enjoyed there as they
pleased, and with Kunti's leave returned to their respective homes.
Desirous of obtaining food, there came, as though impelled by fate, to
that feast, in course of her wanderings, a Nishada woman, the mother of
five children, accompanied by all her sons. O king, she, and her children,
intoxicated with the wine they drank, became incapable. Deprived of
consciousness and more dead than alive, she with all her sons lay down in
that mansion to sleep. Then when all the inmates of the house lay down to
sleep, there began to blow a violent wind in the night. Bhima then set
fire to the house just where Purochana was sleeping. Then the son of Pandu
set fire to the door of that house of lac. Then he set fire to the mansion
in several parts all around. Then when the sons of Pandu were satisfied
that the house had caught fire in several parts those chastisers of foes
with their mother, entered the subterranean passage without losing any
time. Then the heat and the roar of the fire became intense and awakened
the townspeople. Beholding the house in flames, the citizens with
sorrowful faces began to say, "The wretch (Purochana) of wicked soul had
under the instruction of Duryodhana built his house for the destruction of
his employer's relatives. He indeed hath set fire to it. O, fie on
Dhritarashtra's heart which is so partial. He hath burnt to death, as if
he were their foe, the sinless heirs of Pandu! O, the sinful and wicked-
souled (Purochana) who hath burnt those best of men, the innocent and
unsuspicious princes, hath himself been burnt to death as fate would have
it."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'The citizens of Varanavata thus bewailed (the
fate of the Pandavas), and waited there for the whole night surrounding
that house. The Pandavas, however, accompanied by their mother coming out
of the subterranean passage, fled in haste unnoticed. But those chastisers
of foes, for sleepiness and fear, could not with their mother proceed in
haste. But, O monarch, Bhimasena, endued with terrible prowess and
swiftness of motion took upon his body all his brothers and mother and
began to push through the darkness. Placing his mother on his shoulder,
the twins on his sides, and Yudhishthira and Arjuna on both his arms,
Vrikodara of great energy and strength and endued with the speed of the
wind, commenced his march, breaking the trees with his breast and pressing
deep the earth with his stamp.'"


SECTION CLI

(Jatugriha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'About this time, the learned Vidura had sent into
those woods a man of pure character and much trusted by him. This person
going to where he had been directed, saw the Pandavas with their mother in
the forest employed in a certain place in measuring the depth of a river.
The design that the wicked Duryodhana had formed had been, through his
spies, known to Vidura of great intelligence, and, therefore, he had sent
that prudent person unto the Pandavas. Sent by Vidura unto them, he showed
the Pandavas on the sacred banks of the Ganga a boat with engines and
flags, constructed by trusted artificers and capable of withstanding wind
and wave and endued with the speed of the tempest or of thought. He then
addressed the Pandavas in these words to show that he had really been sent
by Vidura, "O Yudhishthira," he said, "listen to these words the learned
Vidura had said (unto thee) as a proof of the fact that I come from him.
Neither the consumer of straw and the wood nor the drier of dew ever
burneth the inmates of a hole in the forest. He escapeth from death who
protecteth himself knowing this, etc. By these credentials know me to be
the person who has been truly sent by Vidura and to be also his trusted
agent. Vidura, conversant with everything, hath again said, 'O son of
Kunti, thou shalt surely defeat in battle Karna, and Duryodhana with his
brothers, and Sakuni.' This boat is ready on the waters, and it will glide
pleasantly thereon, and shall certainly bear you all from these regions!"

"'Then beholding those foremost of men with their mother pensive and sad he
caused them to go into the boat that was on the Ganga, and accompanied
them himself. Addressing them again, he said, "Vidura having smelt your
heads and embraced you (mentally), hath said again that in commencing your
auspicious journey and going alone you should never be careless."

"'Saying these words unto those heroic princes, the person sent by Vidura
took those bulls among men over to the other side of the Ganga in his boat.
And having taken them over the water and seen them all safe on the
opposite bank, he uttered the word "Jaya" (victory) to their success and
then left them and returned to the place whence he had come.

"'The illustrious Pandavas also sending through that person some message to
Vidura, began, after having crossed the Ganga, to proceed with haste and
in great secrecy.'"


SECTION CLII

(Jatugriha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Then, when the night had passed away, a large
concourse of the townspeople came there in haste to see the sons of Pandu.
After extinguishing the fire, they saw that the house just burnt down had
been built of lac in materials and that (Duryodhana's) counsellor
Purochana had been burnt to death. And the people began to bewail aloud
saying, "Indeed, this had been contrived by the sinful Duryodhana for the
destruction of the Pandavas. There is little doubt that Duryodhana hath,
with Dhritarashtra's knowledge, burnt to death the heirs of Pandu, else
the prince would have been prevented by his father. There is little doubt
that even Bhishma, the son of Santanu, and Drona and Vidura and Kripa and
other Kauravas have not, any of them, followed the dictates of duty. Let
us now send to Dhritarashtra to say, 'Thy great desire hath been achieved!
Thou hast burnt to death the Pandavas!'"

"'They then began to extinguish the members to obtain some trace of the
Pandavas, and they saw the innocent Nishada woman with her five sons burnt
to death. Then the miner sent by Vidura, while removing the ashes, covered
the hole he had dug with those ashes in such a way that it remained
unnoticed by all who had gone there.

"'The citizens then sent to Dhritarashtra to inform him that the Pandavas
along with (Duryodhana's) counsellor Purochana had been burnt to death.
King Dhritarashtra, on hearing the evil news of the death of the Pandavas,
wept in great sorrow. And he said, "King Pandu, my brother of great fame,
hath, indeed, died today when those heroic sons of his together with their
mother have been burnt to death. Ye men, repair quickly to Varanavata and
cause the funeral rites to be performed of those heroes and of the
daughter of Kuntiraj! Let also the bones of the deceased be sanctified
with the usual rites, and let all the beneficial and great acts (usual on
such occasions) be performed. Let the friends and relatives of those that
have been burnt to death repair thither. Let also all other beneficial
acts that ought, under the circumstances, to be performed by us for the
Pandavas and Kunti be accomplished by wealth."

"'Having said this, Dhritarashtra, the son of Ambika, surrounded by his
relatives, offered oblations of water to the sons of Pandu. And all of
them, afflicted with excessive sorrow, bewailed aloud, exclaiming, "O
Yudhishthira! Oh prince of the Kuru race!"--While others cried aloud, "Oh,
Bhima!--O Phalguna!"--while some again,--"Oh, the twins!--Oh, Kunti!"--
Thus did they sorrow for the Pandavas and offer oblations of water unto
them. The citizens also wept for the Pandavas but Vidura did not weep much,
because he knew the truth.

"'Meanwhile the Pandavas endued with great strength with their mother
forming a company of six going out of the town of Varanavata arrived at
the banks of the Ganga. They then speedily reached the opposite bank aided
by the strength of the boatmen's arms, the rapidity of the river's current,
and a favourable wind. Leaving the boat, they proceeded in the southern
direction finding their way in the dark by the light of the stars. After
much suffering they at last reached, O king, a dense forest. They were
then tired and thirsty; sleep was closing their eyes every moment. Then
Yudhishthira, addressing Bhima endued with great energy, said, "What can
be more painful than this? We are now in the deep woods. We know not which
side is which, nor can we proceed much further. We do not know whether
that wretch Purochana hath or hath not been burnt to death. How shall we
escape from these dangers unseen by others? O Bharata, taking us on
thyself, proceed thou as before. Thou alone amongst us art strong and
swift as the wind."

"'Thus addressed by Yudhishthira the just, the mighty Bhimasena, taking up
on his body Kunti and his brothers, began to proceed with great
celerity.'"


SECTION CLIII

(Jatugriha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'As the mighty Bhima proceeded, the whole forest with
its trees and their branches seemed to tremble, in consequence of their
clash with his breast. The motion of his thighs raised a wind like unto
that which blows during the months of Jyaishtha and Ashadha (May and June).
And the mighty Bhima proceeded, making a path for himself, but treading
down the trees and creepers before him. In fact, he broke (by the pressure
of his body) the large trees and plants, with their flowers and fruits,
standing on his way. Even so passeth through the woods breaking down
mighty trees, the leader of a herd of elephants, of the age of sixty years,
angry and endued with excess of energy, during the season of rut when the
liquid juice trickle down the three parts of his body. Indeed, so great
was the force with which Bhima endued with the speed of Garuda or of Marut
(the god of wind), proceeded that the Pandavas seemed to faint in
consequence. Frequently swimming across streams difficult of being crossed,
the Pandavas disguised themselves on their way from fear of the sons of
Dhritarashtra. And Bhima carried on his shoulder his illustrious mother of
delicate sensibilities along the uneven banks of rivers. Towards the
evening, O bull of Bharata's race, Bhima (bearing his brothers and mother
on his back) reached a terrible forest where fruits and roots and water
were scarce and which resounded with the terrible cries of birds and
beasts. The twilight deepened the cries of birds and beasts became fiercer,
darkness shrouded everything from the view and untimely winds began to
blow that broke and laid low many a tree large and small and many creepers
with dry leaves and fruits. The Kaurava princes, afflicted with fatigue
and thirst, and heavy with sleep, were unable to proceed further. They
then all sat down in that forest without food and drink. Then Kunti,
smitten with thirst, said unto her sons, "I am the mother of the five
Pandavas and am now in their midst. Yet I am burning with thirst!" Kunti
repeatedly said this unto her sons. Hearing these words, Bhima's heart,
from affection for his mother, was warmed by compassion and he resolved to
go (along as before). Then Bhima, proceeding through that terrible and
extensive forest without a living soul, saw a beautiful banian tree with
widespreading branches. Setting down there his brothers and mother, O bull
of Bharata's race, he said unto them, "Rest you here, while I go in quest
of water. I hear the sweet cries of aquatic fowls. I think there must be a
large pool here." Commanded, O Bharata, by his elder brother who said unto
him, "Go", Bhima proceeded in the direction whence the cries of those
aquatic fowls were coming. And, O bull of Bharata's race, he soon came
upon a lake and bathed and slaked his thirst. And affectionate unto his
brothers, he brought for them, O Bharata, water by soaking his upper
garments. Hastily retracing his way over those four miles he came unto
where his mother was and beholding her he was afflicted with sorrow and
began to sigh like a snake. Distressed with grief at seeing his mother and
brothers asleep on the bare ground, Vrikodara began to weep, "Oh, wretch
that I am, who behold my brothers asleep on the bare ground, what can
befall me more painful than this? Alas, they who formerly at Varanavata
could not sleep on the softest and costliest beds are now asleep on the
bare ground! Oh, what more painful sight shall I ever behold than that of
Kunti--the sister of Vasudeva, that grinder of hostile hosts--the daughter
of Kuntiraja,--herself decked with every auspicious mark, the daughter-in-
law of Vichitravirya,--the wife of the illustrious Pandu,--the mother of
us (five brothers),--resplendent as the filaments of the lotus and
delicate and tender and fit to sleep on the costliest bed--thus asleep, as
she should never be, on the bare ground! Oh, she who hath brought forth
these sons by Dharma and Indra and Maruta--she who hath ever slept within
palaces--now sleepeth, fatigued, on the bare ground! What more painful
sight shall ever be beheld by me than that of these tigers among men (my
brothers) asleep on the ground! Oh, the virtuous Yudhishthira, who
deserveth the sovereignty of the three worlds, sleepeth, fatigued, like an
ordinary man, on the bare ground! This Arjuna of the darkish hue of blue
clouds, and unequalled amongst men sleepeth on the ground like an ordinary
person! Oh, what can be more painful than this? Oh the twins, who in
beauty are like the twin Aswins amongst the celestials, are asleep like
ordinary mortals on the bare ground! He who hath no jealous evil-minded
relatives, liveth in happiness in this world like a single tree in a
village. The tree that standeth single in a village with its leaves and
fruits, from absence of other of the same species, becometh sacred and is
worshipped and venerated by all. They again that have many relatives who,
however, are all heroic and virtuous, live happily in the world without
sorrow of any kind. Themselves powerful and growing in prosperity and
always gladdening their friends and relatives, they live, depending on
each other, like tall trees growing in the same forest. We, however, have
been forced in exile by the wicked Dhritarashtra and his sons having
escaped with difficulty, from sheer good fortune, a fiery death. Having
escaped from that fire, we are now resting in the shade of this tree.
Having already suffered so much, where now are we to go? Ye sons of
Dhritarashtra of little foresight, ye wicked fellows, enjoy your temporary
success. The gods are certainly auspicious to you. But ye wicked wretches,
ye are alive yet, only because Yudhishthira doth not command me to take
your lives. Else this very day, filled with wrath, I would send thee, (O
Duryodhana), to the of Yama (Pluto) with thy children and friends and
brothers, and Karna, and (Sakuni) the son of Suvala! But what can I do,
for, ye sinful wretches, the virtuous king Yudhishthira, the eldest of the
Pandavas, is not yet angry with you?"

"'Having said this, Bhima of mighty arms, fired with wrath, began to
squeeze his palms, sighing deeply in affliction. Excited again with wrath
like an extinguished fire blazing up all on a sudden, Vrikodara once more
beheld his brothers sleeping on the ground like ordinary persons sleeping
in trustfulness. And Bhima said unto himself, "I think there is some town
not far off from this forest. These all are asleep, so I will sit awake.
And this will slake their thirst after they rise refreshed from sleep."
Saying this, Bhima sat there awake, keeping watch over his sleeping mother
and brothers.'"


SECTION CLIV

(Hidimva-vadha Parva)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Not far from the place where the Pandavas were asleep,
a Rakshasa by name Hidimva dwelt on the Sala tree. Possessed of great
energy and prowess, he was a cruel cannibal of visage that was grim in
consequence of his sharp and long teeth. He was now hungry and longing for
human flesh. Of long shanks and a large belly, his locks and beard were
both red in hue. His shoulders were broad like the neck of a tree; his
ears were like unto arrows, and his features were frightful. Of red eyes
and grim visage, the monster beheld, while casting his glances around, the
sons of Pandu sleeping in those woods. He was then hungry and longing for
human flesh. Shaking his dry and grizzly locks and scratching them with
his fingers pointed upwards, the large-mouthed cannibal repeatedly looked
at the sleeping sons of Pandu yawning wistfully at times. Of huge body and
great strength, of complexion like the colour of a mass of clouds, of
teeth long and sharp-pointed and face emitting a sort of lustre, he was
ever pleased with human flesh. And scenting the odour of man, he addressed
his sister, saying, "O sister, it is after a long time that such agreeable
food hath approached me! My mouth waters at the anticipated relish of such
food. My eight teeth, so sharp-pointed and incapable of being resisted by
any substance, I shall, today, after a long time, put into the most
delicious flesh. Attacking the human throat and even opening the veins, I
shall (today) drink a plentiful quantity of human blood, hot and fresh and
frothy. Go and ascertain who these are, lying asleep in these woods. The
strong scent of man pleaseth my nostrils. Slaughtering all these men,
bring them unto me. They sleep within my territory. Thou needest have no
fear from them. Do my bidding soon, for we shall then together eat their
flesh, tearing off their bodies at pleasure. And after feasting to our
fill on human flesh we shall then dance together to various measures!"

"'Thus addressed by Hidimva in those woods, Hidimva, the female cannibal,
at the command of her brother, went, O bull of Bharata's race, to the spot
where the Pandavas were. And on going there, she beheld the Pandavas
asleep with their mother and the invincible Bhimasena sitting awake. And
beholding Bhimasena unrivalled on earth for beauty and like unto a
vigorous Sala tree, the Rakshasa woman immediately fell in love with him,
and she said to herself, "This person of hue like heated gold and of
mighty arms, of broad shoulders as the lion, and so resplendent, of neck
marked with three lines like a conch-shell and eyes like lotus-petals, is
worthy of being my husband. I shall not obey the cruel mandate of my
brother. A woman's love for her husband is stronger than her affection for
her brother. If I slay him, my brother's gratification as well as mine
will only be momentary. But if I slay him not, I can enjoy with him for
ever and ever." Thus saying, the Rakshasa woman, capable of assuming form
at will, assumed an excellent human form and began to advance with slow
steps towards Bhima of mighty arms. Decked with celestial ornaments she
advanced with smiles on her lips and a modest gait, and addressing Bhima
said, "O bull among men, whence hast thou come here and who art thou? Who,
besides, are these persons of celestial beauty sleeping here? Who also, O
sinless one, is this lady of transcendent beauty sleeping so trustfully in
these woods as if she were lying in her own chamber? Dost thou not know
that this forest is the abode of a Rakshasa. Truly do I say, here liveth
the wicked Rakshasa called Hidimva. Ye beings of celestial beauty, I have
been sent hither even by that Rakshasa--my brother--with the cruel intent
of killing you for his food. But I tell thee truly that beholding thee
resplendent as a celestial, I would have none else for my husband save
thee! Thou who art acquainted with all duties, knowing this, do unto me
what is proper. My heart as well as my body hath been pierced by (the
shafts of) Kama (Cupid). O, as I am desirous of obtaining thee, make me
thine. O thou of mighty arms, I will rescue thee from the Rakshasa who
eateth human flesh. O sinless one, be thou my husband. We shall then live
on the breasts of mountains inaccessible to ordinary mortals. I can range
the air and I do so at pleasure. Thou mayest enjoy great felicity with me
in those regions."

"'Hearing these words of hers, Bhima replied, "O Rakshasa woman, who can,
like a Muni having all his passions under control, abandon his sleeping
mother and elder and younger brothers? What man like me would go to
gratify his lust, leaving his sleeping mother and brothers as food for a
Rakshasa?"

"'The Rakshasa woman replied, "O, awaken all these, I shall do unto you all
that is agreeable to thee! I shall certainly rescue you all from my
cannibal brother."

"'Bhima then said, "O Rakshasa woman, I will not, from fear of thy wicked
brother, awaken my brothers and mother sleeping comfortably in the woods.
O timid one, Rakshasas are never able to bear the prowess of my arms. And,
O thou of handsome eyes, neither men, nor Gandharvas, nor Yakshas are able
to bear my might. O amiable one, thou mayst stay or go as thou likest, or
mayst even send thy cannibal brother, O thou of delicate shape. I care
not."'"


SECTION CLV

(Hidimva-vadha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Hidimva, the chief of the Rakshasas, seeing that his
sister returned not soon enough, alighted from the tree, proceeded quickly
to the spot where the Pandavas were. Of red eyes and strong arms and the
arms and the hair of his head standing erect, of large open mouth and body
like unto a mass of dark clouds, teeth long and sharp-pointed, he was
terrible to behold. And Hidimva, beholding her brother of frightful visage
alight from the tree, became very much alarmed, and addressing Bhima said,
"The wicked cannibal is coming hither in wrath. I entreat thee, do with
thy brothers, as I bid thee. O thou of great courage, as I am endued with
the powers of a Rakshasa, I am capable of going whithersoever I like.
Mount ye on my hips, I will carry you all through the skies. And, O
chastiser of foes, awaken these and thy mother sleeping in comfort. Taking
them all on my body, I will convey you through the skies."

"'Bhima then said, "O thou of fair hips, fear not anything. I am sure that
as long as I am here, there is no Rakshasa capable of injuring any of
these, O thou of slender waist. I will slay this (cannibal) before thy
very eyes. This worst of Rakshasas, O timid one, is no worthy antagonist
of mine, nor can all the Rakshasas together bear the strength of my arms.
Behold these strong arms of mine, each like unto the trunk of an elephant.
Behold also these thighs of mine like unto iron maces, and this broad and
adamantine chest. O beautiful one, thou shall today behold my prowess like
unto that of Indra. O thou of fair hips, hate me not, thinking that I am a
man."

"'Hidimva replied saying, "O tiger among men, O thou of the beauty of a
celestial, I do not certainly hold thee in contempt. But I have seen the
prowess that Rakshasas exert upon men."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then, O Bharata, the wrathful Rakshasa eating
human flesh heard these words of Bhima who had been talking in that way.
And Hidimva beheld his sister disguised in human form, her head decked
with garlands of flowers and her face like the full moon and her eyebrows
and nose and eyes and ringlets all of the handsomest description, and her
nails and complexion of the most delicate hue, and herself wearing every
kind of ornament and attired in fine transparent robes. The cannibal,
beholding her in that charming human form, suspected that she was desirous
of carnal intercourse and became indignant. And, O best of the Kurus,
becoming angry with his sister, the Rakshasa dilated his eyes and
addressing her said, "What senseless creature wishes to throw obstacles in
my path now that I am so hungry? Hast thou become so senseless, O Hidimva,
that thou fearest not my wrath? Fie on thee, thou unchaste woman! Thou art
even now desirous of carnal intercourse and solicitous of doing me an
injury. Thou art ready to sacrifice the good name and honour of all the
Rakshasas, thy ancestors! Those with whose aid thou wouldst do me this
great injury, I will, even now, slay along with thee." Addressing his
sister thus, Hidimva, with eyes red with anger and teeth pressing against
teeth, ran at her to kill her then and there. But beholding him rush at
his sister, Bhima, that foremost of smiters, endued with great energy,
rebuked him and said, "Stop--Stop!"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'And Bhima, beholding the Rakshasa angry with his
sister, smiled (in derision), and said, addressing him, "O Hidimva, what
need is there for thee to awaken these persons sleeping so comfortably? O
wicked cannibal, approach me first without loss of time. Smite me first,--
it behoveth thee not to kill a woman, especially when she hath been sinned
against instead of sinning. This girl is scarcely responsible for her act
in desiring intercourse with me. She hath, in this, been moved by the
deity of desire that pervadeth every living form. Thou wicked wretch and
the most infamous of Rakshasas, thy sister came here at thy command.
Beholding my person, she desireth me. In that the timid girl doth no
injury to thee. It is the deity of desire that hath offended. It behoveth
thee not to injure her for this offence. O wicked wretch, thou shalt not
slay a woman when I am here. Come with me, O cannibal, and fight with
myself singly. Singly shall I send thee today to the abode of Yama (Pluto).
O Rakshasa, let thy head today, pressed by my might, be pounded to pieces,
as though pressed by the tread of a mighty elephant. When thou art slain
by me on the field of battle, let herons and hawks and jackals tear in
glee thy limbs today on the ground. In a moment I shall today make this
forest destitute of Rakshasas,--this forest that had so long been ruled by
thee, devourer of human beings! Thy sister, O Rakshasa, shall today behold
thyself, huge though thou art like a mountain, like a huge elephant
repeatedly dragged by a lion. O worst of Rakshasas, thyself slain by me,
men ranging these woods will henceforth do so safely and without fear."

"'Hearing these words, Hidimva said, "What need is there, O man, for this
thy vaunt and this thy boast? Accomplish all this first, and then mayst
thou vaunt indeed. Therefore, delay thou not. Thou knowest thyself to be
strong and endued with prowess, so thou shalt rightly estimate thy
strength today in thy encounter with me. Until that, I will not slay these
(thy brothers). Let them sleep comfortably. But I will, as thou art a fool
and the utterer of evil speeches, slay thee first. After drinking thy
blood, I will slay these also, and then last of all, this (sister of mine)
that hath done me an injury."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Saying this, the cannibal, extending his arms
ran in wrath towards Bhimasena, that chastiser of foes. Then Bhima of
terrible prowess quickly seized, as though in sport, with great force, the
extended arms of the Rakshasa who had rushed at him. Then seizing the
struggling Rakshasa with violence, Bhima dragged him from that spot full
thirty-two cubits like a lion dragging a little animal. Then the Rakshasa,
thus made to feel the weight of Bhima's strength, became very angry and
clasping the Pandava, sent forth a terrible yell. The mighty Bhima then
dragged with force the Rakshasa to a greater distance, lest his yells
should awaken his brothers sleeping in comfort. Clasping and dragging each
other with great force, both Hidimva and Bhimasena put forth their prowess.
Fighting like two full-grown elephants mad with rage, they then began to
break down the trees and tear the creepers that grew around. And at those
sounds, those tigers among men (the sleeping Pandavas) woke up with their
mother, and saw Hidimva sitting before them.'"


SECTION CLVI

(Hidimva-vadha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Roused from sleep, those tigers among men, with their
mother, beholding the extraordinary beauty of Hidimva, were filled with
wonder. And Kunti, gazing at her with wonder at her beauty, addressed her
sweetly and gave her every assurance. She asked, "O thou of the splendour
of a daughter of the celestials, whose art thou and who art thou? O thou
of the fairest complexion, on what business hast thou come hither and
whence hast thou come? If thou art the deity of these woods or an Apsara,
tell me all regarding thyself and also why thou stayest here?" Thereupon
Hidimva replied, "This extensive forest that thou seest, of the hue of
blue cloud, is the abode of a Rakshasa of the name of Hidimva. O handsome
lady, know me as the sister of that chief of the Rakshasa. Revered dame, I
had been sent by that brother of mine to kill thee with all thy children.
But on arriving here at the command of that cruel brother of mine, I
beheld thy mighty son. Then, O blessed lady, I was brought under the
control of thy son by the deity of love who pervadeth the nature of every
being, and I then (mentally) chose that mighty son of thine as my husband.
I tried my best to convey you hence, but I could not (because of thy son's
opposition). Then the cannibal, seeing my delay, came hither to kill all
these thy children. But he hath been dragged hence with force by that
mighty and intelligent son of thine--my husband. Behold now that couple--
man and Rakshasa--both endued with great strength and prowess, engaged in
combat, grinding each other and filling the whole region with their
shouts."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing those words of hers, Yudhishthira
suddenly rose up and Arjuna also and Nakula and Sahadeva of great energy
and they beheld Bhima and the Rakshasa already engaged in fight, eager to
overcome each other and dragging each other with great force, like two
lions endued with great might. The dust raised by their feet in
consequence of that encounter looked like the smoke of a forest-
conflagration. Covered with that dust their huge bodies resembled two tall
cliffs enveloped in mist. Then Arjuna, beholding Bhima rather oppressed in
the fight by the Rakshasa, slowly said with smiles on his lips, "Fear not,
O Bhima of mighty arms! We (had been asleep and therefore) knew not that
thou wast engaged with a terrible Rakshasa and tired in fight. Here do I
stand to help thee, let me slay the Rakshasa, and let Nakula and Sahadeva
protect our mother." Hearing him, Bhima said, "Look on this encounter, O
brother, like a stranger. Fear not for the result. Having come within the
reach of my arms, he shall not escape with life." Then Arjuna said, "What
need, O Bhima, for keeping the Rakshasa alive so long? O oppressor of
enemies, we are to go hence, and cannot stay here longer. The east is
reddening, the morning twilight is about to set in. The Rakshasa become
stronger by break of day, therefore, hasten, O Bhima! Play not (with thy
victim), but slay the terrible Rakshasa soon. During the two twilights
Rakshasas always put forth their powers of deception. Use all the strength
of thy arms."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'At this speech of Arjuna, Bhima blazing up with
anger, summoned the might that Vayu (his father) puts forth at the time of
the universal dissolution. And filled with rage, he quickly raised high in
the air the Rakshasa's body, blue as the clouds of heaven, and whirled it
a hundred times. Then addressing the cannibal, Bhima said, "O Rakshasa,
thy intelligence was given thee in vain, and in vain hast thou grown and
thriven on unsanctified flesh. Thou deservest, therefore, an unholy death
and I shall reduce thee today to nothing. I shall make this forest blessed
today, like one without prickly plants. And, O Rakshasa, thou shalt no
longer slay human beings for thy food." Arjuna at this juncture, said, "O
Bhima, if thou thinkest it a hard task for thee to overcome this Rakshasa
in combat, let me render thee help, else, slay him thyself without loss of
time. Or, O Vrikodara, let me alone slay the Rakshasa. Thou art tired, and
hast almost finished the affair. Well dost thou deserve rest."'

