Gospel of the Servant, the Gospel according to Mark, than in the
Gospel of the Word of God, the Gospel according to John. And so I
think we are entitled to say that by this name, which the testimony of
all our four Gospels makes it certain, even to the most suspicious
reader, that Christ applied to Himself, He declared His humanity, His
absolutely perfect and complete humanity.

In substance He is claiming the same thing for Himself that Paul
claimed for Him when he called Him 'the second Adam.' There have been
two men in the world, says Paul, the fallen Adam, with his infantile
and undeveloped perfections, and the Christ, with His full and
complete humanity. All other men are fragments, He is the 'entire and
perfect chrysolite.' As one of our epigrammatic seventeenth-century
divines has it, 'Aristotle is but the rubbish of an Adam,' and Adam is
but the dim outline sketch of a Jesus. Between these two there has
been none. The one Man as God meant him, the type of man, the perfect
humanity, the realised ideal, the home of all the powers of manhood,
is He who Himself claimed that place for Himself, and stepped into it
with the strange words upon His lips, 'I am meek and lowly of heart.'

'Who is this Son of Man?' Ah, brethren! 'who can bring a clean thing
out of an unclean? Not one.' A perfect Son of Man, born of a woman,
'bone of our bone and flesh of our flesh,' must be more than a Son of
Man. And that moral completeness and that ideal perfection in all the
faculties and parts of His nature which drove the betrayer to clash
down the thirty pieces of silver in the sanctuary in despair that 'he
had betrayed innocent blood'; which made Pilate wash his hands 'of the
blood of this just person'; which stopped the mouths of the
adversaries when He challenged them to convince Him of sin, and which
all the world ever since has recognised and honoured, ought surely to
lead us to ask the question, 'Who is this Son of Man?' and to answer
it, as I pray we all may answer it, 'Thou art the Christ, the Son of
the living God!'

This fact of His absolute completeness invests His work with an
altogether unique relationship to the rest of mankind. And so we find
the name employed upon His own lips in connections in which He desires
to set Himself forth as the single and solitary medium of all blessing
and salvation to the world--as, for instance, 'The Son of Man came to
give His life a ransom for the many'; 'Ye shall see the heavens
opened, and the angels of God ascending and descending on the Son of
Man.' He is what the ladder was in the vision to the patriarch, with
his head upon the stone and the Syrian sky over him--the Medium of all
communication between earth and heaven. And that ladder which joins
heaven to earth, and brings all angels down on the solitary watchers,
comes straight down, as the sunbeams do, to every man wherever he is.
Each of us sees the shortest line from his own standing-place to the
central light, and its beams come straight to the apple of each man's
eye. So because Christ is more than a man, because He is _the_ Man,
His blessings come to each of us direct and straight, as if they had
been launched from the throne with a purpose and a message to us
alone. Thus He who is in Himself perfect manhood touches all men, and
all men touch Him, and the Son of Man, whom God hath sealed, will give
to every one of us the bread from heaven. The unique relationship
which brings Him into connection with every soul of man upon earth,
and makes Him the Saviour, Helper, and Friend of us all, is expressed
when He calls Himself the Son of Man.

III. And now one last word in regard to the predictive character of
this designation.

Even if we cannot regard it as being actually a quotation of the
prophecy in the Book of Daniel, there is an evident allusion to that
prophecy, and to the whole circle of ideas presented by it, of an
everlasting dominion, which shall destroy all antagonistic power, and
of a solemn coming for judgment of One like a Son of Man.

We find, then, the name occurring on our Lord's lips very frequently
in that class of passages with which we are so familiar, and which are
so numerous that I need not quote them to you; in which He speaks of
the second coming of the Son of Man; as, for instance, that one which
connects itself most distinctly with the Book of Daniel, the words of
high solemn import before the tribunal of the High Priest. 'Hereafter
shall ye see the Son of Man sitting at the right hand of power, and
coming in the glories of heaven'; or as when He says, 'He hath given
Him authority to execute judgment also because He is the Son of Man';
or as when the proto-martyr, with his last words, declared in sudden
burst of surprise and thrill of gladness, 'I see the heavens opened,
and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God.'

Two thoughts are all that I can touch on here. The name carries with
it a blessed message of the present activity and perpetual manhood of
the risen Lord. Stephen does not see Him as all the rest of Scripture
paints Him, _sitting_ at the right hand of God, but _standing_ there.
The emblem of His sitting at the right hand of God represents
triumphant calmness in the undisturbed confidence of victory. It
declares the completeness of the work that He has done upon earth, and
that all the history of the future is but the unfolding of the
consequences of that work which by His own testimony waa finished when
He bowed His head and died. But the dying martyr sees him _standing_,
as if He had sprung to His feet in response to the cry of faith from
the first of the long train of sufferers. It is as if the Emperor upon
His seat, looking down upon the arena where the gladiators are
contending to the death, could not sit quiet amongst the flashing axes
of the lictors and the purple curtains of His throne, and see their
death-struggles, but must spring to His feet to help them, or at least
bend down with the look and with the reality of sympathy. So Christ,
the Son of Man, bearing His manhood with Him,

  'Still bends on earth a Brother's eye,'

and is the ever-present Helper of all struggling souls that put their
trust in Him.

Then as to the other and main thought here in view--the second coming
of that perfect Manhood to be our Judge. It is too solemn a subject
for human lips to say much about. It has been vulgarised, and the
power taken out of it by many well-meant attempts to impress it upon
men's hearts. But that coming is _certain_. That manhood could not end
its relationship to us with the Cross, nor yet with the slow, solemn,
upward progress which bore Him, pouring down blessings, up into the
same bright cloud that had dwelt between the cherubim and had received
Him into its mysterious recesses at the Transfiguration. That He
should come again is the only possible completion of His work.

That Judge is our Brother. So in the deepest sense we are tried by our
Peer. Man's knowledge at its highest cannot tell the moral desert of
anything that any man does. You may judge action, you may sentence for
breaches of law, you may declare a man clear of any blame for such,
but for any one to read the secrets of another heart is beyond human
power; and if He that is the Judge were only a man there would be wild
work, and many a blunder in the sentences that were given. But when we
think that it is the Son of Man that is our Judge, then we know that
the Omniscience of divinity, that ponders the hearts and reads the
motives, will be all blended with the tenderness and sympathy of
humanity; that we shall be judged by One who knows all our frame, not
only with the knowledge of a Maker, if I may so say, as from outside,
but with the knowledge of a possessor, as from within; that we shall
be judged by One who has fought and conquered in all temptations; and
most blessed of all, that we shall be judged by One with whom we have
only to plead His own work and His own love and His Cross that we may
stand acquitted before His throne.

So, brethren, in that one mighty Name all the past, present, and
future are gathered and blended together. In the past His Cross fills
the retrospect: for the future there rises up, white and solemn, His
judgment throne. 'The Son of Man _is_ come to give His life a ransom
for the many'; that is the centre point of all history. The Son of Man
_shall_ come to judge the world; that is the one thought that fills
the future. Let us lay hold by true faith on the mighty work which He
has done on the Cross, then we shall rejoice to see our Brother on the
throne, when the 'judgment is set and the books are opened.' Oh,
friends, cleave to Him ever in trust and love, in communion and
imitation, in obedience and confession, that ye may be accounted
worthy 'to stand before the Son of Man' in that day!




A PARTING WARNING

'Jesus therefore said unto them, Yet a little while is the light among
you. Walk while ye have the light, that darkness overtake you not: and
he that walketh in the darkness knoweth not whither he goeth. While ye
have the light, believe on the light, that ye may become sons of
light.'--JOHN xii. 35,36 (R.V.).

These are the last words of our Lord's public ministry. He afterwards
spoke only to His followers in the sweet seclusion of the sympathetic
home at Bethany, and amid the sanctities of the upper chamber. 'Yet a
little while am I with you';--the sun had all but set. Two days more,
and the Cross was reared on Calvary, but there was yet time to turn to
the light. And so His divine charity 'hoped all things,' and continued
to plead with those who had so long rejected Him. As befits a last
appeal, the words unveil the heart of Christ. They are solemn with
warning, radiant with promise, almost beseeching in their earnestness.
He loves too well not to warn, but He will not leave the bitterness of
threatening as a last savour on the palate, and so the lips, into
which grace is poured, bade farewell to His enemies with the promise
and the hope that even they may become 'the sons of light.'

The solemnity of the occasion, then, gives great force to the words;
and the remembrance of it sets us on the right track for estimating
their significance. Let us see what lessons for us there may be in
Christ's last words to the world.

I. There is, first, a self-revelation.

It is no mere grammatical pedantry that draws attention to the fact
that four times in this text does our Lord employ the definite
article, and speak of 'the light.' And that that is no mere accident
is obvious from the fact that, in the last clause of our text, where
the general idea of light is all that is meant to be emphatic, the
article is omitted. 'Yet a little while is _the_ light with you; walk
while ye have _the_ light.... While ye have _the_ light, believe in
_the_ light, that ye may be the children of light.'

So then, most distinctly here, in His final appeal to the world, He
draws back the curtain, as it were, takes away the shade that had
covered the lamp, and lets one full beam stream out for the last
impression that He leaves. Is it not profoundly significant and
impressive that then, of all times, over and over again, in the
compass of these short verses, this Galilean peasant makes the
tremendous assertion that He is what none other can be, in a solitary
and transcendent sense, _the_ Light of Mankind? Undismayed by
universal rejection, unfaltering in spite of the curling lips of
incredulity and scorn, unbroken by the near approach of certain
martyrdom, He presents Himself before the world as its Light. Nothing
in the history of mad, fanatical claims to inspiration and divine
authority is to be compared with these assertions of our Lord. He is
the fontal Source, He says, of all illumination; He stands before the
whole race, and claims to be 'the Master-Light of all our seeing.'
Whatsoever ideas of clearness of knowledge, of rapture of joy, of
whiteness of purity, are symbolised by that great emblem, He declares
that He manifests them all to men. Others may shine; but they are, as
He said, 'lights kindled,' and therefore 'burning.' Others may shine,
but they have caught their radiance from Him. All teachers, all
helpers, all thinkers draw their inspiration, if they have any, from
Him, in whom was life, and the Life was the Light of men.

There has been blazing in the heavens of late a new star, that burst
upon astonished astronomers in a void spot; but its brilliancy, though
far transcending that of our sun, soon began to wane, and before long,
apparently, there will be blackness again where there was blackness
before. So all lights but His are temporary as well as derived, and
men 'willing for a season to rejoice' in the fleeting splendours, and
to listen to the teacher of a day, lose the illumination of his
presence and guidance of his thoughts as the ages roll on. But _the_
Light is 'not for an age, but for all time.'

Now, brethren, this is Christ's estimate of Himself. I dwell not on it
for the purpose of seeking to exhaust its depth of significance. In it
there lies the assertion that He, and He only, is the source of all
valid knowledge of the deepest sort concerning God and men, and their
mutual relations. In it lie the assertion that He, and He only, is the
source of all true gladness that may blend with our else darkened
lives, and the further assertion that from Him, and from Him alone,
can flow to us the purity that shall make us pure. We have to turn to
that Man close by His Cross, on whom while He spoke the penumbra of
the eclipse of death was beginning to show itself, and to say to Him
what the Psalmist said of old to the Jehovah whom he knew, and whom we
recognise as indwelling in Jesus: 'With Thee is the fountain of life.
Thou makest us to drink of the river of Thy pleasures. In Thy light
shall we see light.'

So Christ thought of Himself; so Christ would have as to think of Him.
And it becomes a question for us how, if we refuse to accept that
claim of a solitary, underived, eternal, and universal power of
illuminating mankind, we can save His character for the veneration of
the world. We cannot go picking and choosing amongst the Master's
words, and say 'This is historical, and that mythical.' We cannot
select some of them, and leave others on one side. You must take the
whole Christ if you take any Christ. And the whole Christ is He who,
within sight of Calvary, and in the face of all but universal
rejection, lifted up His voice, and, as His valediction to the world,
declared, 'I am the Light of the world.' So He says to us. Oh that we
all might cast ourselves before Him, with the cry, 'Lighten our
darkness, O Lord, we beseech Thee!'

II. Secondly, we have here a double exhortation.

'Walk in the light; believe in the light.' These two sum up all our
duties; or rather, unveil for us the whole fullness of the possible
privileges and blessings of which our relation to that light is
capable. It is obvious that the latter of them is the deeper in idea,
and the prior in order of sequence. There must be the 'belief' in the
light before there is the 'walk' in the light. Walking includes the
ideas of external activity and of progress. And so, putting these two
exhortations together, we get the whole of Christianity considered as
subjective. 'Believe in the light; trust in the light,' and then
'walk' in it. A word, then, about each of these branches of this
double exhortation.

'Trust in the light.' The figure seems to be dropped at first sight;
for it wants little faith to believe in the sunshine at midday; and
when the light is pouring out, how can a man but see it? But the
apparent incongruity of the metaphor points to something very deep in
regard to the spiritual side. We cannot but believe in the light that
meets the eye when it meets it, but it is possible for a man to blind
himself to the shining of this light. Therefore the exhortation is
needed--'Believe in the light,' for only by believing it can you see
it. Just as the eye is the organ of sight, just as its nerves are
sensitive to the mysterious finger of the beam, just as on its
mirroring surface impinges the gentle but mighty force that has winged
its way across all the space between us and the sun, and yet falls
without hurting, so faith, the 'inward eye which makes the bliss' of
the solitary soul, is the one organ by which you and I can see the
light. 'Seeing is believing,' says the old proverb. That is true in
regard to the physical. Believing is seeing, is much rather the way to
put it in regard to the spiritual and divine.

Only as we trust the light do we see the light. Unless you and I put
our confidence in Jesus Christ, the Son of God and Son of Man, we have
no adequate knowledge of Him and no clear vision of Him. We must know
that we may love; but we must love that we may know. We must believe
that we may see. True, we must see that we may believe, but the
preliminary vision which precedes belief is slight and dim as compared
with the solidity and the depth of assurance with which we apprehend
the reality and know the lustre of Him whom our faith has grasped. You
will never know the glory of the light, nor the sweetness with which
it falls upon the gazing eye, until you turn your face to that Master,
and so receive on your susceptible and waiting heart the warmth and
the radiance which He only can bestow. 'Believe in the light.' Trust
it; or rather, trust Him who is it. He cannot deceive. This light from
heaven can never lead astray. Absolutely we may rely upon it;
unconditionally we must follow it. Lean upon Him--to take another
metaphor--with all your weight. His arm is strong to bear the burden
of our weaknesses, sorrows, and, above all, our sins. 'While ye have
light, trust the light.'

But then that is not enough. Man, with his double relations, must have
an active and external as well as an inward and contemplative life.
And so our Lord, side by side with the exhortation on which I have
been touching, puts the other one, 'Walk in the light.' Our inward
emotions, however deep and precious, however real the affiance,
however whole-hearted the love, are maimed and stunted, and not what
the light requires, unless there follows upon them the activity of the
walk. What do we get the daylight for? To sit and gaze at it? By no
means; but that it may guide us upon our path and help us in all our
work. And so all Christian people need ever to remember that Jesus
Christ has indissolubly bound together these two phases of our
relation to Him as the light of life-inward and blessed contemplation
by faith and outward practical activity. To walk is, of course, the
familiar metaphor for the external life of man, and all our deeds are
to be in conformity with the Light, and in communion with Him. This is
the deepest designation, perhaps, of the true character of a Christian
life in its external aspect--that it walks in Christ, doing nothing
but as His light shines, and ever bearing along with it conscious
fellowship with Him who is thus the guiding and irradiating and
gladdening and sanctifying life of our lives, '_Walk_ in the light as
He _is_ in the light.' Our days fleet and change; His are stable and
the same. For, although these words which I have quoted, in their
original application refer to God the Father, they are no less true
about Him who rests at the right hand of God, and is one light with
Him. He _is_ in the light. We may approximate to that stable and calm
radiance, even though our lives are passed through changing scenes,
and effort and struggle are their characteristics. And oh! how
blessed, brother, such a life will be, all gladdened by the unsetting
and unclouded sunshine that even in the shadiest places shines, and
turns the darkness of the valley of the shadow of death into solemn
light; teaching gloom to glow with a hidden sun!

But there is not only the idea of activity here, there is the further
notion of progress. Unless Christian people to their faith add work,
and have both their faith and their consequent work in a continual
condition of progress and growth, there is little reason to believe
that they apprehend the light at all. If you trust the light you will
walk in it; and if your days are not in conformity nor in communion
with Him, and are not advancing nearer and nearer to the central
blaze, then it becomes you to ask yourselves whether you have verily
seen at all, or trusted at all, 'the Light of life.'

III. Thirdly, there is here a warning.

'Walk whilst ye have the light, lest the darkness come upon you.' That
is the summing up of the whole history of that stiff-necked and
marvellous people. For what has all the history of Israel been since
that day but groping in the wilderness without any pillar of fire? But
there is more than that in it. Christ gives us this one solemn warning
of what falls on us if we turn away from Him. Rejected light is the
parent of the densest darkness, and the man who, having the light,
does not trust it, piles around himself thick clouds of obscurity and
gloom, far more doleful and impenetrable than the twilight that
glimmers round the men who have never known the daylight of
revelation. The history of un-Christian and anti-Christian Christendom
is a terrible commentary upon these words of the Master, and the cries
that we hear all round us to-day from men who will not follow the
light of Christ, and moan or boast that they dwell in agnostic
darkness, tell us that, of all the eclipses that can fall upon heart
and mind, there is none so dismal or thunderously dark as that of the
men who, having seen the light of Christ in the sky, have turned from
it and said, 'It is no light, it is only a mock sun.' Brethren, tempt
not that fate.

And if Christian men and women do not advance in their knowledge and
their conformity, like clouds of darkness will fall upon them. None is
so hopeless as the unprogressive Christian, none so far away as those
who have been brought nigh and have never come any nigher. If you
believe the light, see that you growingly trust and walk in it, else
darkness will come upon you, and you will not know whither you go.

IV. And lastly, there is here a hope and a promise.

'That ye may be the sons of light.'

Faith and obedience turn a man into the likeness of that in which he
trusts. If we trust Jesus we open our hearts to Him; and if we open
our hearts to Him He will come in. If you are in a darkened room, what
have you to do in order to have it filled with glad sunshine? Open the
shutters and pull up the blinds, and the light will do all the rest.
If you trust the light, it will rush in and fill every crevice and
cranny of your hearts. Faith and obedience will mould us, by their
natural effect, into the resemblance of that on which we lean. As one
of the old German mystics said, 'What thou lovest, that thou dost
become.' And it is blessedly true. The same principle makes Christians
like Christ, and makes idolaters like their gods. 'They that make them
are like unto them; so is every one that trusteth in them,' says one
of the Psalms. 'They followed after vanity and are become vain,' says
the chronicler of Israel's defections. 'We with unveiled faces
beholding'--or mirroring--'the glory of the Lord, are changed into the
same image.' Trust the light and you become 'sons of the light.'

And so, dear friends, all of us may hope that by degrees, as the
reward of faith and of walking, we still may bear the image of the
heavenly, even here on earth. While as yet we only believe in the
light, we may participate in its transforming power, like some far-off
planet on the utmost bounds of some solar system, that receives faint
and small supplies of light and warmth, through a thick atmosphere of
vapour, and across immeasurable spaces. But we have the assurance that
we shall be carried nearer our centre, and then, like the planets that
are closer to the sun than our earth is, we shall feel the fuller
power of the heat, and be saturated with the glory of the light. 'We
shall see Him as He is'; and then we too 'shall blaze forth like the
sun in the kingdom of our Father.'




THE LOVE OF THE DEPARTING CHRIST

'... When Jesus knew that His hour was come that He should depart out
of this world unto the Father, having loved His own which were in the
world, He loved them unto the end.'--JOHN xiii. 1.

The latter half of St. John's Gospel, which begins with these words,
is the Holy of Holies of the New Testament. Nowhere else do the
blended lights of our Lord's superhuman dignity and human tenderness
shine with such lambent brightness. Nowhere else is His speech at once
so simple and so deep. Nowhere else have we the heart of God so
unveiled to us. On no other page, even of the Bible, have so many
eyes, glistening with tears, looked and had the tears dried. The
immortal words which Christ spoke in that upper chamber are His
highest self-revelation in speech, even as the Cross to which they led
up is His most perfect self-revelation in act.

To this most sacred part of the New Testament my text is the
introduction. It unveils to us gleams of Christ's heart, and does what
the Evangelists very seldom venture to do, viz. gives us some sort of
analysis of the influences which then determined the flow and the
shape of our Lord's love.

Many good commentators prefer to read the last words of my text, 'He
loved them unto the _uttermost_' rather than 'unto the _end_'--so
taking them to express the depth and degree rather than the permanence
and perpetuity of our Lord's love. And that seems to me to be by far
the worthier and the nobler meaning, as well as the one which is borne
out by the usual signification of the expression in other Greek
authors. It is much to know that the emotions of these last moments
did not interrupt Christ's love. It is even more to know that in some
sense they perfected it, giving even a greater vitality to its
tenderness, and a more precious sweetness to its manifestations. So
understood, the words explain for us why it was that in the sanctity
of the upper chamber there ensued the marvellous act of the
foot-washing, the marvellous discourses which follow, and the climax
of all, that High-priestly prayer. They give utterance to a love which
Christ's consciousness at that solemn hour tended to shapen and to
deepen.

So, under the Evangelist's guidance, we may venture to gaze at least a
little way into these depths, and with all reverence to try and see
something at all events of the fringe and surface of the love 'which
passeth knowledge.' 'Jesus, knowing that His hour was come, that He
should depart out of the world unto the Father, having loved His own
which were in the world, loved them then unto the uttermost.'

My object will be best accomplished by simply following the guidance
of the words before us, and asking you to look first at that love as a
love which was not interrupted, but perfected by the prospect of
separation.

I. It would take us much too far away, however interesting the
contemplation might be, to dwell with any particularity upon our
Lord's consciousness as it is here set forth in that 'He knew that His
hour was come, that He should depart out of the world unto the
Father.' But I can scarcely avoid noticing, though only in a few
sentences, the salient points of that Christ-consciousness as it is
set forth here.

'He knew that His hour was come.' All His life was passed under the
consciousness of a divine necessity laid upon Him, to which He
lovingly and cheerfully yielded Himself. On His lips there are no
words more significant, and few more frequent, than that divine 'I
must!' 'It behoves the Son of Man' to do this, that, and the
other--yielding to the necessity imposed by the Father's will, and
sealed by His own loving resolve to be the Saviour of the world. And
in like manner, all through His life He declares Himself conscious of
the hours which mark the several crises and stages of His mission.
They come to Him and He discerns them. No external power can coerce
Him to any act till the hour come. No external power can hinder Him
from the act when it comes. When the hour strikes He hears the phantom
sound of the bell; and, hearing, He obeys. And thus, at the last and
supreme moment, to Him it dawned unquestionable and irrevocable. How
did He meet it? Whilst on the one hand there was the shrinking of
which we have such pathetic testimony in the broken prayer that He
Himself amended--'Father! save Me from this hour.... Yet for this
cause came I unto this hour,'--there is a strange, triumphant joy,
blending with the shrinking, that the decisive hour is at last come.

Mark, too, the form which the consciousness took--not that now the
hour had come for suffering or death or bearing the sins of the
world--all which aspects of it were nevertheless present to Him, as we
know; but that now He was soon to leave all the world beneath Him and
to return to the Father.

The terror, the agony, the shame, the mysterious burden of a world's
sins were now to be laid upon Him--all these elements are submerged,
as it were, and become less conspicuous than the one thought of
leaving behind all the limitations, and the humiliations, and the
compelled association with evil which, like a burning brand laid upon
a tender skin, was an hourly and momentary agony to Him, and soaring
above them all, unto His own calm home, His habitation from eternity
with the Father, as He had been before the world was. How strange this
blending of shrinking and of eagerness, of sorrow and of joy, of human
trembling consciousness of impending death, and of triumphant
consciousness of the approach of the hour when the Son of Man, even in
His bitterest agony and deepest humiliation, should, paradoxically, be
glorified, and should 'leave the world to go unto the Father'!

We cannot enter with any particularity or depth into this marvellous
and unique consciousness, but it is set forth here--and that is the
point to which especially I desire to turn your attention--as the
basis and the reason for a special tenderness softening His voice, and
taking possession of His heart, as He thought of the impending
separation.

And is that not beautiful? And does it not help us to realise how
truly 'bone of our bone and flesh of our flesh,' and bearing a heart
thrilling with all innocent human emotions that divine Saviour was?
We, too, have known what it is to feel, because of approaching
separation from dear ones, the need for a tenderer tenderness. At such
moments the masks of use and wont drop away, and we are eager to find
some word, to put our whole souls into some look, our whole strength
into one clinging embrace that may express all our love, and may be a
joy to two hearts for ever after to remember. The Master knew that
longing, and felt the pain of separation; and He, too, yielded to the
human impulse which makes the thought of parting the key to unlock the
hidden chambers of the most jealously guarded heart, and let the
shyest of its emotions come out for once into the daylight. So,
'knowing that His hour was come, He loved them unto the uttermost.'

But there is not only in this a wonderful expression of the true
humanity of the Christ, but along with that a suggestion of something
more sacred and deeper still. For surely amidst all the parting scenes
that the world's literature has enshrined, amidst all the examples of
self-oblivion at the last moment, when a martyr has been the comforter
of his weeping friends, there are none that without degradation to
this can be set by the side of this supreme and unique instance of
self-oblivion. Did not Christ, for the sake of that handful of poor
people, first and directly, and for the rest of us afterwards, of
course, secondarily and indirectly, so suppress all the natural
emotions of these last moments as that their absolute absence is
unique and singular, and points onwards to something more, viz. that
this Man who was susceptible of all human affections, and loved us
with a love which is not merely high above our grasp, absolute,
perfect, changeless and divine, but with a love like our own human
affection, had also more than a man's heart to give us, and gave us
more, when, that He might comfort and sustain, He crushed down Himself
and went to the Cross with words of tenderness and consolation and
encouragement for others upon His lips? Knowing all that was lying
before Him, He was neither absorbed nor confounded, but carried a
heart at leisure to love even then 'unto the uttermost.'

And if the prospect only sharpened and perfected, nor interrupted for
one instant the flow of His love, the reality has no power to do aught
else. In the glory, when He reached it, He poured out the same loving
heart; and to-day He looks down upon us with the same Face that bent
over the table in the upper room, and the same tenderness flows to us.
When John saw his Master next, after His Ascension, amidst the glories
of the vision in his rocky Patmos, though His face was as the sun
shineth in his strength, it was the old face. Though His hand bore the
stars in a cluster, it was the hand that had been pierced with the
nails. Though the breast was girded with the golden girdle of
sovereignty and of priesthood, it was the breast on which John's happy
head had lain; and though the 'Voice was as the sound of many waters,'
it soothed itself to a murmur, gentle as that with which the tideless
sea about him rippled upon the silvery sand when He said, 'Fear not
... I am the First and the Last.' Knowing that He goes to the Father,
He loves to the uttermost, and being with the Father, He still so
loves.

II. And now I must, with somewhat less of detail, dwell upon the other
points which this text brings out for us. It suggests to us next that
we have in the love of Jesus Christ a love which is faithful to the
obligations of its own past.

Having loved, He loves. Because He had been a certain thing, therefore
He is and He shall be that same. That is an argument that implies
divinity. About nothing human can we say that because it has been
therefore it shall be. Alas! about much that is human we have to say
the converse, that because it has been, therefore it will cease to be.
And though, blessed be God! they are few and they are poor who have
had no experience in their lives of human hearts whose love in the
past has been such that it manifestly is for ever, yet we cannot with
the same absolute confidence say about one another, even about the
dearest, 'Having loved, he loves.' But we can say so about Christ.
There is no exhaustion in that great stream that pours out from His
heart; no diminution in its flow.

They tell us that the central light of our system, that great sun
itself, pouring out its rays exhausts its warmth, and were it not
continually replenished, must gradually, and even though continually
replenished, will ultimately cease to blaze, and be a dead, cold mass
of ashes. But this central Light, this heart of Christ, which is the
Sun of the World, will endure like the sun, and after the sun is cold,
His love will last for ever. He pours it out and has none the less to
give. There is no bankruptcy in His expenditure, no exhaustion in His
effort, no diminution in His stores. 'Thy mercy endureth for ever';
'Thou hast loved, therefore Thou wilt love' is an inference for time
and for eternity, on which we may build and rest secure.

III. Then, still further, we have here this love suggested as being a
love which has special tenderness towards its own. 'Having loved His
own, He loved them to the uttermost.'

These poor men who, with all their errors, did cleave to Him; who, in
some dim way, understood somewhat of His greatness and His
sweetness--and do you and I do more?--who, with all their sins, yet
were true to Him in the main; who had surrendered very much to follow
Him, and had identified themselves with Him, were they to have no
special place in His heart because in that heart the whole world lay?
Is there any reason why we should be afraid of saying that the
universal love of Jesus Christ, which gathers into His bosom all
mankind, does fall with special tenderness and sweetness upon those
who have made Him theirs and have surrendered themselves to be His?
Surely it must be that He has special nearness to those who love Him;
surely it is reasonable that He should have special delight in those
who try to resemble Him; surely it is only what one might expect of
Him that He should in a special manner honour the drafts, so to speak,
of those who have confidence in Him, and are building their whole
lives upon Him. Surely, because the sun shines down upon dunghills and
all impurities, that is no reason why it should not lie with special
brightness on the polished mirror that reflects its lustre. Surely,
because Jesus Christ loves--Blessed be His name!--the publicans and
the harlots and the outcasts and the sinners, that is no reason why He
should not bend with special tenderness over those who, loving Him,
try to serve Him, and have set their whole hopes upon Him. The rainbow
strides across the sky, but there is a rainbow in every little dewdrop
that hangs glistening on the blades of grass. There is nothing
limited, nothing sectional, nothing narrow in the proclamation of a
special tenderness of Christ towards His own, when you accompany with
that truth this other, that all men are besought by Him to come into
that circle of 'His own,' and that only they themselves shut any out
therefrom. Blessed be His name! the whole world dwells in His love,
but there is an inner chamber in which He discovers all His heart to
those who find in that heart their Heaven and their all. 'He came to
His own,' in the wider sense of the word, and 'His own received Him
not'; but also, 'having loved His own He loved them unto the end.'
There are textures and lives which can only absorb some of the rays of
light in the spectrum; some that are only capable of taking, so to
speak, the violet rays of judgment and of wrath, and some who open
their hearts for the ruddy brightness at the other end of the line. Do
you see to it, brethren, that you are of that inner circle who receive
the whole Christ into their hearts, and to whom He can unfold the
fullness of His love.

IV. And, lastly, my text suggests that love of Christ as being made
specially tender by the necessities and the dangers of His friends.
'He loved His own which were in the world,' and so loving them, 'loved
them to the uttermost.'

We have, running through these precious discourses which follow my
text, many allusions to the separation which was to ensue, and to His
leaving His followers in circumstances of peculiar peril, defenceless
and solitary. 'I come unto Thee, and am no more in the world,' says He
in the final High-priestly prayer, 'but these are in the world. Holy
Father, keep them through Thine own name.' The same contrast between
the certain security of the Shepherd and the troubled perils of the
scattered flock seems to be in the words of my text, and suggests a
sweet and blessed reason for the special tenderness with which He
looked upon them. As a dying father on his deathbed may yearn over
orphans that he is leaving defenceless, so Christ is here represented
as conscious of an accession even to the tender longings of His heart,
when He thought of the loneliness and the dangers to which His
followers were to be exposed.

Ah! It seems a harsh contrast between the Emperor, sitting throned
there between the purple curtains, and the poor athletes wrestling in
the arena below. It seems strange to think that a loving Master has
gone up into the mountain, and has left His disciples to toil in
rowing on the stormy sea of life; but the contrast is only apparent.
For you and I, if we love and trust Him, are with Him 'in the heavenly
places' even whilst we toil here, and He is with us, working with us,
even whilst He 'sitteth at the right hand of God.'

We may be sure of this, brethren, that that love ever increases its
manifestations according to our deepening necessities. The darker the
night the more lustrous the stars. The deeper, the narrower, the
savager, the Alpine gorge, usually the fuller and the swifter the
stream that runs through it. And the more that enemies and fears
gather round about us, the sweeter will be the accents of our
Comforter's voice, and the fuller will be the gifts of tenderness and
grace with which He draws near to us. Our sorrows, dangers,
necessities, are doors through which His love can come nigh.

So, dear friends, we have had experience of sweet and transient human
love; we have had experience of changeful and ineffectual love; turn
away from them all to this immortal, deep heart of Christ's, welling
over with a love which no change can affect, which no separation can
diminish, which no sin can provoke, which becomes greater and tenderer
as our necessities increase, and ask Him to fill your hearts with
that, that you may 'know the length and breadth and depth and height
of that love which passeth knowledge,' and so 'be filled with all the
fullness of God.'




THE SERVANT-MASTER

'Jesus knowing that the Father had given all things into His hands,
and that He was come from God, and went to God; He riseth from supper,
and laid aside His garments; and took a towel, and girded Himself.
After that He poureth water into a basin, and began to wash the
disciples' feet, and to wipe them with the towel wherewith He was
girded.'--JOHN xiii. 3-5.

It has been suggested that the dispute as to 'which was the greatest,'
which broke the sanctities of the upper chamber, was connected with
the unwillingness of each of the Apostles to perform the menial office
of washing the feet of his companions. They had come in from Bethany,
and needed the service. But apparently it was omitted, and although we
can scarcely suppose that the transcendent act which is recorded in my
text was performed at the beginning of the meal, yet I think we shall
not be wrong if we see in it a reference to the neglected service.

The Evangelist who tells us of the dispute, and does not tell us of
the foot-washing, preserves a sentence which finds its true meaning
only in this incident, 'I am among you as He that serveth.' And
although John is the only recorder of this pathetic incident, there
are allusions in other parts of Scripture which seem to hint at it.
As, for instance, when Paul speaks of 'taking upon Him the form of a
servant'; and still more strikingly when Peter employs the remarkable
word, which he does employ in his exhortation, 'Be ye clothed with
humility.' For the word rendered there 'clothed' occurs only in that
one place in Scripture, and means literally the putting on of a
slave's costume. One can scarcely help, then, seeing in these three
passages to which I have referred echoes of this incident which John
alone preserves to us. And so we get at once a hint of the harmony and
of the incompleteness of the Gospel records.

I. Consider the motives of this act.

Now that is ground upon which the Evangelists very seldom enter. They
tell us what Christ did, but very rarely do they give us any glimpses
into why He did it. But this section of the Gospel is remarkable for
its full and careful analysis of what Christ's impelling motives were
in the final acts of His life. How did John find out why Christ did
this deed? Perhaps he who had 'leaned upon His bosom at supper,' and
was evidently very closely associated with Him, may, in some
unrecorded hour of intimate communion during the forty days between
the Resurrection and the Ascension, have heard from the Master the
exposition of His motives. But more probably, I think, the long years
of growing likeness to his Lord, and of meditation upon the depth of
meaning in the smallest events that his faithful memory recalled,
taught him to understand Christ's purpose and motives. 'The secret of
the Lord is with them that fear Him,' and the liker we get to our
Master and the more we are filled with His Spirit, the more easy will
it be for us to divine the purpose and the motives of His actions,
whether as they are recorded in the Scripture or as they come to us in
the experience of daily life.

But, passing that point, I desire for a moment to fix your attention
on the twofold key to our Lord's action which is given in this
