much blended good and evil. It expresses a true earnestness, a
dissatisfaction with self, a consciousness of unattained bliss and a
longing for it, a felt readiness to take any pains to secure it, a
confidence in Christ's guidance--in short, much of the child spirit.
But it has also a too light estimate of what good is, a mistaken
notion that 'eternal life' can be won by external deeds, which
implies fatal error as to its nature and his own power to do these.
This superficial estimate of goodness, and this over confidence in
his ability to do good acts, are the twin mistakes against which
Christ's treatment of him is directed.

Adopting Luke's version of our Lord's answer, the counter-question,
which begins it, lays hold of the polite address, which had slipped
from the ruler's lips as mere form, and bids him widen out his
conceptions of 'good.' Jesus does not deny that He has a right to
the title, but questions this man's right to give it Him. The ruler
thought of Jesus only as a man, and, so thinking, was too ready with
his adjective. Conventional phrases of compliment may indicate much
of the low notions from which they spring. He who is so liberal with
his ascriptions of goodness needs to have his notions of what it is
elevated. Jesus lays down the great truth which this man, in his
confidence that he by his own power could do any good needed for
eternal life, was perilously forgetting. God is the only good, and
therefore all human goodness must come from Him; and if the ruler is
to do 'good,' he must first be good, by receiving goodness from God.

But the saying has an important bearing on Christ's character. The
world calls Him good. Why? There is none good but God. So we are
face to face with this dilemma--Either Jesus Christ is God manifest
in the flesh, or He is not good.

Having thus tried to deepen his conceptions, and awaken his
consciousness of imperfection, our Lord meets the man on his own
ground by referring him to the Law, which abundantly answered his
inquiry. The second half of the commandments are alone quoted
by Him; for they have especially to do with conduct, and the
infractions of them are more easily recognised than those of the
first. The ruler expected that some exceptional and brilliant deeds
would be pointed out and he is relegated to the old homely duties,
which it is gross crime not to do.

A shade of disappointment and impatience is in his protestation that
he had done all these ever since he was a lad. No doubt he had, and
his coming to Jesus confessed that though he had, the doing had not
brought him 'eternal life.' Are there not many youthful hearts which
would have to say the same, if they would be frank with themselves?
They have some longings after a bliss and calm which they feel is
not theirs. They have kept within the lines of that second half of
the Decalogue, but that amount and sort of 'good thing' has not
brought peace. Jesus looks on all such as He did on this young man,
'loves' them, and speaks further to them as He did to him. What
was lacking? The soul of goodness, without which these other things
were 'dead works.' And what is that soul? Absolute self-renunciation
and following Christ. For this man the former took the shape of
parting with his wealth, but that external renunciation in itself
was as 'dead' and impotent to bring eternal life as all his other
good acts had been. It was precious as a means to an end--the
entrance into the number of Christ's disciples; and as an expression
of that inward self-surrender which is essential for discipleship.

The real stress of the condition is in its second half, 'Follow me.'
He who enters the company of Christ's followers enters the kingdom,
and has eternal life. If he does not do that, he may give his goods
to feed the poor, and it profiteth him nothing. Eternal life is not
the external wages for external acts, but the outcome and consequence
of yielding self to Jesus, through whom goodness, which keeps the
law, flows into the soul.

The requirement pierced to the quick. The man loved the world more
than eternal life, after all. But though he went away, he went
sorrowful; and that was perhaps the presage that he would come back.

(2) Jesus follows him with sad yearning, and, we may be sure, still
sought to draw him back. His exclamation is full of the charity
which makes allowance for temptation. It speaks a universal truth,
never more needed than in our days, when wealth has flung its golden
chains round so many professing Christians. How few of us believe
that it gets harder for us to be disciples as we grow richer! There
are multitudes in our churches who would be far nearer Christ than
they are ever likely to be, if they would literally obey the
injunction to get rid of their wealth.

We are too apt to take such commands as applicable only to the
individuals who received them, whereas, though, no doubt, the
spirit, and not the letter, is the universal element in them, there
are far more of us than we are willing to confess, who need to obey
the letter in order to keep the spirit. What a depth of vulgar
adoration of the power of money is in the disciples' exclamation,
'If rich men cannot get into the kingdom, who can get in!' Or
perhaps it rather means, If self-renunciation is the condition, who
can fulfil it? The answer points us all to the only power by which
we can do good, and overcome self; namely by God's help. God is
'good,' and we can be good too, if we look to Him. God will fill our
souls with such sweetness that earth will not be hard to part with.

(3) The last paragraph of this passage teaches the reward of
self-renunciation. Peter shoves his oar in, after his fashion. It
would have been better if he had not boasted of their surrender,
but yet it was true that they had given up all. Only a fishing-boat
and a parcel of old nets, indeed, but these were all they had to
give; and God's store, which holds His children's surrendered
valuables, has many things of small value in it--cups of cold water
and widows' mites lying side by side with crowns and jewels.

So Jesus does not rebuke the almost innocent self-congratulation,
but recognises in it an appeal to his faithfulness. It was really a
prayer, though it sounded like a vaunt, and it is answered by
renewed assurances. To part with outward things for Christ's sake or
for the kingdom's sake--which is the same thing--is to win them
again with all their sweetness a hundred-fold sweeter. Gifts given
to Him come back to the giver mended by His touch and hallowed by
lying on His altar. The present world yields its full riches only to
the man who surrenders all to Jesus. And the 'eternal life,' which
the ruler thought was to be found by outward deeds, flows
necessarily into the heart which is emptied of self, that it may be
filled with Him who is the life, and will be perfected yonder.




THE MAN THAT STOPPED JESUS


    'And Jesus stood, and commanded him to be brought
    unto Him: and when he was come near, He asked him,
    41. Saying, What wilt thou that I shall do unto
    thee?'--LUKE xviii. 40-41.

This story of the man that stopped Christ is told by the three
'Synoptic' Evangelists, and it derives a special value from having
occurred within a week of the Crucifixion. You remember how
graphically Mark tells how the blind man hears who is passing and
immediately begins to cry with a loud voice to Christ to have mercy
upon him; how the officious disciples--a great deal more concerned
for the Master's dignity than He was Himself--tried to silence him;
and how, with a sturdy persistence and independence of externals
which often goes along with blindness, 'he cried the more a great
deal' because they did try, and then how he won the distinction of
being the man that stopped Christ. When Jesus stood still, and
commanded him to be called, the crowd wheeled right round at once, and
instead of hindering, encumbered him with help, and bade him to 'rise,
and be of good cheer.' Then he flings away some poor rag that he had
had to cover himself sitting there, and wearing his under-garment
only, comes to Christ, and Jesus asks, 'What do you want?' A promise
in the shape of a question. Bartimaeus knows what he wants, and
answers without hesitation, and so he gets his request.

Now, I think in all this incident, and especially in its centre
part, which I have read, there are great lessons for us. And the
first of them is, I see here a wonderful revelation of Christ's
quick sympathy at a moment when He was most absorbed.

I said that all this occurred within a week of our Lord's
Crucifixion. If you will recall the way in which that last journey
to Jerusalem is described in the Evangelists, you will see that
there was something very extraordinary about the determination and
tension of spirit which impelled Jesus along the road, all the
way from Galilee. Mark says that the disciples followed and were
amazed. There was something quite unlike what they had been
accustomed to, in His face and bearing, and it was so strange to
them that they were puzzled and frightened. We read, too, that their
amazement and fright prevented them from going very near Him on the
road; 'as they _followed_ they were afraid.' Then the story
goes on to tell how James and John, with their arrogant wish, did
draw closer to Him, the rest of them lagging behind, conscious of a
certain unaccustomed distance between Him and them, which only the
ambitious two dared to diminish. Further, one of the Evangelists
speaks of His face being 'set' to go to Jerusalem, the gentle
lineaments fixed in a new expression of resolution and absorption.
The Cross was flinging its shadow over Him. He was bracing Himself
up for the last struggle. If ever there was a moment of His life
when we might have supposed that He would be oblivious of externals,
and especially of the individual sorrows of one poor blind beggar
sitting by the roadside, it was that moment. But however plunged in
great thoughts about the agonising suffering that He was going to
front, and the grand work that He was going to do, and the great
victory that He was going to win so soon, He had

  'A heart at leisure from itself
  To soothe and sympathise.'

Even at that supreme hour He stood still and commanded him to be
called. I wonder if it is saying too much to say that in the
exercise of that power of healing and helping Bartimaeus, Jesus
found some relief from the pressure of impending sorrow.

Brethren, is not that a lesson for us all? It is not spiritualising,
allegorising, cramming meanings into an incident that are not in it,
when we say--Think of Jesus Christ as one of ourselves, knowing that
He was going to His death within a week, and then think of Him
turning to this poor man. Is not that a pattern for us? We are often
more selfish in our sorrows than in our joys. Many of us are inclined,
when we are weighed down by personal sorrows, to say, 'As long as I
have this heavy weight lying on my heart, how can you expect me to
take an interest in the affairs of others, or to do Christian work,
or to rise to the calls of benevolence and the cries of need?' We do
not expect _you_ to do it; but Jesus Christ did it, 'leaving us
an example that we should follow in His steps.' Next to the blessed
influences of God's own Spirit, and the peace-bringing act of submission,
there is no such comfort for sorrow, as to fling ourselves into others'
griefs, and to bear others' burdens. Our Lord, with His face set like
a flint, on the road to the Cross, but yet sufficiently free of heart
to turn to Bartimaeus, reads a lesson that rebukes us all, and should
teach us all.

Further, do we not see here a beautiful concrete instance, on the
lower plane, of the power of earnest desire.

No enemy could have stopped Christ on that road; no opposition could
have stopped Him, no beseeching on the part of loving and ignorant
friends, repeating the temptation in the wilderness--or the foolish
words of Peter, 'This shall not be unto Thee,' could have stopped
Him. He would have trodden down all such flimsy obstacles, as a lion
'from the thickets of Jordan' crashes through the bulrushes, but
this cry stopped Him, 'Jesus, thou Son of David, have mercy on me,
and the Cross and all else that He was hastening to, great as it was
for the world, had to wait its turn, for something else had to be
done first. There was noise enough on the road, the tramp of many
feet, the clatter of many eager tongues, but the voice of one poor
man sitting in the dust there by the roadside, found its way through
all the noise to Christ's ears. 'Which things are an allegory.'
There is an ocean of praise always, as I might so say breaking upon
Christ's Throne, but the little stream of my petitions flows
distinguishable through all that sea. As one of our poets says, we
may even think of Him as 'missing my little human praise' when the
voice of one poor boy was not heard. Surely amidst all the
encouragements that we have to believe that our cry is not sent up
into an empty heaven, nor into deaf ears, and that all the multitude
of creatures that wait before that Throne do not prevent the
individualising knowledge and the individualising love of Jesus
Christ from coming straight to every one of us, this little incident
is not the least instructive and precious. He that heard Bartimaeus
will hear us.

In like manner, may I not say that here we have an illustration of
how Christ, who has so much besides to do, would suspend other work,
if it were needful, in order to do what we need? As I have said, the
rest had to wait. Bartimaeus stopped Christ. And our hand, if it be
the hand of faith, put out to the hem of the garment as Jesus of
Nazareth passeth by, will so far stop Him as that He will do what we
wish, if what we wish is in accordance with our highest good. There
was another man in Jericho who stopped Christ, on that same journey;
for not only the petition of Bartimaeus, but the curiosity--which
was more than curiosity--of Zacchaeus, stopped Him, and He who stood
still, though He had His face set like a flint to go to Jerusalem,
because Bartimaeus cried, stood still and looked up into the
sycamore tree where the publican was--the best fruit that ever it
bore--and said, 'Zacchaeus; come down, I must abide at thy house.'
Why _must_ He abide? Because He discerned there a soul that He
could help and save, and that arrested Him on His road to the Cross.

So, dear friends, amidst all the work of administering the universe
which He does, and of guiding and governing and inspiring His
Church, which He does, if you ask for the supply of your need He
would put that work aside for a moment, if necessary, to attend to
you. That is no exaggeration; it is only a strong way of putting the
plain truth that Christ's love individualises each of its objects;
and lavishes itself upon each one of us; as if there were no other
beings in the universe but only our two selves.

And then, remember too, that what Bartimaeus got was not taken from
anyone else. Nobody suffered because Jesus paused to help him. They
sat down in ranks, five thousand of them, and as they began to eat,
those that were first served would be looked upon with envious eye
by the last 'ranks,' who would be wondering if the bits of bread and
the two small fishes were enough to go round. But the first group
was fed full and the last group had as much, and they took up 'of
the fragments that remained, twelve baskets full.'

  'Enough for all, enough for each,
  Enough for evermore.'

There is one more thought rising out of this story. It teaches a
wonderful lesson as to the power which Christ puts into the hand of
believing prayer.

'What wilt thou that I shall do unto thee?' He had asked the same
question a little while before, under very different circumstances.
When James and John came and tried to beguile Him into a blind
promise, because they knew that It was not likely that they would
get what they asked if they said it out at first. He avoided the
snare with that same question, To them the question was a refusal;
they had said: 'Master, we will that Thou wouldst do whatever we
should desire'; and He said: 'What is it that ye desire? Let Me know
that first.' But when blind Bartimaeus cried, Jesus smiled down upon
him--though his sightless eyeballs could not see the smile, there
would be a smile in the cadence of His words--and He said: 'What
wouldst thou that I should do for thee?' To this suppliant that
question was a promise--'I will do what you want.' He puts the key
of the royal treasure-house into the hand of faith, and says, 'Go in
and help yourself. Take what you will.'

Only, of course, we must remember that there are limitations in the
very nature of the case, imposed not arbitrarily, but because the
very nature of the truest gifts creates them, and these limitations
to some of us sound as if they took all the blessedness out of the
act of prayer. 'We know,' says one of the Apostles, 'that if we ask
anything according to His will He heareth us.' Some of us think that
that is a very poor kind of charter, but it sets the necessary limit
to the omnipotence of faith. 'What wouldst thou that I should do for
thee?' Unless our answer always, and at bottom, is, 'Not my will,
but Thine,' we have not yet learnt the highest blessing, nor the
truest meaning, of prayer. For to pray does not mean to insist, to
press our wishes on God, but it means, first, to desire that our
wills may be brought into harmony with His. The old Rabbis hit upon
great truths now and then, and one of them said, 'Make God's will
thy will, that He may make thy will His will.' If any poor, blind
Bartimaeus remembers that, and asks accordingly, he has the key to
the royal treasury in his possession, and he may go in and plunge
his hand up to the wrist in jewels and diamonds, and carry away bars
of gold, and it will all be his.

When this man, who had no sight in his eyeballs, knew that whatever
he wanted he should have, he did not need to pause long to consider
what it was that he wanted most. If you and I had that Aladdin's
lamp given to us, and had only to rub it for a mighty spirit to come
that would fulfil our wishes, I wonder if we should be as sure of
what we wanted. If we were as conscious of our need as the blind man
was of his, we should pause as little in our response to the
question: 'What wouldst thou that I should do for thee?' 'Lord! Dost
Thou not see that mine eyes are dark? What else but sight can I
want?' Jesus still comes to us with the same question. God grant
that we may all say; 'Lord, how canst Thou ask us? Dost Thou not see
that my soul is stained, my love wandering, my eyeballs dim? Give me
Thyself!' If we thus ask, then the answer will come as quickly to us
as it did to this blind man: 'Go thy way! Thy faith hath saved
thee,' and that 'Go thy way' will not be dismissal from the Presence
of our Benefactor, but our 'way' will be the same as Bartimaeus'
was, when he received his sight, and 'followed Jesus in the way.'




MELTED BY KINDNESS


    'And when Jesus came to the place, He looked up, and saw
    him, and said unto him, Zacchaeus, make haste, and come
    down; for to-day I must abide at thy house.'
    --LUKE xix. 5.

It is characteristic of Luke that only he tells the story
of Zacchaeus. He always dwells with special interest on incidents
bringing out the character of Christ as the Friend of outcasts. His
is eminently the Gospel of forgiveness. For example, we owe to Him
the three supreme parables of the lost sheep, the lost coin, and the
prodigal son, as well as those of the Pharisee and the publican
praying in the Temple; and of the good Samaritan. It is he that
tells us that all the publicans and sinners came near to Jesus to
hear Him; and he loses no opportunity of enforcing the lesson with
which this incident closes, 'The Son of Man is come to seek and to
save that which was lost.' It is because of the light that it throws
upon that great thought that he tells this fascinating story of
Zacchaeus. I need not repeat it. We all remember it, and the
quaintness and grotesqueness of part of it fix it in people's
memories. We know how the rich tax gatherer, pocketing his dignity,
and unable to see over the heads of the crowd, scrambled up into the
branches of the sycamore tree that overhung the road; and there was
found by the eye of love, and surprised by the words of kindness,
which melted him down, and made a new man of him on the spot. The
story seems to me to be full of teaching, to which I desire to turn
your attention at this time.

I. First, note the outcast, drawn by imperfect motives to Jesus
Christ.

It has been supposed that this man was a Gentile, but his Jewish
name establishes his origin. And, if so, the fact that he was a
publican and a Jew says a good deal about his character. There are
some trades which condemn, to a certain extent, the men who engage
in them. You would not expect to find a man of sensitive honour
acting as a professional spy; or one of earnest religious character
keeping a public-house. You would not expect to find a very good Jew
condescending to be the tool of the Roman Government. Zacchaeus was
at the head of the revenue office in Jericho, a position of
considerable importance, inasmuch as there was a large volume of
trade through that city from its situation near the fords of the
Jordan, and from the fertility of the plain in which it stood. He
had made some money, and probably made it by very questionable
means. He was the object, not undeservedly, of the execration and
suspicion of his countrymen. Italians did not love Italians who took
service under Austria. Irishmen did not love Irishmen who in the bad
old days used to collect church cess. And so Jews had no very kind
feeling towards Jews who became Caesar's servants. That a man should
be in such a position indicated that he cared more for money than
for patriotism, religion, or popular approval. His motto was the
motto of that Roman Emperor who said, 'Money has no smell,' out of
whatever cesspool it may have been fished up. But the consciousness
of being encompassed by universal hatred would induce the object of
it to put on an extra turn of the screw, and avenge upon individuals
the general hostility. So we may take it for granted that Zacchaeus,
the head of the Jericho custom-house, and rich to boot, was by no
means a desirable character.

What made him want to see Jesus Christ? He said to himself, curiosity;
but probably he was doing himself injustice, and there was something
else working below than merely the wish to see what sort of man was
this Rabbi Joshua from Galilee that everybody was talking about. Had
he heard that Jesus had a soft place in His heart for his class? Or
was he, perhaps, beginning to get tired of being the butt of universal
hatred, and finding that money scarcely compensated for that? Or was
there some reaching out towards some undefined good, and a
dissatisfaction with a very defined present, though unnamed, evil?
Probably so. Like some of us, he put the trivial motive uppermost
because he was half ashamed of the half-conscious better one.

I wonder if there are any here now who said to themselves that they
would come out of curiosity to hear the preacher, or from some such
ordinary motive, and who all the while have, lying deep below that,
another reason altogether, a dim feeling that it is not all right
between them and God, and that here may be the place to have it put
right? At all events, from whatsoever imperfect motives little
Zacchaeus was perched up in the sycamore there, he went to
see Christ, and he got more than he went for. Unconsciously we may
be drawn, and imperfect motives may lead us to a perfect Saviour.

He sets us an example in another way. Do not be too punctilious
about dignity in pursuing aims that you know to be good. It would be
a sight to bring jeers and grins on the faces of the crowd to see
the rich man of the custom-house sitting up amongst the leaves. But
he did not mind about that if he got a good look at the Rabbi when
He passed. People care nothing for ridicule if their hearts are set
upon a thing. I wish there were more of us who did not mind being
laughed at if only what we did helped us to see Jesus Christ. Do not
be afraid of ridicule. It is not a test of truth; in nine cases out
of ten it is the grimace of fools.

II. Then, further, notice the self-invited Guest.

When the little procession stopped under the sycamore tree,
Zacchaeus would begin to feel uncomfortable. He may have had
experience in past times of the way in which the great doctors of
orthodoxy were in the habit of treating a publican, and may have
begun to be afraid that this new one was going to be like all the
rest, and elicit some kind of mob demonstration against him. The
crowd would be waiting with intense curiosity to see what would pass
between the Rabbi and the revenue collector. They would all be very
much astonished. 'Zacchaeus! make haste and come down. To-day I must
abide at thy house.' Perhaps it was the first time since he had been
a child at his mother's knee that he had heard his name pronounced
in tones of kindness. There was not a ragged beggar in Jericho who
would not have thought himself degraded by putting his foot across
the threshold that Jesus now says He will cross.

It is the only time in which we read that Jesus volunteered to go
into any house. He never offers to go where He is not wanted, any
more than He ever stays away where He is. And so the very fact of
His saying 'I will abide at thy house,' is to me an indication
that, deep down below Zacchaeus' superficial and vulgar curiosity,
there was something far more noble which our Lord fosters into life
and consciousness by this offer.

Many large truths are suggested by it on which we may touch. We have
in Christ's words an illustration of His individualising knowledge.
'Zacchaeus, come down.' There is no sign that anybody had told Christ
the name, or that He knew anything about Zacchaeus before by human
knowledge. But the same eye that saw Nathanael under the fig-tree
saw Zacchaeus in the sycamore; and, seeing in secret, knew without
being told the names of both. Christ does not name men in vain. He
generally, when He uses an individual's name in addressing him, means
either to assert His knowledge of his character, or His authority
over him, or in some way or other to bespeak personal adhesion and
to promise personal affection. So He named some of His disciples,
weaving a bond that united each single soul to Himself by the act.
This individualising knowledge and drawing love and authority are all
expressed, as I think, in that one word 'Zacchaeus.' And these are as
true about us as about him. The promises of the New Testament, the
words of Jesus Christ, the great, broad, universal 'whosoevers' of
His assurance and of His commandments are as directly meant for each
of us as if they were in an envelope with our names upon them and put
into our hands. We, too, are spoken to by Him by our names, and for
us, too, there may be a personal bond of answering love that knits us
individually to the Master, as there certainly is a bond of personal
regard, compassion, affection, and purpose of salvation in His heart
in regard of each single soul of all the masses of humanity. I should
have done something if I should have been able to gather into a point,
that blessedly pierced some heart to let the life in, the broad truths
of the Gospel. 'Whosoever will, let him come.' Say to yourself, 'That
is me.' 'Whosoever cometh I will in no wise cast out.' Say to yourself,
'That is me.' And in like manner with all the general declarations,
and especially with that chiefest of them all, 'God so loved the world
that He gave His only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in Him
should not perish.' Read it as you may--and you will never read it
right until you do--'God so loved _me_'--John, Mary, or whatever
be your name--'Jesus so loved _me_ that if _I_ believe upon
Him _I_ shall not perish, but have everlasting life.'

Then, note, further, how here we get the revelation, in a concrete
form, of Christ's perfect willingness and desire to make common
cause, and dwell with the most degraded and outcast. I have said
that this is the only instance in which He volunteered to be a
guest. Pharisees asked Him, and He did not refuse. The publican's
dwelling, which was tabooed, He opened the door of by His own hand.
And that is what He always does.

This little incident may be taken to be, not merely a symbol of His
whole dealings, but an illustration, in small, of the same principle
which has its largest embodiment and illustration in the fact of His
Incarnation and Manhood. Why did Jesus Christ take flesh and dwell
among us? Because He desired to seek and to save that which is lost.
Why did He go into the publican's house, and brave the sneers of the
crowd, and associate Himself with the polluted? For the same reason.
Microscopic crystals and gigantic ones are due to the same forces
working in the same fashion. This incident is more than a symbol; it
is a little instance of the operation of the law which finds its
supreme and transcendent instance in the fact that the Eternal Son
of God bowed the heavens and came down 'and dwelt among us, and we
beheld His glory.'

His example is our pattern. A Christian church which does not
imitate its Master in its frank and continual willingness to
associate itself with the degraded and the outcast has lost one of
the truest signs of its being vitalised with the life of Christ.
There is much in this day in the condition of Christian communities
to make men dissatisfied and fearful. But there is one thing which,
though in all its developments one cannot sympathise with it, is in
its essence wholly good, and that is the new and quickened
consciousness that a church which does not address itself to the
outcasts has no business to live; and that Christian people who are
too proud of their righteousness to go amongst the unclean and the
degraded are a great deal more of Pharisees than Christians, and
have need to learn which be the first principles of the religion
which they profess. Self-righteousness gathers up its skirts in holy
horror; perfect righteousness goes cheerily and without fear amongst
the outcasts, for where should the physician go but to the sick, and
where should Christ be found but in the house of the publican?

Further, the saying of our Lord suggests His recognition of the
great law that ruled His life. Chronology here is of much
importance. We do not generally remember that the scene with
Zacchaeus was within about a week of the Crucifixion. Our Lord was
on that last journey to Jerusalem to die, during the whole of which
there was over His demeanour a tension of holy impatience,
altogether unlike His usual manner, which astonished and amazed the
disciples as they followed Him. He set His face like a flint to go
to Jerusalem; and strode before them on the way as if He were eager
to reach the culmination of His sufferings and of His work. Thus
borne on the wings of the strong desire to be perfected on the
Cross, He is arrested on His path. Nothing else was able to stop
Him, but 'To-day I _must_ abide in thy house.' There was a soul
to be saved; and the world's sacrifice had to wait till the single
soul was secured. Christ hurrying, if I may use the word, at all
events steadfastly and without wavering, pressing towards the Cross,
let His course be stopped by this need. The highest 'must' was
obedience to the Father's will, and parallel with that need there
was the other, of rescuing the Father's prodigal sons. So this elder
Brother owned the obligation, and paused on the road to Calvary, to
lodge in the house of Zacchaeus. Let us learn the sweet lesson,
and take the large consolations that lie in such a thought.

Again, the utterance of this self-invited Guest suggests His
over-abundant fulfilment of timid, half-conscious desires. I said at
the beginning of my remarks that only curiosity was on the surface;
but that the very fact that our Lord addressed Himself to the man
seemed to imply that He descried in him something more than mere vulgar
curiosity. And the glad leap with which Zacchaeus came down from his
tree might have revealed to Zacchaeus himself, as no doubt it did to
some of the bystanders, what it was that he had been dimly wishing.
So with us all there are needs, longings, half-emerging wishes, that
have scarcely come into the field of consciousness, but yet have
power enough to modify our actions. Jesus Christ understands all
about us, and reads us better than we do ourselves; and is ready to
meet, and by meeting to bring into full relief, these vague feelings
after an undefined good. Brethren, He is to us, if we will let Him
be, all that we want; and He is to us all that we need, although we
only half know that we need it, and never say to ourselves that we
wish it.

There is a last thought deducible from these words of our Lord's;
and that is, His leaving a man to decide whether he will have Him or
no. 'Make haste and come down, for to-day I _must_ abide at thy
house. Yes! but if Zacchaeus had stuck in his tree, Christ's 'must'
would not have been fulfilled. He would have gone on to Jerusalem if
the publican had not scrambled down in haste. He forces Himself on
no man; He withholds Himself from no man. He respects that awful
prerogative of being the architects of our own evil and our own
good, by our own free and unconstrained choice.

Did you ever think that it was now or never with this publican; that
Jesus Christ was never to go through the streets of Jericho any
more; that it was Zacchaeus' last chance; and that, if he had not
made haste, he would have lost Christ for ever? And so it is yet.
There may be some in this place at this moment to whom Jesus Christ
is now making His last appeal. I know not; no man knows. A Rabbi
said, when they asked him when a man should repent, 'Repent on the
last day of your lives.' And they said, 'But we do not know when
that will be.' And he said, 'Then repent _now_.' So I say,
because some of you may never hear Christ's Gospel again, and
because none of us know whether we shall or not; make sure work of
it _now_, and do not let Jesus Christ go out of the city and
up the road between the hills yonder; for if once the folds of the
ravine shut Him from sight He will never be back in Jericho, or seen
by Zacchaeus any more for ever.

III. And so, lastly, notice the outcast melted by kindness.

We do not know at what stage in our Lord's intercourse with the
publican he 'stood and said, Half of my goods I give to the poor,'
and so on. But whensoever it was, it was the sign of the entire
revolution that had been wrought upon him by the touch of that
loving hand, and by the new fountain of sympathy and love
that he had found in Jesus Christ.

Some people have supposed, indeed, that his words do not mark a vow
for the future, but express his practice in the past. But it seems
to me to be altogether incongruous that Zacchaeus should advertise
his past good in order to make himself out to be not quite so bad as
people thought him, and, therefore, not so unworthy of being
Christ's host. Christ's love kindles sense of our sin, not
complacent recounting of our goodness. So Zacchaeus said, 'Lord!
Thou hast loved me, and I wonder. I yield, and fling away my black
past; and, so far as I can, make restitution for it.'

The one transforming agency is the love of Christ received into the
heart. I do not suppose that Zacchaeus knew as much about Jesus
Christ even after the conversation as we do; nor did he see His love
in that supreme death on the Cross as we do. But the love of the
Lord made a deep dint in his heart, and revolutionised his whole
nature. The thing that will alter the whole current and set of a
man's affections, that will upset his estimate of the relative value
of material and spiritual, and that will turn him inside out and
upside down, and make a new man of him, is the revelation of the
supreme love that in Jesus Christ has come into the world, with an
individualising regard to each of us, and has died on the Cross for
the salvation of us all. Nothing else will do it. People had frowned
on Zacchaeus, and it made him bitter. They had execrated and
persecuted him; and his only response was setting his teeth more
firmly and turning the screw a little tighter when he had the
chance. You can drive a man into devilry by contempt. If you want to
melt him into goodness, try love. The Ethiopian cannot change his
skin, but Jesus Christ can change his heart, and that will change
his skin by degrees. The one transforming power is faith in the love
of Jesus Christ.

Further, the one test of a true reception of Him is the abandonment
of past evil and restitution for it as far as possible. People say
that our Gospel is unreal and sentimental, and a number of other
ugly adjectives. Well! If it ever is so, it is the fault of the
speakers, and not of the Gospel. For its demands from every man that
accepts it are intensely practical, and nothing short of a complete
turning of his back upon his old self, shown in the conclusive
forsaking of former evil, however profitable or pleasant, and
reparation for harm done to men, satisfies them.

It is useless to talk about loving Jesus Christ and trusting Him,
and having the sweet assurance of forgiveness, and a glorious hope
of heaven, unless these have made you break off your bad habits of
whatsoever sort they may be, and cast them behind your backs. Strong
emotion, sweet deep feeling, assured confidence in the sense of
forgiveness and the hope of heaven, are all very well. Let us see
your faith by your works; and of these works the chief is--Behold
the evil that I did, I do it no more: 'Behold! Lord! the half of my
goods I give to the poor.' There was a young ruler, a chapter before
this, who could not make up his mind to part with wealth in order to
follow Christ. This man has so completely made up his mind to follow
Christ that he does not need to be bidden to give up his worldly
goods. The half given to the poor, and fourfold restoration to those
whom he had wronged, would not leave much. How astonished Zacchaeus
would have been if anybody had said to him that morning, 'Zacchaeus!
before this night falls you will be next door to a pauper, and you
will be a happier man than you are now!'

So, dear friends, like him, all of us may, if we will, and if we
need, make a sudden right-about-face that shall alter the complexion
of our whole future. People tell us that sudden conversions are
suspicious. So they may be in certain cases. But the moment when a
man makes up his mind to change the direction in which his face is
set will always be a moment, however long may be the hesitation, and
the meditation, and the preparation that led up to it.

Jesus Christ is standing before each of us as truly as He did before
that publican, and is saying to us as truly as He said to him, 'Let
Me in.' 'Behold! I stand at the door and knock. If any man open ...
I will enter.' If He comes in He will teach you what needs to be
turned out if He is to stop; and will make the sacrifice blessed and
not painful; and you will be a happier and a richer man with Christ
and nothing than with all beside and no Christ.




THE TRADING SERVANTS


    'Then came the first, saying, Lord, thy pound hath
    gained ten pounds.... And the second came, saying,
    Lord, thy pound hath gained five pounds.'
    --LUKE xix.16, 18.

The Evangelist, contrary to his usual practice, tells us what was
the occasion of this parable. It was spoken at Jericho, on our
Lord's last journey to Jerusalem, Bethany was but a day's march
distant; Calvary but a week ahead. An unusual tension of spirit
marked our Lord's demeanour, and was noticed by the disciples with
awe. It infected them, and the excitable crowd, which was more than
usually excitable because on its way to the passover festival. The
air was electric, and everybody felt that something was impending.
They 'thought that the kingdom of God should _immediately_
appear.' So Christ spoke this parable to damp down that expectation
which might easily flash up into the flame of rebellion. He tells
them His real programme. He was to go a long way off to receive
the kingdom. That was a familiar experience amongst the nations
tributary to Rome, and more than one of the Herodian family had
passed through it. In the meantime there was to be a period of
expectancy. It was to be a long time, for he had to go to a 'far
country,' and it was to be extended enough for the servants to turn
their money over many times during His absence. When He did return
it was not to do what they expected. They thought that the kingdom
meant Jewish lordship over subject nations. He teaches them that it
meant the destruction of the rebellious citizens, and a rigid
scrutiny of the servants' faithfulness.

Now, the words of my two texts bring out in connection with this
outline of the future some large lessons which I desire to draw.

I. Notice the small capital that the servants receive to trade with.

It was a pound apiece, which, numismatic authorities tell us, is
somewhat about the same value as some L6 odd of English money;
though, of course, the purchasing power would be considerably
greater. A small amount, and an equal amount to every servant--these
are the two salient points of this parable. They make the broad
distinction between it and the other parable, which is often mixed
up with it, the parable of the talents. There, instead of the amount
being excessively small, it is exceedingly great; for a talent was
worth some L400, and ten talents would be L4000, a fair capital for
a man to start with. The other point of difference between the two
parables, which belongs to the essence of each, is that while the
gift in the one case is identical, in the other case it is graduated
and different.

Now, to suppose that these are but two varying versions of the same
parable, which the Evangelists have manipulated is, in my judgment,
to be blind to the plainest of the lessons to be drawn from them.

There are two sorts of gifts. In one, all Christian men, the
Master's servants, are alike; in another, they differ. Now, what is
the thing in which all Christians are alike? What gift do they all
possess equally; rich and poor, largely endowed or slenderly
equipped; 'talented'--as we use the word from the parable--or not?
The rich man and the poor, the wise man and the foolish, the
cultured man and the ignorant, the Fijian and the Englishman, have
one thing alike--the message of salvation which we call the Gospel
of the blessed Lord. That is the 'pound.' We all stand upon an equal
platform there, however differently we are endowed in respect of
capacities and other matters. All have it; and all have the same.

Now if that is the interpretation of this parable, there are
considerations that flow from that thought, and on which I would
dwell for a moment.

The first of them is the apparent smallness of the gift. You may
feel a difficulty in accepting that explanation, and may have been
saying to yourselves that it cannot be correct, because Jesus Christ
would never compare the unspeakable gift of His message of salvation
through Him, to that paltry sum. But throw yourselves back to the
moment of utterance, and I think you will feel the pathos and power
of the metaphor. Here was that handful of disciples set in the midst
of a hostile world, dead against them, with its banded superstitions,
venerable idolatries, systematised philosophies, the force of the
mightiest instruments of material power that the world had ever seen,
in the organisation and military power of Rome. And there stood twelve
Galilean men, with their simple, unlettered message; one poor 'pound,'
and that was all. 'The foolishness of preaching,' the message which to
'the Jews was a stumbling-block, and to the Greeks was folly,' was all
that they were equipped with. Their Master, who left them to seek a
Kingdom, had so little to bestow, before He received His crown, that
all that He could spare them was that small sum. They had to go into
business in a very poor way. They had to be content to do a very
insignificant retail trade. 'The foolishness of God is wiser than men;
and the weakness of God is stronger than men.' The old experience of
the leather sling and the five stones out of the brook, in the hand of
the stripling, that made short work of the brazen armour of the giant,
and penetrated with a whizz into his thick skull, and laid him
prostrate, was to be repeated. 'He called his servants, and gave
them'--a pound apiece! If you and I, Christian men and women, were
true to the Master's legacy, and believed that we have in it more
wealth than the treasures of wisdom and knowledge or force which the
world has laid up, we should find that our mite was more than they all
have in their possession.

Further, the texts suggest the purpose for which the pound is given.
The servants had to live on it themselves, no doubt. So have we.
They had to trade with it. So have we. Now that means two things.
We get the Gospel, not as some of us lazily suppose, in order to
secure that we shall not be punished for our past sins whilst we
live, and go to heaven when we die. We get it, not only to enjoy its
consolations and its sweetness, but to do business with.

And there are two ways in which this trading is to be done by us.
The main one is the honest application of the principles and powers
of the Gospel to the moulding of our own characters, and the making
us better, purer, gentler, more heavenly-minded, and more
Christlike. That is the first trading that we have to carry on with
the Word. We get it not for an indolent assent, as so many of us
misuse it. We receive it not merely to say, 'Oh I believe it,' and
there an end, but that we may bring it to bear upon all our conduct,
and that it may be the chief formative influence in our characters.
Christian people! is that what you do with your Christianity? Is the
Gospel moulding you, hour by hour, moment by moment? Have you
brought all its great truths to bear upon your daily lives? Have
you inwrought its substance into, not merely your understandings
or your emotions, but your daily conduct? Is it indeed the life of
your lives, and the leaven that is leavening your whole character?
You have it to trade with; see that you do not wrap it in a napkin,
and stow it idly away in some corner.

Then there is the other way of trading and that is, telling it to
others. That is an obligation incumbent on all Christians. There may
be differences in regard to other gifts, which determine the manner
in which each shall use the equal gift which we all possess alike.
But these are of subordinate importance. The main thing is to feel
that the possession of Christian faith, which is our way of
receiving the pound, carries with it indissolubly the obligation of
Christian evangelism. However it may be discharged, discharged it is
to be, by every true servant. I am sometimes half disposed to think
that it would have been better for the Church if there had never
been any men in my position, on whom the mass of unspiritual, idle
because busy, and silent because little-loving, Christian professors
contentedly roll the whole obligation to preach God's Gospel. My
brethren, the world is not going to be evangelised by officials.
Until all Christian people wake up to the sense that they have the
'pound' to trade with, there will be nothing adequate done to bring
the world to the obedience and the love of Jesus Christ. You say you
have the Gospel; if you have it what are you doing with it?

Self-centred Christianity, if such a thing were possible, is a
mistake. It is generally a sham; it is always a crime. A man that
puts away his pound, and never goes out and says, 'Come, share with
me in the wealth that I have found in Jesus Christ' will be like a
miser that puts his hoardings into an old stocking, and hides it in
the ground somewhere. When he goes to dig it up, he is only too
likely to find that all the coins have slipped out. If you want to
keep your Christianity, let the air into it. If you want it to
increase, sow it. There are hosts of you who would be far happier
