
2. The critical revision and correction of the historic and patristic
texts;

3. The removal of spurious patristic texts;

4. The remodelling of the rubrics;

5. The institution of a new form of common office for confessors and for
virgins to facilitate the lessening of the number of feasts of saints,
without diminishing the honour due to them (Burton and Myers, _op.
cit._, p. 144).

We may sum up, then, all that has been said in this long section by
stating that from Apostolic times there was public prayer, thrice daily.
The Jewish converts, having the psalms committed to memory needed not,
nor could they have in those bookless days, a psalter script. In the
third century, morning, evening, and night offices are mentioned.
Compline was in existence in the time of St. Benedict. "From the seventh
century onwards, ecclesiastical writers, papal decrees and conciliar
decrees recognise the eight parts of the office, which we have seen took
shape during the sixth century, and regard their recitation by priests
and monks as enjoined by positive law. During this period, or at least
at its commencement, Lauds and Vespers alone had a clearly defined
structure and followed a definite arrangement. As far as we can see, St.
Gregory arranged the little hours for Sunday only, and their arrangement
for week days was left to the care of the bishops and metropolitans, or
even of abbots. This was also the case, in many instances, with regard
to Matins, for the number of psalms to be recited thereat was not
definitely fixed. As regards the little hours--Prime, Terce, Sext, None
and Compline--the freedom of the competent ecclesiastical authorities
was as yet unconfined by canonical restrictions. Chrodegang (766) was
first to follow the usages of the Benedictines of the Roman Basilica,
in prescribing for secular clergy the celebration at Prime of the
_officium Capituli_ (_i.e._, the reunion in the chapter for
reading the rule or, on certain days, the writings and homilies of the
Fathers). The rest of the chapter--_i.e._, all that follows the
_confiteor_ in Prime as a preparation for the work of the day,
seems to have been composed in the ninth century.... Under Charlemagne
and his successors variations in the canonical hours completely
disappeared" (Baudot, _op. cit._, pp. 63-65).

On this foundation was built up the Office, to which additions were
made, and of which reforms were effected, up to our own time.

"For us, traditional liturgy is represented by the Roman Breviary of
Urban VIII., a book which constitutes for us a Vulgate of the Roman
Office.... The thing which renders this Vulgate of 1632 precious to us
is that, thanks to the wisdom of Paul IV., Pius V., and Clement VIII.,
the differences between it and the Breviary of the Roman Curia of the
thirteenth century are mere differences of detail: the substantial
identity of the two is beyond dispute. The Breviary of Urban VIII. is
the lineal descendant of the Breviary of Innocent III. And the latter in
its turn is the legitimate descendant of the Roman canonical Office, as
it was celebrated in the basilica of St. Peter at the end of the eighth
century, such as it had gradually come to be in the course of the
seventh and eighth centuries, a genuinely Roman combination of various
elements, some of them Roman and some not, but of which some, at all
events, go back to the very beginnings of the Catholic religion"
(Battifol, _op. cit._, p. 353).




CHAPTER III.


EXCELLENCE OF THE ROMAN BREVIARY--THE ESTEEM
  WHICH WE SHOULD HAVE FOR THE BOOK ITSELF.

The Roman Breviary is excellent, firstly, in itself; and, secondly, in
comparison with all other breviaries.

It is excellent in itself, in its antiquity, for in substance it goes
back to the first ages of Christianity. It is excellent, in its author,
for it has been constructed and imposed as an obligation by the supreme
pontiffs, the vicars of Jesus Christ, the supreme pastors of the whole
Church. It is excellent, in its perpetuity, for it has come down to us
through all the ages without fundamental change. It is excellent in its
universality, in its doctrine, in the efficacy of its prayer, the
official prayer of the Church. It is excellent in the matter of which it
is built up, being composed of Sacred Scripture, the words of the
Fathers and the lives of God's saints. It is excellent in its style and
in its form for the parts of each hour; the antiphons, psalms,
canticles, hymns, versicles, follow one another in splendid harmony.

The opinions and praises of the saints who dwelt on this matter of the
Breviary would fill a volume. Every priest has met with many such
eulogies in his reading. Newman's words are very striking. "There is,"
he wrote, "so much of excellence and beauty in the services of the
Breviary, that were it skilfully set before the Protestants, by
Romanistic controversialists, as the book of devotions received by
their communion, it would undoubtedly raise a prejudice in their
favour, if he were ignorant of the case and but ordinarily candid and
unprejudiced.... In a word, it will be attempted to wrest a weapon out
of our adversaries' hands, who have in this, as in many other instances,
appropriated to themselves a treasure" (Newman, _Tracts for the
Times_, No. 275, _The Roman Breviary_). This tract raised a
storm amongst Newman's fellow Protestants. All the old Protestant
objections against the Breviary and its recitation (See Bellarmine,
_Controv_. iii., _de bonis operibus de oratione_ i., i. clx.)
were re-published in a revised and embittered form. What a change has
come amongst non-Catholics! Hundreds of Anglican clergymen are reading
daily with attention and devotion the once hated and despised prayer
book, the Roman Breviary. How old Bellarmine would wonder if he saw
modern England with its hundreds of parsons reading their _Hours_!
How he would wonder to read "The Band of Hope" (1915), an address
delivered by an Anglican clergyman to a society of London clergymen.
It includes a rule of life beginning, "Every day we say our Mass and
our Office." (_Cf_. R. Knox's _Spiritual Aeneid_, p. 102.)

The Roman Breviary is excellent, too, in comparison with every other
breviary (e.g., Aberdeen, Sarum, Gallican). For none of these can show
the antiquity, the authority, the doctrine, the sublime matter, the
beautiful order, which the Roman Breviary presents. It was for these
reasons that the emperors, Pepin (714-768), Charlemagne (742-814),
Charles the Bald (823-888), adapted the Roman rite (Gueranger,
_Institutiones Liturgiques_, tom. i.). And Grandicolas (1772), an
erudite liturgist, but a prominent Gallican with no love for Roman
rites, declared that the Roman Breviary stands in relation to other
breviaries as the Roman Church stands in relation to all other Christian
bodies, first and superior in every way (_Com. Hist. in Brev. Rom._,
cap. 2). St. Francis De Sales applied to his Breviary the words of St.
Augustine on the Psalter, "_Psalterium meum, gaudium meum._"




CHAPTER IV.


THE CONTENTS OF THE BREVIARY.


SECTION I.

The title of the Breviary is, BREVIARIUM ROMANUM EX DECRETO SACROSANCTI
CONCILII TRIDENTINI RESTITUTUM S. PII V. PONTIFICIS MAXIMI JUSSU EDITUM,
ALIORUMQUE PONTIFICIUM, CURA RECOGNITUM PII PAPAE X., AUCTORITATE
REFORMATUM. This work is divided into four parts, the first part being
called _Pars Hiemalis_, the winter part; the second part, _Pars
Verna_, the spring part; the third part, _Pars Aestiva_, the
summer part; and the fourth part, the _Pars Autumnalis_, the autumn
part.

The Church, guided by the Holy Ghost, has drawn up these volumes of
liturgical prayer, so that for each season, even for each day, her
official prayer may be suited to the time, to different degrees of
solemnity and of rite, and so that it may be fixed and determined, yet
having great beauty in its wonderful unity and variety. Hence, nothing
in her official prayer is left to chance, nothing is left to the
selection or caprice of the individual who recites this prayer; all is
foreseen, everything is in order, every tittle has a reason for its
existence and its place in the liturgy, and represents the end and the
intentions of the Church. For, every part of the Roman Breviary is
stamped with the wisdom, the zeal and the piety of the Church, which
presents it, as an offering all suitable for and worthy of God's honour
and glory.

Considering, then, the Breviary as a liturgical book, we find that the
Divine Office has four general divisions, corresponding to the divisions
of our Lord's life. First, from Advent to Septuagesima; second, from
Septuagesima to Easter; third, from Easter to Pentecost; fourth, from
Pentecost to Advent. These divisions correspond also to the divisions of
the year, winter, spring, summer and autumn.

The end and object of the Office are to invite us to join in the
infinite praise which the Son of God rendered to His Father during His
life, and which He renders still in Heaven and in the Tabernacle.
"_Domine in unione illius divinae intentionis qua ipse in terris laudes
Deo persolvisti, has tibi Horas persolvo,_" "O Lord, in union with that
divine intention wherewith Thou whilst here on earth Thyself didst
praise God, I offer these Hours to Thee." The life of Christ is divided
into four principal divisions: first, His birth, circumcision, epiphany,
presentation; second, His public life and His death; third, His
resurrection, ascension, and descent of the Holy Ghost; fourth, His
mystic life in the Church and in Heaven. Hence arise the four general
divisions of the Divine Office:--

_First General Division which begins the Church's year_. From Advent
to Septuagesima:--The birth of the Saviour preceded by His life in Mary's
womb, and by the four weeks of Advent, representing (it is said) the
passing of the four thousand years, and embracing the mysteries of the
Holy Infancy, Circumcision, Epiphany, Holy Name of Jesus, and the
Presentation.

_Second General Division, from Septuagesima till Easter_:--The death
of Christ preceded by the events of His public life, His fasting,
temptation, preaching, miracles, passion and death.

_Third General Division, from Easter to Pentecost_:--The
Resurrection, the Ascension, Pentecost.

_Fourth General Division, from Pentecost till Advent_, the
termination of the Church's year. The mystic life of Christ in the
Church, which will end on the Judgment Day.

These divisions make up the four parts of the Roman Breviary.

The first part, _Pars Prima_, contains the Pontifical Bull,
_Quod a nobis_, of Pope Pius V. (1568). It states:--1. That the
cause of the new edition was to remove the regrettable variety in the
public liturgy. 2. It recalls the labours of Pope Paul IV., Pius IV.,
and Pius V. for the same end. 3. It announces the abolition of the
too-abbreviated Breviary of Quignonez and of all those which have not,
for two hundred years preceding 1568, an authentic approbation or a
lawful custom. 4. It gives permission to those using such breviaries
to adopt the Roman Breviary. 5. It withdraws all privileges in respect
to other breviaries. 6. It declares the Roman Breviary obligatory on all
except those mentioned (_vide 3, supra_). 7. Even bishops are
forbidden to make the smallest change in the new Breviary. 8. The
recitation of offices from other breviaries does not fulfil the
obligation of those bound to breviary recitation. 9. Bishops are
requested to introduce the new Breviary. 10. The Pope suppressed the
obligation of reciting on certain days the little Office of the Blessed
Virgin, the Office of the Dead, the Penitential and the Gradual Psalms,
11. But he recommends their recitation on certain fixed days and grants
an indulgence for the practice. 12. Where the custom of reciting the
little Office, in choir, exists, it should be retained. 13. The
appointment of the time for the adoption of the Breviary is obligatory.
14. Prohibition, under pain of excommunication, is made against those
who print, distribute or receive copies of this Breviary without lawful
authority. 15. The authentic publication and obligation of the Bull.

The second document in the _Pars Prima_ of the Roman Breviary is
the Bull _Divino Afflatu_, issued by Pope Pius X, on 1st November,
1911. It tells us:--

1. That the psalms were composed under divine inspiration, and that it
is well known that from the beginning of the Church they were used not
only to foster the piety of the faithful, who offered "the sacrifice of
praise to God, that is to say, the fruit of lips confessing to His name"
(Heb. xiii. 15), but--that retaining the custom of the Old Law--they
held a conspicuous place in both the liturgy and Divine Office of the
New Law. He quotes St. Basil, who calls psalmody the voice of the infant
Church, and Urban VIII., who calls psalmody the daughter of hymnody
which is chanted before the throne of God in Heaven. Two quotations from
St. Athanasius and St. Augustine, in praise of psalmody, are added.

2. In the Psalms there is a certain wonderful power which arouses in
souls a zeal for all virtues. Two quotations from St. Augustine are
added. One says that as it is written that all Scriptures both of the
Old and the New Testaments are divinely inspired and useful for our
instruction.... Nevertheless, the book of the Psalms is, as it were, a
very Paradise containing in itself the fruits of all the other books and
expressing them in hymns; and moreover it joins its own hymns to them
and merges them in the general song of praise. Two further quotations
from St. Augustine, in similar strain, follow. For who will be, asks the
saint, unmoved by those frequent passages in the Psalms in which are
proclaimed the immensity, the omnipotence, the infallible justice, the
goodness, the clemency of God? Or who is not moved by the prayers and
thanksgivings for benefits received by the humble and trustful
petitions, by the cries of souls sorrowing for sin, found in the Psalms?
Whom will the Psalmist not fill with admiration when he recounts the
gifts of the Divine loving kindness towards the people of Israel and all
mankind, and when he sets forth the truths of heavenly wisdom? Who,
finally, will not be inflamed with love by the carefully foreshadowed
figure of Christ, our Redeemer, whose voice St. Augustine heard in the
Psalms, either singing or sighing or rejoicing in Hope or mourning in
present sorrow?

3. In, former ages it was decreed by Popes and Councils and by monastic
laws that the whole Psaltery should be recited weekly. Pope St. Pius
V., Pope Clement VIII., and Pope Urban VIII. in their revisions of the
Breviary ordered this weekly recitation. And even at the present time,
such would be the recitation of the Psalter had not the condition of
things changed.

4. This arose from the multiplication of saints' offices (_officia de
sanctis_), which after the canonization of saints gradually grew to
such a huge number that very often the Dominical and Ferial Office
remained unread, and hence not a few psalms were neglected, which yet
are as the rest, as St. Ambrose says, "the benediction of the people,
the praise of God, the praise offering of the multitude, the acclamation
of all, the expression of the community, the voice of the Church, the
resounding confession of faith, the truly official devotion, the joy of
liberty, the shout of gladness, the re-echoing of joy."

Many complaints from prudent and pious men reached the Pope about the
omission of psalms, which took away from those bound to recite the
Office not only helps, well suited for God's praises and for the
expression of their inmost souls, but also diminished that desirable
variety in prayers which is so appreciated and which so well accords
with and aids our worthy, attentive, and devout praise of God. For St.
Basil says that "in smooth uniformity the soul often grows weary and
while present is yet away, but when in psalmody and chant are changed
and varied in every hour, the fervour is renewed and its attention is
restored."

5. This matter of the reform of the order of the psalter was brought
before the Holy See by many bishops and chiefly in the Vatican Council,
where the demand for the old custom of reciting the whole psalter
weekly was renewed, with the provision that any new arrangement should
not impose a greater onus on the clergy, now labouring more arduously in
the vineyard of the sacred ministry on account of the diminution of
toilers. These requests and wishes were repeated to Pope Pius X., and he
took up the matter cautiously, so that the honour due to the cult of the
saints should not be diminished, nor the onus on the clergy increased by
the weekly recitation of the full Psalter. Begging the help of God, the
pontiff formed a commission of learned and industrious men, who with
judgment and care carried out his wishes. The results of their labours
were submitted to the Sacred Congregation of Rites, and after careful
consideration by the members of the Congregation the matter was
submitted to the Pope, who sanctioned the new arrangement, that is, as
regards the order and the division of the Psalms, Antiphons, Versicles
and Hymns, with the rubrics and rules pertaining to the same. And the
Pope ordered an authentic edition of these new arrangements to be
prepared and issued from the Vatican Press.

6. The arrangement of the Psalter has an intimate connection with the
Divine Office and the Liturgy; and by these new decrees regarding the
Office and the Psalms a first step in the improvement of the Breviary
and the Missal has been taken. These matters will be dealt with by a
commission of learned men which is soon to be formed. Amongst other
things that this first step established was that the recitation of the
Scripture lessons with the proper responses according to the rubrics
should receive due honour and more frequent recitation, and that in the
Liturgy the most ancient Masses of the Sundays throughout the year,
especially those of Lent, should be restored to their places.

7. The use of the old order of Psalms found in the Roman Breviary is
abolished and interdicted from 1st January, 1913, and the use of the new
Psalter for all clergy, secular and regular, who used the Roman Breviary
as revised by Pius V., Clement VIII., Urban VIII., and Leo XIII., and
those who continue to use the old order do not satisfy their obligation.

8. Ecclesiastical superiors are to introduce the new order of the
Psalter, and chapters are permitted to use it if the majority of the
members agree to its introduction.

9. Establishment and declaration of the validity and efficacy of the
Bull, notwithstanding all previous apostolic constitutions and rulings,
whether general or particular. Any person infringing these papal
abolitions, revocations, etc., sins and merits God's anger.

10. Date and place of promulgation.




SECTION II.


THE YEAR AND ITS PARTS.

The Council of Trent, Sess. XXIII., c. 18, orders "_ut in disciplina
ecclesiastica clerici commodius instituantur grammaticas, cantus,
computi ecclesiastici, aliarumque bonarum artium disciplinam
discant_." The minute study of the ecclesiastical calendar is not
now so necessary for each priest, as it was centuries ago. The _Ordo
Divini Officii recitandi_, issued yearly, and prepared with great
accuracy, relieves priests of much labour and secures them from many
doubts. And the decision of the Congregation of Rites (13th January,
1899) regarding the authority of the _ordo_ gives greater security.
"_Qui probabilius judicat errare Calendarium tenetur eidem Calend.
stare, nec potest proprio inhaerere judicio quoad officium, Missam vel
colorem Paramentorum._" Of course this decision does not apply to
errors which are _openly_ and _plainly_ at variance with the
rubrics of the Missal and Breviary. However, it may be well to revise
and to recall the student days' lessons on the Church's Calendar. The
study is not an easy one, and in labouring to be brief, probably, I may
be obscure and incomplete.

"_Annus menses habet duodecim..._" says the Breviary. The year has
twelve months, fifty-two weeks plus one day, or 365 days and almost six
hours. But these six hours make up a day every four years, and this
fourth year is called bisextile.

In making calculations the six hours were taken as six complete hours,
and not six hours wanting some minutes. And the aggregate miscalculation
continued until the minutes added yearly, amounted to ten days and
changed the date of the spring equinox. Pope Gregory XIII. (1572-1585)
sought to remedy the error. He re-established the spring equinox to the
place fixed by the Council of Nice (787). The year had fallen ten days
in arrear from the holding of the Council until the year of the
Gregorian correction, 1582. He again fixed it to the day arranged by the
Council, the 14th of the Paschal moon. And he arranged, that such a
time-derangement should not occur again. He omitted ten full days in
October, 1582, so that the fourth day of the month was followed
immediately by the fifteenth. He determined that the secular year must
begin on 1st January, that three leap years should be omitted in every
four centuries, e.g., 1700, 1800, 1900, 2100, and his arrangement has
been observed throughout nearly the whole world.

_Quarter Tenses_ fall on the Wednesdays, Fridays, and Saturdays after
the third Sunday of Advent, after the first Sunday of Lent; after
Pentecost Sunday, and after the feast of the exaltation of the Cross.

_The Nineteen Years' Course of the Golden Number_. This course or
cycle was invented by an Athenian astronomer about 433 B.C. It was not
exact, but was hailed with delight by the Greeks, who adorned their
temples with the key number, done in gold figures; hence the name. The
cycle of course is the revolution of nineteen years, from 1 to 19. When
this revolution or course of years is run there is a new beginning in
marking, No. 1, e.g., in the year 1577 the nineteenth number, the golden
number, was 1; the following year it was 2, and so on until in 1597 the
golden number again is 2. A table given in the Breviary shows how the
golden number may be found and a short rule for the finding of it in any
year is given. To the number of the year (e.g., 1833) add 1; then divide
the sum thus resulting by 19 and the remainder is the golden number; if
there be no remainder the golden number is 19.




EPACTS AND NEW MOONS.

The Epact (Greek [Greek: epaktos] from [Greek: eapgo] I add) is nothing
more than the number of days by which the common solar year of 365 days
exceeds the common lunar year of 354 days. So that the epact of the
first year is 11, because the common solar year exceeds the common lunar
year by 11 days, and these added to the 11 days of the first, produce 22
as the epact. At the end of the second year the new moon falls 22 days
sooner than in the first year. The epact of the third year is three,
because if 11 be added to the 22, the result is 33, and from this 33 we
subtract 30 days which make up a lunar embolism and the remainder gives
