ambitiously, to see our Lord, and had his wish.

That is the question which every one must try to answer for himself in 
fear and trembling, for, he that hath this hope in Him purifieth himself, 
even as He is pure.  The common sense of men--which is often their 
conscience and highest reason--has taught them this, more or less 
clearly, in all countries and all ages.  There are very few religions 
which have not made purifying of some kind a part of their duty.  The 
very savage, when he enters (as he fancies) the presence of his god, will 
wash and adorn himself that he may be fit, poor creature, for meeting the 
paltry god which he has invented out of his own brain; and he is right as 
far as he goes.  The Englishman, when he dresses himself in his best to 
go to church, obeys the same reasonable instinct.  And, indeed, is not 
holy baptism a sign that this instinct is a true one?--that if God be 
pure, he who enters the presence of God must purify himself, even as God 
is pure?  Else why, when each person, whether infant or adult, is 
received into Christ's Church, is washing with water, whether by 
sprinkling, as now, or, as of old, by immersion, the very sign and 
sacrament of his being received into God's kingdom?  The instinct, I say, 
is reasonable, and has its root in the very heart of man.  Whatsoever we 
respect and admire we shall also try to copy, if it be only for a time.  
If we are going into the presence of a wiser man than ourselves, we shall 
surely recollect and summon up what little wisdom or knowledge we may 
have; if into the presence of a holier person, we shall try to call up in 
ourselves those better and more serious thoughts which we so often 
forget, that we may be, even for a few minutes, fit for that good 
company.  And if we go into the presence of a purer person than 
ourselves, we shall surely (unless we be base and brutal) call up our 
purest and noblest thoughts, and try to purify ourselves, even as they 
are pure.  It is true what poets have said again and again, that there 
are women whose mere presence, whose mere look, drives all bad thoughts 
away--women before whom men dare no more speak, or act, nay, even think, 
basely, than they would dare before the angels of God.

But if it be so--and so it is--what must we be, to be fit to appear 
before Him who is Purity itself?--before that spotless Christ in whom is 
no sin and who knows what is in man; who is quick and piercing as a two-
edged sword, even to the dividing asunder of the joints and marrow, so 
that all things are naked and open in the sight of Him with whom we have 
to do?  What purity can we bring into His presence which will not seem 
impure to Him?  What wisdom which will not seem folly?  What humility 
which will not seem self-conceit?  What justice which will not seem 
unjust?  What love which will not seem hardness of heart, in the sight of 
Him who charges His angels with folly, and the very heavens are not clean 
in His sight?  Who loved Him better, and whom did He love better, than St 
John?  Yet, what befel St John when, in the spirit, he saw Him even 
somewhat as He is?--"And I fell at His feet as dead."  If St John himself 
was struck down with awe, what shall we feel, even the best and purest 
among us?  All we can do is to cast ourselves, now and for ever, in life, 
in death, and in the day of judgment, on His boundless mercy and love--
who stooped from heaven to die for us and cry, God be merciful to me a 
sinner.

Therefore, I have many fears for some who are ready enough to talk of 
their fulness of hope and their assurance of salvation, and to join in 
hymns which express weariness of this life and longings for the joys of 
heaven, and prayers that they may depart and be with Christ.  If they are 
not in earnest in such words they mock God; but if they are in earnest, 
some of them, I fear much, tempt God.  What if He took them at their 
word?  What if He gave them their wish?  What if they departed and 
entered the presence of Christ, only to meet with a worse fate than that 
of Gerontius?  Only to be overwhelmed with shame and terror, because, 
though they have been talking of being with Christ, they have not been 
trying to be like Christ; because they have not sought after holiness, 
without which no man shall see the Lord; because they have not tried to 
purify themselves, even as He is pure; and have, poor, heedless souls, 
gone out of the world, with all their sins upon their head, to enter a 
place for which they will find themselves utterly unfit, because it is a 
place into which nothing can enter which defileth, or committeth 
abomination, or maketh a lie, and from which the covetous are specially 
excluded; and in which will be fulfilled the parable of the man who came 
to the feast, not having on a wedding garment,--Take him, bind him hand 
and foot, and cast him into the outer darkness.  There shall be wailing 
and gnashing of teeth.

Assurance, my friends, may be reasonable enough when it is founded on 
repentance and hatred of evil, and love and practice of what is good.  
But, again, assurance may be as unreasonable as it is offensive.  We 
blame a man who has too much assurance about earthly things.  Let us 
beware that we have not too much assurance about heavenly things.  For 
our assurance will surely be too great, unreasonable, built upon the 
sand, if it be built on mere self-conceit of our own orthodoxy, and our 
own privileges, or our own special connection with God.

Meanwhile it has been my comfort to meet with some--would God they were 
more numerous--who, instead of talking of their assurance of salvation, 
lived in a state of noble self-discontent and holy humility; who could 
see nothing but their own faults and failings; who, though they were 
holier than others, considered themselves as unholy; though they were 
doing more good than others, thought themselves useless; whose standard 
of duty was so lofty, that they could think of nothing, but how far they 
had failed in reaching it; who measured themselves, not by other men, but 
by Christ Himself; and, doing that, had nought to say, save, "God be 
merciful to me a sinner."  And for such people I have had full assurance, 
just because they had no assurance themselves.  And I have said in my 
heart, These are worthy, just because they think themselves unworthy.  
These are fit to appear in the presence of God, just because they believe 
themselves unfit.  These are they who will cry at the day of judgment, in 
wondering humility,--Lord, when saw we Thee hungry, or thirsty, or naked, 
or in prison, and visited Thee?  And will receive for answer,--"Inasmuch 
as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have 
done it unto Me."  "Thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will 
make thee ruler over many things.  Enter into the joy of thy Lord."

To which end may God of His mercy bring us, and all we love.  Amen.



SERMON IV.  THE LORD COMING TO HIS TEMPLE



Westminster Abbey.  November, 1874.

Malachi iii. 1, 2.  "The Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to His 
temple. . . .  But who may abide the day of His coming? and who shall 
stand when He appeareth? for He is like a refiner's fire, and like 
fuller's sope."

We believe that this prophecy was fulfilled at the first coming of our 
Lord Jesus Christ.  We believe that it will be fulfilled again, in that 
great day when He shall judge the quick and the dead.  But it is of 
neither of these events I wish to speak to you just now.  I wish to speak 
of an event which has not (as far as we know) happened; which will 
probably never happen; but which is still perfectly possible; and one, 
too, which it is good for us to face now and then, and ask ourselves, If 
this thing came to pass, what should I think, and what should I do?

I shall touch the question with all reverence and caution.  I shall try 
to tread lightly, as one who is indeed on hallowed ground.  For the 
question which I have dared to ask you and myself is none other than 
this--If the Lord suddenly came to this temple, or any other in this 
land; if He appeared among us, as He did in Judea eighteen hundred years 
ago, what should we think of Him?  Should we recognise, or should we 
reject, our Saviour and our Lord?  It is an awful thought, the more we 
look at it.  But for that very reason it may be the more fit to be asked, 
once and for all.

Now, to put this question safely and honestly, we must keep within those 
words which I just said--as He appeared in Judea eighteen hundred years 
ago.  We must limit our fancy to the historic Christ, to the sayings, 
doings, character which are handed down to us in the four Gospels; and 
ask ourselves nothing but--What should I think if such a personage were 
to meet me now?  To imagine Him--as has been too often done--as doing 
deeds, speaking words, and even worse, entertaining motives, which are 
not written in the four Gospels, is as unfair morally, as it is illogical 
critically.  It creates a phantom, a fictitious character, and calls that 
Christ.  It makes each writer, each thinker--or rather dreamer--however 
shallow his heart and stupid his brain--and all our hearts are but too 
shallow, and all our brains too stupid--the measure of a personage so 
vast and so unique, that all Christendom for eighteen hundred years has 
seen in Him, and we of course hold seen truly, the Incarnate God.  No; we 
must think of nothing save what is set down in Holy Writ.

And yet, alas! we cannot use in our days, that which eighteen hundred 
years ago was the most simple and obvious test of our Lord's 
truthfulness, namely His miraculous powers.  The folly and sin of man 
have robbed us of what is, as it were, one of the natural rights of 
reasoning, man.  Lying prodigies and juggleries, forged and pretended 
miracles, even--oh, shame!--imitations of His most sacred wounds, have, 
up to our own time, made all rational men more and more afraid of aught 
which seems to savour of the miraculous; till most of us, I think, would 
have to ask forgiveness--as I myself should have to ask,--if, tantalized 
and insulted again and again by counterfeit miracles, we failed to 
recognise real miracles, and Him who performed them.  Therefore, for good 
or evil, we should be driven back upon that test alone, which, after all, 
perhaps, is the most sure as well as the most convincing--the moral test-
-the test of character.  What manner of personage would He be did He 
condescend to appear among us?  Of that, thank God, the Gospels ought to 
leave us in no doubt.  What acts He might condescend to perform, what 
words He might condescend to speak, it is not for such beings as we to 
guess.  But how He would demean Himself we know; for Holy Writ has told 
us how He demeaned Himself in Judea eighteen hundred years ago; and He is 
the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever, and can be only like Himself.  
But should we know Him merely by His bearing and character?  Should we 
see in Him an utterly ideal personage--The Son of Man, and therefore, ere 
we lost sight of Him once more, the Son of God?  Let us think.  First, 
therefore, we must believe that--as in Judea of old--Christ would meet 
men with all consideration and courtesy.  He would not break the bruised 
reed, nor quench the smoking flax.  He would not strive, nor cry, nor let 
His voice be heard in the streets.  He would not cause any of God's 
little ones to offend, to stumble.  In plain words, He would not shock 
and repel them by any conduct of His.  Therefore, as in Judea of old, He 
would be careful of, even indulgent to, the usages of society, as long as 
they were innocent.  He would never outrage the code of manners, however 
imperfect, however conventional, which this or any other civilised nation 
may have agreed on, to express and keep up respect, self-restraint, 
delicacy, of man toward man, of man toward woman, of the young ward the 
old, of the living toward the dead.  No.

As I said just now, He would never cause, by any act or word of His, one 
of God's little ones to stumble and fall away.

I used just now that word MANNERS.  Let me beg your very serious 
attention to it.  I use it, remember, in its true, its ancient--that is, 
in its moral and spiritual sense.  I use it as the old Greeks, the old 
Romans, used their corresponding words; as our wise forefathers used it, 
when they said well, that "Manners maketh man;" that manners are at once 
the efficient cause of a man's success, and the proof of his deserving to 
succeed:  the outward and visible sign of whatsoever inward and spiritual 
grace, or disgrace, there may be in him.  I mean by the word what our 
Lord meant when He reproved the pushing and vulgar arrogance of the 
Scribes and Pharisees, and laid down the golden rule of all good manners, 
"Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister; and 
whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant."

Next, I beg you to remember that all, or almost all, good manners which 
we have among us--courtesies, refinements, self-restraint, and mutual 
respect--all which raises us, socially and morally, above our forefathers 
of fifteen hundred years ago--deep-hearted men, valiant and noble, but 
coarse, and arrogant, and quarrelsome--all that, or almost all, we owe to 
Christ, to the influence of His example, and to that Bible which 
testifies of Him.  Yes, the Bible has been for Christendom, in the 
cottage as much as in the palace, the school of manners; and the saying 
that he who becomes a true Christian becomes a true gentleman, is no 
rhetorical boast, but a solid historic fact.

Now imagine Christ to reappear on earth, with that perfect outward beauty 
of character--with what Greeks and Romans, and our own ancestors, would 
have called those perfect manners--which, if we are to believe the 
Gospels, He shewed in Judea of old, which won then so many hearts, 
especially of the common people, sounder judges often of true nobility 
than many who fancy themselves their betters.  Conceive--but which of us 
can conceive?--His perfect tenderness, patience, sympathy, graciousness, 
and grace, combined with perfect strength, stateliness, even awfulness, 
when awe was needed.  Remember that, if, again, the Gospels are to be 
believed.  He alone, of all personages of whom history tells us, solved 
in His own words and deeds the most difficult paradox of human character-
-to be at once utterly conscious, and yet utterly unconscious, of self; 
to combine with perfect self-sacrifice a perfect self-assertion.  Whether 
or not His being able to do that proved Him to have been that which He 
was, the Son of God, it proves Him at least to have been the Son of Man--
the unique and unapproachable ideal of humanity, utterly inspired by the 
Holy Spirit of God.

But again:  He condescended, in His teaching of old, to the level of 
Jewish, knowledge at that time.  We may, therefore, believe that He would 
condescend to the level of our modern knowledge; and what would that 
involve?  It would leave Him, however less than Himself, at least master 
of all that the human race has thought or discovered in the last eighteen 
hundred years.  Think of that.  And think again, that if He condescended, 
as in Judea of old, to employ that knowledge in teaching men--He who knew 
what was in man, and needed not that any should bear witness to Him of 
man--He would manifest a knowledge of human nature to which that of a 
Shakspeare would be purblind and dull; a knowledge of which the Scripture 
nobly says that "The Word of God is quick and powerful, and sharper than 
any two-edged sword, even to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit, and 
of the joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents 
of the heart;" so that all "things are naked and opened unto the eyes of 
Him with whom we have to do."  And consider that, in the light of that 
knowledge, He might adapt himself as perfectly to us of this great city, 
as He did to the villagers of Galilee, or to the townsmen of Jerusalem.

Consider, again, that He who spoke as never man yet spake in Jerusalem, 
might speak as man never yet spoke on English soil; that He who was 
listened to gladly once, because He spake with authority, and not as the 
scribes, at second hand, and by rule and precedent, might be listened to 
gladly here once more.  For He might speak here, not as we poor scribes 
can speak at best, but with an authority, originality, earnestness, as 
well as an eloquence, which might exercise a fascination, which would be, 
to all with whom He came in contact, what Malachi calls it, "a refiner's 
fire"--most purifying, though often most painful to the very best; a 
fascination which might be to every one who came under its spell a 
veritable Judgment and Day of the Lord, shewing each man with fearful 
clearness to which side he really inclined at heart in the struggle 
between truth and falsehood, good and evil; a fascination, therefore, 
equally attractive to those who wished to do right, and intolerable to 
those who wished to do wrong.

Consider that last thought.  And consider, too, that those to whom the 
fascination of such a personage might be so intolerable, that it might 
turn to utter hate, would probably be those whose moral sense was so 
perverted, that they thought they were doing right when they were doing 
wrong, and speaking truth when they were telling lies.  It is an awful 
thought.  But we know that there were such men, and too many, among the 
scribes and Pharisees of Jerusalem.  And human nature is the same in 
every age.  Be that as it may--however retired His life, He could not 
long be hid.  He would shortly exercise, almost without attempting it, an 
enormous public influence.

But yet, as in Judea of old, would He not be only too successful?  Would 
He not be at once too liberal for some, and too exacting for others?  
Would He not, as in Judea of old, encounter not merely the active envy of 
the vain and the ambitious, which would follow one who spoke as never man 
spoke; not merely the active malignity of those who wish their fellow-
creatures to be bad and not good; not merely the bigotry of every sect 
and party; but that mere restless love of new excitements, and that dull 
fear and suspicion of new truths, and even of old truths in new words, 
which beset the uneducated of every rank and class, and in no age more 
than in our own?  And therefore I must ask, in sober sadness, how long 
would His influence last?  It lasted, we know, in Judea of old, for some 
three years.  And then--.  But I am not going to say that any such 
tragedy is possible now.  It would be an insult to Him; an insult to the 
gracious influences of His Spirit, the gracious teaching of His Church, 
to say that of our generation, however unworthy we may be of our high 
calling in Christ.  And yet, if He had appeared in any country of 
Christendom only four hundred years ago, might He not have endured an 
even more dreadful death than that of the cross?

But doubtless, no personal harm would happen to Him here.  Only there 
might come a day, in which, as in Judea of old, "after He had said these 
things, many were offended, and walked no more with Him:" when his 
hearers and admirers would grow fewer and more few, some through bigotry, 
some through envy, some through fickleness, some through cowardice, till 
He was left alone with a little knot of earnest disciples; who might 
diminish, alas, but too rapidly, when they found at He, as in Judea of 
old, did not intend to become the head of a new sect, and to gratify 
their ambition and vanity by making them His delegates.  And so the 
world, the religious world as well as the rest, might let Him go His way, 
and vanish from the eyes and minds of men, leaving behind little more 
than a regret that one so gifted and so fascinating should have proved--I 
hardly like to say the words, and yet they must be said--so unsafe and so 
unsound a teacher.

I shall not give now the reasons which have led me, and not in haste, to 
this melancholy conclusion.  I shall only say that I have come to it, 
with pain, and shame, and fear.  With shame and fear.  For when I ask you 
the solemn question, Would you know Christ if He came among you? do I not 
ask myself a question which I dare not answer?  How can I tell whether I 
should recognise, after all, my Saviour and my Lord?  How do I know that 
if He said (as He but too certainly might), something which clashed 
seriously with my preconceived notions of what He ought to say, I should 
not be offended, and walk no more with Him?  How do I know that if He 
said, as in Judea of old, "Will ye too go away?" I should answer with St 
Peter, "Lord, to whom shall we go?  Thou hast the words of eternal life, 
and we believe and are sure that thou art the Christ, the Son of the 
living God?"  I dare not ask that question of myself.  How then dare I 
ask it of you?  I know not.  I can only say, "Lord, I believe:  help thou 
mine unbelief."  I know not.  But this I know--that in this or any other 
world, if you or I did recognise Him, it would be with utter shame and 
terror, unless we had studied and had striven to copy either Himself, or 
whatsoever seems to us most like Him.  Yes; to study the good, the 
beautiful, and the true in Him, and wheresoever else we find it--for all 
that is good, beautiful, and true throughout the universe are nought but 
rays from Him, the central sun--to obey St. Paul of old, and "whatsoever 
things are true, venerable, just, pure, lovely, and of good report--if 
there be any virtue and if there be any praise, to think on these 
things,"--on these scattered fragmentary sacraments of Him whose number 
is not two, nor seven, "but seventy-times seven;" that is the way--I 
think, the only way--to be ready to recognise our Saviour, and to prepare 
to meet our God; that He may be to us, too, as a refiner's fire, and 
refine us--our thoughts, our deeds, our characters throughout.

And I think, too, that this is the way, perhaps the only way, to rid 
ourselves of the fancy that we can be accounted righteous before God for 
any works or deservings of our own.  Those in whom that fancy lingers 
must have but a paltry standard of what righteousness is, a mean 
conception of moral--that is, spiritual--perfection.  But those who look 
not inwards, but upwards; not at themselves, but at Christ and all 
spiritual perfection--they become more and more painfully aware of their 
own imperfections.  The beauty of Christ's character shows them the 
