bones) with great attention and care the fierce weapons called _Vajra_.
And having manufactured it, he joyfully addressed Indra, saying, "With
this foremost of weapons, O exalted one, reduce that fierce foe of the
gods to ashes. And having slain the foe, rule thou happily the entire
domain of heaven, O chief of the celestials, with those that follow
thee." And thus addressed by Twashtri, Purandara took the _Vajra_ from
his hand, joyfully and with proper respect.'"


SECTION CI

"Lomasa said, 'Armed with the _Vajra_ then, and supported by celestials
endued with great might, Indra then approached Vritra, who was then
occupying the entire earth and the heaven. And he was guarded on all
sides by huge-bodied Kalakeyas with upraised weapons resembling gigantic
mountains with towering peaks. And the encounter that took place between
the gods and the Danavas lasted for a short while and was, O chief of
the Bharatas, terrific in the extreme, appalling as it did the three
worlds. And loud was the clash of swords and scimitars upraised and
warded off by heroic hands in course of those fierce encounters. And
heads (severed from trunks) began to roll from the firmament to the
earth like fruits of the palmyra palm falling upon the ground, loosened
from their stalks. And the Kalakeyas armed with iron-mounted bludgeons
and cased in golden mail ran against the gods, like moving mountains on
conflagration. And the gods, unable to stand the shock of that impetuous
and proudly advancing host, broke and fled from fear. Purandara of a
thousand eyes, beholding the gods flying in fear and Vritra growing in
boldness, became deeply dejected. And the foremost of gods Purandara,
himself, agitated with the fear of the Kalakeyas, without losing a
moment, sought the exalted Narayana's refuge. And the eternal Vishnu
beholding Indra so depressed enhanced his might by imparting unto him a
portion of his own energy. And when the celestials beheld that Sakra was
thus protected by Vishnu, each of them imparted unto him his own energy.
And the spotless Brahmarshis also imparted their energies unto the chief
of the celestials. And favoured thus by Vishnu and all the gods and by
the high-blessed Rishis also, Sakra became mightier than before. And
when Vritra learnt that the chief of the celestials had been filled with
might of others, he sent forth some terrific roars. And at these roars
of his, the earth, the directions, the firmament, heaven, and the
mountains all began to tremble. And the chief of the celestials, deeply
agitated on hearing that fierce and loud roar, was filled with fear, and
desiring to slay the Asura soon, hurled, O king, the mighty _Vajra_. And
struck with Indra's _Vajra_ the great Asura decked in gold and garlands
fell head-long, like the great mountain Mandara hurled of yore from
Vishnu's hands; and although the prince of Daityas was slain, yet Sakra
in panic ran from the field, desiring to take shelter in a lake,
thinking that the _Vajra_ itself had not been hurled from his hands and
regarding that Vritra himself was still alive. The celestials, however,
and the great Rishis became filled with joy, and all of them began to
cheerfully chant the praise of Indra. And mustering together, the
celestials began to slay the Danavas, who were dejected at the death of
their leader. And struck with panic at sight of the assembled celestial
host, the afflicted Danavas fled to the depths of the sea. And having
entered the fathomless deep, teeming with fishes and crocodiles, the
Danavas assembled together and began to proudly conspire for the
destruction of the three worlds. And some amongst them that were wise in
inferences suggested courses of action, each according to his judgment.
In course of time, however, the dreadful resolution arrived at those
conspiring sons of Diti, was that they should, first of all, compass the
destruction of all persons possessed of knowledge and ascetic virtue.
The worlds are all supported by asceticism. Therefore, they said, "Lose
no time for the destruction of asceticism. Compass ye without delay the
destruction of those on earth that are possessed of ascetic virtues,
that are conversant with duties and the ways of morality, and that have
a knowledge of _Brahma_; for when these are destroyed, the universe
itself will be destroyed." And all the Danavas, having arrived at this
resolution for the destruction of the universe, became highly glad. And
thenceforth they made the ocean--that abode of Varuna--with billows high
as hills, their fort, from which to make their sallies.'"


SECTION CII

"Lomasa said, 'The Kalakeyas then having recourse to that receptacle of
waters, which is the abode of Varuna, began their operations for the
destruction of the universe. And during the darkness of the night those
angry Daityas began to devour the Munis they found in woody retreats and
sacred spots. And those wicked wretches devoured in the asylum of
Vasishtha, Brahmanas to the number of a hundred and eighty, besides nine
other ascetics. And, proceeding to the asylum of Chyavana that was
inhabited by many _Brahmacharis_, they devoured a century of Brahmanas
that lived upon fruit and roots alone. And they began to do all this
during the darkness of the night, while they entered the depths of the
sea by day. And they slew a full score of Brahmanas of subdued souls and
leading a Brahmacharya mode of life and living upon air and water alone,
in the retreat of Bharadwaja. And it was thus that those Danavas the
Kalakeyas, intoxicated with prowess of arms and their lives nearly run
out, gradually invaded all the asylums of the Rishis during the darkness
of the night, slaughtering numerous Brahmanas. And, O best of men,
although the Danavas behaved in this way towards the ascetics in woody
retreats, yet men failed to discover anything of them. And every morning
people saw the dead bodies of Munis emaciated with frugal diet, lying on
the ground. And many of those bodies were without flesh and without
blood, without marrow, without entrails, and with limbs separated from
one another. And here and there lay on the ground heaps of bones like
masses of conch shells. And the earth was scattered over with the
(sacrificial) contents of broken jars and shattered ladles for pouring
libations of clarified butter and with the sacred fires kept with care
by the ascetics. And the universe afflicted with the terror of the
Kalakeyas, being destitute of Vedic studies and _vashats_ and
sacrificial festivals and religious rites, became entirely cheerless.
And, O king, when men began to perish in this way, the survivors,
afflicted with fear, fled for their lives in all directions. And some
fled to caverns and some behind mountain-streams and springs and some
through fear of death, died without much ado. And some who were brave
and mighty bowmen cheerfully went out and took great trouble in tracking
the Danavas. Unable, however, to find them out, for the Asuras had
sought refuge in the depths of the sea, these brave men came back to
their homes gratified with the search. And, O lord of men, when the
universe was being thus destroyed, and when sacrificial festivals and
religious rites had been suspended, the gods became deeply afflicted.
And gathering together with Indra in their midst they began, from fear,
to take counsel of one another. And repairing unto the exalted and
uncreate Narayana--that unvanquished god of Vaikuntha--the celestials
sought his protection. And bowing unto the slayer of Madhu, the gods
addressed him, saying, "O lord, thou art the creator, the protector, and
the slayer of ourselves as well as of the universe. It is thou who has
created this universe with its mobile and immobile creatures. O thou of
eyes like lotus leaves, it was thou who in days of yore hadst for the
benefit of all creatures raised from the sea the sunken earth, assuming
also the form of a boar. And, O best of male beings, assuming also the
form of half-man and half-lion, thou hadst slain in days of yore that
ancient Daitya of mighty prowess known by the name of Hiranyakasipu. And
that other great Asura also, Vali by name, was incapable of being slain
by any one. Assuming the form of a dwarf, thou exiledest him from the
three worlds. O lord, it was by thee that that wicked Asura, Jambha by
name, who was a mighty bowman and who always obstructed sacrifices, was
slain. Achievements like these, which cannot be counted, are thine. O
slayer of Madhu, we who have been afflicted with fear, have thee for our
refuge. It is for this, O god of gods, that we inform thee of our
present troubles. Protect the worlds, the gods, and Sakra also, from a
terrible fear."'"


SECTION CIII

"'The celestials said, "Through thy favour it is that all born beings of
the four kinds increase. And they being created, propitiate the dwellers
of heaven by offerings made to the gods and the names of departed
forefathers. Thus it is that people, protected by thee and free from
trouble live depending on one another, and (so) increase. Now this peril
hath befallen the people. We do not know by whom are Brahmanas being
killed during the night. If the Brahmanas are destroyed, the earth
itself will meet with destruction, and if the earth cometh to an end,
heaven also will cease to exist. O mighty-armed one, O lord of the
universe! we beseech thee (to act so) that all the worlds, protected by
thee, may not come to an end, so it may please thee."

"'Vishnu said, "Ye gods! To me is known the reason of the destruction of
the born beings, I shall speak of it to you; listen with minds free from
tribulation. There exists an exceedingly fierce host, known by the name
of Kalakeyas. They, under the lead of Vritra, were devastating the whole
universe. And when they saw that Vritra was slain by the sagacious Indra
endued with a thousand eyes, they, to preserve their lives, entered into
the ocean, that abode of Varuna. And having entered the ocean, abounding
with sharks and crocodiles, they at night killed the saints at this spot
with the view of exterminating the people. But they cannot be slain, as
they have taken shelter within the sea. Ye should, therefore, think of
some expedient to dry up the ocean. Who save Agastya is capable of
drying up the sea. And without drying up the ocean, these (demons)
cannot be assailed by any other means." Hearing these words of Vishnu,
the gods took the permission of Brahma, who lives at the best of all
regions, and went to the hermitage of Agastya. Then they beheld the
high-souled Agastya, the son of Varuna, of resplendent mien, and waited
upon by saints, even as Brahma is waited upon by celestials. And
approaching him, they addressed the son of Mitra and Varuna at the
hermitage, magnanimous and unswerving, and looking like an embodiment of
pious works piled together, and glorified him by reciting his deeds. The
deities said, "Thou wert formerly the refuge of the gods when they were
oppressed by Nahusha. Thorn of the world that he was, he was thrown down
from his throne of heaven--from the celestial regions. Vindhya, the
foremost of all mountains, suddenly began to increase his height, from a
wrathful competition with the sun (_i.e._, to rival him in altitude).
But he hath ceased to increase, as he was unable to disobey thy command.
And when darkness hath covered the world, the born beings were harassed
by death, but having obtained thee for a protector, they attained the
utmost security. Whenever we are beset by perils, thy reverence is
always our refuge; for this reason it is that we solicit a boon from
thee; as thou ever grantest the boon solicited (of thee)."'"


SECTION CIV

"Yudhishthira said, 'O great saint! I am desirous of hearing in detail
why it was that Vindhya, made senseless with wrath, suddenly began to
increase his bulk.'

"Lomasa said, 'The sun between his rising and setting used to revolve
round that monarch of mountains--the great Meru of golden lustre. And
seeing this the mountain Vindhya spake to Surya saying, "As thou every
day goest round Meru and honourest him by thy circumambulations, do thou
even the same by me, O maker of light!" Thus addressed, the sun replied
to the great mountain, saying, "I do not of my own will honour this
mountain by my circumambulations. By those who have built this universe
hath that path been assigned to me." Thus addressed the mountain
suddenly began to increase from wrath, desirous, O chastiser of foes, of
obstructing the path of the Sun and the Moon. And all the assembled gods
came to Vindhya, the mighty king of mountains, and tried to dissuade him
from his course. But he heeded not what they said. And then all the
assembled gods went to the saint, living in the hermitage, engaged in
the practice of austerities, and the very best of persons devoted to
virtue; and stated all that happened to Agastya, possessed of exceeding
marvellous power.

"'The gods said, "This king of hills, Vindhya, giving way to wrath, is
stopping the path of the Sun and the Moon, and also the course of the
stars. O foremost of Brahmanas! O thou great in gifts! excepting
thyself, there is none who can prevent him; therefore do thou make him
desist." Hearing these words of the gods the Brahmana came to the
mountain. And he with his wife, having arrived there, came near Vindhya
and spake to him, saying, "O thou best of mountains! I wish to have a
path given to me by thee, as, for some purpose, I shall have to go to
the southern region. Until my return, do thou wait for me. And when I
have returned, O king of mountains, thou mayst increase in bulk as much
as thou pleasest." And, O slayer of foes! having made this compact with
Vindhya up to the present day Varuna's son doth not return from the
southern region. Thus have I, asked by thee, narrated to thee why
Vindhya doth not increase in bulk, by reason of the power of Agastya.
Now, O king! hear how the Kalakeyas were killed by the gods, after they
had obtained their prayer from Agastya.

"'Having heard the words of the gods, Agastya, the son of Mitra, and
Varuna, said, "Wherefore are ye come? What boon do ye solicit from me?"
Thus addressed by him, the deities then spake to the saint, saying,
"This deed we ask thee to achieve, _viz_., to drink up the great ocean,
O magnanimous (saint)! Then we shall be able to slay those enemies of
the gods, known by the name of Kalakeyas, together with all their
adherents." Having heard the words of the gods, the saint said, "Let it
be so--I shall do even what ye desire, and that which will conduce to
the great happiness of men." Having said this, he then proceeded to the
ocean--the lord of rivers,--accompanied by sages, ripe in the practice
of penances, and also by the deities, O thou who leadest an excellent
life! And men and snakes, celestial choristers, Yakshas and Kinnaras
followed the magnanimous saints,--desirous of witnessing that wonderful
event. Then they came up all together near to the sea, of awful roar,
dancing, as it were, with its billows, bounding with the breeze, and
laughing with masses of froth, and stumbling at the caves, and thronged
with diverse kinds of sharks, and frequented by flocks of various birds.
And the deities accompanied by Agastya and celestial choristers and huge
snakes and highly-gifted saints, approached the immense watery waste.'"


SECTION CV

"Lomasa said, 'That blessed saint, the son of Varuna, having reached the
sea spake unto the assembled gods, and the saints gathered together,
saying "I surely am going to drink up the ocean--that abode of the god
of waters. Be ye quickly ready with those preparations which it devolves
upon you to make." Having spoken these few words, the unswerving
offspring of Mitra and Varuna, full of wrath, began to drink up the sea,
while all the worlds stood observing (the deed). Then the gods, together
with Indra, seeing how the sea was being drunk up, were struck with
mighty amazement, and glorified him with laudatory words, saying, "Thou
art our protector, and the Providence itself for men,--and also the
creator of the worlds. By thy favour the universe with its gods may
possibly be saved from havoc." And the magnanimous one, glorified by the
gods--while the musical instruments of celestial choristers were playing
all round, and while celestial blossoms were showered upon him--rendered
waterless the wide ocean. And seeing the wide ocean rendered devoid of
water, the host of gods was exceedingly glad; and taking up choice
weapons of celestial forge, fell to slaying the demons with courageous
hearts,--And they, assailed by the magnanimous gods, of great strength,
and swift of speed, and roaring loudly, were unable to withstand the
onset of their fleet and valorous (foes)--those residents of the
heavenly regions, O descendant of Bharata! And those demons, attacked by
the gods, bellowing loudly, for a moment carried on terrible conflict.
They had been in the first instance burnt by the force of penances
performed by the saints, who had matured their selves; therefore, the
demons, though they tried to the utmost, were at last slaughtered by the
gods. And decked with brooches of gold, and bearing on their persons
ear-rings and armlets, the demons, when slain, looked beautiful indeed,
like _palasa_ trees when full of blossoms. Then, O best of men! a
few--the remnant of those that were killed of the Kalakeya race, having
rent asunder the goddess Earth, took refuge at the bottom of the nether
regions. And the gods, when they saw that the demons were slain, with
diverse speeches, glorified the mighty saint, and spake the following
words. "O thou of mighty arms, by thy favour men have attained a mighty
blessing, and the Kalakeyas, of ruthless strength have been killed by
thy power, O creator of beings! Fill the sea (now), O mighty-armed one;
give up again the water drunk up by thee." Thus addressed, the blessed
and mighty saint replied, "That water in sooth hath been digested by me.
Some other expedient, therefore, must be thought of by you, if ye desire
to make endeavour to fill the ocean." Hearing this speech of that saint
of matured soul, the assembled gods were struck with both wonder and
sadness, O great king! And thereupon, having bidden adieu to each other,
and bowed to the mighty saint all the born beings went their way. And
the gods with Vishnu, came to Brahma. And having held consultation
again, with the view of filling up the sea, they, with joined hands,
spake about replenishing it.'"


SECTION CVI

"Lomasa said, 'Then gathered together, Brahma, the grandfather of men
(thus) addressed, "Go ye, O gods! whither your pleasure may lead you, or
your desire conduct you. It will take a long course of time for the
ocean to resume its wonted state; the occasion will be furnished by the
agnates of the great king Bhagiratha." Hearing the words of the
(universal) grandfather (Brahma), all the foremost gods went their way
biding the day (when the ocean was to be filled again).'

"Yudhishthira said, 'What was that occasion, O Saint? And how did the
agnates of (Bhagiratha furnish the same)? And how was the ocean refilled
by the interference of Bhagiratha? O Saint, who deemest thy religious
practices as thy only treasure, O thou of the priestly class! I wish to
hear the account of the achievements of the king, narrated in detail by
thyself.'"

Vaisampayana said, "Thus addressed by the magnanimous and virtuous king,
he, the chief of men of the priestly class, narrated the achievements of
the high-souled (king) Sagara.

"Lomasa said, 'There was born in the family of the Ikshaku tribe, a
ruler of the earth named Sagara, endued with beauty, and strength. And
that same (king) of a dreaded name was sonless, O descendant of Bharata!
And he carried havoc through the tribes of the Haihayas and the
Talajanghas; brought under subjection the whole of the military caste;
(and so) ruled over his own kingdom. And, O most praiseworthy of the
descendants of Bharata! O chief of the Bharata race! he had two wives
proud of their beauty and of their youth,--one a princess of the
Vidarbha race, and the other of the royal line of Sivi. And, O chief of
kings, that same ruler of men, betook himself to the mountain Kailasa,
accompanied by both his wives, and with the desire of having a son
became engaged in the practice of exceeding austere penances. And being
engaged in the practice of rigid austerities, and (also) employed in the
contemplation known by the name of Yoga, he obtained the sight of the
magnanimous god with three eyes--the slayer of the demon called Tripura;
the worker of blessings (for all beings); the (eternally) existent one;
the ruling Being, the holder of the Pinaka bow; carrying in his hand his
(well-known weapon)--the trident; the god of three eyes; the repository
of (eternal) peace; the ruler of all those that are fierce; capable of
assuming very many forms; and the lord of the goddess Uma. And that same
ruler of men, of mighty arms, as soon as he beheld the god--that giver
of boons--fell down at his feet, with both his queens, and proffered a
prayer to have a son. And the god Siva, well pleased with him, spake
(thus) to that most righteous of the rulers of men, attended by his two
wives, saying, "O lord of men! considering the (astrological) moment at
which thou hast proffered thy prayer to me, sixty thousand sons, O
foremost of choice men valorous and characterised by exceeding pride,
will be born in one of thy two wives (here). But they all, O ruler of
the earth, shall perish together. In the other wife, (however), will be
born a single valiant son, who will perpetuate thy race." Having said
this to him, the god Rudra (Siva) vanished from sight at that very spot,
and that same king Sagara now came (back) to his own abode accompanied
by his two wives, exceedingly delighted at heart (for what had happened)
then. And, O most praiseworthy of the sons of Manu! (i.e., men), there
the two lotus-eyed wives of him--the princess of Vidarbha and the
princess of Sivi--came (erelong) to be with child. And afterwards, on
the due day, the princess of Vidarbha brought forth (something) of the
shape of a gourd and the princess of Sivi gave birth to a boy as
beautiful as a god. Then the ruler of the earth made up his mind to
throw away the gourd,--when he heard (proceeding) from the sky a speech
(uttered) in a grave and solemn voice, "O king! do thou not be guilty of
this hasty act; thou shouldst not abandon thy sons. Take out the seeds
from the gourd and let them be preserved with care in steaming vessels
partly filled with clarified butter. Then thou wilt get, O scion of
Bharata's race! sixty thousand sons. O ruler of men! the great god
(Siva) hath spoken that thy sons are to be born in this manner. Let not
therefore thy mind be turned away therefrom."'"


SECTION CVII

"Lomasa said, 'O most righteous of kings! When he heard these words
(proceeding) from the sky, he had faith therein, and did all that he was
directed to do, O chief of the men of Bharata's race! Then the ruler of
men took separately each of the seeds and then placed these divisions
(of the gourd) in vessels filled with clarified butter. And intent on
the preservation of his sons, he provided a nurse for every
(receptacle). Then after a long time there arose sixty thousand
exceedingly powerful sons of that same king--gifted with unmeasured
strength, they were born, O ruler of earth! to that saint-like king, by
Rudra's favour. And they were terrible; and their acts were ruthless.
And they were able to ascend and roam about in the sky; and being
numerous themselves, despised everybody, including the gods. And they
would chase even the gods, the Gandharvas, and the Rakshasas and all the
born beings, being themselves valiant and addicted to fighting. Then all
people, harassed by the dull-headed sons of Sagara, united with all the
gods, went to Brahma as their refuge. And then addressed the blessed
grandfather of all beings (Brahma), "Go ye your way, ye gods, together
with all these men. In a not very long space of time, there will come
about, O gods! a great and exceedingly terrible destruction of Sagara's
sons, caused by the deed perpetrated by them." Thus addressed, those
same gods, and men, O lord of the sons of Manu! bade adieu to the
grandfather, and went back to whence they had come. Then, O chief of
Bharata's race! after the expiry of very many days, the mighty king
Sagara accepted the consecration for performing the rites of a
horse-sacrifice. And his horse began to roam over the world, protected
by his sons. And when the horse reached the sea, waterless and frightful
to behold--although the horse was guarded with very great care--it
(suddenly) vanished at the very spot (it stood upon). Then, O respected
sir! those same sons of Sagara imagined the same fine horse to have been
stolen; and returning to their father, narrated how it had been stolen
out of sight. And thereupon he addressed them, saying, "Go ye and search
for the horse in all the cardinal points." Then, O great king, by this
command of their father, they began to search for the horse in the
cardinal points and throughout the whole surface of the earth. But all
those sons of Sagara, all mutually united, could not find the horse, nor
the person who had stolen it. And coming back then, they with joined
palms thus addressed their father, (standing) before them, "O Protector
of men! O ruler of the earth! O king! by thy command, the whole of this
world with its hills and its forest tracts, with its seas, and its
woods, and its islands, with its rivulets and rivers and caves, hath
been searched through by us. But we cannot find either the horse, or the
thief who had stolen the same." And hearing the words, the same king
became senseless with wrath, and then told them all, carried away by
Destiny, "Go ye all, may ye never return! Search ye again for the horse.
Without that sacrificial horse, ye must never return, my boys!"

"'And those same sons of Sagara, accepted this command of their father,
and once more began to search through the entire world. Now these heroes
saw a rift on the surface of the earth. And having reached this pit, the
sons of Sagara began to excavate it. And with spades and pickaxes they
went on digging the sea, making the utmost efforts. And that same abode
of Varuna (namely the ocean), being thus excavated by the united sons
of Sagara and rent and cut on all sides round, was placed in a condition
of the utmost distress. And the demons and snakes and Rakshasas and
various (other) animated beings began to utter distressful cries, while
being killed by Sagara's sons. And hundreds and thousands of animated
beings were beheld with severed heads and separated trunks and with
their skins and bones and joints rent asunder and broken. Thus they went
on digging the ocean, which was the abode of Varuna and an exceedingly
long space of time expired in this work, but still the horse was not
found. Then, O lord of earth! towards the north-eastern region of the
sea, the incensed sons of Sagara dug down as far as the lower world, and
there they beheld the horse, roaming about on the surface of the ground.
And they saw the magnanimous Kapila, who looked like a perfect mass of
splendour. And having beheld him shining with his brightness, just as
the fire shineth with its flames, they, O king! seeing the horse, were
flushed with delight. And they being incensed, sent forward by their
fate, paid no heed to the presence of the magnanimous Kapila, and ran
forward with a view to seizing the horse. Then, O great king! Kapila,
the most righteous of saints,--he whom the great sages name as Kapila
Vasudeva--assumed a fiery look, and the mighty saint shot flames towards
them, and thereby burnt down the dull-headed sons of Sagara. And Narada,
whose practice of austerities was very great, when he beheld them
reduced to ashes, came to Sagara's side, and gave the information to
him. And when the king learnt this terrible news which proceeded from
the mouth of the saint, for nearly an hour he remained sad, and then he
bethought himself of what Siva had said. Then sending for Ansuman, the
son of Asamanjas, and his own grandson, he, O chief of Bharata's race!
spake the following words, "Those same sixty thousand sons of unmeasured
strength having encountered Kapila's wrath, have met their death on my
account. And, O my boy of stainless character! thy father also hath been
forsaken by me, in order to discharge my duty (as a king), and being
desirous of doing good to my subjects."'

"Yudhishthira said, 'O saint, whose sole wealth consists in religious
practices! Tell me for what reason, Sagara, the foremost of kings,
abandoned his own begotten son, endued with valour--an act so difficult
(for all other men).'

"Lomasa said, 'A son was born to Sagara, known by the name of Asamanjas,
he who was given birth to by the princess of Sivi. And he used to seize
by throat the feeble children of the townsmen, and threw them while
screaming into the river. And thereupon the townsmen, overwhelmed with
terror and grief, met together, and all standing with joined palms,
besought Sagara in the following way, "O great king! Thou art our
protector from the dreaded peril of attack from a hostile force.
Therefore it is proper for thee to deliver us from the frightful danger,
proceeding from Asamanjas." And the most righteous of the rulers of men,
having heard this frightful news from his subjects, for nearly an hour
remained sad and then spake to his ministers, saying, "This day from the
city let my son Asamanjas be driven forth. If ye wish to do what will be
acceptable to me, let this be quickly done." And, O protector of men!
those same ministers, thus addressed by the king, performed in a hurry
exactly what the king had commanded them to do. Thus have I narrated to
thee how the magnanimous Sagara banished his son, with a view to the
welfare of the residents of the town. I shall now fully narrate to thee
what Ansuman of the powerful bow was told by Sagara. Listen to me!
