
But she answered: "Call me not Naomi, but call me Mara, for the Almighty
hath dealt very bitterly with me." She said this because Naomi means
"pleasant" and Mara means "bitter," and the sorrowing widow felt that
her life was a bitter rather than a pleasant one, since she had been
bereaved of her husband and sons.

There lived in Bethlehem a man named Boaz, who was a relative of Naomi's
husband, and who was also very wealthy. He had a large farm and many
people, both men and women, worked in his fields, and as it was about
the beginning of the barley harvest when the two women came to
Bethlehem, these fields presented a busy appearance.

Ruth wished to do something to help support herself and her
mother-in-law, so she begged Naomi to let her go into the fields and
glean after the reapers--that is, to gather up the barley that was left
after they had made up the sheaves--and Naomi told her that she might
go.

[Illustration: THE PRODIGAL SON.]

Ruth happened to choose the field of Boaz to work in, and when the
wealthy man came into the field and saw her, he said, "The Lord bless
thee!" but he did not know who she was.

As he went away he inquired of the head reaper about the young woman,
and afterward he said to Ruth: "Go not to glean in another field, but
keep here close to my maidens." He also spoke to his young men about
her, telling them to be kind and courteous to her, and he bade her go
and drink of the water which they drew whenever she was thirsty.

When Ruth wondered at his kindness and asked him why he was so good to a
stranger, he told her that he had heard of her love for Naomi and her
unselfish devotion, and he said: "The Lord reward thee, and a full
recompense be given thee of the Lord God of Israel, under whose wings
thou art come to trust." He invited her also to sit with his reapers at
meal-time, and he waited upon her that she might have enough to eat and
drink.

When she had gone he commanded his young men to let her glean among the
sheaves and to drop some handfuls purposely for her, and not to find
fault with her or reprove her.

So Ruth worked in the field all day, and then beat out the barley which
she had gleaned and took it to the city to show Naomi, who was very
glad, indeed, and very thankful.

Naomi asked Ruth where she had gleaned, and when she had heard the whole
story, she told her that Boaz was a near relative and that it was well
for her to stay in his fields, as he had given her permission to do,
until the end of the harvest. So Ruth kept close to the maidens who
gleaned in the fields of Boaz until the end of both the barley and the
wheat harvests.

Then one night when Boaz was to have a winnowing of barley, Naomi told
Ruth to make herself ready, putting on her best clothing, and to go to
the winnowing and the feast and to ask Boaz what she should do.

The winnowing is the fanning out of the straws from the kernels after
the husks have been beaten off. A great many people helped about the
work, and a feast was prepared for them.

Ruth did as Naomi had told her to do. When she had informed Boaz that
she was a near relative he said, "Blessed be thou of the Lord, my
daughter." Then he told her not to be afraid, but to bring the long veil
which she wore, and when she had brought it he poured a large quantity
of barley into it. She carried this to the city and gave it to her
mother-in-law, telling her what Boaz had said, and Naomi was comforted;
for she knew that Boaz would advise them wisely.

After this Boaz went to the city and consulted with the chief men and
those that were interested in the welfare of Naomi and Ruth, and when he
found that it would be wronging no one, he told the people that he was
going to take Ruth for his wife, and the people said, "We are
witnesses." So Boaz married Ruth; but in her new position as the wife of
a very wealthy and influential man, this noble woman did not forget her
love for Naomi, whom she still tenderly cared for. When a little son
came to bless the union, Naomi rejoiced, for she felt almost as though
it was her own little son, and she named him Obed and delighted in
taking care of him.

When Obed became a man he married and had a son named Jesse, who in turn
became the father of David, the great king of Israel. Jesus Himself was
of the House of David, and so God's promise to His chosen people was
fulfilled.




MOSES.


Pharaoh, the King of Egypt, had made a law that every boy baby of the
Hebrew race should be killed, and there was great sorrow because of it.
But when Moses was born, his mother managed to hide him for three
months; then she made a cradle, or little ark, and putting him into it,
carried him down to a river and hid the cradle among the reeds there.

Soon after this, Pharaoh's daughter came with her maidens to the
river-side, and when she saw the beautiful child, she sent one of her
maidens to bring it to her.

She took the little boy to the palace and named him Moses, and he became
a great man among the Egyptians; he knew, however, that he belonged to
the Hebrew race, and when he saw how badly his own people were treated,
he tried to help them; but at last he was obliged to leave Egypt, and
became a shepherd, taking care of the flocks of a priest called Jethro.
He also married Jethro's daughter.

[Illustration: THE GOOD SAMARITAN.]

After a time, God spoke to Moses out of a burning bush, and told him
that he must go and rescue his people from the cruel Egyptians. Moses
thought he could not do this; but God promised to help him, and to show
him what he would be able to do with that help, God turned the rod which
Moses carried into a serpent. Then God told Moses to pick the serpent
up by the tail, and as he did so, it became a rod again. He showed him
another sign, also; but Moses was still afraid, because he could not
talk well and thought that Pharaoh would not listen to him. So God told
him to take his brother Aaron for a spokesman.

