envelopings, and will be out? What shall we say of the men that have it
not? God forbid I should say there is no fire, but I do say that if the
fountain never rises into the sunlight above the dead level of the pool,
there can be very little pressure at the main; that if a man has not the
longing to speak his religious convictions, those convictions must be
very hesitating and very feeble; that if you never felt 'I must say to
somebody I have found the Messias,' you have not found Him in any very
deep sense, and that if the light that is in you can be buried under a
bushel, it is not much of a light after all, and needs a great deal of
feeding and trimming before it can be what it ought to be.

On the other hand, all deep experience of the purifying power of Christ
upon character will show itself in conduct. It is all very well for
people to profess that they have received the forgiveness of sins and
the inner sanctification of God's Spirit. If you have, let us see it,
and let us see it in the commonest, pettiest affairs of daily life. The
communication between the inmost experience and the outermost conduct is
such as that if there be any real revolution deep down, it will manifest
itself in the daily life. I make all allowance for the loss of power in
transmission, for the loss of power in friction. I am glad to believe
that you and I, and all our imperfect brethren, are a great deal better
in heart than we ever manage to show ourselves to be in life. Thank God
for the consolation that may come out of that thought--but
notwithstanding I press on you my point that, making all such allowance,
and setting up no impossible standard of absolute identity between duty
and conduct in this present life, yet, on the whole, if we are Christian
people with any deep central experience of the cleansing power and
influence of Christ and His grace, we shall show it in life and in
conduct. Or, to put it into the graphic and plain image of my text, If
we are light we shall shine.

III. Again, and very briefly, this obligation of giving light is still
further enforced by the thought that that was Christ's very purpose in
all that He has done with us and for us.

The homely figure here implies that _He_ has not kindled the lamp to put
it under the bushel, but that _His_ purpose in lighting it was that it
might give light. God has made us partakers of His grace, and has given
to us to be light in the Lord, for this among other purposes, that we
should impart that light to others. No creature is so small that it has
not the right to expect that its happiness and welfare shall be regarded
by God as an end in His dealings with it; but no creature is so great
that it has the right to expect that its happiness or well-being shall
be regarded by God and itself as God's only end in His dealings with it.
He gives us His grace, His pardon, His love, the quickening of His
Spirit by our union with Jesus Christ; He gives us our knowledge of Him,
and our likeness to Him--what for? 'For my own salvation, for my
happiness and well-being,' you say. Certainly, blessed be His name for
His love and goodness! But is that all His purpose? Paul did not think
so when he said, 'God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness
hath shined into our hearts that we might give to others the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.' And
Christ did not think so when He said, 'Men do not light a candle and put
it under a bushel, but that it may give light to all that are in the
house.' 'Heaven doth with us as we with torches do: not light them for
themselves.' The purpose of God is that we may shine. The lamp is
kindled not to illumine itself, but that it may 'give light to all that
are in the house.'

Consider again, that whilst all these things are true, there is yet a
solemn possibility that men--even good men--may stifle and smother and
shroud their light. You can do, and I am afraid a very large number of
you do do, this; by two ways. You can bury the light of a holy character
under a whole mountain of inconsistencies. If one were to be fanciful,
one might say that the bushel or meal-chest meant material well-being,
and the bed, indolence and love of ease. I wonder how many of us
Christian men and women have buried their light under the flour-bin and
the bed, so interpreted? How many of us have drowned our consecration
and devotion in foul waters of worldly lusts, and have let the love of
earth's goods, of wealth and pleasure and creature love, come like a
poisonous atmosphere round the lamp of our Christian character, making
it burn dim and blue?

And we can bury the light of the Word under cowardly and sheepish and
indifferent silence. I wonder how many of us have done that? Like
blue-ribbon men that button their great-coats over their blue ribbons
when they go into company where they are afraid to show them, there are
many Christian people that are devout Christians at the Communion Table,
but would be ashamed to say they were so in the miscellaneous company of
a railway carriage or a _table d'hote_. There are professing Christians
who have gone through life in their relationships to their fathers,
sisters, wives, children, friends, kindred, their servants and
dependants, and have never spoken a loving word for their Master. That
is a sinful hiding of your light under the bushel and the bed.

IV. And so the last word, into which all this converges, is the plain
duty: If you are light, shine!

'Let your light so shine before men,' nays the text, 'that they may see
your good works and glorify your Father which is in Heaven.' In the next
chapter our Lord says: 'Take heed that ye do not your alms before men to
be seen of them. Thou shalt not be as the hypocrites are; for they love
to pray standing in the synagogues that they may be seen of men.' What
is the difference between the two sets of men and the two kinds of
conduct? The motive makes the difference for one thing, and for another
thing, 'Let your light so shine' does not mean 'take precautions that
your goodness may come out into public,' but it means 'Shine!' You find
the light, and the world will find the eyes, no fear of that! You do not
need to seek 'to be seen of men,' but you do need to shine that men may
see.

The lighthouse keeper takes no pains that the ships tossing away out at
sea may behold the beam that shines from his lamp; all that he does is
to feed it and tend it. And that is all that you and I have to do--tend
the light, and do not, like cowards, cover it up. Modestly, but yet
bravely, carry out your Christianity, and men will see it. Do not be as
a dark lantern, burning with the slides down and illuminating nothing
and nobody. Live your Christianity, and it will be beheld.

And remember, candles are not lit to be looked at. Candles are lit that
something else may be seen by them. Men may see God through your words,
through your conduct, who never would have beheld Him otherwise, because
His beams are too bright for their dim eyes. And it is an awful thing to
think that the world always--_always_--takes its conception of
Christianity from the Church, and neither from the Bible nor from
Christ; and that it is you and your like, you inconsistent Christians,
you people that say your sins are forgiven and yet are doing the old
sins day by day which you say are pardoned, you low-toned, unpraying,
worldly Christian men, who have no elevation of character and no
self-restraint of life and no purity of conduct above the men in your
own profession and in your own circumstances all round you--it is you
that are hindering the coming of Christ's Kingdom, it is you that are
the standing disgraces of the Church, and the weaknesses and diseases of
Christendom. I speak strongly, not half as strongly as the facts of the
case would warrant; but I lay it upon all your consciences as professing
Christian people to see to it that no longer your frivolities, or
doubtful commercial practices, or low, unspiritual tone of life, your
self-indulgence in household arrangements, and a dozen other things that
I might name--that no longer do they mar the clearness of your testimony
for your Master, and disturb with envious streaks of darkness the light
that shines from His followers.

How effectual such a witness may be none who have not seen its power can
suppose. Example does tell. A holy life curbs evil, ashamed to show
itself in that pure presence. A good man or woman reveals the ugliness
of evil by showing the beauty of holiness. More converts would be made
by a Christ-like Church than by many sermons. Oh! if you professing
Christians knew your power and would use it, if you would come closer to
Christ, and catch more of the light from His face, you might walk among
men like very angels, and at your bright presence darkness would flee
away, ignorance would grow wise, impurity be abashed, and sorrow
comforted.

Be not content, I pray you, till your own hearts are fully illumined by
Christ, having no part dark--and then live as remembering that you have
been made light that you may shine. 'Arise, shine, for thy light is
come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.'


THE NEW FORM OF THE OLD LAW

     'Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets: I am
     not come to destroy, but to fulfil. 18. For verily I say unto you,
     Till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise
     pass from the law, till all be fulfilled. 19. Whosoever therefore
     shall break one of these least commandments, and shall teach men
     so, he shall be called the least in the kingdom of heaven: but
     whosoever shall do and teach them, the same shall be called great
     in the kingdom of heaven. 20. For I say unto you, That except your
     righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and
     Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven.
     21. Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt
     not kill; and whosoever shall kill shall be in danger of the
     judgment: 22. But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his
     brother without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment; and
     whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be in danger of the
     council; but whosoever shall say, Thou fool, shall be in danger of
     hell-fire. 23. Therefore, if thou bring thy gift to the altar, and
     there rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee; 24.
     Leave there thy gift before the altar, and go thy way; first be
     reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. 25.
     Agree with thine adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the way with
     him; lest at any time the adversary deliver thee to the judge, and
     the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into
     prison. 26. Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no means come out
     thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing.'--MATT. v.
     17-26.

This passage falls naturally into two parts--the former extending from
verse 17 to 20 inclusive; the latter, from verse 21 to the end. In the
former, the King of the true kingdom lays down the general principles of
the relation between its laws and the earlier revelation of the divine
will; in the latter, He exemplifies this relation in one case, which is
followed, in the remainder of the chapter, by three other illustrative
examples.

I. The King laying down the law of His kingdom in its relation to the
older law of God.

The four verses included in this section give a regular sequence of
thought: verse 17 declaring our Lord's personal relation to the former
revelation as fulfilling it; verse 18 basing that statement of the
purpose of His coming on the essential permanence of the old law; verses
19 and 20 deducing thence the relation of His disciples to that law, and
that in such a way that verse 19 corresponds to verse 18, and affirms
that this permanent law is binding in its minutest details on His
subjects, while verse 20 corresponds to verse 17, and requires their
deepened righteousness as answering to His fulfilment of the law.

The first thing that strikes one in looking at these verses is their
authoritative tone. There may, even thus early in Christ's career, have
been some murmurs that He was taking up a position of antagonism to
Mosaism, which may account for the 'think not' which introduces the
section. But however that may be, the swift transition from the
Beatitudes to speak of Himself and of the meaning of His work is all of
a piece with His whole manner; for certainly never did religious teacher
open his mouth, who spoke so perpetually about Himself as did the meek
Jesus. 'I came' declares that He is 'the coming One,' and is really a
claim to have voluntarily appeared among men, as well as to be the
long-expected Messiah. With absolute decisiveness He states the purpose
of His coming. He knows the meaning of His own work, which so few of us
do, and it is safe to take His own account of what He intends, as it so
seldom is. His opening declaration is singularly composed of blended
humility and majesty. Its humility lies in His placing Himself, as it
were, in line with previous messengers, and representing Himself as
carrying on the sequence of divine revelation. It would not have been
humble for anybody but Him to say that, but it was so for Him. Its
majesty lies in His claim to 'fulfil' all former utterances from God.
His fulfilment of the law properly so called is twofold: first, in His
own proper person and life, He completes obedience to it, realises its
ideal; second, in His exposition of it, both by lip and life, He deepens
and intensifies its meaning, changing it from a letter which regulates
the actions, to a spirit which moves the inward man.

So these first words point to the peculiarity of His coming as being His
own act, and make two daring assertions, as to His character, which He
claims to be sinless, and as to His teaching, which he claims to be an
advance upon all the former divine revelation. As to the former, He
speaks here as He did to John, 'thus it becometh us to fulfil all
righteousness.' No trace of consciousness of sin or defect appears in
any words or acts of His. The calmest conviction that He was perfectly
righteous is always manifest. How comes it that we are not repelled by
such a tone? We do not usually admire self-complacent religious
teachers. Why has nobody ever given Christ the lie, or pointed to His
unconsciousness of faults as itself the gravest fault? Strange inaugural
discourse for a humble sage and saint to assert his own immaculate
perfection, stranger still that a listening world has said, 'Amen!'
Note, too, the royal style here. In this part of the 'Sermon' our Lord
twice uses the phrase, 'I say unto you,' which He once introduces with
His characteristic 'verily.' Once He employs it to give solemnity to the
asseveration which stretches forward to the end of this solid-seeming
world, and once He introduces by it the stringent demand for His
followers' loftier righteousness. His unsupported word is given us as
our surest light in the dark future, His bare command as the most
imperative authority. This style goes kingly; it calls for absolute
credence and unhesitating submission. When He speaks, even if we have
nothing but His word, it is ours neither 'to make reply' nor 'to reason
why,' but simply to believe, and swiftly to do. Rabbis might split hairs
and quote other rabbis by the hour; philosophers may argue and base
their teachings on elaborate demonstrations; moralists may seek to sway
the conscience through reason; legislators to appeal to fear and hope.
He speaks, and it is done; He commands, and it stands fast. There is
nothing else in the world the least like the superb and mysterious
authority with which He fronts the world, and, as Fountain of knowledge
and Source of obligation, summons us all to submit and believe, by that
'Verily, I say unto you.'

Verse 18. Next we have to notice the exuberant testimony to the
permanence of the law. Not the smallest of its letters, not even the
little marks which distinguished some of them, or the flourishes at the
top of some of them, should pass,--as we might say, not even the stroke
across a written 't,' which shows that it is not 'l.' The law shall last
as long as the world. It shall last till it be accomplished. And what
then? The righteousness which it requires can never be so realised that
we shall not need to realise it any more, and in the new heavens
righteousness dwelleth. But in a very real sense law shall cease when
fulfilled. There is no law to him who can say, 'Thy law is within my
heart.' When law has become both 'law and impulse,' it has ceased to be
law, in so far as it no longer stands over against the doer as an
external constraint.

Verse 19. On this permanence of the law Christ builds its imperative
authority in His kingdom. Obviously, the 'kingdom of heaven' in verse 19
means the earthly form of that kingdom. The King republishes, as it
were, the old code, and adopts it as the basis of His law. He thus
assumes the absolute right of determining precedence and dignity in that
kingdom. The sovereign is the 'fountain of honour,' whose word ennobles.
Observe the merciful accuracy of the language. The breach of the
commandments either in theory or in practice does not exclude from the
kingdom, for it is, while realised on earth, a kingdom of sinful men
aiming after holiness; but the smallest deflection from the law of
right, in theory or in practice, does lower a man's standing therein,
inasmuch as it makes him less capable of that conformity to the King,
and consequent nearness to Him, which determines greatness and smallness
there. Dignity in the kingdom depends on Christ-likeness, and
Christ-likeness depends on fulfilling, as He did, all righteousness.
Small flaws are most dangerous because least noticeable. More Christian
men lose their chance of promotion in the kingdom by a multitude of
little sins than by single great ones.

Verse 20. As the King has Himself by His perfect obedience fulfilled the
law, His subjects likewise must, in their obedience, transcend the
righteousness of those who best knew and most punctiliously kept it. The
scribes and Pharisees are not here regarded as hypocrites, but taken as
types of the highest conformity with the law which the old dispensation
afforded. The new kingdom demands a higher, namely a more spiritual and
inward righteousness, one corresponding to the profounder meaning which
the King gives to the old commandment. And this loftier fulfilment is
not merely the condition of dignity in, but of entrance at all into, the
kingdom. Inward holiness is the essence of the character of all its
subjects. How that holiness is to be ours is not here told, except in so
far as it is hinted by the fact that it is regarded as the issue of the
King's fulfilling the law. These last words would have been terrible and
excluding if they had stood alone. When they follow 'I am come to
fulfil,' they are a veiled gospel, implying that by His fulfilment the
righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us.

II. We have an illustrative example in the case of the old commandment
against murder. This part of the passage falls into three
divisions--each occupying two verses. First we have the deepening and
expansion of the commandment. This part begins with the royal style
again. 'What was said to them of old' is left in its full authority.
'But I say unto you' represents Jesus as possessing co-ordinate
authority with that law, of which the speaker is unnamed, perhaps
because the same Word of God which now spoke in Him had spoken it. We
need but refer here to the Jewish courts and Sanhedrim, and to that
valley of Hinnom, where the offal of Jerusalem and the corpses of
criminals were burned, nor need we discuss the precise force of 'Raca'
and 'thou fool.' The main points to be observed are, the distinct
extension of the conception of 'killing' to embrace malevolent anger,
whether it find vent or is kept close in the heart; the clear
recognition that, whilst the emotion which is the source of the overt
act is of the same nature as the act, and that therefore he who 'hateth
his brother is a murderer,' there are degrees in criminality, according
as the anger remains unexpressed, or finds utterance in more or less
bitter and contemptuous language; that consequently there are degrees in
the severity of the punishment which is administered by no earthly
tribunal; and that, finally, this stern sentence has hidden in it the
possibility of forgiveness, inasmuch as the consequence of the sin is
liability to punishment, but not necessarily suffering of it. The old
law had no such mitigation of its sentence.

Verses 23, 24. The second part of this illustrative example intensifies
the command by putting obedience to it before acts of external worship.
The language is vividly picturesque. We see a worshipper standing at the
very altar while the priest is offering his sacrifice. In that sacred
moment, while he is confessing his sins, a flash across his memory shows
him a brother offended,--rightly or wrongly it matters not. The solemn
sacrifice is to pause while he seeks the offended one, and, whatever the
other man's reception of his advances may be, he cleanses his own bosom
of its perilous stuff; then he may come back and go on with the
interrupted worship. Nothing could put in a clearer light the prime
importance of the command than this setting aside of sacred religious
acts for its sake. 'Obedience is better than sacrifice.' And the little
word 'therefore,' at the beginning of verse 23, points to the terrible
penalties as the reason for this urgency. If such destruction may light
on the angry man, nothing should come between him and the conquest of
his anger. Such self-conquest, which will often seem like degradation,
is more acceptable service to the King, and truer worship, than all
words or ceremonial acts. Deep truths as to the relations between
worship, strictly so called, and life, lie in these words, which may
well be taken to heart by those whose altar is Calvary, and their gift
the thank-offering of themselves.

Verses 25, 26. The third part is a further exhortation to the same
swiftness in casting out anger from the heart, thrown into a parabolic
form. When you quarrel with a man, says Christ in effect, prudence
enjoins to make it up as soon as possible, before he sets the law in
motion. If once he, as plaintiff, has brought you before the judge, the
law will go on mechanically through the stages of trial, condemnation,
surrender to the prison authorities, and confinement till the last
farthing has been paid. So, if you are conscious that you have an
adversary,--and any man that you hate is your adversary, for he will
appear against you at that solemn judgment to come,--agree with him,
put away the anger out of your heart at once. In the special case in
hand, the 'adversary' is the man with whom we are angry. In the general
application of the precept to the whole series of offences against the
law, the adversary may be regarded as the law itself. In either
interpretation, the stages of appearing before the judge and so on up
till the shutting up in prison are the stages of the judgment before the
tribunal, not of earth, but of the kingdom of heaven. They point to the
same dread realities as are presented in the previous verses under the
imagery of the Jewish courts and the foul fires of the valley of Hinnom.
Christ closes the grave parable with His solemn 'Verily I say unto
thee'--as looking on the future judgment, and telling us what His eyes
saw. The words have no bearing on the question of the duration of the
imprisonment, for He does not tell us whether the last farthing could
ever be paid or not; but they do teach this lesson, that, if once we
fall under the punishments of the kingdom, there is no end to them until
the last tittle of the consequences of our breach of its law has been
paid. To delay obedience, and still more to delay abandoning
disobedience, is madness, in view of the storm that may at any moment
burst on the heads of the rebels.

Thus He deepens and fulfils one precept of the old law by extending the
sweep of its prohibition from acts to thoughts, by setting obedience to
it above sacrifice and worship, and by picturing in solemn tones of
parabolic warning the consequences of having the disobeyed precept as
our unreconciled adversary. In this one case we have a specimen of His
mode of dealing with the whole law, every jot of which He expanded in
His teaching, and perfectly observed in His life.

A gospel is hidden even in these warnings, for it is distinctly taught
that the offended law may cease to be our adversary, and that we may be
reconciled with it, ere yet it has accused us to the judge. It was not
yet time to proclaim that the King 'fulfilled' the law, not only by
life, but by death, and that therefore all His believing subjects 'are
justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the
law,' as well as endowed with the righteousness by which they fulfil
that law in deeper reality, and fairer completeness, than did those 'of
old time,' who loved it most.


'SWEAR NOT AT ALL'

     'Again, ye have heard that it hath been said by them of old time,
     Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt perform unto the Lord
     thine oaths: 34. But I say unto you, Swear not at all; neither by
     heaven; for it is God's throne: 35. Nor by the earth; for it is His
     footstool; neither by Jerusalem; for it is the city of the great
     King. 36. Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst
     not make one hair white or black. 37. But let your communication
     be, Yea, yea; Nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than these cometh of
     evil.'--MATT. v. 33-37.

In His treatment of the sixth and seventh commandments, Jesus deepened
them by bringing the inner man of feeling and desire under their
control. In His treatment of the old commandments as to oaths, He
expands them by extending the prohibitions from one kind of oath to all
kinds. The movement in the former case is downwards and inwards; in the
latter it is outwards, the compass sweeping a wider circle. Perjury, a
false oath, was all that had been forbidden. He forbids all. We may note
that the forms of colloquial swearing, which our Lord specifies, are not
to be taken as an exhaustive enumeration of what is forbidden. They are
in the nature of a parenthesis, and the sentence runs on continuously
without them--'Swear not at all ... but let your communication be Yea,
yea; Nay, nay.' The reason appended is equally universal, for it
suggests the deep thought that 'whatsoever is more than these' that is
to say, any form of speech that seeks to strengthen a simple, grave
asseveration by such oaths as He has just quoted, 'cometh of evil'
inasmuch as it springs from, and reveals, the melancholy fact that his
bare word is not felt binding by a man, and is not accepted as
conclusive by others. If lies were not so common, oaths would be
needless. And oaths increase the evil from which they come, by
confirming the notion that there is no sin in a lie unless it is sworn
to.

The oaths specified are all colloquial, which were and are continually
and offensively mingled with common speech in the East. Nowhere are
there such habitual liars, and nowhere are there so many oaths. Every
traveller there knows that, and sees how true is Christ's filiation of
the custom of swearing from the custom of falsehood. But these poisonous
weeds of speech not only tended to degrade plain veracity in the popular
mind, but were themselves parents of immoral evasions, for it was the
teaching of some Rabbis, at all events, that an oath 'by heaven' or 'by
earth' or 'by Jerusalem' or 'by my head' did not bind. That further
relaxation of the obligation of truthfulness was grounded on the words
quoted in verse 33, for, said the immoral quibblers, 'it is "thine oaths
to the Lord" that thou "shalt perform," and for these others you may do
as you like' Therefore our Lord insists that every oath, even these
mutilated, colloquial ones which avoid His name, is in essence an appeal
to God, and has no sense unless it is. To swear such a truncated oath,
then, has the still further condemnation that it is certainly an
irreverence, and probably a quibble, and meant to be broken. It must be
fully admitted that there is little in common between such pieces of
senseless profanity as these oaths, or the modern equivalents which
pollute so many lips to-day, and the oath administered in a court of
justice, and it may further be allowed weight that Jesus does not
specifically prohibit the oath 'by the Lord,' but it is difficult to see
how the principles on which He condemns are to be kept from touching
even judicial oaths. For they, too, are administered on the ground of
the false idea that they add to the obligation of veracity, and give a
guarantee of truthfulness which a simple affirmation does not give. Nor
can any one, who knows the perfunctory formality and indifference with
which such oaths are administered and taken, and what a farce 'kissing
the book' has become, doubt that even judicial oaths tend to weaken the
popular conception of the sin of a lie and the reliance to be placed
upon the simple 'Yea, yea; Nay, nay.'


NON-RESISTANCE

     'Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a
     tooth for a tooth: 39. But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil:
     but whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the
     other also. 40. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take
     away thy coat, let him have thy cloke also. 41. And whosoever shall
     compel thee to go a mile, go with him twain. 42. Give to him that
     asketh thee, and from him that would borrow of thee turn not thou
     away.'--MATT. v. 38-42.

The old law directed judges to inflict penalties precisely equivalent to
offences--'an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth' (Exod. xxi. 24),
but that direction was not for the guidance of individuals. It was
suited for the stage of civilisation in which it was given, and probably
was then a restriction, rather than a sanction, of the wild law of
retaliation. Jesus sweeps it away entirely, and goes much further than
even its abrogation. For He forbids not only retaliation but even
resistance. It is unfortunate that in this, as in so many instances,
controversy as to the range of Christ's words has so largely hustled
obedience to them out of the field, that the first thought suggested to
a modern reader by the command 'Resist not evil' (or, an evil man) is
apt to be, Is the Quaker doctrine of uniform non-resistance right or
wrong, instead of, Do I obey this precept? If we first try to understand
its meaning, we shall be in a position to consider whether it has
limits, springing from its own deepest significance, or not. What, then,
is it not to resist? Our Lord gives three concrete illustrations of what
He enjoins, the first of which refers to insults such as contumelious
blows on the cheek, which are perhaps the hardest not to meet with a
flash of anger and a returning stroke; the second of which refers to
assaults on property, such as an attempt at legal robbery of a man's
undergarment; the third of which refers to forced labour, such as
impressing a peasant to carry military or official baggage or
documents--a form of oppression only too well known under Roman rule in
Christ's days. In regard to all three cases, He bids His disciples
submit to the indignity, yield the coat, and go the mile. But such
yielding without resistance is not to be all. The other cheek is to be
given to the smiter; the more costly and ample outer garment is to be
yielded up; the load is to be carried for two miles. The disciple is to
meet evil with a manifestation, not of anger, hatred, or intent to
inflict retribution, but of readiness to submit to more. It is a hard
lesson, but clearly here, as always, the chief stress is to be laid, not
on the outward action, but on the disposition, and on the action mainly
as the outcome and exhibition of that. If the cheek is turned, or the
cloak yielded, or the second mile trudged with a lowering brow, and hate
or anger boiling in the heart, the commandment is broken. If the inner
man rises in hot indignation against the evil and its doer, he is
resisting evil more harmfully to himself than is many a man who makes
his adversary's cheeks tingle before his own have ceased to be reddened.
We have to get down into the depths of the soul, before we understand
the meaning of non-resistance. It would have been better if the eager
controversy about the breadth of this commandment had oftener become a
study of its depth, and if, instead of asking, 'Are we ever warranted in
resisting?' men had asked, 'What in its full meaning is non-resistance?'
The truest answer is that it is a form of Love,--love in the face of
insults, wrongs, and domineering tyranny, such as are illustrated in
Christ's examples. This article of Christ's New Law comes last but one
in the series of instances in which His transfiguring touch is laid on
the Old Law, and the last of the series is that to which He has been
steadily advancing from the first--namely, the great Commandment of
Love. This precept stands immediately before that, and prepares for it.
It is, as suffused with the light of the sun that is all but risen,
'Resist not evil,' for 'Love beareth all things.'

It is but a shallow stream that is worried into foam and made angry and
noisy by the stones in its bed; a deep river flows smooth and silent
above them. Nothing will enable us to meet 'evil' with a patient
yielding love which does not bring the faintest tinge of anger even into
the cheek reddened by a rude hand, but the 'love of God shed abroad in
the heart,' and when that love fills a man, 'out of him will flow a
river of living water,' which will bury evil below its clear, gentle
abundance, and, perchance, wash it of its foulness. The 'quality of'
this non-resistance 'is twice blessed,' 'it blesseth him that gives and
him that takes.' For the disciple who submits in love, there is the gain
of freedom from the perturbations of passion, and of steadfast abiding
in the peace of a great charity, the deliverance from the temptation of
descending to the level of the wrong-doer, and of losing hold of God and
all high visions. The tempest-ruffled sea mirrors no stars by night, nor
is blued by day. If we are to have real communion with God, we must not
flush with indignation at evil, nor pant with desire to shoot the arrow
back to him that aimed it at us. And in regard to the evil-doer, the
most effectual resistance is, in many cases, not to resist. There is
something hid away somewhere in most men's hearts which makes them
ashamed of smiting the offered left cheek, and then ashamed of having
smitten the right one. 'It is a shame to hit him, since he does not
defend himself,' comes into many a ruffian's mind. The safest way to
travel in savage countries is to show oneself quite unarmed. He that
meets evil with evil is 'overcome of evil'; he that meets it with
patient love is likely in most cases to 'overcome evil with good.' And
even if he fails, he has, at all events, used the only weapon that has
any chance of beating down the evil, and it is better to be defeated
when fighting hate with love than to be victorious when fighting it with
itself, or demanding an eye for an eye.

But, if we take the right view of this precept, its limitations are in
itself. Since it is love confronting, and seeking to transform evil into
its own likeness, it may sometimes be obliged by its own self not to
yield. If turning the other cheek would but make the assaulter more
angry, or if yielding the cloak would but make the legal robber more
greedy, or if going the second mile would but make the press-gang more
severe and exacting, resistance becomes a form of love and a duty for
the sake of the wrong-doer. It may also become a duty for the sake of
others, who are also objects of love, such as helpless persons who
otherwise would be exposed to evil, or society as a whole. But while
clearly that limit is prescribed by the very nature of the precept, the
resistance which it permits must have love to the culprit or to others
as its motive, and not be tainted by the least suspicion of passion or
vengeance. Would that professing Christians would try more to purge
their own hearts, and bring this solemn precept into their daily lives,
instead of discussing whether there are cases in which it does not
apply! There are great tracts in the lives of all of us to which it
should apply and is not applied; and we had better seek to bring these
under its dominion first, and then it will be time enough to debate as
to whether any circumstances are outside its dominion or not.


THE LAW OF LOVE

     'Ye have heard that it hath been said, Thou shalt love thy
     neighbour, and hate thine enemy. 44. But I say unto you, Love your
     enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you,
     and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you;
     45. That ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven:
     for He maketh His sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and
     sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. 46. For if ye love them
     which love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the
     same? 47. And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye more than
     others! do not even the publicans so? 48. Be ye therefore perfect,
     even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.'--MATT. v.
     43-48.

The last of the five instances of our Lord's extending and deepening and
spiritualising the old law is also the climax of them. We may either
call it the highest or the deepest, according to our point of view. His
transfiguring touch invests all the commandments with which He has been
dealing with new inwardness, sweep, and spirituality, and finally He
proclaims the supreme, all-including commandment of universal love. 'It
hath been said, Thou shalt love thy neighbour'--that comes from Lev.
xix. 18; but where does 'and hate thine enemy' come from? Not from
Scripture, but in the passage in Leviticus 'neighbour' is co-extensive
with 'children of thy people,' and the hatred and contempt of all men
outside Israel which grew upon the Jews found a foothold there. 'Who is
my neighbour?' was apparently a well-discussed question in the schools
of the Rabbis, and, whether any of these teachers ever committed
themselves to plainly formulating the principle or not, practically the
duty of love was restricted to a narrow circle, and the rest of the wide
world left out in the cold. But not only was the circumference of love's
circle drawn in, but to hate an enemy was elevated almost into a duty.
It is the worst form of retaliation. 'An eye for an eye' is bad enough,
but hate for hate plunges men far deeper in the devil's mire. To flash
back from the mirror of the heart the hostile looks which are flung at
us, is our natural impulse; but why should we always leave it to the
other man to pitch the keynote of our relations with him? Why should we
echo only his tones? Cannot we leave his discord to die into silence and
reply to it by something more musical? Two thunder-clouds may cast
lightnings at each other, but they waste themselves in the process.
Better to shine meekly and victoriously on as the moon does on piled
masses of darkness till it silvers them with its quiet light. So Jesus
bids us do. We are to suppress the natural inclination to pay back in
the enemy's own coin, to 'give him as good as he gave us,' to 'show
proper spirit,' and all the other fine phrases with which the world
whitewashes hatred and revenge. We are not only to allow no stirring of
malice in our feelings, but we are to let kindly emotions bear fruit in
words blessing the cursers, and in deeds of goodness, and, highest of
all, in prayers for those whose hate is bitterest, being founded on
religion, and who are carrying it into action in persecution. We cannot
hate a man if we pray for him; we cannot pray for him if we hate him.
Our weakness often feels it so hard not to hate our enemies, that our
only way to get strength to keep this highest, hardest commandment is to
begin by trying to pray for the foe, and then we gradually feel the
infernal fires dying down in our temper, and come to be able to meet his
evil with good, and his curses with blessings. It is a difficult lesson
that Jesus sets us. It is a blessed possibility that Jesus opens for
us, that our kindly emotions towards men need not be at the mercy of
theirs to us. It is a fair ideal that He paints, which, if Christians
deliberately and continuously took it for their aim to realise, would
revolutionise society, and make the fellowship of man with man a
continual joy. Think of what any community, great or small, would be, if
enmity were met by love only and always. Its fire would die for want of
fuel. If the hater found no answering hate increasing his hate, he would
often come to answer love with love. There is an old legend spread
through many lands, which tells how a princess who had been changed by
enchantment into a loathly serpent, was set free by being thrice kissed
by a knight, who thereby won a fair bride with whom he lived in love and
joy. The only way to change the serpent of hate into the fair form of a
friend is to kiss it out of its enchantment.

No doubt, partial anticipations of this precept may be found, buried
under much ethical rubbish, elsewhere than in the Sermon on the Mount,
and more plainly in Old Testament teaching, and in Rabbinical sayings;
but Christ's 'originality' as a moral teacher lies not so much in the
absolute novelty of His commandments, as in the perspective in which He
sets them, and in the motives on which He bases them, and most of all in
His being more than a teacher, namely, the Giver of power to fulfil what
He enjoins. Christian ethics not merely recognises the duty of love to
men, but sets it as the foundation of all other duties. It is root and
trunk, all others are but the branches into which it ramifies. Christian
ethics not merely recognises the duty, but takes a man by the hand,
leads him up to his Father God, and says: There, that is your pattern,
and a child who loves his Father will try to copy his ways and be made
like Him by his love. So Morality passes into Religion, and through the
transition receives power beyond its own. The perfection of worship is
imitation, and when men 'call Him Father' whom they adore, imitation
becomes the natural action of a child who loves.

A dew-drop and a planet are both spheres, moulded by the same law of
gravitation. The tiny round of our little drops of love may be not all
unlike the colossal completeness of that Love, which owns the sun as
'His sun,' and rays down light and distils rain over the broad world.
God loves all men apart altogether from any regard to character,
therefore He gives to all men all the good gifts that they can receive
apart from character, and if evil men do not get His best gifts, it is
not because He withholds, but because they cannot take. There are human
love-gifts which cannot be bestowed on enemies or evil persons. It is
not possible, nor fit, that a Christian should feel to such as he does
to those who share his faith and sympathies; but it is possible, and
therefore incumbent, that he should not only negatively clear his heart
of malice and hatred, but that he should positively exercise such active
beneficence as they will receive. That is God's way, and it should be
His children's.

The thought of the divine pattern naturally brings up the contrast
between it and that which goes by the name of love among men. Just
because Christians are to take God as their example of love, they must
transcend human examples. Here again Jesus strikes the note with which
He began His teaching of His disciples' 'righteousness'; but very
significantly He does not now point to Pharisees, but to publicans, as
those who were to be surpassed. The former, no doubt, were models of
'righteousness' after a rigid, whitewashed-sepulchre sort, but the
latter had bigger hearts, and, bad as they were and were reputed to be,
they loved better than the others. Jesus is glad to see and point to
even imperfect sparks of goodness in a justly condemned class. No doubt,
publicans in their own homes, with wife and children round them, let
their hearts out, and could be tender and gentle, however gruff and
harsh in public. When Jesus says '_even_ the publicans,' He is not
speaking in contempt, but in recognition of the love that did find some
soil to grow on, even in that rocky ground. But is not the bringing in
of the 'reward' as a motive a woful downcome? and is love that loves for
the sake of reward, love at all? The criticism and questions forget that
the true motive has just been set forth, and that the thought of
'reward' comes in, only as secondary encouragement to a duty which is
based upon another ground. To love because we shall gain something,
either in this world or in the next, is not love but long-sighted
selfishness; but to be helped in our endeavours to widen our love so as
to take in all men, by the vision of the reward, is not selfishness but
a legitimate strengthening of our weakness. Especially is that so, in
view of the fact that 'the reward' contemplated is nothing else than the
growth of likeness to the Father in heaven, and the increase of filial
consciousness, and the clearer, deeper cry, 'Abba, Father.' If longing
for, and having regard to, that 'recompense of reward' is selfishness,
and if the teaching which permits it is immoral, may God send the world
more of such selfishness and of teachers of it!

But the reference to the shrunken love-streams that flow among men
passes again swiftly to the former thought of likeness to God as the
great pattern. Like a bird glancing downwards for a moment to earth, and
then up again and away into the blue, our Lord's words re-soar, and
settle at last by the throne of God. The command, 'Be ye perfect, even
as your Father which is in heaven is perfect,' may be intended to refer
only to the immediately preceding section, but one is inclined to regard
it rather as the summing up of the whole of the preceding series of
commandments from verse 20 onwards. The sum of religion is to imitate
the God whom we worship. The ideal which draws us to aim at its
realisation must be absolutely perfect, however imperfect may be all our
attempts to reproduce it. We sometimes hear it said that to set up
perfection as our goal is to smite effort dead and to enthrone despair.
But to set up an incomplete ideal is the surest way to take the heart
out of effort after it. It is the Christian's prerogative to have ever
gleaming before him an unattained aim, to which he is progressively
approximating, and which, unreached, beckons, feeds hope of endless
approach, and guarantees immortality.


TRUMPETS AND STREET CORNERS

     'Take heed that ye do nob your alms before men, to be seen of them:
     otherwise ye have no reward of your Father which is in heaven. 2.
     Therefore, when thou doest thine alms, do not sound a trumpet
     before thee, as the hypocrites do in the synagogues, and in the
     streets, that they may have glory of men. Verily I say unto you,
     They have their reward. 3. But when thou doest alms, let not thy
     left hand know what thy right hand doeth; 4. That thine alms may be
     in secret: and thy Father, which seeth in secret, Himself shall
     reward thee openly. 5. And when thou prayest, thou shalt not be as
     the hypocrites are: for they love to pray standing in the
     synagogues, and in the corners of the streets, that they may be
     seen of men. Verily I say unto you, They have their reward.'--MATT.
     vi. 1-5.

Our Lord follows His exposition of the deepened sense which the old law
assumes in His kingdom, by a warning against the most subtle foes of
true righteousness. He first gives the warning in general terms in verse
1, and then flashes its light into three dark corners, and shows how
hankering after men's praise corrupts the beneficence which is our duty
to our neighbour, the devotion which is our duty to God, and the
abstinence which is our duty to ourselves. We deal now with the two
former.

We have first the general warning, given out like the text of a sermon,
or the musical phrase which underlies the various harmonies of some
concerto. The first word implies that the evil is a subtle and seducing
one. 'Take heed' as of something which may steal into and mar the
noblest lives. The serpent lies coiled under the leaves, and may sting
and poison the unwary hand. The generality of the warning, and the
logical propriety of the whole section, require the adoption of the
reading of the Revised Version, namely, 'righteousness.' The thing to be
taken heed of is not the doing it 'before men,' which will often be
obligatory, often necessary, and never in itself wrong, but the doing it
'to be seen of them.' Not the number of spectators, but the furtive
glance of our eyes to see if they are looking at us, makes the sin. We
are to let our good works shine, that men may glorify our Father. Pious
souls are to shine, and yet to be hid,--a paradox which can be easily
solved by the obedient. If our motive is to make God's glory more
visible, we shall not be seeking to be ourselves admired. The
harp-string's swift vibrations, as it gives out its note, make it
