in their faith, especially as expounded by Ramanuja. As names for the
deity he uses Narayana and Vasudeva and he quotes freely from the
Bhagavad-gita and the Vishnu Purana. Compared with the emotional
deism of Caitanya this faith seems somewhat philosophic and reticent.

Ramanuja clearly indicates its principal points in the first words of
his Sri Bhashya. "May my mind be filled with devotion towards the
highest Brahman, the abode of Lakshmi; who is luminously revealed in
the Upanishads: who in sport produces, sustains and reabsorbs the
entire universe: whose only aim is to foster the manifold classes of
beings that humbly worship him."[583] He goes on to say that his
teaching is that of the Upanishads, "which was obscured by the mutual
conflict of manifold opinions," and that he follows the commentary of
Bodhayana and other teachers who have abridged it.

That is to say, the form of Vishnuism which Ramanuja made one of the
principal religions of India claims to be the teaching of the
Upanishads, although he also affiliates himself to the Bhagavatas. He
interprets the part of the Vedanta Sutras which treats of this
sect[584] as meaning that the author states and ultimately disallows
the objections raised to their teaching and he definitely approves it.
"As it is thus settled that the highest Brahman or Narayana himself
is the promulgator of the entire Pancaratra and that this system
teaches the nature of Narayana and the proper way of worshipping him,
none can disestablish the view that in the Pancaratra all the other
doctrines are comprised."[585]

The true tradition of the Upanishads he contends has been distorted by
"manifold opinions," among which the doctrine of Sankara was no doubt
the chief. That doctrine was naturally distasteful to devotional
poets, and from the time of Nathamuni onwards a philosophic reaction
against it grew up in Srirangam. Ramanuja preaches the worship of a
loving God, though when we read that God produces and reabsorbs the
universe in sport, we find that we are farther from Christianity than
we at first supposed. There is a touch of mythology in the mention of
Lakshmi[586] but it is clear that Ramanuja himself had little liking
for mythology. He barely mentions Rama and Krishna in the Sri
Bhashya nor does he pay much attention to the consort of the deity. On
the other hand he shows no sign of rejecting the ritual and
regulations of the Brahmans. He apparently wished to prove that the
doctrine of salvation by devotion to a personal god is compatible with
a system as strictly orthodox as Sankara's own.

I shall treat elsewhere of his philosophy, known as the
Visishtadvaita or non-duality, which yet recognizes a distinction
between God and individual souls. The line of thought is old and at
all periods is clearly a compromise, unwilling to deny that God is
everything and yet dissatisfied with the idea that a personal deity
and our individual transmigrating souls are all merely illusion.
Devotional theism was growing in Ramanuja's time. He could not break
with the Upanishads and Vedantic tradition but he adapted them to the
needs of his day. He taught firstly that the material world and human
souls are not illusion but so to speak the body of God who comprises
and pervades them: secondly this God is omniscient, omnipresent,
almighty and all-merciful, and salvation (that is mukti or deliverance
from transmigration) is obtained by those souls who, assisted by his
grace, meditate on him and know him; thirdly this salvation consists
not in absorption into God but in blissful existence near him and in
participation of his glorious qualities. He further held[587] that God
exists in five modes, namely: (_a_) Para, the entire supreme spirit,
(_b_) the fourfold manifestation as Vasudeva, Sankarshana, Pradyumna
and Aniruddha, (_c_) incarnations such as Rama and Krishna, (_d_)
the internal controller or Antaryamin according to the text[588] "who
abiding in the soul rules the soul within," (_e_) duly consecrated
images.

The followers of Ramanuja are at present divided into two schools
known as Tengalais and Vadagalais, or southern and northern.[589] The
double residence of the founder is one reason for the division, since
both Mysore and Trichinopoly could claim to have personal knowledge of
his teaching. The really important difference seems to be that the
Tengalai or southern school is inclined to break away from Sanskrit
tradition, to ignore the Vedas in practice and to regard the Tamil
Nalayiram as an all-sufficient scripture, whereas the Vadagalais,
though not rejecting the Nalayiram, insist on the authority of the
Vedas. But both divisions are scrupulous about caste observances and
the ceremonial purity of their food. They are separated by nice
questions of doctrine, especially as to the nature of prapatti,
resignation or self-surrender to the deity, a sentiment slightly
different from bhakti which is active faith or devotion. The
northerners hold that the soul lays hold of the Lord, as the young
monkey hangs on to its mother, whereas the southerners say that the
Lord picks up the helpless and passive soul as a cat picks up a
kitten.[590] According to the northerners, the consort of Vishnu is,
like him, uncreated and equally to be worshipped as a bestower of
grace: according to the southerners she is created and, though divine,
merely a mediator or channel of the Lord's grace. Even more important
in popular esteem is the fact that the Vadagalai sectarian mark ends
between the eyebrows whereas the Tengalais prolong it to the tip of
the nose. _Odium theologicum_ is often bitterest between the sects
which are most nearly related and accordingly we find that the
Tengalais and Vadagalais frequently quarrel. They use the same temples
but in many places both claim the exclusive right to recite the hymns
of the Arvars. The chief difference in their recitation lies in the
opening verse in which each party celebrates the names of its special
teachers, and disputes as to the legality of a particular verse in a
particular shrine sometimes give rise to free fights and subsequent
lawsuits.

The two schools reckon the apostolic succession differently and appear
to have separated in the thirteenth century, in which they were
represented by Pillai Lokacarya and Vedanta Desika[591]
respectively. The Tengalai, of which the first-named teacher was the
practical founder, must be regarded as innovators, for in their use of
Tamil as the language of religion they do not follow the example of
Ramanuja. Lokacarya teaches that the grace of God is irresistible and
should be met not merely by active faith, but by self-surrender,[592]
and entire submission to the guidance of the spiritual teacher. He was
the author of eighteen works called Rahasyas or secrets[593] but
though he appears to have been the first to formulate the Tengalai
doctrines, Manavala Mahamuni (1370-1443 A.D.) is regarded by the sect
as its chief saint. His images and pictures are frequent in south
India and he wrote numerous commentaries and poems. Vedanta Desika,
the founder of the Vadagalai, was a native of Conjeevaram but spent
much of his life at Srirangam. He was a voluminous author and
composed _inter alia_ an allegorical play in ten acts, portraying the
liberation of the soul under the auspices of King Viveka
(discrimination) and Queen Sumati (Wisdom).

At the present day the two sects recognize as their respective heads
two Acaryas who are married, whereas all Smarta Acaryas are
celibates.[594] The Tengalai Acarya resides near Tinnevelly, the
Vadagalai in the district of Kurnool. They both make periodical
visitations in their districts and have considerable ecclesiastical
power. In the south Srirangam near Trichinopoly is their principal
shrine: in the north Melucote in the Seringapatam district is esteemed
very sacred.


5


It was only natural that Ramanuja's advocacy of qualified non-duality
should lead some more uncompromising spirit to affirm the doctrine of
Dvaita or duality. This step was taken by Madhva Acarya, a Kanarese
Brahman who was probably born in 1199 A.D.[595] In the previous year
the great temple of Jagannatha at Puri had been completed and the
Vishnuite movement was at its height. Madhva though educated as a
Saiva became a Vaishnava. He denied absolutely the identity of the
Supreme Being with the individual soul and held that the world is not
a modification of the Lord but that he is like a father who begets a
son. Yet in practice, rigid monotheism is not more prevalent among
Madhva's followers than in other sects. They are said to tolerate the
worship of Sivaite deities and of the lingam in their temples[596] and
their ascetics dress like Saivas.

Madhva travelled in both northern and southern India and had a
somewhat troubled life, for his doctrine, being the flat contradiction
of the Advaita, involved him in continual conflicts with the followers
of Sankara who are said to have even stolen his library. At any rate
they anathematized his teaching with a violence unusual in Indian
theology.[597] In spite of such lively controversy he found time to
write thirty-seven works, including commentaries on the Upanishads,
Bhagavad-gita and Vedanta Sutras. The obvious meaning of these texts
is not that required by his system, but they are recognized by all
Vaishnavas as the three Prasthanas or starting-points of philosophy
and he had to show that they supported his views. Hence his
interpretation often seems forced and perverse. The most extraordinary
instance of this is his explanation of the celebrated phrase in the
Chandogya Upanishad Sa atma tat tvam asi. He reads Sa atma atat tvam
asi and considers that it means "You are not that God. Why be so
conceited as to suppose that you are?"[598] Monotheistic texts have
often received a mystical and pantheistic interpretation. The Old
Testament and the Koran have been so treated by Kabbalists and Sufis.
But in Madhva's commentaries we see the opposite and probably rarer
method. Pantheistic texts are twisted until they are made to express
uncompromising monotheism.

The sect is often called Brahma-sampradaya, because it claims that its
doctrine was revealed by Brahma from whom Madhva was the sixth teacher
in spiritual descent. Its members are known as Madhvas but prefer to
call themselves Sad-Vaishnavas. Its teaching seems more rigid and
less emotional than that of other Vishnuites and is based on the
Pancabheda or five eternal distinctions between (_a_) God and the
soul, (_b_) God and matter, (_c_) the soul and matter, (_d_)
individual souls, (_e_) individual atoms of matter. God is generally
called Vishnu or Narayana rather than Vasudeva. Krishna is adored
but not in his pastoral aspect. Vishnu and his spouse Lakshmi are
real though superhuman personalities and their sons are Brahma the
creator and Vayu.[599] Peculiar to this sect is the doctrine that
except through Vayu, the son of Vishnu, salvation is impossible. Vayu
has been three times incarnate as Hanumat, the helper of Rama, as
Bhima and as Madhva himself.[600] Souls are separate, innumerable and
related to God as subjects to a king. They are of three classes: those
who are destined to eternal bliss in the presence of God: those who
revolve eternally in the maze of transmigration: and those who tending
ever downwards are doomed to eternal suffering.

This last doctrine, as well as the doctrine of salvation through Vayu,
the wind or spirit, has led many to suspect that Madhva was influenced
by Christian ideas, but it is more probable that he owed something to
Islam. Such influence would no doubt be distant and indirect, for a
Brahman would not come into contact with Moslim doctors, though it is
said that Madhva could speak Persian.[601] But some Moslim ideas such
as the absolute separation of God from the world and the
predestination of souls to eternal happiness and misery may have
entered Brahman minds. Still, nearly all Madhva's views (with the
possible exception of eternal punishment) have Indian analogies. The
Yoga teaches that there are innumerable souls distinct from one
another and from God and though salvation through the spirit sounds
Christian, yet the Upanishads constantly celebrate Vayu (wind) and
Prana (breath) as the pervading principle of the world and the home
of the self. "By the wind (Vayu) as thread, O Gautama, this world and
the other world and all creatures are bound together."[602] Thus the
idea that the wind is the universal mediator is old and it does not
seem that Madhva regarded Vayu as a redeemer or expiation for sin like
Christ.

The Madhvas are still an energetic and important sect. Their
headquarters are at Udipi in South Kanara and they also hold an annual
conference at Tirupati at which examinations in theology are held and
prizes given. At Udipi are eight maths and a very sacred temple,
dedicated by Madhva himself to Krishna. The head of each math is
charged in turn with the supervision of this temple during two years
and the change of office is celebrated by a great biennial festival in
January. The worship is more puritanical than in the temples of other
sects, dancing girls for instance not being allowed, but great
importance is attached to the practice of branding the body with the
emblems of Vishnu. The sect, like the Sri Vaishnavas, is divided
into two parties, the Vyasakutas who are conservative and use Sanskrit
scriptures,[603] and the Dasakutas who have more popular tendencies
and use sacred books written in Kanarese. Neither the Sri Vaishnavas
nor the Madhvas are numerous in northern India.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 564: Such as the Vishnu Purana, Vishnu Dharma, said to be
a section of the Garuda Purana and the Bhagavad-gita.]

[Footnote 565: The Hindus are well aware that the doctrine of Bhakti
spread from the south to the north. See the allegory quoted in
_J.R.A.S._ 1911, p. 800.]

[Footnote 566: Thus Ramanuja says (Sri Bhashya, II. 2. 43) that the
Vedanta Sutras do not refute the Sankhya and Yoga but merely certain
erroneous views as to Brahman not being the self.]

[Footnote 567: It has been described as the earliest of the Vishnuite
Churches and it would be so if we could be sure that the existence of
the doctrine called Dvaitadvaita was equivalent to the existence of
the sect. But Bhandarkar has shown some reason for thinking that
Nimbaditya lived after Ramanuja. It must be admitted that the worship
of Radha and the doctrine of self-surrender or prapatti, both found in
the Dasasloki, are probably late.]

[Footnote 568: See Grierson in _E.R.E._ vol. II. p. 457.]

[Footnote 569: The Church of the Nimavats is also called
Sanakadi-sampradaya because it professes to derive its doctrine from
Sanaka and his brethren who taught Narada, who taught Nimbarka. At
least one sub-sect founded by Harivamsa (born 1559) adopts a doctrine
analogous to Saktism and worships Radha as the manifestation of
Krishna's energy.]

[Footnote 570: Called the Dasasloki. It is translated in Bhandarkar's
_Vaishn and Saivism_, pp. 63-5.]

[Footnote 571: Also spelt Alvar and Azhvar. The Tamil pronunciation of
this difficult letter varies in different districts. The word
apparently means one who is drowned or immersed in the divine love.
Cf. _Azhi_, the deep sea; _Azhal_, being deep or being immersed.]

[Footnote 572: An educated Vaishnava told me at Srirangam that devas
and saints receive the same homage.]

[Footnote 573: It is possible that the poems attributed to Namm'arvar
and other saints are really later compositions. See _Epig. Ind_. vol.
VIII. p. 294.]

[Footnote 574: XI. 5. 38-40.]

[Footnote 575: Bhandarkar (_Vaishn. and Saivism_, p. 50) thinks it
probable that Kulasekhara, one of the middle Arvars, lived about
1130. But the argument is not conclusive and it seems to me improbable
that he lived after Nathamuni.]

[Footnote 576: The first called Mudal-Ayiram consists of nine hymns
ascribed to various saints such as Periyarvar and Andal. The second
and third each consist of a single work the Periya-tiru-mori and the
Tiru-vay-mori ascribed to Tiru-mangai and Namm'arvar respectively.
The fourth part or Iyar-pa is like the first a miscellany containing
further compositions by these two as well as by others.]

[Footnote 577: Nityanusandhanam series: edited with Telugu paraphrase
and English translation by M.B. Srinivasa Aiyangar, Madras, 1898.]

[Footnote 578: The best known is the Guru-parampara-prabhavam of
Brahmatantra-svatantra-swami. For an English account of these doctors
see T. Rajagopala Chariar, _The Vaishnavite Reformers of India_,
Madras, 1909.]

[Footnote 579: Agamapramanya. He also wrote a well-known hymn called
Alavandar-Stotram and a philosophical treatise called Siddhi-traya.]

[Footnote 580: He states himself that he followed Boddhayana, a
commentator on the Sutras of unknown date but anterior to Sankara. He
quotes several other commentators particularly Dramida, so that his
school must have had a long line of teachers.]

[Footnote 581: See _Gazetteer of India_, vol. XXIII. s.v. There is a
Kanarese account of his life called Dibya-caritra. For his life and
teaching see also Bhandarkar in _Berichte VIIth Int. Orient.
Congress_, 1886, pp. 101 ff. Lives in English have been published at
Madras by Alkondaville Govindacarya (1906) and Krishnaswami Aiyangar
(? 1909).]

[Footnote 582: He also wrote the Vedartha Sangraha, Vedartha Pradipa,
Vedanta Sara and a commentary on the Bhagavad-gita.]

[Footnote 583: _S.B.E._ XLVIII. p. 3.]

[Footnote 584: II. 2. 36-39.]

[Footnote 585: II. 2. 43 _ad fin._]

[Footnote 586: Ramanuja's introduction to the Bhagavad-gita is more
ornate but does not go much further in doctrine than the passage here
quoted.]

[Footnote 587: This fivefold manifestation of the deity is a
characteristic Pancaratra doctrine. See Schrader, _Int._ pp. 25, 51
and _Sri Bhashya_, II. 242.]

[Footnote 588: See Br. Ar. Up III. 7. The Sri Vaishnavas attach great
importance to this chapter.]

[Footnote 589: Only relatively northern and southern. Neither flourish
in what we call northern India.]

[Footnote 590: Hence the two doctrines are called markata-nyaya and
marjara-nyaya, monkey theory and cat theory. The latter gave rise to
the dangerous doctrine of Doshabhogya, that God enjoys sin, since it
gives a larger scope for the display of His grace. Cf. Oscar Wilde in
_De Profundis_, "Christ, through some divine instinct in him, seems to
have always loved the sinner as being the nearest possible approach to
perfection in man.... In a manner not yet understood of the world, he
regarded sin and suffering as being in themselves beautiful holy
things and modes of perfection.... Christ, had he been asked, would
have said--I feel quite certain about it--that the moment the prodigal
son fell on his knees and wept, he made his having wasted his
substance with harlots, his swine herding and hungering for the husks
they ate beautiful and holy moments in his life."]

[Footnote 591: Also called Venkatanatha. For some rather elaborate
studies in the history of the Sri-Vaishnavas see V. Rangacharis'
articles in _J. Bombay R.A.S._ 1915 and 1916 and _J. Mythic Society_,
1917, Nos. 2 ff.]

[Footnote 592: Prapatti and acaryabhimana.--The word _prapatti_ seems
not to occur in the Sri Bhashya and it is clear that Ramanuja's
temperament was inclined to active and intelligent devotion. But
_prapatti_ is said to have been taught by Nathamuni and Sathagopa
(Rajagopala Chariar, _Vaishnavite Reformers_, p. 6). The word means
literally _approaching._]

[Footnote 593: The Artha-pancaka and Tattva-traya are the best known.
See text and translation of the first in _J.R.A.S._ 1910, pp.
565-607.]

[Footnote 594: Ramanuja set less store than Sankara on asceticism and
renunciation of the world. He held the doctrine called _samucchaya_
(or combination) namely that good works as well as knowledge are
efficacious for salvation.]

[Footnote 595: Also called Anandatirtha and Purnaprajna. According to
others he was born in 1238 A.D. See for his doctrines Grierson's
article Madhvas in _E.R.E._ and his own commentaries on the Chandogya
and Brihad Ar. Upanishads published in _Sacred Books of the Hindus_,
vols. III. and XIV. For his date Bhandarkar, _Vaishn. and Saivism_,
pp. 58-59 and _I.A._. 1914, pp. 233 ff. and 262 ff. Accounts of his
life and teaching have been written by Padmanabha Char. and Krishna
Svami Aiyer (Madras, 1909). His followers maintain that he is not dead
but still alive at Badari in the Himalayas.]

[Footnote 596: See Padmanabha Char. _l.c._ page 12. Madhva condemned
the worship of inanimate objects (_e.g._ com. Chand. Up. VII. 14. 2)
but not the worship of Brahman _in_ inanimate objects.]

[Footnote 597: In a work called the _Pashanda capetika_ or _A Slap for
Heretics_, all the adherents of Madhva are consigned to hell and the
Saurapurana, chaps. XXXVIII.-XL. contains a violent polemic against
them. See Jahn's _Analysis_, pp. 90-106 and Barth in _Melanges
Harlez_, pp. 12-25. It is curious that the Madhvas should have been
selected for attack, for in many ways they are less opposed to
Sivaites than are other Vishnuite sects but the author was clearly
badly informed about the doctrines which he attacks and he was
probably an old-fashioned Sivaite of the north who regarded Madhvism
as a new-fangled version of objectionable doctrines.

The Madhvas are equally violent in denouncing Sankara and his
followers. They miswrite the name Samkara, giving it the sense of
mongrel or dirt and hold that he was an incarnation of a demon called
Manimat sent by evil spirits to corrupt the world.]

[Footnote 598: See his comment on Chand. Up. VI. 8. 7. Compare
Bhag.-g. XV. 7. The text appears to say that the soul (Jiva) is a part
(amsa) of the Lord. Madhva says it is so-called because it bears some
reduced similitude to the Lord, though quite distinct from him.
Madhva's exegesis is supported by a system of tantric or cabalistic
interpretation in which every letter has a special meaning. Thus in
the passage of the Chand. Up. mentioned above the simple words _sa ya
eshah_ are explained as equivalent to Sara essence, yama the
controller, and ishta the desired one. The reading atat tvam asi is
said not to have originated with Madhva but to be found in a Bhagavata
work called the Samasamhita.]

[Footnote 599: In his commentary on the opening of the Chand. Up.
Madhva seems to imply a Trinity consisting of Vishnu, Rama (=Lakshmi)
and Vayu.]

[Footnote 600: This is expressly stated at the end of the commentary
on the Brih. Ar. Upan.]

[Footnote 601: _Life and teachings of Sri-Madhvacharyar_ by Padmanabha
Char. 1909, p. 159. Some have suspected a connection between Madhva's
teaching and Manicheism, because he attached much importance to an
obscure demon called Manimat (see Mahabh. III. 11, 661) whom he
considered incarnate in Sankara. It is conceivable that in his Persian
studies he may have heard of Mani as an arch-heretic and have
identified him with this demon but this does not imply any connection
between his own system (or Sankara's either) and Manicheism.]

[Footnote 602: Brih. Ar. Upan. III. 7. 2.]

[Footnote 603: Among them are the Manimanjari, the Madhvavijaya and
the Vayustuti, all attributed to a disciple of Madhva and his son.]




CHAPTER XXX

LATER VISHNUISM IN NORTH INDIA


1


With the fifteenth century Hinduism enters on a new phase. Sects arise
which show the influence of Mohammedanism, sometimes to such an extent
that it is hard to say whether they should be classed as Hindu or
Moslim, and many teachers repudiate caste. Also, whereas in the
previous centuries the centre of religious feeling lay in the south,
it now shifts to the north. Hinduism had been buffeted but not
seriously menaced there: the teachers of the south had not failed to
recognize by their pilgrimages the sanctity and authority of the
northern seats of learning: such works as the Gita-govinda testify to
the existence there of fervent Vishnuism. But the country had been
harassed by Moslim invasions and unsettled by the vicissitudes of
transitory dynasties. The Jains were powerful in Gujarat and
Rajputana. In Bengal Saktism and moribund Buddhism were not likely to
engender new enthusiasms. But in a few centuries the movements
inaugurated in the south increased in extension and strength. Hindus
and Mohammedans began to know more of each other, and in the sixteenth
century under the tolerant rule of Akbar and his successors the new
sects which had been growing were able to consolidate themselves.

After Ramanuja and Madhva, the next great name in the history of
Vishnuism, and indeed of Hinduism, is Ramanand. His date is
uncertain.[604] He was posterior to Ramanuja, from whose sect he
detached himself, and Kabir was his disciple, apparently his immediate
disciple. Some traditions give Prayaga as his birthplace, others
Melucote, but the north was the scene of his activity. He went on a
lengthy pilgrimage, and on his return was accused of having infringed
the rules of his sect as to eating, etc., and was excommunicated, but
received permission from his Guru to found a new sect. He then settled
in Benares and taught there. He wrote no treatise but various hymns
ascribed to him are still popular.[605] Though he is not associated
with any special dogma, yet his teaching is of great importance as
marking the origin of a popular religious movement characterized by
the use of the vernacular languages instead of Sanskrit, and by a
laxity in caste rules culminating in a readiness to admit as equals
all worshippers of the true God.[606] This God is Rama rather than
Krishna. I have already pointed out that the worship of Rama as the
Supreme Being (to be distinguished from respect for him as a hero) is
not early: in fact it appears to begin in the period which we are
considering. Of the human forms of the deity Krishna was clearly the
most popular but the school of Ramanuja, while admitting both Rama and
Krishna as incarnations, preferred to adore God under less
mythological and more philosophic names such as Narayana. Ramanand,
