those are the ones whom Allah has guided, and those are the ones endued
with understanding.

P: Who hear advice and follow the best thereof. Such are those whom
Allah guideth, and such are men of understanding.

S: Those who listen to the word, then follow the best of it; those are
they whom Allah has guided, and those it is who are the men of
understanding.

039.019
Y: Is, then, one against whom the decree of Punishment is justly due
(equal to one who eschews Evil)? Wouldst thou, then, deliver one (who
is) in the Fire?

P: Is he on whom the word of doom is fulfilled (to be helped), and canst
thou (O Muhammad) rescue him who is in the Fire?

S: What! as for him then against whom the sentence of chastisement is
due: What! can you save him who is in the fire?

039.020
Y: But it is for those who fear their Lord. That lofty mansions, one
above another, have been built: beneath them flow rivers (of delight):
(such is) the Promise of Allah: never doth Allah fail in (His) promise.

P: But those who keep their duty to their Lord, for them are lofty halls
with lofty halls above them, built (for them), beneath which rivers
flow. (It is) a promise of Allah. Allah faileth not His promise.

S: But (as for) those who are careful of (their duty to) their Lord,
they shall have high places, above them higher places, built (for
them), beneath which flow rivers; (this is) the promise of Allah: Allah
will not fail in (His) promise.

039.021
Y: Seest thou not that Allah sends down rain from the sky, and leads it
through springs in the earth? Then He causes to grow, therewith,
produce of various colours: then it withers; thou wilt see it grow
yellow; then He makes it dry up and crumble away. Truly, in this, is a
Message of remembrance to men of understanding.

P: Hast thou not seen how Allah hath sent down water from the sky and
hath caused it to penetrate the earth as watersprings, and afterward
thereby produceth crops of divers hues; and afterward they wither and
thou seest them turn yellow; then He maketh them chaff. Lo! herein
verily is a reminder for men of understanding.

S: Do you not see that Allah sends down water from the cloud, then makes
it go along in the earth in springs, then brings forth therewith
herbage of various colors, then it withers so that you see it becoming
yellow, then He makes it a thing crushed and broken into pieces? Most
surely there is a reminder in this for the men of understanding.

039.022
Y: Is one whose heart Allah has opened to Islam, so that he has received
Enlightenment from Allah, (no better than one hard-hearted)? Woe to
those whose hearts are hardened against celebrating the praises of
Allah! they are manifestly wandering (in error)!

P: Is he whose bosom Allah hath expanded for Al-Islam, so that he
followeth a light from his Lord, (as he who disbelieveth)? Then woe
unto those whose hearts are hardened against remembrance of Allah. Such
are in plain error.

S: What! is he whose heart Allah has opened for Islam so that he is in a
light from his Lord (like the hard-hearted)? Nay, woe to those whose
hearts are hard against the remembrance of Allah; those are in clear
error.

039.023
Y: Allah has revealed (from time to time) the most beautiful Message in
the form of a Book, consistent with itself, (yet) repeating (its
teaching in various aspects): the skins of those who fear their Lord
tremble thereat; then their skins and their hearts do soften to the
celebration of Allah's praises. Such is the guidance of Allah: He
guides therewith whom He pleases, but such as Allah leaves to stray,
can have none to guide.

P: Allah hath (now) revealed the fairest of statements, a Scripture
consistent, (wherein promises of reward are) paired (with threats of
punishment), whereat doth creep the flesh of those who fear their Lord,
so that their flesh and their hearts soften to Allah's reminder. Such
is Allah's guidance, wherewith He guideth whom He will. And him whom
Allah sendeth astray, for him there is no guide.

S: Allah has revealed the best announcement, a book conformable in its
various parts, repeating, whereat do shudder the skins of those who
fear their Lord, then their skins and their hearts become pliant to the
remembrance of Allah; this is Allah's guidance, He guides with it whom
He pleases; and (as for) him whom Allah makes err, there is no guide
for him.

039.024
Y: Is, then, one who has to fear the brunt of the Penalty on the Day of
Judgment (and receive it) on his face, (like one guarded therefrom)? It
will be said to the wrong-doers: "Taste ye (the fruits of) what ye
earned!"

P: Is he then, who will strike his face against the awful doom upon the
Day of Resurrection (as he who doeth right)? And it will be said unto
the wrong-doers: Taste what ye used to earn.

S: Is he then who has to guard himself with his own person against the
evil chastisement on the resurrection day? And it will be said to the
unjust: Taste what you earned.

039.025
Y: Those before them (also) rejected (revelation), and so the Punishment
came to them from directions they did not perceive.

P: Those before them denied, and so the doom came on them whence they
knew not.

S: Those before them rejected (prophets), therefore there came to them
the chastisement from whence they perceived not.

039.026
Y: So Allah gave them a taste of humiliation in the present life, but
greater is the punishment of the Hereafter, if they only knew!

P: Thus Allah made them taste humiliation in the life of the world, and
verily the doom of the Hereafter will be greater if they did but know.

S: So Allah made them taste the disgrace in this world's life, and
certainly the punishment of the hereafter is greater; did they but
know!

039.027
Y: We have put forth for men, in this Qur'an every kind of Parable, in
order that they may receive admonition.

P: And verily We have coined for mankind in this Qur'an all kinds of
similitudes, that haply they may reflect;

S: And certainly We have set forth to men in this Quran similitudes of
every sort that they may mind.

039.028
Y: (It is) a Qur'an in Arabic, without any crookedness (therein): in
order that they may guard against Evil.

P: A Lecture in Arabic, containing no crookedness, that haply they may
ward off (evil).

S: An Arabic Quran without any crookedness, that they may guard (against
evil).

039.029
Y: Allah puts forth a Parable a man belonging to many partners at
variance with each other, and a man belonging entirely to one master:
are those two equal in comparison? Praise be to Allah! but most of them
have no knowledge.

P: Allah coineth a similitude: A man in relation to whom are several
part-owners, quarrelling, and a man belonging wholly to one man. Are
the two equal in similitude? Praise be to Allah! But most of them know
not.

S: Allah sets forth an example: There is a slave in whom are (several)
partners differing with one another, and there is another slave wholly
owned by one man. Are the two alike in condition? (All) praise is due
to Allah. Nay! most of them do not know.

039.030
Y: Truly thou wilt die (one day), and truly they (too) will die (one
day).

P: Lo! thou wilt die, and lo! they will die;

S: Surely you shall die and they (too) shall surely die.

039.031
Y: In the end will ye (all), on the Day of Judgment, settle your
disputes in the presence of your Lord.

P: Then lo! on the Day of Resurrection, before your Lord ye will
dispute.

S: Then surely on the day of resurrection you will contend one with
another before your Lord.

039.032
Y: Who, then, doth more wrong than one who utters a lie concerning
Allah, and rejects the Truth when it comes to him; is there not in Hell
an abode for blasphemers?

P: And who doth greater wrong than he who telleth a lie against Allah,
and denieth the truth when it reacheth him? Will not the home of
disbelievers be in hell?

S: Who is then more unjust than he who utters a lie against Allah and
(he who) gives the lie to the truth when it comes to him; is there not
in hell an abode for the unbelievers?

039.033
Y: And he who brings the Truth and he who confirms (and supports) it
- such are the men who do right.

P: And whoso bringeth the truth and believeth therein - Such are the
dutiful.

S: And he who brings the truth and (he who) accepts it as the truth--
these are they that guard (against evil).

039.034
Y: They shall have all that they wish for, in the presence of their
Lord: such is the reward of those who do good:

P: They shall have what they will of their Lord's bounty. That is the
reward of the good:

S: They shall have with their Lord what they please; that is the reward
of the doers of good;

039.035
Y: So that Allah will turn off from them (even) the worst in their deeds
and give them their reward according to the best of what they have
done.

P: That Allah will remit from them the worst of what they did, and will
pay them for reward the best they used to do.

S: So that Allah will do away with the worst of what they did and give
them their reward for the best of what they do.

039.036
Y: Is not Allah enough for his Servant? But they try to frighten thee
with other (gods) besides Him! for such as Allah leaves to stray, there
can be no guide.

P: Will not Allah defend His slave? Yet they would frighten thee with
those beside Him. He whom Allah sendeth astray, for him there is no
guide.

S: Is not Allah sufficient for His servant? And they seek to frighten
you with those besides Him; and whomsoever Allah makes err, there is no
guide for him.

039.037
Y: And such as Allah doth guide there can be none to lead astray. Is not
Allah Exalted in Power, (Able to enforce His Will), Lord of
Retribution?

P: And he whom Allah guideth, for him there can be no misleader. Is not
Allah Mighty, Able to Requite (the wrong)?

S: And whom Allah guides, there is none that can lead him astray; is not
Allah Mighty, the Lord of retribution?

039.038
Y: If indeed thou ask them who it is that created the heavens and the
earth, they would be sure to say, "Allah". Say: "See ye then? the
things that ye invoke besides Allah,- can they, if Allah wills some
Penalty for me, remove His Penalty?- Or if He wills some Grace for me,
can they keep back his Grace?" Say: "Sufficient is Allah for me! In Him
trust those who put their trust."

P: And verily, if thou shouldst ask them: Who created the heavens and
the earth? they will say: Allah. Say: Bethink you then of those ye
worship beside Allah, if Allah willed some hurt for me, could they
remove from me His hurt; or if He willed some mercy for me, could they
restrain His mercy? Say: Allah is my all. In Him do (all) the trusting
put their trust.

S: And should you ask them, Who created the heavens and the earth? They
would most certainly say: Allah. Say: Have you then considered that
what you call upon besides Allah, would they, if Allah desire to
afflict me with harm, be the removers of His harm, or (would they), if
Allah desire to show me mercy, be the withholders of His mercy? Say:
Allah is sufficient for me; on Him do the reliant rely.

039.039
Y: Say: "O my People! Do whatever ye can: I will do (my part): but soon
will ye know-"

P: Say: O my people! Act in your manner. Lo! I (too) am acting. Thus ye
will come to know

S: Say: O my people! work in your place, surely I am a worker, so you
will come to know.

039.040
Y: "Who it is to whom comes a Penalty of ignominy, and on whom descends
a Penalty that abides."

P: Who it is unto whom cometh a doom that will abase him, and on whom
there falleth everlasting doom.

S: Who it is to whom there shall come a punishment which will disgrace
him and to whom will be due a lasting punishment.

039.041
Y: Verily We have revealed the Book to thee in Truth, for (instructing)
mankind. He, then, that receives guidance benefits his own soul: but he
that strays injures his own soul. Nor art thou set over them to dispose
of their affairs.

P: Lo! We have revealed unto thee (Muhammad) the Scripture for mankind
with truth. Then whosoever goeth right it is for his soul, and
whosoever strayeth, strayeth only to its hurt. And thou art not a
warder over them.

S: Surely We have revealed to you the Book with the truth for the sake
of men; so whoever follows the right way, it is for his own soul and
whoever errs, he errs only to its detriment; and you are not a
custodian over them.

039.042
Y: It is Allah that takes the souls (of men) at death; and those that
die not (He takes) during their sleep: those on whom He has passed the
decree of death, He keeps back (from returning to life), but the rest
He sends (to their bodies) for a term appointed verily in this are
Signs for those who reflect.

P: Allah receiveth (men's) souls at the time of their death, and that
(soul) which dieth not (yet) in its sleep. He keepeth that (soul) for
which He hath ordained death and dismisseth the rest till an appointed
term. Lo! herein verily are portents for people who take thought.

S: Allah takes the souls at the time of their death, and those that die
not during their sleep; then He withholds those on whom He has passed
the decree of death and sends the others back till an appointed term;
most surely there are signs in this for a people who reflect.

039.043
Y: What! Do they take for intercessors others besides Allah? Say:

"Even if they have no power whatever and no intelligence?"
P: Or choose they intercessors other than Allah? Say: What! Even though
they have power over nothing and have no intelligence?

S: Or have they taken intercessors besides Allah? Say: what! even though
they did not ever have control over anything, nor do they understand.

039.044
Y: Say: "To Allah belongs exclusively (the right to grant) intercession:
to Him belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth: In the End,
it is to Him that ye shall be brought back."

P: Say: Unto Allah belongeth all intercession. His is the Sovereignty of
the heavens and the earth. And afterward unto Him ye will be brought
back.

S: Say: Allah's is the intercession altogether; His is the kingdom of
the heavens and the earth, then to Him you shall be brought back.

039.045
Y: When Allah, the One and Only, is mentioned, the hearts of those who
believe not in the Hereafter are filled with disgust and horror; but
when (gods) other than He are mentioned, behold, they are filled with
joy!

P: And when Allah alone is mentioned, the hearts of those who believe
not in the Hereafter are repelled, and when those (whom they worship)
beside Him are mentioned, behold! they are glad.

S: And when Allah alone is mentioned, the hearts of those who do not
believe in the hereafter shrink, and when those besides Him are
mentioned, lo! they are joyful.

039.04
Y: Say: "O Allah! Creator of the heavens and the earth! Knower of all
that is hidden and open! it is Thou that wilt judge between Thy
Servants in those matters about which they have differed."

P: Say: O Allah! Creator of the heavens and the earth! Knower of the
Invisible and the Visible! Thou wilt judge between Thy slaves
concerning that wherein they used to differ.

S: Say: O Allah! Originator of the heavens and the earth, Knower of the
unseen and the seen! Thou (only) judgest between Thy servants as to
that wherein they differ.

039.047
Y: Even if the wrong-doers had all that there is on earth, and as much
more, (in vain) would they offer it for ransom from the pain of the
Penalty on the Day of Judgment: but something will confront them from
Allah, which they could never have counted upon!

P: And though those who do wrong possess all that is in the earth, and
therewith as much again, they verily will seek to ransom themselves
therewith on the Day of Resurrection from the awful doom; and there
will appear unto them, from their Lord, that wherewith they never
reckoned.

S: And had those who are unjust all that is in the earth and the like of
it with it, they would certainly offer it as ransom (to be saved) from
the evil of the punishment on the day of resurrection; and what they
never thought of shall become plain to them from Allah.

039.048
Y: For the evils of their Deeds will confront them, and they will be
(completely) encircled by that which they used to mock at!

P: And the evils that they earned will appear unto them, and that
whereat they used to scoff will surround them.

S: And the evil (consequences) of what they wrought shall become plain
to them, and the very thing they mocked at shall beset them.

039.049
Y: Now, when trouble touches man, he cries to Us: But when We bestow a
favour upon him as from Ourselves, he says, "This has been given to me
because of a certain knowledge (I have)!" Nay, but this is but a trial,
but most of them understand not!

P: Now when hurt toucheth a man he crieth unto Us, and afterward when We
have granted him a boon from Us, he saith: Only by force of knowledge I
obtained it. Nay, but it is a test. But most of them know not.

S: So when harm afflicts a man he calls upon Us; then, when We give him
a favor from Us, he says: I have been given it only by means of
knowledge. Nay, it is a trial, but most of them do not know.

039.050
Y: Thus did the (generations) before them say! But all that they did was
of no profit to them.

P: Those before them said it, yet (all) that they had earned availed
them not;

S: Those before them did say it indeed, but what they earned availed
them not.

039.051
Y: Nay, the evil results of their Deeds overtook them. And the
wrong-doers of this (generation)- the evil results of their Deeds will
soon overtake them (too), and they will never be able to frustrate (Our
Plan)!

P: But the evils that they earned smote them; and such of these as do
wrong, the evils that they earn will smite them; they cannot escape.

S: So there befell them the evil (consequences) of what they earned; and
(as for) those who are unjust from among these, there shall befall them
the evil (consequences) of what they earn, and they shall not escape.

039.052
Y: Know they not that Allah enlarges the provision or restricts it, for
any He pleases? Verily, in this are Signs for those who believe!

P: Know they not that Allah enlargeth providence for whom He will, and
straiteneth it (for whom He will). Lo! herein verily are portents for
people who believe.

S: Do they not know that Allah makes ample the means of subsistence to
whom He pleases, and He straitens; most surely there are signs in this
for a people who believe.

039.053
Y: Say: "O my Servants who have transgressed against their souls!
Despair not of the Mercy of Allah: for Allah forgives all sins: for He
is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

P: Say: O My slaves who have been prodigal to their own hurt! Despair
not of the mercy of Allah, Who forgiveth all sins. Lo! He is the
Forgiving, the Merciful.

S: Say: O my servants! who have acted extravagantly against their own
souls, do not despair of the mercy of Allah; surely Allah forgives the
faults altogether; surely He is the Forgiving the Merciful.

039.054
Y: "Turn ye to our Lord (in repentance) and bow to His (Will), before
the Penalty comes on you: after that ye shall not be helped."

P: Turn unto your Lord repentant, and surrender unto Him, before there
come unto you the doom, when ye cannot be helped.

S: And return to your Lord time after time and submit to Him before
there comes to you the punishment, then you shall not be helped.

039.055
Y: "And follow the best of (the courses) revealed to you from your Lord,
before the Penalty comes on you - of a sudden while ye perceive not!"-

P: And follow the better (guidance) of that which is revealed unto you
from your Lord, before the doom cometh on you suddenly when ye know
not,

S: And follow the best that has been revealed to you from your Lord
before there comes to you the punishment all of a sudden while you do
not even perceive;

039.056
Y: "Lest the soul should (then) say: 'Ah! Woe is me!- In that I
neglected (my duty) towards Allah, and was but among those who
mocked!'"-

P: Lest any soul should say: Alas, my grief that I was unmindful of
Allah, and I was indeed among the scoffers!

S: Lest a soul should say: O woe to me! for what I fell short of my duty
to Allah, and most surely I was of those who laughed to scorn;

039.057
Y: "Or (lest) it should say: 'If only Allah had guided me, I should
certainly have been among the righteous!'"-

P: Or should say: If Allah had but guided me I should have been among
the dutiful!

S: Or it should say: Had Allah guided me, I would certainly have been of
those who guard (against evil);

039.058
Y: "Or (lest) it should say when it (actually) sees the penalty: 'If
only I had another chance, I should certainly be among those who do
good!'"

P: Or should say, when it seeth the doom: Oh, that I had but a second
chance that I might be among the righteous!

S: Or it should say when it sees the punishment: Were there only a
returning for me, I should be of the doers of good.

039.059
Y: "(The reply will be:) 'Nay, but there came to thee my Signs, and thou
didst reject them: thou wast Haughty, and became one of those who
reject faith!'"

P: (But now the answer will be): Nay, for My revelations came unto thee,
but thou didst deny them and wast scornful and wast among the
disbelievers.

S: Aye! My communications came to you, but you rejected them, and you
were proud and you were one of the unbelievers.

039.060
Y: On the Day of Judgment wilt thou see those who told lies against
Allah;- their faces will be turned black; is there not in Hell an abode
for the Haughty?

P: And on the Day of Resurrection thou (Muhammad) seest those who lied
concerning Allah with their faces blackened. Is not the home of the
scorners in hell?

S: And on the day of resurrection you shall see those who lied against
Allah; their faces shall be blackened. Is there not in hell an abode
for the proud?

039.061
Y: But Allah will deliver the righteous to their place of salvation: no
evil shall touch them, nor shall they grieve.

P: And Allah delivereth those who ward off (evil) because of their
deserts. Evil toucheth them not, nor do they grieve.

S: And Allah shall deliver those who guard (against evil) with their
achievement; evil shall not touch them, nor shall they grieve.

039.062
Y: Allah is the Creator of all things, and He is the Guardian and
Disposer of all affairs.

P: Allah is Creator of all things, and He is Guardian over all things.

S: Allah is the Creator of every thing and He has charge over every
thing.

039.063
Y: To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth: and those who
reject the Signs of Allah,- it is they who will be in loss.

P: His are the keys of the heavens and the earth, and they who
disbelieve the revelations of Allah - such are they who are the losers.

S: His are the treasures of the heavens and the earth; and (as for)
those who disbelieve in the communications of Allah, these it is that
are the losers.

039.064
Y: Say: "Is it some one other than Allah that ye order me to worship, O
ye ignorant ones?"

P: Say (O Muhammad, to the disbelievers): Do ye bid me serve other than
Allah? O ye fools!

S: Say: What! Do you then bid me serve others than Allah, O ignorant
men?

039.065
Y: But it has already been revealed to thee,- as it was to those before
thee,- "If thou wert to join (gods with Allah), truly fruitless will be
thy work (in life), and thou wilt surely be in the ranks of those who
lose (all spiritual good)".

P: And verily it hath been revealed unto thee as unto those before thee
(saying): If thou ascribe a partner to Allah thy work will fail and
thou indeed wilt be among the losers.

S: And certainly, it has been revealed to you and to those before you:
Surely if you associate (with Allah), your work would certainly come to
naught and you would certainly be of the losers.

039.066
Y: Nay, but worship Allah, and be of those who give thanks.

P: Nay, but Allah must thou serve, and be among the thankful!

S: Nay! but serve Allah alone and be of the thankful.

039.067
Y: No just estimate have they made of Allah, such as is due to Him: On
the Day of Judgment the whole of the earth will be but His handful, and
the heavens will be rolled up in His right hand: Glory to Him! High is
He above the Partners they attribute to Him!

P: And they esteem not Allah as He hath the right to be esteemed, when
the whole earth is His handful on the Day of Resurrection, and the
heavens are rolled in His right hand. Glorified is He and High Exalted
from all that they ascribe as partner (unto Him).

S: And they have not honored Allah with the honor that is due to Him;
and the whole earth shall be in His grip on the day of resurrection and
the heavens rolled up in His right hand; glory be to Him, and may He be
exalted above what they associate (with Him).

039.068
Y: The Trumpet will (just) be sounded, when all that are in the heavens
and on earth will swoon, except such as it will please Allah (to
exempt). Then will a second one be sounded, when, behold, they will be
standing and looking on!

P: And the trumpet is blown, and all who are in the heavens and all who
are in the earth swoon away, save him whom Allah willeth. Then it is
blown a second time, and behold them standing waiting!

S: And the trumpet shall be blown, so all those that are in the heavens
and all those that are in the earth shall swoon, except such as Allah
please; then it shall be blown again, then lo! they shall stand up
awaiting.

039.069
Y: And the Earth will shine with the Glory of its Lord: the Record (of
Deeds) will be placed (open); the prophets and the witnesses will be
brought forward and a just decision pronounced between them; and they
will not be wronged (in the least).

P: And the earth shineth with the light of her Lord, and the Book is set
up, and the prophets and the witnesses are brought, and it is judged
between them with truth, and they are not wronged.

S: And the earth shall beam with the light of its Lord, and the Book
shall be laid down, and the prophets and the witnesses shall be brought
up, and judgment shall be given between them with justice, and they
shall not be dealt with unjustly.

039.070
Y: And to every soul will be paid in full (the fruit) of its Deeds; and
(Allah) knoweth best all that they do.

P: And each soul is paid in full for what it did. And He is Best Aware
of what they do.

S: And every soul shall be paid back fully what it has done, and He
knows best what they do.

039.071
Y: The Unbelievers will be led to Hell in crowd: until, when they
arrive, there, its gates will be opened. And its keepers will say, "Did
not messengers come to you from among yourselves, rehearsing to you the
Signs of your Lord, and warning you of the Meeting of This Day of
yours?" The answer will be: "True: but the Decree of Punishment has
been proved true against the Unbelievers!"

P: And those who disbelieve are driven unto hell in troops till, when
they reach it and the gates thereof are opened, and the warders thereof
say unto them: Came there not unto you messengers of your own, reciting
unto you the revelations of your Lord and warning you of the meeting of
this your Day? they say: Yea, verily. But the word of doom of
disbelievers is fulfilled.

S: And those who disbelieve shall be driven to hell in companies; until,
when they come to it, its doors shall be opened, and the keepers of it
shall say to them: Did not there come to you messengers from among you
reciting to you the communications of your Lord and warning you of the
meeting of this day of yours? They shall say: Yea! But the sentence of
punishment was due against the unbelievers.

039.072
Y: (To them) will be said: "Enter ye the gates of Hell, to dwell
therein: and evil is (this) Abode of the Arrogant!"

P: It is said (unto them): Enter ye the gates of hell to dwell therein.
Thus hapless is the journey's end of the scorners.

S: It shall be said: Enter the gates of hell to abide therein; so evil
is the abode of the proud.

039.073
Y: And those who feared their Lord will be led to the Garden in crowds:
until behold, they arrive there; its gates will be opened; and its
keepers will say: "Peace be upon you! well have ye done! enter ye here,
to dwell therein."

P: And those who keep their duty to their Lord are driven unto the
Garden in troops till, when they reach it, and the gates thereof are
opened, and the warders thereof say unto them: Peace be unto you! Ye
are good, so enter ye (the Garden of delight), to dwell therein;

S: And those who are careful of (their duty to) their Lord shall be
conveyed to the garden in companies; until when they come to it, and
its doors shall be opened, and the keepers of it shall say to them:
Peace be on you, you shall be happy; therefore enter it to abide.

039.074
Y: They will say: "Praise be to Allah, Who has truly fulfilled His
Promise to us, and has given us (this) land in heritage: We can dwell
in the Garden as we will: how excellent a reward for those who work
(righteousness)!"

P: They say: Praise be to Allah, Who hath fulfilled His promise unto us
and hath made us inherit the land, sojourning in the Garden where we
will! So bounteous is the wage of workers.

S: And they shall say: (All) praise is due to Allah, Who has made good
to us His promise, and He has made us inherit the land; we may abide in
the garden where we please; so goodly is the reward of the workers.

039.075
Y: And thou wilt see the angels surrounding the Throne (Divine) on all
sides, singing Glory and Praise to their Lord. The Decision between
them (at Judgment) will be in (perfect) justice, and the cry (on all
sides) will be, "Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds!"

P: And thou (O Muhammad) seest the angels thronging round the Throne,
hymning the praises of their Lord. And they are judged aright. And it
is said: Praise be to Allah, the Lord of the Worlds!

S: And you shall see the angels going round about the throne glorifying
the praise of their Lord; and judgment shall be given between them with
justice, and it shall be said: All praise is due to Allah, the Lord of
the worlds.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 40:

                      AL-GHAFIR (THE FORGIVER (GOD) )
 Total Verses: 85 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

040.001
Y: Ha Mim.

P: Ha. Mim.

S: Ha Mim.

040.002
Y: The revelation of this Book is from Allah, Exalted in Power, Full of
Knowledge,-

P: The revelation of the Scripture is from Allah, the Mighty, the
Knower,

S: The revelation of the Book is from Allah, the Mighty, the Knowing,

040.003
Y: Who forgiveth sin, accepteth repentance, is strict in punishment, and
hath a long reach (in all things). there is no god but He: to Him is
the final goal.

P: The Forgiver of sin, the Accepter of repentance, the Stern in
punishment, the Bountiful. There is no God save Him. Unto Him is the
journeying.

S: The Forgiver of the faults and the Acceptor of repentance, Severe to
punish, Lord of bounty; there is no god but He; to Him is the eventual
coming.

040.004
Y: None can dispute about the Signs of Allah but the Unbelievers. Let
not, then, their strutting about through the land deceive thee!

P: None argue concerning the revelations of Allah save those who
disbelieve, so let not their turn of fortune in the land deceive thee
(O Muhammad).

S: None dispute concerning the communications of Allah but those who
disbelieve, therefore let not their going to and fro in the cities
deceive you.

040.005
Y: But (there were people) before them, who denied (the Signs),- the
People of Noah, and the Confederates (of Evil) after them; and every
People plotted against their prophet, to seize him, and disputed by
means of vanities, therewith to condemn the Truth; but it was I that
seized them! and how (terrible) was My Requital!

P: The folk of Noah and the factions after them denied (their
messengers) before these, and every nation purposed to seize their
messenger and argued falsely, (thinking) thereby to refute the Truth.
Then I seized them, and how (awful) was My punishment.

S: The people of Nuh and the parties after them rejected (prophets)
before them, and every nation purposed against their messenger to
destroy him, and they disputed by means of the falsehood that they
might thereby render null the truth, therefore I destroyed them; how
was then My retribution!

040.006
Y: Thus was the Decree of thy Lord proved true against the Unbelievers;
that truly they are Companions of the Fire!

P: Thus was the word of thy Lord concerning those who disbelieve
fulfilled: That they are owners of the Fire.

S: And thus did the word of your Lord prove true against those who
disbelieved that they are the inmates of the fire.

040.007
Y: Those who sustain the Throne (of Allah) and those around it sing
Glory and Praise to their Lord; believe in Him; and implore Forgiveness
for those who believe: "Our Lord! Thy Reach is over all things, in
Mercy and Knowledge. Forgive, then, those who turn in Repentance, and
follow Thy Path; and preserve them from the Penalty of the Blazing
Fire!"

P: Those who bear the Throne, and all who are round about it, hymn the
praises of their Lord and believe in Him and ask forgiveness for those
who believe (saying): Our Lord! Thou comprehendest all things in mercy
and knowledge, therefor forgive those who repent and follow Thy way.
Ward off from them the punishment of hell.

S: Those who bear the power and those around Him celebrate the praise of
their Lord and believe in Him and ask protection for those who believe:
Our Lord! Thou embracest all things in mercy and knowledge, therefore
grant protection to those who turn (to Thee) and follow Thy way, and
save them from the punishment of the hell:

040.008
Y: "And grant, our Lord! that they enter the Gardens of Eternity, which
Thou hast promised to them, and to the righteous among their fathers,
their wives, and their posterity! For Thou art (He), the Exalted in
Might, Full of Wisdom."

P: Our Lord! And make them enter the Gardens of Eden which thou hast
promised them, with such of their fathers and their wives and their
descendants as do right. Lo! Thou, only Thou, art the Mighty, the Wise.

S: Our Lord! and make them enter the gardens of perpetuity which Thou
hast promised to them and those who do good of their fathers and their
wives and their offspring, surely Thou are the Mighty, the Wise.

040.009
Y: "And preserve them from (all) ills; and any whom Thou dost preserve
from ills that Day,- on them wilt Thou have bestowed Mercy indeed: and
that will be truly (for them) the highest Achievement".

P: And ward off from them ill-deeds; and he from whom Thou wardest off
ill-deeds that day, him verily hast Thou taken into mercy. That is the
supreme triumph.

S: And keep them from evil deeds, and whom Thou keepest from evil deeds
this day, indeed Thou hast mercy on him, and that is the mighty
achievement.

040.010
Y: The Unbelievers will be addressed: "Greater was the aversion of Allah
to you than (is) your aversion to yourselves, seeing that ye were
called to the Faith and ye used to refuse."

P: Lo! (on that day) those who disbelieve are informed by proclamation:
Verily Allah's abhorrence is more terrible than your abhorrence one of
another, when ye were called unto the faith but did refuse.

S: Surely those who disbelieve shall be cried out to: Certainly Allah's
hatred (of you) when you were called upon to the faith and you
rejected, is much greater than your hatred of yourselves.

040.011
Y: They will say: "Our Lord! twice hast Thou made us without life, and
twice hast Thou given us Life! Now have we recognised our sins: Is
there any way out (of this)?"

P: They say: Our Lord! Twice hast Thou made us die, and twice hast Thou
made us live. Now we confess our sins. Is there any way to go out?

S: They shall say: Our Lord! twice didst Thou make us subject to death,
and twice hast Thou given us life, so we do confess our faults; is
there then a way to get out?

040.012
Y: (The answer will be:) "This is because, when Allah was invoked as the
Only (object of worship), ye did reject Faith, but when partners were
joined to Him, ye believed! the Command is with Allah, Most High, Most
Great!"

P: (It is said unto them): This is (your plight) because, when Allah
only was invoked, ye disbelieved, but when some partner was ascribed to
Him ye were believing. But the command belongeth only to Allah, the
Sublime, the Majestic.

S: That is because when Allah alone was called upon, you disbelieved,
and when associates were given to Him, you believed; so judgment
belongs to Allah, the High, the Great.

040.013
Y: He it is Who showeth you his Signs, and sendeth down sustenance for
you from the sky: but only those receive admonition who turn (to
Allah).

P: He it is Who showeth you His portents, and sendeth down for you
provision from the sky. None payeth heed save him who turneth (unto
Him) repentant.

S: He it is Who shows you His signs and sends down for you sustenance
from heaven, and none minds but he who turns (to Him) again and again.

040.014
Y: Call ye, then, upon Allah with sincere devotion to Him, even though
the Unbelievers may detest it.

P: Therefor (O believers) pray unto Allah, making religion pure for Him
(only), however much the disbelievers be averse -

S: Therefore call upon Allah, being sincere to Him in obedience, though
the unbelievers are averse:

040.015
Y: Raised high above ranks (or degrees), (He is) the Lord of the Throne
(of Authority): by His Command doth He send the Spirit (of inspiration)
to any of His servants he pleases, that it may warn (men) of the Day of
Mutual Meeting,-

P: The Exalter of Ranks, the Lord of the Throne. He causeth the Spirit
of His command upon whom He will of His slaves, that He may warn of the
Day of Meeting,

S: Possessor of the highest rank, Lord of power: He makes the
inspiration to light by His command upon whom He pleases of His
servants, that he may warn (men) of the day of meeting.

040.016
Y: The Day whereon they will (all) come forth: not a single thing
concerning them is hidden from Allah. Whose will be the dominion that
Day? That of Allah, the One the Irresistible!

P: The day when they come forth, nothing of them being hidden from
Allah. Whose is the Sovereignty this day? It is Allah's, the One, the
Almighty.

S: (Of) the day when they shall come forth, nothing concerning them
remains hidden to Allah. To whom belongs the kingdom this day? To
Allah, the One, the Subduer (of all).

040.017
Y: That Day will every soul be requited for what it earned; no injustice
will there be that Day, for Allah is Swift in taking account.

P: This day is each soul requited that which it hath earned; no wrong
(is done) this day. Lo! Allah is swift at reckoning.

S: This day every soul shall be rewarded for what it has earned; no
injustice (shall be done) this day; surely Allah is quick in reckoning.

040.018
Y: Warn them of the Day that is (ever) drawing near, when the hearts
will (come) right up to the throats to choke (them); No intimate friend
nor intercessor will the wrong-doers have, who could be listened to.

P: Warn them (O Muhammad) of the Day of the approaching (doom), when the
hearts will be choking the throats, (when) there will be no friend for
the wrong-doers, nor any intercessor who will be heard.

S: And warn them of the day that draws near, when hearts shall rise up
to the throats, grieving inwardly; the unjust shall not have any
compassionate friend nor any intercessor who should be obeyed.

040.019
Y: (Allah) knows of (the tricks) that deceive with the eyes, and all
that the hearts (of men) conceal.

P: He knoweth the traitor of the eyes, and that which the bosoms hide.

S: He knows the stealthy looks and that which the breasts conceal.

040.020
Y: And Allah will judge with (justice and) Truth: but those whom (men)
invoke besides Him, will not (be in a position) to judge at all. Verily
it is Allah (alone) Who hears and sees (all things).

P: Allah judgeth with truth, while those to whom they cry instead of Him
judge not at all. Lo! Allah, He is the Hearer, the Seer.

S: And Allah judges with the truth; and those whom they call upon
besides Him cannot judge aught; surely Allah is the Hearing, the
Seeing.

040.021
Y: Do they not travel through the earth and see what was the End of
those before them? They were even superior to them in strength, and in
the traces (they have left) in the land: but Allah did call them to
account for their sins, and none had they to defend them against Allah.

P: Have they not travelled in the land to see the nature of the
consequence for those who disbelieved before them? They were mightier
than these in power and (in the) traces (which they left behind them)
in the earth. Yet Allah seized them for their sins, and they had no
protector from Allah.

S: Have they not travelled in the earth and seen how was the end of
those who were before them? Mightier than these were they in strength--
and in fortifications in the land, but Allah destroyed them for their
sins; and there was not for them any defender against Allah.

040.022
Y: That was because there came to them their messengers with Clear
(Signs), but they rejected them: So Allah called them to account: for
He is Full of Strength, Strict in Punishment.

P: That was because their messengers kept bringing them clear proofs (of
Allah's Sovereignty) but they disbelieved; so Allah seized them. Lo! He
is Strong, severe in punishment.

S: That was because there came to them their messengers with clear
arguments, but they rejected (them), therefore Allah destroyed them;
surely He is Strong, Severe in retribution.

040.023
Y: Of old We sent Moses, with Our Signs and an authority manifest,

P: And verily We sent Moses with Our revelations and a clear warrant

S: And certainly We sent Musa with Our communications and clear
authority,

040.024
Y: To Pharaoh, Haman, and Qarun; but they called (him) "a sorcerer
telling lies!"...

P: Unto Pharaoh and Haman and Korah, but they said: A lying sorcerer!

S: To Firon and Haman and Qaroun, but they said: A lying magician.

040.025
Y: Now, when he came to them in Truth, from Us, they said, "Slay the
sons of those who believe with him, and keep alive their females," but
the plots of Unbelievers (end) in nothing but errors (and
delusions)!...

P: And when he brought them the Truth from Our presence, they said: Slay
the sons of those who believe with him, and spare their women. But the
plot of disbelievers is in naught but error.

S: So when he brought to them the truth from Us, they said: Slay the
sons of those who believe with him and keep their women alive; and the
struggle of the unbelievers will only come to a state of perdition.

040.026
Y: Said Pharaoh: "Leave me to slay Moses; and let him call on his Lord!
What I fear is lest he should change your religion, or lest he should
cause mischief to appear in the land!"

P: And Pharaoh said: Suffer me to kill Moses, and let him cry unto his
Lord. Lo! I fear that he will alter your religion or that he will cause
confusion in the land.

S: And Firon said: Let me alone that I may slay Musa and let him call
upon his Lord; surely I fear that he will change your religion or that
he will make mischief to appear in the land.

040.027
Y: Moses said: "I have indeed called upon my Lord and your Lord (for
protection) from every arrogant one who believes not in the Day of
Account!"

P: Moses said: Lo! I seek refuge in my Lord and your Lord from every
scorner who believeth not in a Day of Reckoning.

S: And Musa said: Surely I take refuge with my Lord and-- your Lord from
every proud one who does not believe in the day of reckoning.

040.028
Y: A believer, a man from among the people of Pharaoh, who had concealed
his faith, said: "Will ye slay a man because he says, 'My Lord is
Allah'?- when he has indeed come to you with Clear (Signs) from your
Lord? and if he be a liar, on him is (the sin of) his lie: but, if he
is telling the Truth, then will fall on you something of the (calamity)
of which he warns you: Truly Allah guides not one who transgresses and
lies!"

P: And a believing man of Pharaoh's family, who hid his faith, said:
Would ye kill a man because he saith: My Lord is Allah, and hath
brought you clear proofs from your Lord? If he is lying, then his lie
is upon him; and if he is truthful, then some of that wherewith he
threateneth you will strike you. Lo! Allah guideth not one who is a
prodigal, a liar.

S: And a believing man of Firon's people who hid his faith said: What!
will you slay a man because he says: My Lord is Allah, and indeed he
has brought to you clear arguments from your Lord? And if he be a liar,
on him will be his lie, and if he be truthful, there will befall you
some of that which he threatens you (with); surely Allah does not guide
him who is extravagant, a liar:

040.029
Y: "O my People! Yours is the dominion this day: Ye have the upper hand
in the land: but who will help us from the Punishment of Allah, should
it befall us?" Pharaoh said: "I but point out to you that which I see
(myself); Nor do I guide you but to the Path of Right!"

P: O my people! Yours is the kingdom to-day, ye being uppermost in the
land. But who would save us from the wrath of Allah should it reach us?
Pharaoh said: I do but show you what I think, and I do but guide you to
wise policy.

S: O my people! yours is the kingdom this day, being masters in the
land, but who will help us against the punishment of Allah if it come
to us? Firon said: I do not show you aught but that which I see
(myself), and I do not make you follow any but the right way.

040.030
Y: Then said the man who believed: "O my people! Truly I do fear for you
something like the Day (of disaster) of the Confederates (in sin)!"-

P: And he who believed said: O my people! Lo! I fear for you a fate like
that of the factions (of old);

S: And he who believed said: O my people! surely I fear for you the like
of what befell the parties:

040.031
Y: "Something like the fate of the People of Noah, the 'Ad, and the
Thamud, and those who came after them: but Allah never wishes injustice
to his Servants."

P: A plight like that of Noah's folk, and A'ad and Thamud, and those
after them, and Allah willeth no injustice for (His) slaves.

S: The like of what befell the people of Nuh and Ad and Samood and those
after them, and Allah does not desire injustice for (His) servants;

040.032
Y: "And O my people! I fear for you a Day when there will be Mutual
calling (and wailing),"-

P: And, O my people! Lo! I fear for you a Day of Summoning,

S: And, O my people! I fear for you the day of calling out,

040.033
Y: "A Day when ye shall turn your backs and flee: No defender shall ye
have from Allah: Any whom Allah leaves to stray, there is none to
guide..."

P: A day when ye will turn to flee, having no preserver from Allah: and
he whom Allah sendeth astray, for him there is no guide.

S: The day on which you will turn back retreating; there shall be no
savior for you from Allah, and whomsoever Allah causes to err, there is
no guide for him:

040.034
Y: "And to you there came Joseph in times gone by, with Clear Signs, but
ye ceased not to doubt of the (Mission) for which he had come: At
length, when he died, ye said: 'No messenger will Allah send after
him.' thus doth Allah leave to stray such as transgress and live in
doubt,"-

P: And verily Joseph brought you of old clear proofs, yet ye ceased not
to be in doubt concerning what he brought you till, when he died, ye
said: Allah will not send any messenger after him. Thus Allah deceiveth
him who is a prodigal, a doubter.

S: And certainly Yusuf came to you before with clear arguments, but you
ever remained in doubt as to what he brought; until when he died, you
said: Allah will never raise a messenger after him. Thus does Allah
cause him to err who is extravagant, a doubter,

040.035
Y: "(Such) as dispute about the Signs of Allah, without any authority
that hath reached them, grievous and odious (is such conduct) in the
sight of Allah and of the Believers. Thus doth Allah, seal up every
heart - of arrogant and obstinate Transgressors."

P: Those who wrangle concerning the revelations of Allah without any
warrant that hath come unto them, it is greatly hateful in the sight of
Allah and in the sight of those who believe. Thus doth Allah print on
every arrogant, disdainful heart.

S: Those who dispute concerning the communications of Allah without any
authority that He has given them; greatly hated is it by Allah and
by those who believe. Thus does Allah set a seal over the heart of
every proud, haughty one.

040.036
Y: Pharaoh said: "O Haman! Build me a lofty palace, that I may attain
the ways and means-"

P: And Pharaoh said: O Haman! Build for me a tower that haply I may
reach the roads,

S: And Firon said: O Haman! build for me a tower that I may attain the
means of access,

040.037
Y: "The ways and means of (reaching) the heavens, and that I may mount
up to the god of Moses: But as far as I am concerned, I think (Moses)
is a liar!" Thus was made alluring, in Pharaoh's eyes, the evil of his
deeds, and he was hindered from the Path; and the plot of Pharaoh led
to nothing but perdition (for him).

P: The roads of the heavens, and may look upon the god of Moses, though
verily I think him a liar. Thus was the evil that he did made
fairseeming unto Pharaoh, and he was debarred from the (right) way. The
plot of Pharaoh ended but in ruin.

S: The means of access to the heavens, then reach the god of Musa, and I
surely think him to be a liar. And thus the evil of his deed was made
fairseeming to Firon, and he was turned away from the way; and the
struggle of Firon was not (to end) in aught but destruction.

040.038
Y: The man who believed said further: "O my people! Follow me: I will
lead you to the Path of Right."

P: And he who believed said: O my people! Follow me. I will show you the
way of right conduct.

S: And he who believed said: O my people! follow me, I will guide you to
the right course;

040.039
Y: "O my people! This life of the present is nothing but (temporary)
convenience: It is the Hereafter that is the Home that will last."

P: O my people! Lo! this life of the world is but a passing comfort, and
lo! the Hereafter, that is the enduring home.

S: O my people! this life of the world is only a (passing) enjoyment,
and surely the hereafter is the abode to settle;

040.040
Y: "He that works evil will not be requited but by the like thereof: and
he that works a righteous deed - whether man or woman - and is a
Believer- such will enter the Garden (of Bliss): Therein will they have
abundance without measure."

P: Whoso doeth an ill-deed, he will be repaid the like thereof, while
whoso doeth right, whether male or female, and is a believer, (all)
such will enter the Garden, where they will be nourished without stint.

S: Whoever does an evil, he shall not be recompensed (with aught) but
the like of it, and whoever does good, whether male or female, and he
is a believer, these shall enter the garden, in which they shall be
given sustenance without measure.

040.041
Y: "And O my people! How (strange) it is for me to call you to Salvation
while ye call me to the Fire!"

P: And, O my people! What aileth me that I call you unto deliverance
when ye call me unto the Fire?

S: And, O my people! how is it that I call you to salvation and you call
me to the fire?

040.042
Y: "Ye do call upon me to blaspheme against Allah, and to join with Him
partners of whom I have no knowledge; and I call you to the Exalted in
Power, Who forgives again and again!"

P: Ye call me to disbelieve in Allah and ascribe unto Him as partners
that whereof I have no knowledge, while I call you unto the Mighty, the
Forgiver.

S: You call on me that I should disbelieve in Allah and associate with
Him that of which I have no knowledge, and I call you to the Mighty,
the most Forgiving;

040.043
Y: "Without doubt ye do call me to one who is not fit to be called to,
whether in this world, or in the Hereafter; our return will be to
Allah; and the Transgressors will be Companions of the Fire!"

P: Assuredly that whereunto ye call me hath no claim in the world or in
the Hereafter, and our return will be unto Allah, and the prodigals
will be owners of the Fire.

S: No doubt that what you call me to has no title to be called to in
this world, nor in the hereafter, and that our turning back is to
Allah, and that the extravagant are the inmates of the fire;

040.044
Y: "Soon will ye remember what I say to you (now), My (own) affair I
commit to Allah: for Allah (ever) watches over His Servants."

P: And ye will remember what I say unto you. I confide my cause unto
Allah. Lo! Allah is Seer of (His) slaves.

S: So you shall remember what I say to you, and I entrust my affair to
Allah, Surely Allah sees the servants.

040.045
Y: Then Allah saved him from (every) ill that they plotted (against
him), but the burnt of the Penalty encompassed on all sides the People
of Pharaoh.

P: So Allah warded off from him the evils which they plotted, while a
dreadful doom encompassed Pharaoh's folk,

S: So Allah protected him from the evil (consequences) of what they
planned, and the most evil punishment overtook Firon's people:

040.046
Y: In front of the Fire will they be brought, morning and evening: And
(the sentence will be) on the Day that Judgment will be established:

"Cast ye the People of Pharaoh into the severest Penalty!"
P: The Fire; they are exposed to it morning and evening; and on the day
when the Hour upriseth (it is said): Cause Pharaoh's folk to enter the
most awful doom.

S: The fire; they shall be brought before it (every) morning and evening
and on the day when the hour shall come to pass: Make Firon's people
enter the severest chastisement.

040.047
Y: Behold, they will dispute with each other in the Fire! The weak ones
(who followed) will say to those who had been arrogant, "We but
followed you: Can ye then take (on yourselves) from us some share of
the Fire?"

P: And when they wrangle in the Fire, the weak say unto those who were
proud: Lo! we were a following unto you; will ye therefor rid us of a
portion of the Fire?

S: And when they shall contend one with another in the fire, then the
weak shall say to those who were proud: Surely we were your followers;
will you then avert from us a portion of the fire?

040.048
Y: Those who had been arrogant will say: "We are all in this (Fire)!
Truly, Allah has judged between (his) Servants!"

P: Those who were proud say: Lo! we are all (together) herein. Lo! Allah
hath judged between (His) slaves.

S: Those who were proud shall say: Surely we are all in it: surely Allah
has judged between the servants.

040.049
Y: Those in the Fire will say to the Keepers of Hell: "Pray to your Lord
to lighten us the Penalty for a day (at least)!"

P: And those in the Fire say unto the guards of hell: Entreat your Lord
that He relieve us of a day of the torment.

S: And those who are in the fire shall say to the keepers of hell: Call
upon your Lord that He may lighten to us one day of the punishment.

040.050
Y: They will say: "Did there not come to you your messengers with Clear
Signs?" They will say, "Yes". They will reply, "Then pray (as ye like)!
But the prayer of those without Faith is nothing but (futile wandering)
in (mazes of) error!"

P: They say: Came not your messengers unto you with clear proofs? They
say: Yea, verily. They say: Then do ye pray, although the prayer of
disbelievers is in vain.

S: They shall say: Did not your messengers come to you with clear
arguments? They shall say: Yea. They shall say: Then call. And the call
of the unbelievers is only in error.

040.051
Y: We will, without doubt, help our messengers and those who believe,
(both) in this world's life and on the Day when the Witnesses will
stand forth,-

P: Lo! We verily do help Our messengers, and those who believe, in the
life of the world and on the day when the witnesses arise,

S: Most surely We help Our messengers, and those who believe, in this
world's life and on the day when the witnesses shall stand up,

040.052
Y: The Day when no profit will it be to Wrong-doers to present their
excuses, but they will (only) have the Curse and the Home of Misery.

P: The day when their excuse availeth not the evil-doers, and theirs is
the curse, and theirs the ill abode.

S: The day on which their excuse shall not benefit the unjust, and for
them is curse and for them is the evil abode.

040.053
Y: We did aforetime give Moses the (Book of) Guidance, and We gave the
book in inheritance to the Children of Israel,-

P: And We verily gave Moses the guidance, and We caused the Children of
Israel to inherit the Scripture,

S: And certainly We gave Musa the guidance, and We made the children of
Israel inherit the Book,

040.054
Y: A Guide and a Message to men of Understanding.

P: A guide and a reminder for men of understanding.

S: A guidance and a reminder to the men of understanding.

040.055
Y: Patiently, then, persevere: for the Promise of Allah is true: and ask
forgiveness for thy fault, and celebrate the Praises of thy Lord in the
evening and in the morning.

P: Then have patience (O Muhammad). Lo! the promise of Allah is true.
And ask forgiveness of thy sin, and hymn the praise of thy Lord at fall
of night and in the early hours.

S: Therefore be patient; surely the promise of Allah is true; and ask
protection for your fault and sing the praise of your Lord in the
evening and the morning.

040.056
Y: Those who dispute about the signs of Allah without any authority
bestowed on them,- there is nothing in their breasts but (the quest of)
greatness, which they shall never attain to: seek refuge, then, in
Allah: It is He Who hears and sees (all things).

P: Lo! those who wrangle concerning the revelations of Allah without a
warrant having come unto them, there is naught else in their breasts
save pride which they will never attain. So take thou refuge in Allah.
Lo! He, only He, is the Hearer, the Seer.

S: Surely (as for) those who dispute about the communications of Allah
without any authority that has come to them, there is naught in their
breasts but (a desire) to become great which they shall never attain
to; Therefore seek refuge in Allah, surely He is the Hearing, the
Seeing.

040.057
Y: Assuredly the creation of the heavens and the earth is a greater
(matter) than the creation of men: Yet most men understand not.

P: Assuredly the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than
the creation of mankind; but most of mankind know not.

S: Certainly the creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than
the creation of the men, but most people do not know.

040.058
Y: Not equal are the blind and those who (clearly) see: Nor are (equal)
those who believe and work deeds of righteousness, and those who do
evil. Little do ye learn by admonition!

P: And the blind man and the seer are not equal, neither are those who
believe and do good works (equal with) the evil-doer. Little do ye
reflect!

S: And the blind and the seeing are not alike, nor those who believe and
do good and the evil-doer; little is it that you are mindful.

040.059
Y: The Hour will certainly come: Therein is no doubt: Yet most men
believe not.

P: Lo! the Hour is surely coming, there is no doubt thereof; yet most of
mankind believe not.

S: Most surely the hour is coming, there is no doubt therein, but most
people do not believe.

040.060
Y: And your Lord says: "Call on Me; I will answer your (Prayer): but
those who are too arrogant to serve Me will surely find themselves in
Hell - in humiliation!"

P: And your Lord hath said: Pray unto Me and I will hear your prayer.
Lo! those who scorn My service, they will enter hell, disgraced.

S: And your Lord says: Call upon Me, I will answer you; surely those who
are too proud for My service shall soon enter hell abased.

040.061
Y: It is Allah Who has made the Night for you, that ye may rest therein,
and the Day as that which helps (you) to see. Verily Allah is full of
Grace and Bounty to men: yet most men give no thanks.

P: Allah it is Who hath appointed for you night that ye may rest
therein, and day for seeing. Lo! Allah is a Lord of bounty for mankind,
yet most of mankind give not thanks.

S: Allah is He Who made for you the night that you may rest therein and
the day to see; most surely Allah is Gracious to men, but most men do
not give thanks.

040.062
Y: Such is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of all things, there is no god
but He: Then how ye are deluded away from the Truth!

P: Such is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of all things, There is no
God save Him. How then are ye perverted?

S: That is Allah, your Lord, the Creator of everything; there is no
God but He; whence are you then turned away?

040.063
Y: Thus are deluded those who are wont to reject the Signs of Allah.

P: Thus are they perverted who deny the revelations of Allah.

S: Thus were turned away those who denied the communications of Allah.

040.064
Y: It is Allah Who has made for you the earth as a resting place, and
the sky as a canopy, and has given you shape- and made your shapes
beautiful,- and has provided for you Sustenance, of things pure and
good;- such is Allah your Lord. So Glory to Allah, the Lord of the
Worlds!

P: Allah it is Who appointed for you the earth for a dwelling-place and
the sky for a canopy, and fashioned you and perfected your shapes, and
hath provided you with good things. Such is Allah, your Lord. Then
blessed be Allah, the Lord of the Worlds!

S: Allah is He Who made the earth a resting-place for you and the heaven
a canopy, and He formed you, then made goodly your forms, and He
provided you with goodly things; that is Allah, your Lord; blessed then
is Allah, the Lord of the worlds.

040.065
Y: He is the Living (One): There is no god but He: Call upon Him, giving
Him sincere devotion. Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds!

P: He is the Living One. There is no God save Him. So pray unto Him,
making religion pure for Him (only). Praise be to Allah, the Lord of
the Worlds!

S: He is the Living, there is no god but He, therefore call on Him,
being sincere to Him in obedience; (all) praise is due to Allah, the
Lord of the worlds.

040.066
Y: Say: "I have been forbidden to invoke those whom ye invoke besides
Allah,- seeing that the Clear Signs have come to me from my Lord; and I
have been commanded to bow (in Islam) to the Lord of the Worlds."

P: Say (O Muhammad): I am forbidden to worship those unto whom ye cry
beside Allah since there have come unto me clear proofs from my Lord,
and I am commanded to surrender to the Lord of the Worlds.

S: Say: I am forbidden to serve those whom you call upon besides Allah
when clear arguments have come to me from my Lord, and I am commanded
that I should submit to the Lord of the worlds.

040.067
Y: It is He Who has created you from dust then from a sperm-drop, then
from a leech-like clot; then does he get you out (into the light) as a
child: then lets you (grow and) reach your age of full strength; then
lets you become old,- though of you there are some who die before;- and
lets you reach a Term appointed; in order that ye may learn wisdom.

P: He it is Who created you from dust, then from a drop (of seed) then
from a clot, then bringeth you forth as a child, then (ordaineth) that
ye attain full strength and afterward that ye become old men - though
some among you die before - and that ye reach an appointed term, that
haply ye may understand.

S: He it is Who created you from dust, then from a small life-germ, then
from a clot, then He brings you forth as a child, then that you may
attain your maturity, then that you may be old-- and of you there are
some who are caused to die before-- and that you may reach an appointed
term, and that you may understand.

040.068
Y: It is He Who gives Life and Death; and when He decides upon an
affair, He says to it, "Be", and it is.

P: He it is Who quickeneth and giveth death. When He ordaineth a thing,
He saith unto it only: Be! and it is.

S: He it is Who gives life and brings death, so when He decrees an
affair, He only says to it: Be, and it is.

040.069
Y: Seest thou not those that dispute concerning the Signs of Allah? How
are they turned away (from Reality)?-

P: Hast thou not seen those who wrangle concerning the revelations of
Allah, how they are turned away? -

S: Have you not seen those who dispute with respect to the
communications of Allah: how are they turned away?

040.070
Y: Those who reject the Book and the (revelations) with which We sent
our messengers: but soon shall they know,-

P: Those who deny the Scripture and that wherewith We send Our
messengers. But they will come to know,

S: Those who reject the Book and that with which We have sent Our
Messenger; but they shall soon come to know,

040.071
Y: When the yokes (shall be) round their necks, and the chains; they
shall be dragged along-

P: When carcans are about their necks and chains. They are dragged

S: When the fetters and the chains shall be on their necks; they shall
be dragged

040.072
Y: In the boiling fetid fluid: then in the Fire shall they be burned;

P: Through boiling waters; then they are thrust into the Fire.

S: Into boiling water, then in the fire shall they be burned;

040.073
Y: Then shall it be said to them: "Where are the (deities) to which ye
gave part-worship-"

P: Then it is said unto them: Where are (all) that ye used to make
partners (in the Sovereignty)

S: Then shall it be said to them: Where is that which you used to set up

040.074
Y: "In derogation of Allah?" They will reply: "They have left us in the
lurch: Nay, we invoked not, of old, anything (that had real
existence)." Thus does Allah leave the Unbelievers to stray.

P: Beside Allah? They say: They have failed us; but we used not to pray
to anything before. Thus doth Allah send astray the disbelievers (in
His guidance).

S: Besides Allah? They shall say: They are gone away from us, nay, we
used not to call upon anything before. Thus does Allah confound the
unbelievers.

040.075
Y: "That was because ye were wont to rejoice on the earth in things
other than the Truth, and that ye were wont to be insolent."

P: (And it is said unto them): This is because ye exulted in the earth
without right, and because ye were petulant.

S: That is because you exulted in the land unjustly and because you
behaved insolently.

040.076
Y: "Enter ye the gates of Hell, to dwell therein: and evil is (this)
abode of the arrogant!"

P: Enter ye the gates of hell, to dwell therein. Evil is the habitation
of the scornful.

S: Enter the gates of hell to abide therein, evil then is the abode of
the proud.

040.077
Y: So persevere in patience; for the Promise of Allah is true: and
whether We show thee (in this life) some part of what We promise them,-
or We take thy soul (to Our Mercy) (before that),-(in any case) it is
to Us that they shall (all) return.

P: Then have patience (O Muhammad). Lo! the promise of Allah is true.
And whether we let thee see a part of that which We promise them, or
(whether) We cause thee to die, still unto Us they will be brought
back.

S: So be patient, surely the promise of Allah is true. So should We make
you see part of what We threaten them with, or should We cause you to
die, to Us shall they be returned.

040.078
Y: We did aforetime send messengers before thee: of them there are some
whose story We have related to thee, and some whose story We have not
related to thee. It was not (possible) for any messenger to bring a
sign except by the leave of Allah: but when the Command of Allah
issued, the matter was decided in truth and justice, and there
perished, there and then those who stood on Falsehoods.

P: Verily We sent messengers before thee, among them those of whom We
have told thee, and some of whom We have not told thee; and it was not
given to any messenger that he should bring a portent save by Allah's
leave, but when Allah's commandment cometh (the cause) is judged
aright, and the followers of vanity will then be lost.

S: And certainly We sent messengers before you: there are some of them
that We have mentioned to you and there are others whom We have not
mentioned to you, and it was not meet for a messenger that he should
bring a sign except with Allah's permission, but when the command of
Allah came, judgment was given with truth, and those who treated (it)
as a lie were lost.

040.079
Y: It is Allah Who made cattle for you, that ye may use some for riding
and some for food;

P: Allah it is Who hath appointed for you cattle, that ye may ride on
some of them, and eat of some -

S: Allah is He Who made the cattle for you that you may ride on some of
them, and some of them you eat.

040.080
Y: And there are (other) advantages in them for you (besides); that ye
may through them attain to any need (there may be) in your hearts; and
on them and on ships ye are carried.

P: (Many) benefits ye have from them - and that ye may satisfy by their
means a need that is in your breasts, and may be borne upon them as
upon the ship.

S: And there are advantages for you in them, and that you may attain
thereon a want which is in your breasts, and upon them and upon the
ships you are borne.

040.081
Y: And He shows you (always) His Signs: then which of the Signs of Allah
will ye deny?

P: And He showeth you His tokens. Which, then, of the tokens of Allah do
ye deny?

S: And He shows you His signs: which then of Allah's signs will you
deny?

040.082
Y: Do they not travel through the earth and see what was the End of
those before them? They were more numerous than these and superior in
strength and in the traces (they have left) in the land: Yet all that
they accomplished was of no profit to them.

P: Have they not travelled in the land to see the nature of the
consequence for those before them? They were more numerous than these,
and mightier in power and (in the) traces (which they left behind them)
in the earth. But all that they used to earn availed them not.

S: Have they not then journeyed in the land and seen how was the end of
those before them? They were more (in numbers) than these and greater
in strength and in fortifications in the land, but what they earned did
not avail them.

040.083
Y: For when their messengers came to them with Clear Signs, they exulted
in such knowledge (and skill) as they had; but that very (Wrath) at
which they were wont to scoff hemmed them in.

P: And when their messengers brought them clear proofs (of Allah's
Sovereignty) they exulted in the knowledge they (themselves) possessed.
And that which they were wont to mock befell them.

S: Then when their messengers came to them with clear arguments, they
exulted in what they had with them of knowledge, and there beset them
that which they used to mock.

040.084
Y: But when they saw Our Punishment, they said: "We believe in Allah,-
the one Allah - and we reject the partners we used to join with Him."

P: Then, when they saw Our doom, they said: We believe in Allah only and
reject (all) that we used to associate (with Him).

S: But when they saw Our punishment, they said: We believe in Allah
alone and we deny what we used to associate with Him.

040.085
Y: But their professing the Faith when they (actually) saw Our
Punishment was not going to profit them. (Such has been) Allah's Way of
dealing with His Servants (from the most ancient times). And even thus
did the Rejecters of Allah perish (utterly)!

P: But their faith could not avail them when they saw Our doom. This is
Allah's law which hath ever taken course for His bondmen. And then the
disbelievers will be ruined.

S: But their belief was not going to profit them when they had seen Our
punishment; (this is) Allah's law, which has indeed obtained in the
matter of His servants, and there the unbelievers are lost.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 41:

                       FUSSILAT (EXPLAINED IN DETAIL)
 Total Verses: 54 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

041.001
Y: Ha Mim:

P: Ha. Mim.

S: Ha Mim!

041.002
Y: A Revelation from (Allah), Most Gracious, Most Merciful;-

P: A revelation from the Beneficent, the Merciful,

S: A revelation from the Beneficent, the Merciful Allah:

041.003
Y: A Book, whereof the verses are explained in detail;- a Qur'an in
Arabic, for people who understand;-

P: A Scripture whereof the verses are expounded, a Lecture in Arabic for
people who have knowledge,

S: A Book of which the verses are made plain, an Arabic Quran for a
people who know:

041.004
Y: Giving good news and admonition: yet most of them turn away, and so
they hear not.

P: Good tidings and a warning. But most of them turn away so that they
hear not.

S: A herald of good news and a warner, but most of them turn aside so
they hear not.

041.005
Y: They say: "Our hearts are under veils, (concealed) from that to which
thou dost invite us, and in our ears in a deafness, and between us and
thee is a screen: so do thou (what thou wilt); for us, we shall do
(what we will!)"

P: And they say: Our hearts are protected from that unto which thou (O
Muhammad) callest us, and in our ears there is a deafness, and between
us and thee there is a veil. Act, then. Lo! we also shall be acting.

S: And they say: Our hearts are under coverings from that to which you
call us, and there is a heaviness in our ears, and a veil hangs between
us and you, so work, we too are working.

041.006
Y: Say thou: "I am but a man like you: It is revealed to me by
Inspiration, that your Allah is one Allah: so stand true to Him, and
ask for His Forgiveness." And woe to those who join gods with Allah,-

P: Say (unto them O Muhammad): I am only a mortal like you. It is
inspired in me that your Allah is One Allah, therefor take the straight
path unto Him and seek forgiveness of Him. And woe unto the idolaters,

S: Say: I am only a mortal like you; it is revealed to me that your
Allah is one Allah, therefore follow the right way to Him and ask His
forgiveness; and woe to the polytheists;

041.007
Y: Those who practise not regular Charity, and who even deny the
Hereafter.

P: Who give not the poor-due, and who are disbelievers in the Hereafter.

S: (To) those who do not give poor-rate and they are unbelievers in the
hereafter.

041.008
Y: For those who believe and work deeds of righteousness is a reward
that will never fail.

P: Lo! as for those who believe and do good works, for them is a reward
enduring.

S: (As for) those who believe and do good, they shall surely have a
reward never to be cut off.

041.009
Y: Say: Is it that ye deny Him Who created the earth in two Days? And do
ye join equals with Him? He is the Lord of (all) the Worlds.

P: Say (O Muhammad, unto the idolaters): Disbelieve ye verily in Him Who
created the earth in two Days, and ascribe ye unto Him rivals? He (and
none else) is the Lord of the Worlds.

S: Say: What! do you indeed disbelieve in Him Who created the earth in
two periods, and do you set up equals with Him? That is the Lord of the
Worlds.

041.010
Y: He set on the (earth), mountains standing firm, high above it, and
bestowed blessings on the earth, and measure therein all things to give
them nourishment in due proportion, in four Days, in accordance with
(the needs of) those who seek (sustenance).

P: He placed therein firm hills rising above it, and blessed it and
measured therein its sustenance in four Days, alike for (all) who ask;

S: And He made in it mountains above its surface, and He blessed therein
and made therein its foods, in four periods: alike for the seekers.

041.011
Y: Moreover He comprehended in His design the sky, and it had been (as)
smoke: He said to it and to the earth: "Come ye together, willingly or
unwillingly." They said: "We do come (together), in willing obedience."

P: Then turned He to the heaven when it was smoke, and said unto it and
unto the earth: Come both of you, willingly or loth. They said: We
come, obedient.

S: Then He directed Himself to the heaven and it is a vapor, so He said
to it and to the earth: Come both, willingly or unwillingly. They both
said: We come willingly.

041.012
Y: So He completed them as seven firmaments in two Days, and He assigned
to each heaven its duty and command. And We adorned the lower heaven
with lights, and (provided it) with guard. Such is the Decree of (Him)
the Exalted in Might, Full of Knowledge.

P: Then He ordained them seven heavens in two Days and inspired in each
heaven its mandate; and We decked the nether heaven with lamps, and
rendered it inviolable. That is the measuring of the Mighty, the
Knower.

S: So He ordained them seven heavens in two periods, and revealed in
every heaven its affair; and We adorned the lower heaven with brilliant
stars and (made it) to guard; that is the decree of the Mighty, the
Knowing.

041.013
Y: But if they turn away, say thou: "I have warned you of a stunning
Punishment (as of thunder and lightning) like that which (overtook) the
'Ad and the Thamud!"

P: But if they turn away, then say: I warn you of a thunderbolt like the
thunderbolt (which fell of old upon the tribes) of A'ad and Thamud;

S: But if they turn aside, then say: I have warned you of a scourge like
the scourge of Ad and Samood.

041.014
Y: Behold, the messengers came to them, from before them and behind
them, (preaching): "Serve none but Allah." They said, "If our Lord had
so pleased, He would certainly have sent down angels (to preach). Now
we reject your mission (altogether)."

P: When their messengers came unto them from before them and behind
them, saying: Worship none but Allah! they said: If our Lord had
willed, He surely would have sent down angels (unto us), so lo! we are
disbelievers in that wherewith ye have been sent.

S: When their messengers came to them from before them and from behind
them, saying, Serve nothing but Allah, they said: If our Lord had
pleased He would certainly have sent down angels, so we are surely
unbelievers in that with which you are sent.

041.015
Y: Now the 'Ad behaved arrogantly through the land, against (all) truth
and reason, and said: "Who is superior to us in strength?" What! did
they not see that Allah, Who created them, was superior to them in
strength? But they continued to reject Our Signs!

P: As for A'ad, they were arrogant in the land without right, and they
said: Who is mightier than us in power? Could they not see that Allah
Who created them, He was mightier than them in power? And they denied
Our revelations.

S: Then as to Ad, they were unjustly proud in the land, and they said:
Who is mightier in strength than we? Did they not see that Allah Who
created them was mightier than they in strength, and they denied Our
communications?

041.016
Y: So We sent against them a furious Wind through days of disaster, that
We might give them a taste of a Penalty of humiliation in this life;
but the Penalty of a Hereafter will be more humiliating still: and they
will find no help.

P: Therefor We let loose on them a raging wind in evil days, that We
might make them taste the torment of disgrace in the life of the world.
And verily the doom of the Hereafter will be more shameful, and they
will not be helped.

S: So We sent on them a furious wind in unlucky days, that We may make
them taste the chastisement of abasement in this world's life; and
certainly the chastisement of the hereafter is much more abasing, and
they shall not be helped.

041.017
Y: As to the Thamud, We gave them Guidance, but they preferred blindness
(of heart) to Guidance: so the stunning Punishment of humiliation
seized them, because of what they had earned.

P: And as for Thamud, We gave them guidance, but they preferred
blindness to the guidance, so the bolt of the doom of humiliation
overtook them because of what they used to earn.

S: And as to Samood, We showed them the right way, but they chose error
above guidance, so there overtook them the scourge of an abasing
chastisement for what they earned.

041.018
Y: But We delivered those who believed and practised righteousness.

P: And We delivered those who believed and used to keep their duty to
Allah.

S: And We delivered those who believed and guarded (against evil).

041.019
Y: On the Day that the enemies of Allah will be gathered together to the
Fire, they will be marched in ranks.

P: And (make mention of) the day when the enemies of Allah are gathered
unto the Fire, they are driven on

S: And on the day that the enemies of Allah shall be brought together to
the fire, then they shall be formed into groups.

041.020
Y: At length, when they reach the (Fire), their hearing, their sight,
and their skins will bear witness against them, as to (all) their
deeds.

P: Till, when they reach it, their ears and their eyes and their skins
testify against them as to what they used to do.

S: Until when they come to it, their ears and their eyes and their skins
shall bear witness against them as to what they did.

041.021
Y: They will say to their skins: "Why bear ye witness against us?" They
will say: "Allah hath given us speech,- (He) Who giveth speech to
everything: He created you for the first time, and unto Him were ye to
return."

P: And they say unto their skins: Why testify ye against us? They say:
Allah hath given us speech Who giveth speech to all things, and Who
created you at the first, and unto Whom ye are returned.

S: And they shall say to their skins: Why have you borne witness against
us? They shall say: Allah Who makes everything speak has made us speak,
and He created you at first, and to Him you shall be brought back.

041.022
Y: "Ye did not seek to hide yourselves, lest your hearing, your sight,
and your skins should bear witness against you! But ye did think that
Allah knew not many of the things that ye used to do!"

P: Ye did not hide yourselves lest your ears and your eyes and your
skins should testify against you, but ye deemed that Allah knew not
much of what ye did.

S: And you did not veil yourselves lest your ears and your eyes and your
skins should bear witness against you, but you thought that Allah did
not know most of what you did.

041.023
Y: "But this thought of yours which ye did entertain concerning your
Lord, hath brought you to destruction, and (now) have ye become of
those utterly lost!"

P: That, your thought which ye did think about your Lord, hath ruined
you; and ye find yourselves (this day) among the lost.

S: And that was your (evil) thought which you entertained about your
Lord that has tumbled you down into perdition, so are you become of the
lost ones.

041.024
Y: If, then, they have patience, the Fire will be a home for them! and
if they beg to be received into favour, into favour will they not
(then) be received.

P: And though they are resigned, yet the Fire is still their home; and
if they ask for favour, yet they are not of those unto whom favour can
be shown.

S: Then if they will endure, still the fire is their abode, and if they
ask for goodwill, then are they not of those who shall be granted
goodwill.

041.025
Y: And We have destined for them intimate companions (of like nature),
who made alluring to them what was before them and behind them; and the
sentence among the previous generations of jinns and men, who have
passed away, is proved against them; for they are utterly lost.

P: And We assigned them comrades (in the world), who made their present
and their past fairseeming unto them. And the Word concerning nations
of the jinn and humankind who passed away before them hath effect for
them. Lo! they were ever losers.

S: And We have appointed for them comrades so they have made
fair-seeming to them what is before them and what is behind them, and
the word proved true against them-- among the nations of the jinn and
the men that have passed away before them-- that they shall surely be
losers.

041.026
Y: The Unbelievers say: "Listen not to this Qur'an, but talk at random
in the midst of its (reading), that ye may gain the upper hand!"

P: Those who disbelieve say: Heed not this Qur'an, and drown the hearing
of it; haply ye may conquer.

S: And those who disbelieve say: Do not listen to this Quran and make
noise therein, perhaps you may overcome.

041.027
Y: But We will certainly give the Unbelievers a taste of a severe
Penalty, and We will requite them for the worst of their deeds.

P: But verily We shall cause those who disbelieve to taste an awful
doom, and verily We shall requite them the worst of what they used to
do.

S: Therefore We will most certainly make those who disbelieve taste a
severe punishment, and We will most certainly reward them for the evil
deeds they used to do.

041.028
Y: Such is the requital of the enemies of Allah,- the Fire: therein will
be for them the Eternal Home: a (fit) requital, for that they were wont
to reject Our Signs.

P: That is the reward of Allah's enemies: the Fire. Therein is their
immortal home, payment forasmuch as they denied Our revelations.

S: That is the reward of the enemies of Allah-- the fire; for them
therein shall be the house of long abiding; a reward for their denying
Our communications.

041.029
Y: And the Unbelievers will say: "Our Lord! Show us those, among jinns
and men, who misled us: We shall crush them beneath our feet, so that
they become the vilest (before all)."

P: And those who disbelieve will say: Our Lord! Show us those who
beguiled us of the jinn and humankind. We will place them underneath
our feet that they may be among the nethermost.

S: And those who disbelieve will say: Our Lord! show us those who led us
astray from among the jinn and the men that we may trample them under
our feet so that they may be of the lowest.

041.030
Y: In the case of those who say, "Our Lord is Allah", and, further,
stand straight and steadfast, the angels descend on them (from time to
time): "Fear ye not!" (they suggest), "Nor grieve! but receive the Glad
Tidings of the Garden (of Bliss), the which ye were promised!"

P: Lo! those who say: Our Lord is Allah, and afterward are upright, the
angels descend upon them, saying: Fear not nor grieve, but hear good
tidings of the paradise which ye are promised.

S: (As for) those who say: Our Lord is Allah, then continue in the right
way, the angels descend upon them, saying: Fear not, nor be grieved,
and receive good news of the garden which you were promised.

041.031
Y: "We are your protectors in this life and in the Hereafter: therein
shall ye have all that your souls shall desire; therein shall ye have
all that ye ask for!"-

P: We are your protecting friends in the life of the world and in the
Hereafter. There ye will have (all) that your souls desire, and there
ye will have (all) for which ye pray.

S: We are your guardians in this world's life and in the hereafter, and
you shall have therein what your souls desire and you shall have
therein what you ask for:

041.032
Y: "A hospitable gift from one Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful!"

P: A gift of welcome from One Forgiving, Merciful.

S: A provision from the Forgiving, the Merciful.

041.033
Y: Who is better in speech than one who calls (men) to Allah, works
righteousness, and says, "I am of those who bow in Islam"?

P: And who is better in speech than him who prayeth unto his Lord and
doeth right, and saith: Lo! I am of those who are muslims (surrender
unto Him).

S: And who speaks better than he who calls to Allah while he himself
does good, and says: I am surely of those who submit?

041.034
Y: Nor can goodness and Evil be equal. Repel (Evil) with what is better:
Then will he between whom and thee was hatred become as it were thy
friend and intimate!

P: The good deed and the evil deed are not alike. Repel the evil deed
with one which is better, then lo! he, between whom and thee there was
enmity (will become) as though he was a bosom friend.

S: And not alike are the good and the evil. Repel (evil) with what is
best, when lo! he between whom and you was enmity would be as if he
were a warm friend.

041.035
Y: And no one will be granted such goodness except those who exercise
patience and self-restraint,- none but persons of the greatest good
fortune.

P: But none is granted it save those who are steadfast, and none is
granted it save the owner of great happiness.

S: And none are made to receive it but those who are patient, and none
are made to receive it but those who have a mighty good fortune.

041.036
Y: And if (at any time) an incitement to discord is made to thee by the
Evil One, seek refuge in Allah. He is the One Who hears and knows all
things.

P: And if a whisper from the devil reach thee (O Muhammad) then seek
refuge in Allah. Lo! He is the Hearer, the Knower.

S: And if an interference of the Shaitan should cause you mischief, seek
refuge in Allah; surely He is the Hearing, the Knowing.

041.037
Y: Among His Signs are the Night and the Day, and the Sun and the Moon.
Do not prostrate to the sun and the moon, but prostrate to Allah, Who
created them, if it is Him ye wish to serve.

P: And of His portents are the night and the day and the sun and the
moon. Do not prostrate to the sun or the moon; but prostrate to Allah
Who created them, if it is in truth Him Whom ye worship.

S: And among His signs are the night and the day and the sun and the
moon; do not prostrate to the sun nor to the moon; and prostrate to
Allah Who created them, if Him it is that you serve.

041.038
Y: But if they (Unbelievers) are arrogant, (no matter): for in the
presence of thy Lord are those who celebrate His praises by night and
by day. And they never flag (nor feel themselves above it).

P: But if they are too proud - still those who are with thy Lord glorify
Him night and day, and tire not.

S: But if they are proud, yet those with your Lord glorify Him during
the night and the day, and they are not tired.

041.039
Y: And among His Signs in this: thou seest the earth barren and
desolate; but when We send down rain to it, it is stirred to life and
yields increase. Truly, He Who gives life to the (dead) earth can
surely give life to (men) who are dead. For He has power over all
things.

P: And of His portents (is this): that thou seest the earth lowly, but
when We send down water thereon it thrilleth and groweth. Lo! He Who
quickeneth it is verily the Quickener of the Dead. Lo! He is Able to do
all things.

S: And among His signs is this, that you see the earth still, but when
We send down on it the water, it stirs and swells: most surely He Who
gives it life is the Giver of life to the dead; surely He has power
over all things.

041.040
Y: Those who pervert the Truth in Our Signs are not hidden from Us.
Which is better?- he that is cast into the Fire, or he that comes safe
through, on the Day of Judgment? Do what ye will: verily He seeth
(clearly) all that ye do.

P: Lo! those who distort Our revelations are not hid from Us. Is he who
is hurled into the Fire better, or he who cometh secure on the Day of
Resurrection? Do what ye will. Lo! He is Seer of what ye do.

S: Surely they who deviate from the right way concerning Our
communications are not hidden from Us. What! is he then who is cast
into the fire better, or he who comes safe on the day of resurrection?
Do what you like, surely He sees what you do.

041.041
Y: Those who reject the Message when it comes to them (are not hidden
from Us). And indeed it is a Book of exalted power.

P: Lo! those who disbelieve in the Reminder when it cometh unto them
(are guilty), for lo! it is an unassailable Scripture.

S: Surely those who disbelieve in the reminder when it comes to them,
and most surely it is a Mighty Book:

041.042
Y: No falsehood can approach it from before or behind it: It is sent
down by One Full of Wisdom, Worthy of all Praise.

P: Falsehood cannot come at it from before it or from behind it. (It is)
a revelation from the Wise, the Owner of Praise.

S: Falsehood shall not come to it from before it nor from behind it; a
revelation from the Wise, the Praised One.

041.043
Y: Nothing is said to thee that was not said to the messengers before
thee: that thy lord has at his Command (all) forgiveness as well as a
most Grievous Penalty.

P: Naught is said unto thee (Muhammad) save what was said unto the
messengers before thee. Lo! thy Lord is owner of forgiveness, and owner
(also) of dire punishment.

S: Naught is said to you but what was said indeed to the messengers
before you; surely your Lord is the Lord of forgiveness and the Lord of
painful retribution.

041.044
Y: Had We sent this as a Qur'an (in the language) other than Arabic,
they would have said: "Why are not its verses explained in detail?
What! (a Book) not in Arabic and (a Messenger) an Arab?" Say: "It is a
Guide and a Healing to those who believe; and for those who believe
not, there is a deafness in their ears, and it is blindness in their
(eyes): They are (as it were) being called from a place far distant!"

P: And if We had appointed it a Lecture in a foreign tongue they would
assuredly have said: If only its verses were expounded (so that we
might understand)? What! A foreign tongue and an Arab? - Say unto them
(O Muhammad): For those who believe it is a guidance and a healing; and
as for those who disbelieve, there is a deafness in their ears, and it
is blindness for them. Such are called to from afar.

S: And if We had made it a Quran in a foreign tongue, they would
certainly have said: Why have not its communications been made clear?
What! a foreign (tongue) and an Arabian! Say: It is to those who
believe a guidance and a healing; and (as for) those who do not
believe, there is a heaviness in their ears and it is obscure to them;
these shall be called to from a far-off place.

041.045
Y: We certainly gave Moses the Book aforetime: but disputes arose
therein. Had it not been for a Word that went forth before from thy
Lord, (their differences) would have been settled between them: but
they remained in suspicious disquieting doubt thereon.

P: And We verily gave Moses the Scripture, but there hath been dispute
concerning it; and but for a Word that had already gone forth from thy
Lord, it would ere now have been judged between them; but lo! they are
in hopeless doubt concerning it.

S: And certainly We gave the Book to Musa, but it has been differed
about, and had not a word already gone forth from your Lord, judgment
would certainly have been given between them; and most surely they are
in a disquieting doubt about it.

041.046
Y: Whoever works righteousness benefits his own soul; whoever works
evil, it is against his own soul: nor is thy Lord ever unjust (in the
least) to His Servants.

P: Whoso doeth right it is for his soul, and whoso doeth wrong it is
against it. And thy Lord is not at all a tyrant to His slaves.

S: Whoever does good, it is for his own soul, and whoever does evil, it
is against it; and your Lord is not in the least unjust to the
servants.

041.047
Y: To Him is referred the Knowledge of the Hour (of Judgment: He knows
all): No date-fruit comes out of its sheath, nor does a female conceive
(within her womb) nor bring forth (Young) but by His knowledge.
The Day that (Allah) will propound to them the (question),
"Where are the partners (ye attributed) to Me?" They will say,
"We do assure thee not one of us can bear witness!"

P: Unto Him is referred (all) knowledge of the Hour. And no fruits burst
forth from their sheaths, and no female carrieth or bringeth forth but
with His knowledge. And on the day when He calleth unto them: Where are
now My partners? they will say: We confess unto Thee, not one of us is
a witness (for them).

S: To Him is referred the knowledge of the hour, and there come not
forth any of the fruits from their coverings, nor does a female bear,
nor does she give birth, but with His knowledge; and on the day when He
shall call out to them, Where are (those whom you called) My
associates? They shall say: We declare to Thee, none of us is a
witness.

041.048
Y: The (deities) they used to invoke aforetime will leave them in the
lurch, and they will perceive that they have no way of escape.

P: And those to whom they used to cry of old have failed them, and they
perceive they have no place of refuge.

S: And away from them shall go what they called upon before, and they
shall know for certain that there is no escape for them.

041.049
Y: Man does not weary of asking for good (things), but if ill touches
him, he gives up all hope (and) is lost in despair.

P: Man tireth not of praying for good, and if ill toucheth him, then he
is disheartened, desperate.

S: Man is never tired of praying for good, and if evil touch him, then
he is despairing, hopeless.

041.050
Y: When we give him a taste of some Mercy from Ourselves, after some
adversity has touched him, he is sure to say, "This is due to my
(merit): I think not that the Hour (of Judgment) will (ever) be
established; but if I am brought back to my Lord, I have (much) good
(stored) in His sight!" But We will show the Unbelievers the truth of
all that they did, and We shall give them the taste of a severe
Penalty.

P: And verily, if We cause him to taste mercy after some hurt that hath
touched him, he will say: This is my own; and I deem not that the Hour
will ever rise, and if I am brought back to my Lord, I surely shall be
better off with Him - But We verily shall tell those who disbelieve
(all) that they did, and We verily shall make them taste hard
