reside in Turkey."2 Happily Mr. Webster was again in the same high
office. Twenty-nine years before, while the Greeks were fighting for
their independence, he had eloquently pleaded their cause in the
House of Representatives of the United States, and procured their
recognition as a nation by our government. An appeal now came to him
from an American citizen of the highest respectability, suffering
oppression by that very nation which he had so befriended. There
being no diplomatic agent of the United States in Greece, the Hon.
George P. Marsh, the learned and able Minister Resident at
Constantinople, was instructed to proceed to Athens in one of the
ships of war, and inquire into the case, with one or more of the
national vessels in that neighborhood subject to his order. Having a
competent knowledge of the Greek language, Mr. Marsh entered upon
his delicate mission in August, 1852, and prosecuted it till the
arrival of his successor in the Constantinople embassy, late in
1853. During this time, Mr. Webster died, and was succeeded by
Edward Everett; and he again by Mr. Marcy, on the accession of
President Pierce. Mr. Webster's letter of instruction, dated April
29, 1852, states the case clearly, as it does also the rights of
missionaries. Mr. Everett's letter, dated February 5, 1853, gives
the opinion of President Fillmore, based on Mr. Marsh's report of
the case. "Although the forms of the law may in general have been
observed," Mr. Everett writes, "it is quite plain, that Dr. King was
not tried for any offense clearly defined by the law of Greece; that
his trial was in many respects unfairly and illegally conducted;
that the constitution and laws of Greece guarantee a full toleration
of all religious opinions; and that there is no proof that Dr. King
has exceeded the just limits of the liberty of speech implied in
such toleration." "Either the sound and safe maxims of criminal
jurisprudence," he adds, "which prevail in this country, are unknown
to the jurisprudence of Greece, or her tribunals were presided over
by persons who entertained very false notions of the judicial
character, or there are prejudices against Dr. King, which, in this
case at least, corrupted the fountains of justice. It may have been
in part produced by all three, and there is reason to suppose that
such is the case. This state of things unavoidably destroys all
confidence in the Greek courts, as far as Dr. King is concerned, and
compels the President to regard their decision in this case as
unjust and oppressive."3 He repeats the declaration of Mr. Webster,
that missionaries are entitled to all the protection, which the Law
of Nations allows to be extended to citizens who reside in foreign
countries in the pursuit of their lawful business. Mr. Marsh was to
communicate to the government of Greece the decided opinion of the
President, "that Dr. King did not have a fair trial, and that
consequently the sentence of banishment ought immediately to be
revoked."

1 See _Proceedings at the Annual Meeting of the Board_ in 1841, pp.
36-39.

2 See _Memorial Volume of the First Fifty Years of the A. B. C. F.
M._, p. 201.

3 _Congressional Documents_, No. 9, Senate, 1854, p. 6.

The piece of ground in Athens purchased by Dr. King in 1829, was at
that time little prized by Turks or Greeks. But after the capital
became permanently fixed there, the land had become a most desirable
part of the city, as it commanded an unobstructed view of many of
the finest ancient monuments and interesting localities of Athens.
For this reason it was early selected by the government as the site
of a national church. The law required the value of all land thus
taken, to be paid for before it was put to use. Years passed, and
the government neither made use of it, nor allowed the owner to
build upon it, and yet refused all compensation. This act of gross
injustice--so gross that it even subjected the government to the
suspicion of sinister aims in the prosecution of Dr. King,1--was
one of the points referred to the President of the United States,
and he declared his conviction, that compensation ought immediately
to be made by the government of Greece.

1 _Senate Documents_, p, 184.

After some delay, this was done, but I know not to what extent. Mr.
Paicos, the Minister of Foreign Affairs, objected, on purely
technical grounds, to reversing the judgment founded on the charge
of reviling the dogmas of the Greek Church; and as Dr. King very
properly refused to receive a pardon, that judgment remained in
force. It was never revived, however, and Mr. Pellicas, one of the
counsel for the defense, having become Minister of Justice, a royal
order was issued, revoking the sentence of banishment.

"Dr. King and his creed," writes Mr. Marsh to the Secretary of
State, "have served as a convenient scape-goat, to bear maledictions
intended for other teachers and other doctrines, as well as for
himself and his faith; or perhaps as an experiment, to test how far
the Greek government would sustain, or foreign powers permit, the
encroachments of an intolerant priesthood upon the guarantees of the
independence of Greece, and the solemn sanction of the constitution
and laws."

A manifest change now took place in the popular sentiment towards
the persecuted missionary. Many who had been bitterly opposed,
became cordial. The preaching service had forty or fifty hearers,
who were generally attentive. The "Exposition of an Apostolical
Church" continued to attract notice. Dr. Barth's "Ecclesiastical
History," translated by Dr. King, was extensively read; and the
American Bible Society responded to an application for a new grant
of ten thousand copies of the New Testament for the schools. Near
the close of 1854, Dr. King placed at the disposal of the Minister
of Ecclesiastical Affairs and Public Instruction for the use of
schools, a thousand copies of "Chrysostom on Reading the
Scriptures," printed with the sanction of the American Tract
Society. The Minister replied, thanking him for the books, and
sending him a copy of a circular he had addressed to the teachers
strongly recommending the reading by the pupils, not only of
Chrysostom, but of the Scriptures also. Several young men appeared
truly converted, and a class in theology was formed, made up of two
young men from Athens and four from Constantinople. These had been
in the Greek department of the Bebek Seminary, and were sent to
study with Dr. King in consequence of the death of Mr. Benjamin.
After a year and a half he still had this class. To aid them he
wrote a little work in modern Greek, combating the idea, prevalent
with many, that nothing in the Word of God can be understood, except
by those who have been enlightened by the study of the Fathers. In
January, 1857, he finished correcting the fifth volume of the
American Tract Society's publications in modern Greek. The first
volume he printed in 1853, the second and third in 1854, the fourth
in 1855. The five volumes contained more than two thousand five
hundred pages, and were in an eligible form; but they were found to
be in advance of the national taste for religious reading.

The old enmity in Greece burst forth, once more, with violence, in
forgeries and fictions of an extraordinary character. It was then
regretted by many patrons of the mission, that the veteran
missionary sustained consular relations to the United States, which
prevented him from meeting this crisis in the simple character of a
missionary; and such may have been the feeling of Dr. King himself,
but he found it difficult to change his relations while the storm
was raging. The public excitement, however, soon subsided, and he
went on with his work unmolested.

In September, 1859, Dr. King was most unexpectedly cited to appear
before the judicial authorities, to answer to charges brought
against him, two years and a half before, by a Greek named Kephalas.
After an examination of two hours, the accusation was read to him.
Its import was not clear; but it implied an apprehension, that he
was secretly endeavoring to form a Christian Church,--an exclusive
body, with members, meetings, rules, and occupations, and a religion
not recognized by the government.

After nearly a year, the Council of Judges decided not to proceed
then with the proscution, [sic] and it was never resumed. Dr. King
now printed, at private expense, five volumes of his own writings;
one in French, and four in modern Greek. Two of the volumes in
modern Greek are supposed to have been made up of forty-eight of his
sermons, and one of miscellaneous documents. Among them were his
Farewell Letter; his Defense; Speech before the Areopagus in 1846;
Exposition of an Apostolic Church; Religious Rites of an Apostolical
Church; Canons for the Interpretation of the Scriptures; Orgies of
Simonides; Answer to the Greek Synod; The Opinion of Twelve Lawyers;
Letter of the Hon. George P. Marsh to the Greek Government; etc.

In the great work of giving the Word of God to the people of Greece,
Dr. King fully acknowledges the hearty cooeperation of the Episcopal
and Baptist missionaries, and of Bible agents both British and
American.

In the autumn of 1862, King Otho and his queen were constrained to
fly from Greece. In the midst of the consequent revolution, the head
of police sent a company of soldiers to protect the house of the
missionary, but Mrs. King told him they were not afraid, and the
soldiers went away. The editors of the "Age" and of the "Hope," his
most bitter persecutors in years past, now fell into deep disgrace,
and were in peril of their lives. Prince Alfred, of Protestant
England, was elected king by an almost unanimous vote. Not obtaining
him, they elected a king from Protestant Denmark. George I. arrived
in October, 1863, and was received by the people with much joy. The
form of government is a constitutional monarchy. There are neither
titles nor privileged classes among the people. The only
qualification for voting is that of a prescribed age, and all
citizens are eligible to the offices of the state, who possess the
required mental qualifications. Unfortunately for Greece, the
article of the constitution of 1843 is retained, which, while it
grants toleration, prohibits proselytism from the Established
Church, which it declares to be a crime punishable by the penal
code. It will be well for Greece, if this be dropped from the
constitution in the revision to be made in 1875. In March of the
year following, twenty-six editors of newspapers at Athens formed a
society, "to discuss subjects connected with the good of the
country," and, by a large majority, chose Dr. Kalopothakes, editor
of the "Star of the East," for their President. In May, the
venerable missionary was invited by the king to administer the
Lord's Supper in the palace; which was no more than an act of public
justice towards one of the oldest, most disinterested, and
self-sacrificing of the friends of the Greek nation.

Dr. King's health was now much impaired, and required a change; and
in July, 1864, he left Athens, with Mrs. King, and reached the
United States in August, where they remained three years. Their
return to Greece was in the autumn of 1867, and the missionary was
happy to find some of his former pupils actively engaged in labors
not very dissimilar to his own. Two were preachers of the Gospel;
Mr. Kalopothakes, from the New York Union Theological Seminary,
ordained by a Presbytery; and Mr. Constantine, from Amherst College
and Andover Seminary, and ordained by a Congregational body. A
third, Mr. Sakellarius, a printer, studied for a while in the
Baptist Seminary at Newton, and had charge of the office of the
"Star." All three had their Bible classes and Sunday-schools. Dr.
King wisely avoided interfering by a separate service of his own.
Sometime before his return, a mob, excited by the report that
"Puritanism" was taught in these schools, nearly forced its way into
the house of Dr. Kalopothakes; but an officer of the police passed
at the moment, and arrested some of the ringleaders. The Cretan
refugees were then there, and about twelve hundred of these were in
their day and Sabbath-schools.

In April, 1868, a distinguished Professor in the University arranged
for an interview between Dr. King and the President of the "Holy
Synod." This man in 1863 signed the accusation against Dr. King, in
consequence of which, after his return to Greece, he was a third
time cited before the Criminal Court, though without any result. The
interview was altogether pleasant, and was a striking illustration
of the progress of public opinion. "A considerable degree of
religious liberty has been gained," writes the missionary, "and a
foundation has been laid, on which, I trust, will one day arise a
beautiful superstructure."

Dr. King finished his course at Athens on the 22d of May, 1869, in
the seventy-seventh year of his age.

The characteristics of this remarkable man are everywhere apparent
in the preceding narrative. He was evidently designed by Providence
to be a reformer; and though he lived not to witness anything that
could be called a reformation among the Greek people, the battle he
fought through so many years with the bigotry and intolerance of the
Greek hierarchy, will be held in perpetual remembrance. A
reformation has begun, and Dr. King, more than any other Protestant,
was the instrument of Providence in bringing it about. To him is it
owing, preeminently, that the Scriptures, since the year 1831, have
been so extensively used in the schools, and that, in Greece, "the
Word of God is not bound." It is not forgotten, that others labored
with him, and not in vain; but it is mainly to the preaching of Dr.
King, during his protracted residence in Greece, in connection with
his persistent and triumphant struggle with the Greek hierarchy,
that we owe, under God, the visible decline of prejudice against
evangelical truth and religious liberty.






CHAPTER XIX.

THE NESTORIANS.

1841-1848.


Mr. and Mrs. Perkins, finding a sea voyage necessary for the
recovery of her health, left Oroomiah July 5, 1841, and arrived at
New York on the 11th of January, just in time to be present at the
special meeting of the Board in that city. Their passage from Smyrna
had been prolonged to one hundred and nine days, and much solicitude
was felt for their safety. They were accompanied by Mar Yohannan,
who desired so earnestly to see the new world, that he could not be
dissuaded from coming. As the early friend and constant helper of
the mission, and as representing one of the most interesting
branches of the ancient Church of Christ, he was received by the
Board and the religious community with Christian affection, and his
visits to different parts of the country with Mr. Perkins were both
pleasant and useful.

The number of pupils in the seminary at the close of 1841 was
forty-six; there were also eighteen in the boarding-school for
girls, and there were twenty free schools in as many villages, all
taught by Nestorian priests. The free schools contained four hundred
and seventy pupils, of whom forty were girls; making the whole
number in the schools five hundred and sixteen. The press, during
its first year, sent forth sixteen hundred volumes, and three
thousand six hundred tracts, containing in all five hundred and ten
thousand pages. Under the superintendence of Mr. Perkins, Mr. Homan
Hallock cut and cast a new font of type, modeled on the best Syriac
manuscripts. This was in the year 1841. Three years later, Mr.
Breath, the printer at Oroomiah, with the help of a native
assistant, cut and prepared two sets of type after the most approved
forms of Syriac calligraphy. The natives pronounced these types
perfect. The two sets resembled each other, the only difference
being that in one the stroke was larger and the letter more open.
Mr. Breath afterwards prepared a third set, of a medium size
compared with the other two.

While the plain of Oroomiah is perhaps one of the most fertile and
beautiful in the world, its luxuriant vegetation occasions fevers at
certain seasons, and ophthalmia is prevalent. To escape fevers, the
missionaries built dormitories on the tops of their flat-roofed
houses. This preventive not being found sufficient, a health-station
was formed in the elevated village of Seir, about six miles from
Oroomiah, where dwellings were provided for two families, which were
surrounded by a strong stone wall, to serve as a defense against any
sudden incursion of the Koords.

Mr. and Mrs. Perkins and Mar Yohannan embarked at Boston on their
return in March, 1843. They were accompanied by the Rev. David T.
Stoddard and wife, and by Misses Catherine E. Myers and Fidelia
Fiske, who went to promote the education of their own sex among the
Nestorians. They reached Oroomiah on the 14th of June, and were
received by the Nestorians with great manifestations of joy. Mr.
Perkins, while at home, prepared for the press an octavo volume of
five hundred pages, entitled "A Residence of Eight Years among the
Nestorian Christians." It is in the form of a journal, is
illustrated by a map and plates, and is a history of the mission
during that time.

The ancient Syriac version of the Scriptures was held in such
veneration by the people, that there were strong reasons for making
it the basis of the proposed version in the modern language. The
case was referred to the Prudential Committee, who decided that the
only proper course was to translate from the original Hebrew and
Greek, and the translation was made accordingly.

The female seminary at Oroomiah now came under the efficient
superintendence of Miss Fiske, and soon assumed a very interesting
religious character. The whole number under instruction in the two
seminaries, and in the forty-four village free schools, was eleven
hundred and forty-two. The call for preaching tasked the capacity of
the mission. The missionaries were free to preach in the Nestorian
churches, and generally found attentive congregations, and they were
aided in the ministry of the word by five intelligent native
preachers. Dr. Perkins thus speaks of a congregation at Ardishai:
"The church was crowded to overflowing. It would have been difficult
for half a dozen more to press themselves into it. Priest Abraham
read the first chapter of the Epistle of James, which we expounded
for more than an hour, to the great satisfaction of the people, who
did not suppress their audible Amen, and ejaculatory comments of
approbation. Priest Abraham spoke very appropriately and feelingly
on the subject of temptations, applying it to his hearers, who are
now so sorely beset by the Jesuits. That crowd of eager listeners
presented a thrilling spectacle. I could not help thanking God for
the privilege of addressing them on the things that pertain to their
everlasting well being."

The efforts of the Jesuits among the Nestorians began in 1838. In
1842, they pushed their proselyting measures so recklessly among the
Armenians of Ispahan and Tabriz, as to lead the Persian King, at the
instance of the Russian Ambassador, to send them out of the kingdom.
A "permanent order" was at the same time adopted, probably on
Russian suggestion, growing out of repugnance to the political
influence of the Jesuits, that no native Christian should be
proselyted from one Christian sect to another. The French
government, after some delay, sent an envoy to Persia to effect, if
possible, the return of the Jesuits; but before his arrival, they
had covertly made their way to Oroomiah, run another race of
proselytism among the Nestorians, and been a second time expelled.
The French agent therefore took cognizance of both expulsions, and
gave the greater prominence to the more recent one, since it had
just occurred, and was fresh in mind, and since the Jesuits were
just then specially intent on adding the Nestorians to their sect.
His demand, however, that they should have leave to return, was
refused. He then required the expulsion of the American
missionaries, as being obnoxious to the same law. The Russian
Ambassador, whose protection the mission had enjoyed since the
departure of the English embassy in 1839, denied that it was the
object of the mission to proselyte in the sense contemplated by the
law. The French envoy then demanded an investigation, and to this
the Ambassador and the Persian government readily assented. Two
Mohammedan meerzas were sent from Tabriz to Oroomiah to make the
investigation. These fell under the papal influence at Oroomiah, and
made a report so strongly prejudiced against the mission, that it
was thought necessary to send a committee to the capital to
counteract their misrepresentations. Messrs. Perkins and Stocking
