the city, and from the villages on the western slopes of Lebanon;
and they will be the first objects to greet the eyes of all who
enter the harbor, and will stand as the exponents and dispensers of
sound Christian learning.

The connection of this mission with the American Board continued
until the latter part of the year 1870, wanting only two years of
half a century, when the reunion of the Presbyterian Church gave
rise to the question of a transfer of the mission to the
Presbyterian Board. The events above described, connected with the
Syrian Protestant College, favored such a result, and the question
was kindly, though reluctantly entertained. On the 20th of
September, 1870, the following paper was received at the Missionary
House:--

"The Syria mission, at a special meeting held in Abeih, August 16,
1870, had laid before them two documents, one from the Prudential
Committee of the American Board of Commissioners for Foreign
Missions, and the other from the Committee of Conference of the
General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church with the American
Board,--touching the transfer of the mission from the American Board
to the Presbyterian Board of Foreign Missions; and having given the
subject their serious and prayerful consideration, they have adopted
the following action:--

"1. That the mission regard the subject thus presented as one which
has not originated with themselves, but as having been brought
before them by the Providence of God; and as not to be decided at
all by them on personal grounds or ecclesiastical preferences, but
to be decided solely in view of its bearings upon the cause of
Christ in this land, and among the churches at home.

"2. That the mission appreciate the delicacy and kindness with which
the Prudential Committee of the American Board of Commissioners for
Foreign Missions conveyed the consent of the Board to the withdrawal
of its members from their service, with the view of forming a new
connection, if they deem it expedient, and the hearty assurance of
their readiness to continue the support of the mission should they
decide to remain as heretofore.

"3. That they also equally appreciate the cordial invitation
extended to them by the Committee of the Presbyterian Church, and
the pledge conveyed to the mission, that they shall enjoy, in the
new proposed connection, all the freedom of action, 'in respect to
their policy and ecclesiastical relations,' which they have hitherto
possessed.

"4. That the mission find great difficulty in considering calmly and
impartially a question involving their separation from the American
Board, the severing of ties which have existed until within two
years of half a century, which have been interwoven with the
earliest recollections of childhood, which have grown strong by
personal connection and active cooeperation during years of service,
and which we had anticipated would only be dissolved by death. No
language can express how much of pain to their hearts the thought of
this separation involves. Their relations to the Secretaries, to the
Prudential Committee, and through them to the churches, have been
most tender and happy.

"In these relations they have found the largest liberty and the
fullest sympathy, and personally, the mission have no cause to
desire a change.

"The feelings of the mission on this point will be more fully
expressed by individual communications from its several members, to
the Prudential Committee.

"5. In view, however, of the weighty considerations which have been
set before the mission for this change of their connection,
considerations whose reasonableness and justice are apparent to
their minds, and in view of the expressed opinion of what is their
duty, on the part of the reunited Presbyterian Church, they cannot
but feel that the call is from God, and the step to be taken is one
demanded by the highest interests of Christ's Church.

"6. That the mission express their conviction, that no change is
demanded in the ecclesiastical connections of any of its members.

"In accordance, therefore, with these views of this whole subject,--

"_Resolved_, 1st; that the mission present to the Prudential
Committee a request for a release from their connection with the
American Board, with a view to placing themselves under the
direction of the Presbyterian Board.

"And 2d, That the mission accept the invitation conveyed in the
letter of the Rev. J. F. Stearns, D. D., Chairman of the Committee
of Conference of the Presbyterian Board of Missions, dated June 19,
1870, to place themselves under the care of the Presbyterian Board.

"Although the official ties which have bound us to those with whom
we have been so long and so happily associated may thus be severed,
we feel that the bonds of sympathy and of prayer remain unchanged,
and will continue so to remain until, in the higher work of praise,
our hearts and voices shall be again and forever _united_."

In accordance with this action the individual members of the mission
sent a request to be released from their connection with the
American Board, and they were released by vote of the Prudential
Committee.

The members of the mission, at that time, were Drs. Thomson, Van
Dyck, and H. H. Jessup, and Messrs. Calhoun, Eddy, Bird, Samuel
Jessup. I. N. Lowry, and James S. Dennis. The author would naturally
have great pleasure in quoting from their letters of farewell, but
can only refer the reader for them to the "Missionary Herald."[1]

[1] _Missionary Herald_, 1870, pp. 391-398.


RESULTS OF THE PAST.


The history of the mission of the American Board to Palestine and
Syria cannot be closed better than by the retrospective summary made
by the mission at the close of their relations with the Board. They
are speaking of the results of past labors.

"To Protestant influence, in great part, may we ascribe the changed
feeling, which has come over the minds of the Mohammedans towards
Christians. The Christian religion has become understood by them to
be not wholly the system of idolatry, which they once regarded it,
nor professing Christians as devoid of morality as they once seemed.
As a consequence, there has been a sensible quenching of the flame
of Moslem bigotry, and a greater respect for Christians, their
rights, their Bible, and their religion. The relative positions of
the crescent and the cross are not what they were when the
missionaries came to Syria. The Bible has gained ground, and the
Koran has lost it, as a controlling influence in the land. Some
Mohammedans are among the attendants upon our preaching, and these
would doubtless be more numerous, but for the risk to property and
to life, which inquirers from among them incur.

"Not without results have the children of the Druzes been taught in
our schools during all these years, and so many conversations been
held with adults of that sect. The leaven of the Gospel has
penetrated even to the secret inner sanctuaries of their religion;
and the white turbans of the initiated Druzes seen in our Sabbath
congregations, the inquirers who come to our houses, and the
baptized converts from among them, show that not in vain to the
Druzes has the light of the Gospel again dawned upon Syria.

"But principally among the nominally Christian sects have the
indirect results of missionary labor extended. These are visible in
the changed power of the clergy. Once excommunication was a terror
above all terrors. Now it is so powerless a weapon, that those who
once wielded it so effectively are ashamed to challenge ridicule by
exposing its weakness.

"Protestantism, once regarded by the mass of the people as the
blackest of heresies, finds everywhere its defenders and
vindicators, even where it lacks followers, and no longer can the
lies gain currency, with which the clergy were accustomed to
frighten away their flocks from gospel influence.

"The religious instruction given in their churches has been
modified. More Bible is taught, and less tradition. The preaching is
more of Christ, and less of the saints. The adoration of pictures
has greatly lessened. All sects have been compelled to introduce
schools, and to educate both boys and girls, to educate their
priests, and to remove the restrictions from reading the Bible.

"The circulation of the Scriptures, and of religious books, has been
wide-spread, and we have heard of some who have been enlightened by
these silent teachers, and have through them found Christ as their
Saviour, and died in joyful trust in Him; though they never had an
opportunity to publicly profess their faith in Him.

"Among all sects, Mohammedan, Druze, Greek, Maronite, and Catholic,
the glaciers of prejudice, which for centuries have been forming,
are now melting under the warmth of the Gospel.

"The gift of the Bible to this people in their own tongue, is the
rich golden tribute which the West has returned to the East, in
acknowledgment of its obligation to the land whence the Bible came.

"Brighter than the light, which kindles early and lingers late upon
the crests of Lebanon and Hermon, crowning them with glory, is the
light of the Gospel, which has shone into dark hearts, in hamlet and
city, recalling the memories of a past not inglorious, and presaging
a fairer splendor in the future.

"Not in vain have Hebard, and Smith, and Whiting, and De Forest, and
Ford, sowed the seed of the Word in tears, even though they went
home with few gathered sheaves. From the heights of heaven they now
behold the springing harvest. Not in vain have others toiled here,
whose summons has not yet come. They bless God for what their eyes
see and their ears hear of the Lord's working around them.
Reluctantly have those yielded to the sad necessity of returning
home, who, having just thrust in the sickle, found their strength
unequal to the toil.

"The churches in America, which have aided in sustaining the mission
by their offerings and their prayers, have seen fewer results, than
have crowned their labors in other fields; their faith has been
sorely tried; but they have been permitted to hear, from time to
time, of souls ransomed from darkness and sin; echoes of the songs
of triumph sung by departing saints have been borne to their ears,
and they have felt that their labors have not been unrewarded.

"By God's grace we have laid anew the foundations of God's living
temple, Christ being the chief corner-stone, and we have seen some
courses already built upon it. We have set up and maintained the
banner of the cross in the face of its pretended friends and its
avowed foes. We have collected a little army on the Lord's side, and
armed them with the sword of the Spirit. We have prepared an arsenal
of spiritual weapons for future conflicts, in the Scriptures and
other religious books translated and committed to the people. We
have established outposts of schools and seminaries, have raised
strongholds of the truth in churches planted here and there
throughout the land. We have taken possession of the land in the
name of King Immanuel, and we aim to subdue and hold it wholly for
him."[1]

[1] From the _Foreign Missionary of the Presbyterian Church_, April,
1871, p. 305-307.






CHAPTER XLII.

THE ARMENIANS.

1867-1869.


The year 1868 added five to the ordained missionary force of the
missions; namely, Messrs. Alpheus N. Andrus, Carmi C. Thayer, John
Edwin Pierce, Royal M. Cole, and Theodore S. Pond. Messrs. Milan H.
Hitchcock, Edward Riggs, Henry Marden, and John Otis Barrows, were
added in 1869. These were all accompanied by their wives. Besides
these, there were George C. Reynolds, M. D., and wife, and ten
unmarried women; namely, Misses Rebecca A. Tracy, Charlotte
Elizabeth Ely, Mary A. C. Ely, Harriet G. Powers, Cyrene O. Van
Duzee, Olive L. Parmelee, Isabella C. Baker, Flavia S. Bliss, Ursula
C. Clarke, and Ardelle M. Griswold. Mardin was now manned, for the
first time, with three missionaries, Messrs. Williams, Andrus, and
Pond, with Misses Parmelee and Baker, two unmarried young women. Dr.
Van Lennep and Mr. Ladd closed their labors in connection with the
mission in 1869.

It was not alone at Harpoot, that the year 1869 opened with a
revival of religion. Aintab, Bitlis, Marash, and Mardin were favored
with the like blessing. The "Week of Prayer" at Marash was described
as a jubilee. Both houses of worship were opened, each day, an hour
before sunset, and in each was a gathering of at least two hundred
and fifty; where the many spontaneous prayers, and the pastor's vain
endeavors to close the services within the hour, showed that the
attendance was not a mere form. Twenty-nine out of fifty-two
candidates were admitted to the first church, and twenty-one out of
forty to the second. Nearly all these were able to read; and the
examination was deemed more remarkable than the number received.

In respect to Mardin, I cannot refrain from quoting the expressive
words of Mr. Williams, whose pen had much of graphic power. "The
community here received the proposal to observe the week of prayer
most joyfully, and preferred two meetings a day to one,--the first
at sunrise, the second an hour and a half before sunset, each an
hour long. Our first meeting was in a pouring rain, thirty present.
This is the first pleasant day, and seventy-six were present in the
morning. One of the preachers opens the meeting by singing, reading,
remarks, and prayer. This occupies from twenty-five to thirty
minutes, and then the meeting is thrown open to others, and six or
eight prayers, short and pertinent, fill the time till the hour is
up. We never before have been able to start a prayer-meeting here,
and now they move off in a line, as if they had done nothing else
all their lives. I think as many as twenty-five persons have led in
prayer."

A church had not yet been formed, but the Protestant community
undertook the entire support of their preacher, and also of one of
their own number as a missionary to the Koords. The latter is thus
described by Mr. Williams: "A great, six feet, brawny fellow, with
unwashed clothes (he is a tanner), long, disheveled hair, large,
open features, and eyes black as coal, that shine like stars; but so
simple in his trust, so tender in his love to Jesus, and earnest in
his efforts to do good! He learned to read with steady, earnest
application, and his questions are so spiritual, so humble, so
childlike, that it is as the sun whenever he enters my door.

"One evening Oosee (Hosea) came in with clothes torn, fez[1] gone,
face bloody, hair wildly disheveled, but the same genial lustre
beaming from his eyes, accompanied by another Protestant, Daoud
(David), who was earnest, almost imperative, that I should at once
go to the governor and enter complaint. Asking for particulars, I
learned that, returning from his garden soon after sunset, Oosee was
set upon by a crowd of Papists, and escaped in the plight I saw him.
Daoud insisted that unless those men were at once imprisoned, no one
would be safe. I asked Oosee how he felt about it. 'Just as you say,
Khowaja,[2] was his reply. I read to him parts of Rom. xii. and
xiii., and showed him that he was justified in entering complaint,
that he had a right to protection, and that those who had set upon
him doubtless deserved punishment; but said I, 'Would those men have
touched you when you were a Papist?' 'Not one.' 'Why?' 'They dare
not. Why, they knew I could thrash the whole of them, and would have
feared I'd kill them. They knew me.' 'And now?' 'Now they think I'm
a Prote, and wont strike back.' 'Did you?' 'Not a bit; I only tried
to get away from them.' 'And if now, instead of throwing them into
prison, you forgive them, and treat them as if nothing had happened,
do you think they will see any difference between Oosee the Papist,
and Oosee the Prote?' 'Of course they will.' 'To what will they
charge the difference?' 'To my new religion.' 'Will not that lead
them to admit the power of the Gospel? Will it not honor Christ?'
'Yes, I believe it will.' 'Well, Oosee, just as _you_ say. If
you on the whole wish it, I will go to the governor and enter
complaint,--you have a clear right to this,--or I will let it drop
just here, as you please.' 'No, Khowaja, I'll not complain, I
forgive them. I'll go home and treat them as if nothing had
happened. That is what Jesus says, and I'll do it. Perhaps they will
come to Christ.' He has never since been molested.

[1] Red Turkish cap.

[2] Gentleman--a title given to the missionaries in Eastern Turkey.

"When it was decided to take a new class of training pupils in
Arabic, Oosee was the first to whom I spoke about joining it. The
proposition was wholly unexpected, and I wish you could have seen
the joy that shone in his eyes and beamed from every feature! I
asked him if he thought his wife would consent to his going. 'We
will ask Jesus,' he said. 'If he wants me to go he will make her
willing. I don't think she'll oppose.' To some, who attempted to
dissuade him on the ground that the allowance was insufficient for
his family, he said, 'If only they will let me study, we will
consent to live in the yard; no matter about a house, we'll get on
any way; anything for Jesus.' Some days after, I said; "How about
the wife?' 'O, she says go, and if need be we'll sell our vineyard
to meet expenses. She is more anxious to go than I.' The vineyard
would possibly bring, if sold, forty dollars in currency."

A church was organized at Mardin in February, which engaged to
choose and support a pastor. On Sabbath afternoon, when it was
organized, and the sacraments were administered, there were present
three hundred and fifty persons, in a room which Mr. Williams says,
"I had always insisted would hold one hundred and fifty, if properly
packed." While candidates were being examined, the wife of Oosee
presented herself. "No one had thought of her as a church-member,
but before her examination was through, each had written against her
name 'accepted.' We were as much delighted as surprised at her
answers, and the meek, loving spirit she showed." Oosee did not go
on the proposed mission, not deeming himself sufficiently educated;
but is understood to have adorned his Christian profession down to
the present time.

The reader has already some acquaintance with the people of Zeitoon,
inhabiting the mountains north of Marash. Until subdued by the Turks
in 1862, they were famed for their defiance of all law. The town
contained about twelve thousand inhabitants, all of them Armenians.
The men were described as of athletic make, quick step, and piercing
eyes, showing in all their bearing that they breathed the free air
of the mountains. The town is about thirty-five miles from Marash,
built against the side of a high rock, the houses hanging one above
another, so that the roof of the house below is the front yard of
the house above.

Two years after their subjugation, Dr. Pratt made a professional
visit, to attend one of their leaders then dangerously sick, and
suffered no molestation. Two years later, at the earnest
solicitation of several Protestants, Mr. Montgomery attempted a
visit, with Pastor Avedis of the second church of Marash, and a
deacon of the first church. The town being then under Turkish
authority, they anticipated no special danger. "At evening, as we
were entering the city," writes Mr. Montgomery, "to visit the
governor of the place, according to custom, a furious mob of men and
boys dragged us from our horses, and at once began beating and
stoning us with frantic rage, rending the air with savage yells. Our
Protestant guide was driven out of sight amid volleys of stones, the
mob crying, 'Kill him! kill the wretch!' The deacon was allowed to
secrete himself; but for Avedis and myself there was no escape till
the mob had spent their fury, stoning us, and afterwards kicking and
beating our prostrate bodies, while we were looking for escape only
through death."

At this crisis, a great strong man, yelling so as to appear in
sympathy with the mob, rushed up to where Mr. Montgomery was lying,
and threw him on his horse, saying to him in an under tone, "Don't
be afraid, trust me;" and then with curses hurried him out of the
way, and took him and the pastor in the dark to his own house,
where, as he dared not to keep them, he got them ready, as well as
he could, to return at once to Marash.

"Thus we were saved," continues Mr. Montgomery, "after having been
in the hands of the mob over two hours. We had a hard ride that
night, hatless, our clothes bloody and torn, and our bodies so
bruised that we could scarce sit on our horses; but we were enabled
to pick our way homeward by the rough mountain paths."

It was subsequently known that this outrage was instigated by the
priests at Marash, with the connivance of the governor. Meanwhile
the Zeitoon people were fearful lest they had gone too far, and the
Protestants began to breathe more freely; and many, who had failed
to declare themselves before, now stood up openly for the truth.

In the summer of 1868, a native preacher was sent to Zeitoon by the
home missionary society of Marash, and was allowed to remain
unmolested, with ample opportunities for preaching the Word. At the
close of the year, Mr. Trowbridge, having removed from
Constantinople to Marash, made a visit to Zeitoon, and remained
there laboring freely from Thursday till Monday. His guide homeward
was a Zeitoon Protestant,--"a tall, gaunt man, past middle life, who
has suffered much there for Christ's sake. At one time the people
blackened his face with a coal, put him astride of a donkey with his
face towards the tail, and thus paraded him through the streets; a
crier shouting before him, 'Thus shall it be done to all who reject
the worship of saints, and do not honor the Virgin Mary.' There is
now no persecution."

Hopeful indications once more appeared among the Greeks at Erzroom
and Trebizond, and also at Kerasun and Ordo, on the coast of the
Black Sea west of Trebizond. Mr. Parmelee visited the two places
last named, and put a helper named Harootune at Ordo, around whom
the people gathered, earnestly desiring to learn the way of life.
Even the women, who were precluded by their notions of propriety
from assembling with the men, anxiously inquired when the helper
would bring his wife, that she might teach them also. Persecution
arose, but as usual it was overruled for good.

Dr. William Goodell, after more than forty years of successful
missionary service, returned in 1865, in feeble health, to spend the
evening of life in his native land. With his wife, who had been his
faithful companion from the first, he made his home with his eldest
son, a physician in Philadelphia. There, beloved and revered, he
lived until February 18, 1867, when he was removed to his heavenly
home, at the age of seventy-five.

To the early friends of Dr. Goodell it seemed that his providential
call was to be a preacher of the Gospel; and such he really was
all through life, and the printed volume of his sermons in
Armeno-Turkish, translated also into Armenian and Bulgarian, has had
a very extensive circulation.[1] But Divine Providence so ordered
the events of his early missionary career, that translating the
Scriptures became his principal work. He began at Malta to translate
the New Testament from the original into the Armeno-Turkish. That
done, he entered upon the Old Testament; and he completed the last
revision of the Bible in 1863. It was a great and good work, and
will transmit his name for grateful remembrance to future ages.

[1] The report of the Nicomedia station for 1871, contains the
following: "In Diermendere, a basket-maker has learned Turkish, and
is supplied with books and tracts in that language for use among the
Turks. The book he thinks most of, and which he begs may be put into
the Arabic character, is Dr. Goodell's sermons. A Baghchejuk
brother, whose business takes him often among the Turks in the
vicinity of Armash, always takes these sermons with him. He says
that the Turks always listen with interest, and sometimes with
tears. He is often requested to read the same sermon over and over
again." The Marsovan report for the same year contains the
following: "At Vizier Keopreu a change in public sentiment has taken
place to such a degree, that the Armenian teacher is preaching Dr.
Goodell's sermons to attentive audiences of his own people."

Dr. Goodell had few equals as an agreeable letter-writer. The author
was in official correspondence with him through his whole missionary
life, and never ceased admiring his vivacity, humor, and felicity of
expression, the aptness of his thoughts, and his very appropriate
quotations of Scripture. He had the power, beyond most men, of
passing at once and by an easy transition, from the merriest
laughter to the most serious topics. His addresses to children had a
resistless charm, and his power of turning a conversation into
channels of his own choice was invaluable, in dealing with conceited
disputatious orientals. "Indomitable in his purpose to do good,
affable and courteous in manner, of ready tact, and abounding in
resistless pleasantry, he gained access wherever he chose to go, and
wielded an influence powerful for good upon all with whom he chose
