All is Mind. According to the Scriptures and Christian Science, all is
God, and there is naught beside Him. "God is Spirit;" and we can only
learn and love Him through His spirit, which brings out the fruits of
Spirit and extinguishes forever the works of darkness by His marvellous
light.

The five material senses testify to the existence of matter. The
spiritual senses afford no such evidence, but deny the testimony of
the material senses. Which testimony is correct? The Bible says:
"Let God be true, and every man a liar." If, as the Scriptures imply,
God is All-in-all, then all must be Mind, since God is Mind. Therefore
in divine Science there is no material mortal man, for man is spiritual
and eternal, he being made in the image of Spirit, or God.

There is no material sense. Matter is inert, inanimate, and
sensationless,--considered apart from Mind. Lives there a man who
has ever found Soul in the body or in matter, who has ever seen
spiritual substance with the eye, who has found sight in matter,
hearing in the material ear, or intelligence in non-intelligence?
If there is any such thing as matter, it must be either mind which
is called matter, or matter without Mind.

Matter without Mind is a moral impossibility. Mind in matter is pantheism.
Soul is the only real consciousness which cognizes being. The body does
not see, hear, smell, or taste. Human belief says that it does; but destroy
this belief of seeing with the eye, and we could not see materially; and
so it is with each of the physical senses.

Accepting the verdict of these material senses, we should believe man
and the universe to be the football of chance and sinking into oblivion.
Destroy the five senses as organized matter, and you must either become
non-existent, or exist in Mind only; and this latter conclusion is the
simple solution of the problem of being, and leads to the equal inference
that there is no matter.


_The sweet sounds and glories of earth and sky, assuming manifold forms
and colors,--are they not tangible and material?_

As Mind they are real, but not as matter. All beauty and goodness are
in and of Mind, emanating from God; but when we change the nature of
beauty and goodness from Mind to matter, the beauty is marred, through
a false conception, and, to the material senses, evil takes the place
of good.

Has not the truth in Christian Science met a response from Prof.
S.P. Langley, the young American astronomer? He says that "color
is in _us_," not "in the rose;" and he adds that this is not "any
metaphysical subtlety," but a fact "almost universally accepted,
within the _last few years_, by physicists."


_Is not the basis of Mind-healing a destruction of the evidence of the
material senses, and restoration of the true evidence of spiritual sense?_

It is, so far as you perceive and understand this predicate and postulate
of Mind-healing; but the Science of Mind-healing is best understood in
practical demonstration. The proof of what you apprehend, in the simplest
definite and absolute form of healing, can alone answer this question of
how much you understand of Christian Science Mind-healing. Not that all
healing is Science, by any means; but that the simplest case, healed in
Science, is as demonstrably scientific, in a small degree, as the most
difficult case so treated.

The infinite and subtler conceptions and consistencies of Christian Science
are set forth in my work Science and Health.


_Is man material or spiritual?_

In Science, man is the manifest reflection of God, perfect and immortal
Mind. He is the likeness of God; and His likeness would be lost if inverted
or perverted.

According to the evidence of the so-called physical senses, man is
material, fallen, sick, depraved, mortal. Science and spiritual sense
contradict this, and they afford the only true evidence of the being
of God and man, the material evidence being wholly false.

Jesus said of personal evil, that "the truth abode not in him," because
there is no material sense. Matter, as matter, has neither sensation nor
personal intelligence. As a pretension to be Mind, matter is a lie, and
"the father of lies;" Mind is not in matter, and Spirit cannot originate
its opposite, named matter.

According to divine Science, Spirit no more changes its species, by
evolving matter from Spirit, than natural science, so-called, or material
laws, bring about alteration of species by transforming minerals into
vegetables or plants into animals,--thus confusing and confounding the
three great kingdoms. No rock brings forth an apple; no pine-tree produces
a mammal or provides breast-milk for babes.

