development of an active and energetic, refined organism, is by no means
a rigid and indispensable necessity in this respect. In fact, some most
"magnetic" individuate make 'graveyards of their stomachs' as a Mental
Scientist puts it.

Lastly, Bramhacharya or Celibacy, as practised by Sannyasis in India, has
a strictly spiritual significance although it certainly has much as
everything to do with Personal Magnetism. To the average man I would say:
"Strive for CONTINENCE, chastity and control in this direction." Do not
emasculate, as that would be a waste of force. The stronger this force,
the better. All Sannyasis learn consciously or unconsciously to transmute
this energy into mental and spiritual force and generally their minds
dwell on a plane of mental and spiritual effort where there cannot be
even a breath of sensuality or grossness. They have gone beyond such
things utterly; the same statement applies to all advanced thinkers,
philosophers and workers, whether married or unmarried. To me the very
name of philosophy carries with it an atmosphere of Chastity, Solemnity,
and Divinity.

But although there is some measure of truth in all the above four
statements, they all miss the real thing. The question resolves itself
into this: "_What makes one man superior to another_?" The study of
nature shows us that the higher form of intelligence controls the lower.
All leaders of mankind, such as Napoleon, Alexander, etc., were clearly
ahead of the times. But they strove for low things and their SUCCESS
from our point of view is doubtful. Let us take higher ground. Buddha,
Christ, Zoroaster, etc., etc., of ancient times and Vivekananda and a few
others in modern times exhibited tremendous powers of influencing men.
You study their lives and writings and try to find out just those things
that constituted the basic cause of their heroic fibre.

If I were asked to sum up the secrets of their Power I would say:
1. "_Their Intelligence_ and _Thought-Power._ 2. Awakened _Will-Power_
and _Self-Control_."

1. It was by their intelligence that they could take fearless possession
of the world, handle men and women easily, read human nature at a glance
and "be all things to all men," _i.e._., put their fingers direct on the
spiritual, mental, and physical _necessities_ of widely varying
temperaments and help each right where he stood in the ladder of
evolution.

2. It was by their developed thought-force that they drew the whole world
to themselves. The positive thinker generates a force that draws all such
as are _negative_ to him. Nearly the whole world was negative to these
Masters and hence felt attracted to them. _These were the human
touchstones_.

3. It was by their strong, manly, marvellous Will-Power that they
drove their suggestions into other minds and gained an immediate
ascendency over whatever environments they were placed in. The whole
man is summed up in his Will. Every other power in man is subservient
to the Will. And say what you will, it is this power more than any other
that we respect in others. It is the central staff in our character.
Intelligence is the directive energy. Will-Power is the propulsive
energy. And the latter when wielded under the guidance of the former
makes of man a veritable God.

4. It was by their unusual power of _Self-control_ that they could stand
square upon their feet and could remain unshaken by the waves of
conflicting opinions and the hostile attacks that continually dashed up
against them. _Master yourself_, i.e., your personal, relative and lower
self, and beyond the shadow of a doubt, _the mastery of others is already
yours._ But the world will teach you bitter lessons and rend you to
pieces if you try consciously to control it while you are still a slave
to your lower self. Be great. Strive for Perfection. So will you be
recognised by others. And according to the transcendent energy of the
highest law of our Being it is the consciousness of heights scaled,
accomplishments achieved and consequent dawning of a Loftier Ideal upon
our intellectual horizon that fills us with Strength and Peace rather
than the recognition of our worth by others. It is a serious mistake to
care for fame, praise and admiration. You get them only when you do not
care for them in the least, when your soul has outgrown all such clinging
to the relative in the light of _eternal thought_, when you have risen to
the Absolute and learnt to read the meaning of the "LARGER WORLD" of
life. Do not pass by this lightly. In it is the key to Peace, Power and
Poise. All that is Real and Permanent, is on the plane of the Absolute.

Now we are drawing to the practical side of our Lesson. The four
principal points, you will please remember, are: (1) Intelligence. (2)
Thought-Force. (3) Will-Power. (4) Self-Control. You might feel
surprised at my retailing this "ancient history" instead of teaching you
how to approach a man, make him your slave and command him to fall
down at your feet and do your bidding. Perhaps you expected me to
tell you how to sail through the air, pass through solid walls,
materialize and dematerialize at will and like Appolonius of Tyana vanish
in the flash of an eye from the court of Ionysius and appear elsewhere at
a distance of 19,000 miles at the same moment. No, no. I will take it
for granted that you are made of different stuff and _an earnest seeker
after the truth_. If you strive to build yourself on the basis of the
simple principles as laid down in this series of lessons you will in time
grow into the Higher Self and at last become one with it. Moreover, your
daily life will be the Occasion for the practical application of these
principles, thus enabling you to pursue your way through life calmly,
earnestly, independently and with the quiet dignity of a man "who knows
what he is about". I cannot and would not speak of "get-rich-quick"
methods of self-development because they are the veriest rot imaginable.

Now then: (1) Intelligence and (2) Thought-Force are the natural
results of an organised brain.

Concentration is the key to such development. Concentration has been
fully explained in Lesson No. 1. By the constant exercise of
concentration, objectively and subjectively, in your daily life you
will in a short time become conscious of growing Strength. The
exercises I give you in this lesson on Self-Control, Will-Culture and
Memory-Culture if gone through with perseverance will further develop
Concentrative ability. In fact, this entire series of lessons will call
for Effort and Concentration. "Rome was not built in a day"--nor can you
achieve real greatness in a few months. No. All I can do is to indicate
the line and the nature of the effort required of you and if clearly
followed, Progress and Growth will commence from the first day. In
connection with this, a little digression would be necessary. The
Occultist says: Nature, unaided, fails. The purposiveness of Deity,
manifesting in nature an evolution, is present in all individual centres
but it has the way to full expression opened out to itself only when the
more evolved centres of life consciously cooperate with it. Evolution is
started and carried only by the creation of centres within the GREAT
CONSCIOUSNESS and by preserving and enlarging or expanding these centres.
So long as the race had not reached "SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS" (see Yoga
Lessons) the sub-conscious forces of nature had entire control over
evolutionary processes, but this stage was reached by the race according
to the LAW OF AVERAGES in the seventeenth century and you are now
expected to take your progress in your hands and consciously direct your
inner forces along such lines as best correspond to the stage of your
growth. So independent study and steady thinking form the secrets of a
keen and broad intelligence. You will always find that the man who is
more powerful than yourself and moves you at his will has an intelligence
and understanding far superior to yours and he can read your whole nature
as he would an open book, although you find him quite beyond your
depth. Learn to regard earnestly the workings of different mentalities
around you. Become a student of human nature. To you, each man
ought to be only a partial expression of his mind. Examine closely into
the motives acting behind each personality. Learn to respond more
quickly to the _Thoughts_ and _Feelings_ of a man than to his outer
speech and action. The latter are objective expressions of the subjective
self. The study of Phrenology and Physiognomy are good things to start
with in your efforts to acquire knowledge of human nature. _Mind is One_
and at the same time, _Many_. Subjectively, it is ONE. Objectively; many.
So by looking _impartially_ into "yourself" in the calm light of the
intellect and through silent introspection, you will always find a clue
to the working bases of other minds. Each man is a puzzle and most of all
are _YOU_ a puzzle unto yourself. Solve either and you have solved both.
"MAN, KNOW THYSELF."


THE MYSTERY OF THE WILL-FORCE.

Will-Force is the power of Re-action. It can render all the other
mental functions _active_ or _passive_. It is the DETERMINATIVE faculty
and is affected most of all by the JUDGMENT. On the lower plane
of mind, Will-Power manifests as Desire and is reciprocally influenced
by outside attractions as well as repulsions. On this plane the Will is
not free. But when it draws the volition for externalizing itself from
_Within_ in the light of the Higher Reason, then indeed is it
_Will-Power. On the material the human will is a slave; on the spiritual
plane it is the sovereign. It may then be called the "awakened" will_. It
is my conviction that the eternal crossing of swords between the
Determinists and the Libertarians can be set at rest only by a right
understanding of the _spiritual_ makeup of man, otherwise the arguments
of both sets of thinkers are equally strong. Each side has got hold of
half the truth, but requires the reconciling light of transcendental
Psychology in order to enable us to see the _whole_ truth as it is.
However, the point I am driving at is that your will is free only when it
is _self-determined_ i.e., when it has risen above the impulses of the
Lower Personal Self and acts under the direction of the Higher Impersonal
Self_. In order to fix this most important truth in your mind, let us
give you a brief idea of the "I AM" consciousness. Do not pass this by as
so much dry rot. No one will ever or can ever manifest genuine Will-Force
of a distinctly spiritual type who does not understand the "I AM"
consciousness. So please listen attentively and think over the following.


THE "I AM" CONSCIOUSNESS.

If you just turn in and examine the report of your consciousness
regarding the _self_-dwelling within, you will become conscious of the
"I". But if you press your examination a little closer you will find that
this "I" may be split up into two distinct aspects which, while working
in unison and conjunction, may nevertheless be set apart in thought.
There is an "I" function and there is a "me" function and these mental
twins develop distinct phenomena. The first is the "MASCULINE" principle;
the second is the "FEMININE" principle. Other terms used in current
writings on New Psychology are Conscious Mind, Active Mind, Voluntary
Mind, Objective Mind and so forth. These all refer to the "I" principle.
And the "me" form of mind corresponds to the Sub-Conscious Mind, Passive
Mind, Involuntary Mind, Subjective Mind and so on. Ninety-nine p. c. of
humanity mean this "me" when they say "I". Now let us examine what this
"me" implies. It consists largely of our consciousness, of our body and
physical sensations as associated with touch, taste, smell, sight and
hearing. The consciousness of some of us is largely bound up in the
physical and carnal side of life. We "live there." There are some men who
consider their "clothes" too as being a part of themselves. But as
consciousness rises in the scale of evolution, man begins to "dissociate"
his idea of "me" from the body and he begins to regard his body as a
beloved companion and as "belonging to" him. He then identifies himself
with his mental states, emotions, feelings, likes and dislikes, habits,
qualities and characteristics. But, by and by, he begins to realize how
even these moods also are subject to change, born and die and are subject
to the Principles of Rhythm and Polarity. He realizes faintly that he can
change them by an effort of will and "transmute" them into mental states
of an exactly opposite nature. Then he again begins to "dissociate"
himself from his emotions and feelings and at last through mental
analysis, introspection and concentration, he sets them apart into the
"not I" collection. He begins _then_ to realize that he is something
_above_ his body and emotions. So also with the intellectual
functions. The intellectual man is very apt to think that although his
_physical_ and _emotional_ selves are something different from him and
under his control, _still his intellect is himself_. This is the stage of
"Self-Consciousness". "I control my body and emotions." But as
consciousness unfolds intellectual man finds that he can practically
stand aside and see (mentally, of course) his mind going through various
processes of intellection. Study of Psychology and Logic will enable
you to see how all your intellectual processes may be held at arm's
length, examined, analysed, labelled and discussed quite with the same
ease as the professor talks of a solid, liquid and acriform substances in
his laboratory. So at last he finds that even the wonderful powers of
the Intellect must go into the "not I" collection. This is almost as far
as the average man can realize. You can realize and say "I am not the
body, not the emotions, not the intellect." Therefore you see, that side
of consciousness which is the sum-total of your physical, emotional and
intellectual functions comprises the "me" or Feminine or Passive mental
principle. That which can separate itself in thought from all the above
is the "I" or the Masculine Function. But another step must be taken.
That which you have been taught to regard as the Spiritual Consciousness
(see "Spiritual Consciousness") will also eventually go into the
"Not-I" or "me" collection. In brief, the spiritual mind may be said to
comprise all that is GOOD, NOBLE and GREAT in the field of consciousness.
It is the "Super-Conscious" mind, just now. But, mark this, when through
further evolution, the "I" has mastered this field of consciousness also
and is able to regard it as being the last of the "me" collections, then
it will lose its sense of _relativity_ and _separation_ and the real
individuality, the "I AM" consciousness, will have been realized.
What do I mean? This "I AM" is not the petulant self-assertion of the
relative ego. "I" but really means GOD CONSCIOUSNESS as perfect
Existence, perfect Knowledge or perfect Bliss. It means the realization
of an Infinite and Eternal Self or Individuality. "He that has lost the
self has gained the SELF". Here is the explanation: this little self or
"I" so long as it is attached to the PERSONALITY which is the product
of the "me" consciousness is bound down to the relative plane. It can
think only through only one brain, enjoy through one body and such
happiness as it gets is transitory, short-lived and impermanent because
this world of relative existence is itself essentially changeable. It is
permanent only in its impermanence. So long as the "I" thinks and while
only for the benefits of its personal self, both thinking and willing are
limited and not free. But when it has succeeded in joining itself to the
Spiritual mind and works for, aspires after the Larger Self--the "I
AM"--it has to renounce or "disattach" itself from the personal self and
work under the guidance of the impersonal Higher Self. "I refuse to
be contained within my hat and boots," said Walt Whitman. When the
Vedantist says "Aham Brahmasmi"--"I am the absolute"--he does not mean
this lower "I". No, no. He is not built that way. For him the moorings of
self-consciousness are out. He has lost all sense of his particular
relative "I" and has _one-d_ himself with the absolute "I AM"--the
impersonal, intangible, immortal, omnipotent Self of and over all.
This "I am" is Spirit or Atman. There can be but one Individuality--that
of the Absolute. It becomes objectively expressed in man as Cosmic
Consciousness. Subjectively it is God. Now then you have an idea of
the "I am" Consciousness. Hold fast to it. It is your real, Larger Self.
In the understanding and the exercise of the Will-Power the "I" or the
Positive Mental Principle is the chief factor. To use the one you must
understand the other. Will is a Soul-Power. This "I"--as I have explained
it above--is negative to the "I AM" or God--both meaning the
same thing. It is positive in relation to the Higher Self. This "I" is
the future promise of the "I AM". It is true it shall lose itself in
finding its Self, but so does the child when it grows into full manhood.
Christ was one with his Father-in-Heaven (i.e., on the spiritual plane)
and therefore he could still the waves and raise the dead. Yet just you
examine the nature of Lord Christ's Will-Force. Think of his constant
retirement into the Silence in order to obtain inspiration for his work
in the objective universe. Again, note his utter indifference to and
absolute control over his personal self. Did he care whether his body
would live or die? Did he live for the enjoyments of the flesh? Did he
"play to the gallery" and act and speak for any worldly gain or low
considerations? No! He had forgotten the interests of the flesh in his
earnest enthusiasm in the cause of the Eternal Spirit. He was not moved
by any dammed sense of prudence and caution. He drew the "Motives" that
energised his Will-Power in the life of Action from _Within_. Nothing
from outside, nothing from the world of lower attractions could in the
least swerve his inner determination or unbalance his brain. Do you or
can you prepare yourself to follow in his steps? Then my first point and
the most infallible method of awakening your Will-Power is this:

(_a_) Teach Thy Will to "Resist and Renounce." Strengthen your Will-Power
by Renunciation. By Resistance is not meant outer resistance or
aggressiveness. I find that all the modern teachers of Hypnotism advise
their students to develop Will-Power by exercising it upon others. This
is placing the cart before the horse. We Hindus know better. No; by
Resistance to and Repression of your lower Desire-Nature is meant letting
the more difficult choice exercise its compelling and restraining power
over the easier one. Says Sister Nivedita: "The Indian ideal is that man
whose lower mind is so perfectly under control that he can at any moment
plunge into the thought-ocean and remain there at will without the least
possibility of a sudden break and unexpected return to the life of the
senses." Yes, your interests should be within and not without. _You must
rise above all personal impulse_. Even in this world you find that men of
distinction, fame and honour have achieved recognition by practising a
little _self-denial_, which is a "milder" form of absolute Renunciation
as practised by true Sanyasis. The man who can work at his aim with
perseverance and denies himself the mess of pottage of present indulgence
in view of some future gain develops Will-Power. So in training your Will
to 'resist', you must, as a first step, sternly refuse to indulge
impulses, desires and tendencies not in consonance with the dictates of
your Higher Self. You must actually go out of your way and "deny"
yourself the little or great "comforts" to which you are or have been
accustomed. The strongest-willed man is he who has the greatest control
over his inclinations, and who can 'force' himself to do such things as
he is naturally most inclined to do. This is a characteristic which
cannot be developed in a day. There are some children and even grown-up
men and women who mistake their 'obstinacy' for Will-Power. They want a
thing and when they do not get it they tear their hair, gnash their
teeth, stamp their feet and fly into a terrible passion. Since people
think that these uncontrolled creatures are strong-willed while all that
you could say about them is that _they are utter slaves to their
desires_. You must practise self-denial in fifty different ways and force
yourself to do certain things, 'little and big,' every day purely for
developing this power of Resistance. No short-cut to this. Some children
develop it unconsciously by 'forcing' themselves to study when they might
play, and by applying themselves to such studies as are dry and
uninteresting to them they thus practise voluntary Concentration.
Practise self-denial in every possible way. Cut off such luxuries as you
think "you must have." "Take a cold bath when you would prefer a warm
one. Arise promptly in the morning. Make yourself call upon people you
have avoided. Stand up in a street car when you would prefer sitting;
walk when it is convenient to ride. Make engagements with yourself and
keep them. Promise yourself that when you see something to be done you
will spring at once to it however strong may be the inclination to put it
off awhile" and back of it all let there be the auto-suggestion: "_I am
doing all these hard things in order to build up my Will-Power and each
time 'I' succeed in forcing 'my mind' to do a thing or not to do it I
make the next victory easier and my Will-Power stronger_." Of course the
above is only a hint as to your line of practise.

(_b_) You must not give yourself such hard tasks of Self-Development
as might be too heavy and beyond the present strength of your Will.
In denying yourself you develop self-control. In forcing yourself to do
certain things you develop powers of Self-Expression. In one the Will
moves along negative lines. In the other along positive lines. Both are
necessary. The man who cannot control and command himself can never
develop and express Himself. But be sure to begin with easy things and
then as you gain in confidence you may attempt more difficult feats.

(_c_) The faculties of Courage and Confidence are essentially important.
Nothing weakens the will so much as Fear and lack of Self-Confidence.
Self-Confidence is not blustering self-conceit. That within you which
says "I CAN" when calmly and doggedly backed by your "I Will" when
deliberately translated into action develops Will-Force and commands
startling results.

(_d_) Always hold these words before your passive Mind:

1. Earnestness. 2. Determination. 3. Courage. 4. Confidence.
5. Stick-to-it-ive-ness. 6. Patience. 7. I can and I will.

