

MOHAMMED'S CONCEPTION OF GOD


His conception of God is essentially deistical. The intimate personal
communion, so characteristic of the Old Testament, is unknown and
unrealised: hence there is little, if anything, in his system that
tends to draw men nigh to God. Attempts to remedy this characteristic
defect have been vainly made by the dervish orders, which, while
acknowledging the claims of Mohammed and his book, have introduced
methods not sanctioned by the system, by which they attempt to find
the communion with the Unseen, for which their souls crave. These
methods are very much akin to the efforts of the devotees of Hinduism.
There is, therefore, lacking amongst Moslems that need which grows out
of personal relationship with the Divine--that need which leads to
moral transformation and spiritual intensity on the part of those who
enjoy such fellowship. The Creator exists apart from His handiwork. He
has predetermined the actions of men. They are destined to eternal
bliss or destruction by an Inflexible Will, so that there is no need
for Divine Interference in their affairs. "God is in His heaven, and
the world is working out its end according to His unalterable decree."

Because of this gross conception, Palgrave has designated the system
"The Pantheism of Force," and says:

     "Immeasurably and eternally exalted above, and dissimilar from all
     creatures, which he levelled before Him on one common plane of
     instrumentality and inertness, God is One in the totality of
     omnipotent and omnipresent action, which acknowledges no rule,
     standard or limit, save His own sole and absolute will. He
     communicates nothing to His creatures, for their seeming power and
     act ever remain His alone, and in return He receives nothing from
     them; for whatever they may be, that they are in Him, by Him, and
     from Him only. And, secondly, no superiority, no distinction, no
     pre-eminence, can be lawfully claimed by one creature ever its
     fellow, in the utter equalisation of their unexceptional servitude
     and abasement; all are alike tools of the one solitary Force which
     employs them to crush or to benefit, to truth or to error, to
     honour or shame, to happiness or misery, quite independently of
     their individual fitness, deserts, or advantages, and simply
     because 'He wills it,' and 'as He wills it ...'

     "One might at first sight think that this tremendous Autocrat, this
     uncontrolled and unsympathising Power, would be far above anything
     like passions, desires, or inclinations. Yet such is not the case,
     for He has, with respect to His creatures, one main feeling and
     source of action, namely, jealousy of them, lest they should
     perchance attribute to themselves something of what is His alone,
     and thus encroach on His all engrossing kingdom. Hence He is ever
     more prone to punish than to reward; to inflict pain than to bestow
     pleasure; to ruin than to build. It is His singular satisfaction to
     let created beings continually feel that they are nothing else than
     His slaves, His tools, and contemptible tools also; that thus they
     may the better acknowledge His superiority, and know His power to
     be above their power, His cunning above their cunning, His will
     above their will, His pride above their pride--or, rather, that
     there is no power, cunning, will, or pride save His own.

     "But He Himself, sterile in His inaccessible height, neither loving
     nor enjoying aught save His own and self-measured decree, without
     son, companion, or counsellor, is no less barren of Himself than
     for His creatures, and His own barrenness and lone egoism in
     Himself is the cause and rule of His indifferent and unregarding
     despotism around. The first note is the key of the whole tune, and
     the primal idea of God runs through and modifies the whole system
     and creed that centres in Him."

Contrast this summary with the teaching of the Old Testament prophets,
the following quotations of which are but a small sample:--

     "Come, now, and let us reason together, saith the Lord. Though your
     sins be as scarlet they shall be as white as snow; though they be
     red like crimson, they shall be as wool."

     "Comfort ye, comfort ye, my people, saith your God. Speak ye
     comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her that her warfare is
     accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned."

     "The spirit of the Lord God is upon me: because the Lord has
     anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek. He hath sent me
     to bind up the broken-hearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives,
     and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, etc."

     "As one whom his mother comforteth, so will I comfort you, saith
     the Lord."

     "Who is a god like unto Thee, that pardoneth iniquity, and passeth
     by the transgression of the remnant of His heritage? He retaineth
     not His anger for ever, because He delighteth in mercy. He will
     turn again; He will have compassion upon us. He will subdue our
     iniquities; and Thou wilt cast all our sins into the depths of the
     sea."

     "He hath showed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord
     require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk
     humbly with thy God."

     "The Lord is good, a stronghold in the day of trouble; and He
     knoweth them that trust in Him."

In the light of such lofty teaching, the conceptions of Mohammed
appear gross and degraded. His asceticism and contemplation never
brought him a vision of God that overwhelmed him and purified as by
fire. He knew the Creator only from what he heard from the lips of
sinful, ignorant men, whose ideas of Deity were base and ignoble.
These ideas, and the passions that made up such a large portion of his
life, obscured his vision, warped his judgment, and led him to
postulate a God that inhabited not a Holy Spiritual Realm, but a
grossly carnal and sensuous paradise.

Millions have been brought beneath his sway because his system panders
to the natural inclinations of man. Spiritual insight is blinded by
carnal desire; conduct is influenced by unbridled license; bigotry and
hatred are fostered by his policy of intoleration; and his followers
are enslaved by a tyranny that blights the reason, because it
discountenances inquiry, and places an insurmountable barrier in the
way of all human progress.

In studying the life of Mohammed, the cause of his failure to uplift
humanity will be clearly seen. His early sincerity, if sincerity it
can be named, was absorbed by his consuming ambition. Had it been
otherwise he might have had his name inscribed with the honourable
ones of the earth--those men whose claims are ratified by their happy
effects. As it is, his name is linked with those whose deeds cause a
shudder of horror and repulsion to all who love honesty, purity, and
truth.




I.--EARLY LIFE.


Mohammed was born in Mecca, a town in Arabia, about seventy miles
inland from the Red Sea. His father, who died 570 A.D., a few months
before the child was born, was a member of the Banu Hashim clan. His
family, although well connected, was a humble one, possessing but
little wealth. On the death of his mother some six years later, the
child was taken by his grandfather, 'ABD-EL-MUTTALIB, who took care of
him for two years. Then he was adopted by his uncle, ABU TALIB, who
employed him to look after his flocks and herds.

From his earliest years, Mohammed must have been brought into contact
with the religious life of Mecca, for his grandfather was custodian of
the Kaaba, or temple, and would frequently take the boy with him on
his official visits to the place. The numerous images of the gods set
up in the temple would be familiar objects to the future prophet,
whose iconoclastic zeal was eventually to bring about their
destruction. His lonely shepherd life favoured the cultivation of the
contemplative habits of his manhood, and played no unimportant part in
the development of those characteristics which eminently fitted him
for the life he was to lead. Nature had endowed him with the essential
abilities of a commander of men, and his early environment provided a
training that enabled him to exercise those gifts most advantageously.

The population of Arabia at this time consisted of numerous
independent nomadic tribes, who were often at enmity one with another.
Political unity there was none, while each tribe had its own patron,
or god, which was considered to be responsible for everything
