Three Keys.


Now, I want to give you _the three keys to John's Gospel._ There's a
back-door key, a side-door key, and a front-door key. These keys hang
outside the doors, low down, that so any one who wants to can easily
reach up, and get them. And if used faithfully and simply they will be
found to unlock every page and line and difficult question.

_The back-door key_ hangs right at the back door. It is the very last
verse of chapter twenty. That really was the last chapter at first. The
thought of the book comes to a close there. The story is complete. Then
the Holy Spirit led John to add a little, a second last-chapter, an
added touch for good measure. Love is never content. It is always adding
more.

Here is the key: "_these are written that ye may believe that Jesus is
the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye may have life through
His name_." This was John's whole thought in telling the Jesus-story.
The practical gripped him wholly and hard. This is the thing that guides
his selection of incidents. This purpose shapes the shape of the book.
It explains everything told, and just why it is told in just the way it
is told.

John lets Jesus walk before our eyes fresh from His Father's presence.
The mere fact of His presence, the winsomeness of His personality, the
clearness of His teaching, the power of His actions, the uncompromising
purity of His character amidst sin-stained crowds and sin-dirtied
surroundings, the unflinching rigidity of His ideals, the persuasiveness
of His very manner and tone of speech, the patience and gentleness, the
rugged granite strength, the mother tenderness, above all the
willingness to suffer so terribly,--all this is a plea, a tremendous
overpowering plea, all the stronger because presented so simply and
briefly. Jesus is a Lover and this is His wooing.

And John's one thought in writing is the same as the one thought in the
Lover's heart. John has become simply an echo of Jesus. It is this, that
_you_, whoever you are, wherever, whatever, that you may _believe_. You
look and listen, question, puzzle a bit maybe, but keep on listening and
looking, thinking, weighing, till you are clear these things are just so
as John tells them. Yon accept them as trustworthy. Then you accept
_Him_, Jesus, as He comes to you, your wooing Lover, your Lover-God,
your Saviour and Lord.

You _believe_: that is you _love_. The grammar of the word works itself
out inside you thus,--believe, trust, love. The truth comes in through
eyes and ears and feeling, into brain and will; through emotion clear
down into your heart. You love. You cannot help yourself. You love
_Him_, Jesus, the One so lovable.

John says that you _may_ believe. It is possible. It is the reasonable
intelligent thing to do after such a presentation. John makes it easy
for us to believe. His telling of the story is so strong and convincing,
though so simple and short, that believing is the natural thing. Jesus
Himself, as He conies to us through John's eyes and speech, is so
believable, so trustworthy, so lovable.

Now we _may_ believe. It's the thing to do after a thoughtful kneeful
study of the case as put by John. We _may believe_ clear into and
through intellect and emotions and will, right down into the depths of
heart and love, clear out into every action of the life.

And John sweeps in the whole crowd of the world in the way he puts it
here. Listen: "that you may believe that Jesus is _the Christ_." That
was for the Jew peculiarly in the first instance. The Jew had been
taught through generations that there was One coming who was God's
chosen One for the Hebrew nation. He was the _Anointed One_. The Hebrew
said _Messiah_. The Greek said _Christ_. Both mean the same, the One
chosen of God, anointed by Him as the King and Leader of His chosen
people, and through them of all the race.

Listen further: "that Jesus is _the Son of God." That_ is for all of us,
Jew and foreigner, insider and outsider. This Jesus is in a distinctive
sense _the_ Son of God, the only begotten Son. This pure loving pleading
wooing suffering dying rising-again Jesus, this is the only begotten Son
of the Father. All there is in a Father comes to, and is in, an only
begotten son. This is God Himself coming to us in His Son.

Once let this sift into thought and heart, then who would _not_ believe,
_and_ trust, _and_ love, _and_ fall on his face in the utter devotion of
a voluntary slave before such a God!

And so believing, trusting, loving, touching, His life flows in and
fills up and floods out. We have it _now_. That word _eternal_, used so
often by John with the word _life_, is not a mere _length_ word. It is
not a calendar word. It tells the sort of life, the quality of life,
that comes in through the opening door of our believing. This is John's
back-door key, but it lets you clear in through the whole house.

Then there is _the side-door key_. It hangs at the side, a bit towards
the back. It is in the Thursday night talk, as we commonly call it, that
last heart-talk with the inner group on the betrayal night. It is in
chapter sixteen, verse twenty-eight: "_I came out from the Father, and
am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go unto the
Father_."

Run through this Gospel with that fresh in your mind, and it is
perfectly fascinating to find how much like a magnet it is, picking out
to itself so many bits from the Master's lips that fit exactly into it.
Jesus' constant thought was that He used to be with the Father; He came
down on an errand to the earth. By and by when the errand was done He
would go back home again.

This sentence becomes a simple, exact, comprehensive outline of the
entire Gospel. Notice: "_I came out from the Father_": that is chapter
one, verses one to eighteen. There Jesus is seen coming down from His
Father's own presence. Then chapter one, verse nineteen through to the
close of the twelfth chapter is fully described and covered by the next
clause, "_and am come into the world_." Here He is seen in the world, in
the midst of its crowds and contentions and oppositions.

"_Again, I leave the world_,"--chapters thirteen to nineteen. In chapters
thirteen to seventeen He is tenderly leaving the inner circle. In
chapters eighteen and nineteen He is going out of the world by the
terrible doorway of the cross it had carpentered for Him. How quietly He
says the words, though the terrible going is yet to come, and is now so
near that He can already feel the shame and the thorns and the nails.

And as quietly He looks beyond and adds, "_and go unto the Father_." In
chapters twenty and twenty-one He lingers a little for the sake of these
being left behind, but His face is already turned homeward. They would
hold Him in their midst. He quietly tells them that He is going back
home to the Father to get things ready for them, as He had said.



He Comes to His Own.


_The front-door key_ hangs right at the very front, outside, low down,
where even a child's hand can reach it. It is in chapter one, verses
eleven and twelve: "_He came unto His own, and they that were His own
received Him not. But as many as received Him to them gave He the right
to become children of God, even to them who believe on His name_." This
is the great key, the chief key to this whole house. It flings the front
door wide open and you are inside at once, and take in the whole of the
house at a glance, one glance, one wonderful glance.

The first twelve chapters tell of Jesus coming to His own, His own
nation, humanly, racially, His own chosen people. He is coming steadily
and persistently, in spite of rebuffs; coming patiently, tenderly,
earnestly; coming ever closer in the ever increasing measure of divine
power seen in His actions.

And continually, persistently, He is being rejected and accepted. He is
rejected silently and contemptuously, then aggressively and bitterly,
viciously and murderously. "His own received Him not." But many received
Him, eagerly and warmly and thoughtfully. They received Him with a
growing depth of conviction and deepening tenderness of love. And as
they come, He is ever receiving them, giving them that touch of new
life that marks only the children of God.

In chapters thirteen to seventeen He is receiving into closer fellowship
those who have received Him, and at the same time wooing them into yet
closer touch. The story of the trial and crucifixion in chapters
eighteen and nineteen, puts the most terrific emphasis on the words,
"_received Him not_." They not only keep Him out of His own possessions,
but do their worst in putting Him out of life. And the little book
closes in its last two chapters with His receivers being received into
the sweetest intimacies of tested triumphant love and into the inner
secrets of rarest resurrection power.

This is the most heart-breaking of all of John's heart-breaking
sentences. John had a hard time writing this Gospel of his. He was not
simply writing a book; that might have been fairly easy. But he was
telling about a friend of his, _the_ friend of his life, his one dearest
Friend. And when he remembers how they treated Him his eyes fill up, and
his heart beats till it thumps, and his quill sticks into the paper in
sheer reluctance to tell the story.

I think likely in the original manuscript, John's own first copy, the
writing was a bit shaky and uneven here. The dew of his wet eyes drops
and blurs the words a bit as he puts down, "He came to His own, and . .
they who were His own . . _received . . Him . . not_."

One day a young student was crossing the quadrangles of one of the old
Scottish Universities towards his quarters in the dormitory. He was not
feeling well. His eyes had troubled him and made his work very
difficult. On the advice of a friend he sought the judgment of an expert
in the treatment of the eyes. The specialist made a very thorough
examination and then informed the young student tactfully but plainly
that he would lose his eyesight, surely and not slowly.

Lose his eyesight? A sudden terrific actual blow between his eyes could
not have stunned his body more than this stunned brain and heart. Lose
his eyesight! All his plans and coveted ambitions seemed slipping clean
out from his grasp. With the loss of eyes would go the loss of
university training, and so of all his dreams. Dazed, blinded, he groped
his way rather than walked out of the physician's office.

His life was to be joined with another's. And now he turned his
distracted steps towards her home, hungry doubtless for some word or
touch of comfort for his sore heart. And he was thinking, too, that with
this utter break-up of the future she must be told. And as he talked he
said in quiet manly words that under these unexpected circumstances, and
the radical change in his prospects, she must be free to do as she
thought best.

And she took her freedom! Yet she was a woman. And a woman's mission is
to teach man love by the real thing of love, by being it herself, and
drawing it out into full flower in him. That was the second staggering
blow. A second time he groped his dazed way out of the house, down the
street, into his lone student quarters.

But another One was near, brooding over him, and tenderly holding his
breaking heart, and speaking words of warm comfort, and breathing in the
freshing breath of true love. And as he yielded to this it overcame all
else. A new mood came and dominated. And it became the fixed thing
mastering all his life. Now he sits down, and out of his torn bleeding
but newly-touched heart writes the words we have all learned to sing:

    "O Love that will _not_ let me go,
      I rest my weary soul in Thee,
    I give Thee back the life I owe,
      That in thine ocean depths its flow
        May richer, fuller be.

    "O Light that followest all my way,
      I yield my flickering torch to Thee;
    My heart restores its borrowed ray
      That in Thy sunshine's glow its day
        May brighter, fairer be.

    "O Joy that seekest me through pain,
      I cannot close my heart to Thee;
    I trace the rainbow through the rain,
      And feel the promise is not vain
        That morn shall tearless be.

    "O Cross that liftest up my head,
      I dare not ask to hide from Thee;
    I lay in dust life's glory dead,
      And from the ground there blossoms red
        Life that shall endless be."

And with but a single change, the change of a word or two in one line,
they stand as at first written. I suppose his biographer omitted the
incident for the same reason that the first three Gospels may have
omitted the incident of Lazarus while he was still living. So there was
a sheltering from personal embarrassment.

He came to his own and his own received him not. _He_--Jesus came to
_His_ own and they that were His own received Him not. Aye, there's more
to add: He _comes_ to His own--you and me--to-day. And His own--

You and I must finish that sentence, each in his own way. And we will;
and we do. We may copy out in our lives just what these men of old did
as told by John. Some of us do. We _may_ do some fine revision work on
the text of John's version as we translate it now into the experience of
our own hearts, and into the life of our own lives. That's the only way
to understand the next sentence about being taken into the family of God
and sharing the fullness of life that is common there.

And this bit that is put down here is only a bit of copy work. _These
things_ are talked and written only that we may be given a lift into
closer touch of heart and life with the Christ, the Son of God, and the
Brother and Saviour of men.




II

The Wooing Lover

     _Who it Was that Came_




       "But with unhurrying chase,
        And unperturbed pace,
    Deliberate speed, majestic instancy,
        They beat--and a Voice beat
        More instant than the Feet--
    _'All things betray thee, who betrayest Me'_"

                    --"_The Hound of Heaven._"


    "Behold, I stand at the door and knock: if any
    man hear my voice and open the door, I will come in
    to him, and will sup with him, and he with me."

    --_Rev. iii. 20._




II

The Wooing Lover

(John i. 1-18.)



In His Own Image.


Love gives. It gives freely and without stint, yet always thoughtfully.
It gives itself out, its very life. This is its life, to give its life.
It lives most by giving most. So it comes into fullness of life.

So it _gets_. A thing of life, in its own image, comes walking eagerly
with outstretched arms to its embrace. It gives that it may get. Yet the
giving is the greater. It brings most joy.

This is the very essence of life, this giving creating spirit. It is
everywhere, in lower life and higher and highest, wherever the touch of
God has come. The sun gives itself out in life and light and warmth. And
out to greet it comes a bit of itself--the fine form and sweet fragrance
of the rose, the tender blade of grass, the unfolding green of the leaf,
the wealth of the soil, the song of the bird and the grateful answer of
all nature.

The hen sits long patient days on her nest. And forth comes cheeping
life in her own image, answering the call of her mothering spirit. The
mother-bird in the nest in the crotch of the tree gives her life day by
day in brooding love. And her wee nestling offspring, in her own image,
answers with glad increase of strength and growth.

Father and mother of our human kind give of their very life that new
life may come. And under the overshadowing touch of an unseen Presence
comes a new life made in their image, and in His who broods unseen over
all three. And over the life wrecked by sin broods the Spirit of God.
And out through the doorway of an opening will, comes a new creature of
winsome life in the very image of that brooding Spirit of God.

This is the holy commonplace of all life. It is the touch of God. It is
everywhere about us, and beneath and above. The father-mother Spirit of
God broods over all our common life. And when things go wrong, He broods
a bit closer and tenderer. He meets every need of the life He has
created. And He meets it in the same way, by giving Himself.

And there's always the response. The fragrance of the rose answers the
sun. The pipped shell brings the longed-for answer to the gladdened
mother-bird. The ever wondrous babe-eyes give unspeakable answer to the
yearning of father and mother heart. The heart of man leaps at the call
of his God.

This makes quite clear the wondrous response men gave Jesus when He
walked among us. Jesus was God coming a bit closer in His brooding love
to mend a break and restore a blurred image. And men answered Him. They
couldn't help it. How they came! They didn't understand Him, but they
felt Him. They couldn't resist the tender, tremendous pull upon their
hearts of His mere presence.

And Jesus drew man into the closest touch of intimate friendship. The
long-range way of doing things never suited Him. And it doesn't. He
didn't keep man at arm's length. And He doesn't. And then because they
were friends, He and they, they were eager to serve, and willing even to
suffer, to walk a red-marked roadway for Him they loved.



The Gospel According to--You.
