 condemnation. It is this view which Christianity gives of moral evil:
 the teaching of Christ was the recall of man to nature, not an
 infusion of something new into Humanity. Christ came to call out all
 the principles and powers of human nature, to restore the natural
 equilibrium of all our faculties; not to call us back to our own
 individual selfish nature, but to human nature as it is in God's
 ideal--the perfect type which is to be realised in us. Christianity is
 the regeneration of our whole nature, not the destruction of one atom
 of it.

 Now the nature of man is to adore God and to love what is god-like in
 man. The office of the tongue is to bless. Slander is guilty because
 it contradicts this; yet even in slander itself, perversion as it is,
 the interest of man in man is still distinguishable. What is it but
 perverted interest which makes the acts, and words, and thoughts of
 his brethren, even in their evil, a matter of such strange delight?
 Remember therefore, this contradicts your nature and your destiny; to
 speak ill of others makes you a monster in God's world: get the habit
 of slander, and then there is not a stream which bubbles fresh from
 the heart of nature,--there is not a tree that silently brings forth
 its genial fruit in its appointed season,--which does not rebuke and
 proclaim you to be a monstrous anomaly in God's world.

 4. The fourth point of guilt is the diabolical character of slander;
 the tongue "is set on fire of hell." Now, this is no mere strong
 expression--no mere indignant vituperation--it contains deep and
 emphatic meaning.

 The apostle means literally what he says, slander is diabolical. The
 first illustration we give of this is contained in the very meaning of
 the word devil. "Devil," in the original, means traducer or slanderer.
 The first introduction of a demon spirit is found connected with a
 slanderous insinuation against the Almighty, implying that His command
 had been given in envy of His creature: "for God doth know that in the
 day ye eat thereof, then your eyes shall be opened, and ye shall be
 as gods, knowing good and evil."

 In the magnificent imagery of the book of Job, the accuser is
 introduced with a demoniacal and malignant sneer, attributing the
 excellence of a good man to interested motives; "Doth Job serve God
 for naught?" There is another mode in which the fearful accuracy of
 St. James's charge may be demonstrated. There is one state only from
 which there is said to be no recovery--there is but one sin that is
 called unpardonable. The Pharisees beheld the works of Jesus. They
 could not deny that they were good works, they could not deny that
 they were miracles of beneficence, but rather than acknowledge that
 they were done by a good man through the co-operation of a Divine
 spirit, they preferred to account for them by the wildest and most
 incredible hypothesis; they said they were done by the power of
 Beelzebub, the prince of the devils. It was upon this occasion that
 our Redeemer said with solemn meaning, "For every idle word that men
 shall speak, they shall give account in the day of judgment." It was
 then that He said, for a word spoken against the Holy Ghost there is
 no forgiveness in this world, or in the world to come.

 Our own hearts respond to the truth of this--to call evil, good, and
 good, evil--to see the Divinest good, and call it Satanic evil--below
 this lowest deep there is _not_ a lower still. There is no cure for
 mortification of the flesh--there is no remedy for ossification of the
 heart. Oh! that miserable state, when to the jaundiced eye all good
 transforms itself into evil, and the very instruments of health
 become the poison of disease. Beware of every approach of
 this!--Beware of that spirit which controversy fosters, of watching
 only for the evil in the character of an antagonist!--Beware of that
 habit which becomes the slanderer's life, of magnifying every speck of
 evil and closing the eye to goodness!--till at last men arrive at the
 state in which generous, universal love (which is heaven) becomes
 impossible, and a suspicious, universal hate takes possession of the
 heart, and _that_ is hell!

 There is one peculiar manifestation of this spirit to which I desire
 specially to direct your attention.

 The politics of the community are guided by the political press. The
 religious views of a vast number are formed by that portion of the
 press which is called religious; it becomes, therefore, a matter of
 deepest interest to inquire what is the spirit of that "religious
 press." I am not asking you what are the views maintained--whether
 Evangelical, Anglican, or Romish--but what is the _spirit_ of that
 fountain from which the religious life of so many is nourished?

 Let any man cast his eye over the pages of this portion of the
 press--it matters little to which party the newspaper or the journal
 may belong--he will be startled to find the characters of those whom
 he has most deeply reverenced, whose hearts he knows, whose integrity
 and life are above suspicion, held up to scorn and hatred: the organ
 of one party is established against the organ of another, and it is
 the recognised office of each to point out with microscopic care the
 names of those whose views are to be shunned; and in order that these
 may be the more shrunk from, the characters of those who hold such
 opinions are traduced and vilified. There is no personality too
 mean--there is no insinuation too audacious or too false for the
 recklessness of these daring slanderers. I do not like to use the
 expression, lest it should appear to be merely one of theatrical
 vehemence; but I say it in all seriousness, adopting the inspired
 language of the Bible, and using it advisedly and with accurate
 meaning, the spirit which guides the "religious press" of this
 country, which dictates those personalities, which prevents
 controversialists from seeing what is good in their opponents, which
 attributes low motives to account for excellent lives, and teaches
 men whom to suspect, and shun, rather than point out where it is
 possible to admire and love--is a spirit "set on fire of hell."

 Before we conclude, let us get at the root of the matter. "Man," says
 the Apostle James, "was made in the image of God:" to slander man is
 to slander God: to love what is good in man is to love it in God. Love
 is the only remedy for slander: no set of rules or restrictions can
 stop it; we may denounce, but we shall denounce in vain. The radical
 cure of it is Charity--"out of a pure heart and faith unfeigned," to
 feel what is great in the human character; to recognise with delight
 all high, and generous, and beautiful actions; to find a joy even in
 seeing the good qualities of your bitterest opponents, and to admire
 those qualities even in those with whom you have least sympathy--be it
 either the Romanist or the Unitarian--this is the only spirit which
 can heal the love of slander and of calumny. If we would bless God, we
 must _first_ learn to bless man, who is made in the image of God.




 II.

 _Preached May 5, 1850._

 THE VICTORY OF FAITH.


   "For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world: and this is
    the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith. Who is he
    that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the
    Son of God?"--1 John v. 4-5.

 There are two words in the system of Christianity which have received
 a meaning so new, and so emphatic, as to be in a way peculiar to it,
 and to distinguish it from all other systems of morality and religion;
 these two words are--the World, and Faith. We find it written in
 Scripture that to have the friendship of the world is to be the enemy
 of God--- whereupon the question arises--The world?--did not God make
 the world? Did He not place us in the world? Are we not to love what
 God has made? And yet meeting this distinctly we have the inspired
 record, "Love not the World."

 The object of the Statesman is, or ought to be, to produce as much
 worldly prosperity as possible--but Christianity, that is Christ,
 speaks little of this world's prosperity, underrates it--nay, speaks
 of it at times as infinitely dangerous.

 The legislator prohibits crime--the moralist transgression--the
 religionist sin. To these Christianity superadds a new enemy--the
 world and the things of the world. "If any man love the world, the
 love of the Father is not in him."

 The other word used in a peculiar sense is Faith. It is impossible for
 any one to have read his Bible ever so negligently, and not to be
 aware that the word Faith, or the grace of Faith, forms a large
 element in the Christian system. It is said to work miracles, remove
 mountains, justify the soul, trample upon impossibilities. Every
 apostle, in his way, assigns to faith a primary importance. Jude
 tells us to "build up ourselves in our most holy faith." John tells us
 that--"he that believeth that Jesus is the Christ, is the born of
 God;" and Paul tells us that, not by merit nor by works, but by trust
 or reliance only, can be formed that state of soul by which man is
 reckoned just before God. In these expressions, the apostles only
 develope their Master's meaning, when He uses such words as these,
 "All things are possible to him that believeth:" "O thou of little
 faith, wherefore didst thou doubt?"

 These two words are brought into diametrical opposition in the text,
 so that it branches into a two-fold line of thought

    I. The Christian's enemy, the World.
   II. The victory of Faith.

 In endeavouring to understand first what is meant by the world, we
 shall feel that the mass of evil which is comprehended under this
 expression, cannot be told out in any one sermon; it is an expression
 used in various ways, sometimes meaning one thing, sometimes meaning
 another;-but we will endeavour to explain its general principles--and
 these we will divide into three heads; first, the tyranny of the
 present; secondly, the tyranny of the sensual; and lastly, the spirit
 of society.

 1. The tyranny of the present.

 "Christ," says the Apostle Paul, "hath redeemed us from this present
 evil world;" and again, "Demas hath forsaken me, having loved this,
 present world."

 Let a stress be laid on the word _present_. Worldliness is the
 attractive power of something present, in opposition to something to
 come. It is this rule and tyranny of the present that constitutes
 Demas a worldly man.

 In this respect, worldliness is the spirit of childhood carried on
 into manhood. The child lives in the present hour--to-day to him is
 everything. The holiday promised at a distant interval is no holiday
 at all--it must be either now or never. Natural in the child, and
 therefore pardonable, this spirit, when carried on into manhood, is
 coarse--is worldliness. The most distinct illustration given us of
 this, is the case of Esau. Esau came from the hunting-field worn and
 hungry; the only means of procuring the tempting mess of his brother's
 pottage was the sacrifice of his father's blessing, which in those
 ages carried with it a substantial advantage; but that birthright
 could be enjoyed only after _years_--the pottage was _present_, near,
 and certain; therefore he sacrificed a future and higher blessing, for
 a present and lower pleasure. For this reason Esau is the Bible type
 of worldliness: he is called in Scripture a profane, that is, not a
 distinctly vicious, but a secular or worldly person--an overgrown
 child; impetuous, inconsistent, not without gleams of generosity and
 kindliness, but ever accustomed to immediate gratification.

 In this worldliness, moreover, is to be remarked the gamester's
 desperate play. There is a gambling spirit in human nature. Esau
 distinctly expresses this: "Behold I am at the point to die, and what
 shall my birthright profit me?" He might never live to enjoy his
 birthright; but the pottage was before him, present, certain, _there_.

 Now, observe the utter powerlessness of mere preaching to cope with
 this tyrannical power of the present. Forty thousand pulpits
 throughout the land this day, will declaim against the vanity of
 riches, the uncertainty of life, the sin of worldliness--against the
 gambling spirit of human nature; I ask what _impression_ will be
 produced by those forty thousand harangues? In every congregation it
 is reducible to a certainty that, before a year has passed, some will
 be numbered with the dead. Every man knows this, but he thinks the
 chances are that it will not be himself; he feels it a solemn thing
 for Humanity generally--but for himself there is more than a chance.
 Upon this chance he plays away life.

 It is so with the child: you tell him of the consequences of to-day's
 idleness--but the sun is shining brightly, and he cannot sacrifice
 to-day's pleasure, although he knows the disgrace it will bring
 to-morrow. So it is with the intemperate man: he says--"Sufficient
 unto the day is the evil, and the good thereof; let me have my portion
 now." So that one great secret of the world's victory lies in the
 mighty power of saying "_Now_."

 2. The tyranny of the sensual.

 I call it _tyranny_, because the evidences of the senses are all
 powerful, in spite of the protestations of the reason. In vain you try
 to persuade the child that _he_ is moving, and not the trees which
 seem to flit past the carriage--in vain we remind ourselves that this
 apparently solid earth on which we stand, and which seems so
 immoveable, is in reality flying through the regions of space with an
 inconceivable rapidity--in vain philosophers would persuade us that
 the colour which the eye beholds, resides not in the object itself,
 but in our own perception; we are victims of the apparent, and the
 verdict of the senses is taken instead of the verdict of the reason.

 Precisely so is it with the enjoyments of the world. The man who died
 yesterday, and whom the world called a successful man--for what did he
 live?--He lived for this world--he gained this world. Houses, lands,
 name, position in society--all that earth could give of enjoyments--he
 had: he was the man of whom the Redeemer said that his thoughts were
 occupied in planning how to pull down his barns and build greater. We
 hear men complain of the sordid love of gold, but gold is merely a
 medium of exchange for other things: gold is land, titles, name,
 comfort--all that the world can give. If the world be _all_, it is
 _wise_ to live for gold. There may be some little difference in the
 degree of degradation in different forms of worldliness; it is
 possible that the ambitious man who lives for power is somewhat higher
 than he who merely lives for applause, and he again may be a trifle
 higher than the mere seeker after gold--but after all, looking closely
 at the matter, you will find that, in respect of the objects of their
 idolatry, they agree in this, that all belong to the present.
 Therefore, says the Apostle, all that is in the world--"the lust of
 the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, is not of the
 Father, but of the world," and are only various forms of one great
 tyranny. And then when such a man is at the brink of death, the words
 said to the man in our Lord's parable must be said to him. "Thou fool,
 the houses thou hast built, the enjoyments thou hast prepared; and all
 those things which have formed thy life for years--when thy soul is
 taken from them, what shall they profit thee?"

 3. The spirit of society.

 The _World_ has various meanings in Scripture; it does not always mean
 the Visible, as opposed to the Invisible; nor the Present, as opposed
 to the Future: it sometimes stands for the secular spirit of the
 day--the Voice of Society.

 Our Saviour says, "If ye were of the world, the world would love his
 own." The apostle says, "Be not conformed to this world;" and to the
 Gentiles he writes, "In time past ye walked according to the course of
 this world, the spirit which now worketh in the children of
 disobedience." In these verses, a tone, a temper, a spirit is spoken
 of. There are two things--the Church and the World--two spirits
 pervading different bodies of men, brought before us in these
 verses--those called the Spirit-born, and those called the World,
 which is to be overcome by the Spirit-born, as in the text,
 "Whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world."

 Let us understand what is meant by the Church of God. When we speak of
 the Church we generally mean a society to aid men in their progress
 God-wards; but the Church of God is by no means co-extensive in any
 age with that organized institution which we _call_ the Church;
 sometimes it is nearly co-extensive--that is, nearly all on earth who
 are born of God are found within its pale, nearly all who are of the
 world are extraneous to it--but sometimes the born of God have been
 found distinct from the Institution called the Church, opposed to
 it--persecuted by it. The Institution of the Church is a blessed
 ordinance of God, organized on earth for the purpose of representing
 the Eternal Church and of extending its limits, but still ever
 subordinate to it.

 The Eternal Church is "the general assembly and church of the
 first-born which are written in heaven;" the selected spirits of the
 most High, who are struggling with the evil of their day; sometimes
 alone, like Elijah, and like him, longing that their work was done;
 sometimes conscious of their union with each other. God is for ever
 raising up a succession of these--His brave, His true, His good.
 Apostolical succession, as taught sometimes, means simply this--a
 succession of miraculous powers flowing in a certain line. The true
 apostolic succession is--not a succession in an hereditary line, or
 line marked by visible signs which men can always identify, but a
 succession emphatically spiritual.

 The Jews looked for an hereditary succession; they thought that
 because they were Abraham's seed, the spiritual succession was
 preserved; the Redeemer told them that "God was able of those stones
