conscientious in their convictions; but this one thing can be done, and
should be: let your opponents alone, and use no influence to prevent their
legitimate action from their own standpoint of experience, knowing, as you
should, that God will well regenerate and separate wisely and finally;
whereas you may err in effort, and lose your fruition.

Hoping to pacify repeated complaints and murmurings against too great
leniency, on my part, towards some of my students who fall into error, I
have opposed occasionally and strongly--especially in the first edition of
this little work--existing wrongs of the nature referred to. But I now
point steadfastly to the power of grace to overcome evil with good. God
will "furnish a table in the wilderness" and show the power of Love.

Science is not the shibboleth of a sect or the cabalistic insignia of
philosophy; it excludes all error and includes all Truth. More mistakes are
made in its name than this period comprehends. Divinely defined, Science is
the atmosphere of God; humanly construed, and according to Webster, it is
"knowledge, duly arranged and referred to general truths and principles on
which it is founded, and from which it is derived." I employ this
awe-filled word in both a divine and human sense; but I insist that
Christian Science is demonstrably as true, relative to the unseen verities
of being, as any proof that can be given of the completeness of Science.

The two largest words in the vocabulary of thought are "Christian" and
"Science." The former is the highest style of man; the latter reveals and
interprets God and man; it aggregates, amplifies, unfolds, and expresses
the ALL-God. The life of Christ is the predicate and postulate of
all that I teach, and there is but one standard statement, one rule, and
one Principle for all scientific truth.

My hygienic system rests on Mind, the eternal Truth. What is termed matter,
or relates to its so-called attributes, is a self-destroying error. When a
so-called material sense is lost, and Truth restores that lost sense,--on
the basis that all consciousness is Mind and eternal,--the former position,
that sense is organic and material, is proven erroneous.

The feasibility and immobility of Christian Science unveil the true
idea,--namely, that earth's discords have not the reality of Mind in the
Science of being; and this idea--dematerializing and spiritualizing
mortals--turns like the needle to the pole all hope and faith to God, based
as it is on His omnipotence and omnipresence.

Eternal harmony, perpetuity, and perfection, constitute the phenomena of
being, governed by the immutable and eternal laws of God; whereas matter
and human will, intellect, desire, and fear, are not the creators,
controllers, nor destroyers of life or its harmonies. Man has an immortal
Soul, a divine Principle, and an eternal being. Man has perpetual
individuality; and God's laws, and their intelligent and harmonious action,
constitute his individuality in the Science of Soul.

In its literary expression, my system of Christian metaphysics is hampered
by material terms, which must be used to indicate thoughts that are to be
understood metaphysically. As a Science, this system is held back by the
common ignorance of what it is and what it does, and (worse still) by those
who come falsely in its name. To be appreciated, Science must be understood
and conscientiously introduced. If the Bible and Science and Health had the
place in schools of learning that physiology occupies, they would
revolutionize and reform the world, through the power of Christ. It is true
that it requires more study to understand and demonstrate what these works
teach, than to learn theology, physiology, or physics; because they teach
divine Science, with fixed Principle, given rule, and unmistakable proof.

Ancient and modern human philosophy are inadequate to grasp the Principle
of Christian Science, or to demonstrate it. Revelation shows this
Principle, and will rescue reason from the thrall of error. Revelation must
subdue the sophistry of intellect, and spiritualize consciousness with the
dictum and the demonstration of Truth and Love. Christian Science
Mind-healing can only be gained by working from a purely Christian
standpoint. Then it heals the sick and exalts the race. The essence of this
Science is right thinking and right acting--leading us to see spirituality
and to be spiritual, to understand and to demonstrate God.

The Massachusetts Metaphysical College and Church of Christ, Scientist, in
Boston, were the outgrowth of the author's religious experience. After a
lifetime of orthodoxy on the platform of doctrines, rites, and ceremonies,
it became a sacred duty for her to impart to others this new-old knowledge
of God.

The same affection, desire, and motives which have stimulated true
Christianity in all ages, and given impulse to goodness, in or out of the
Church, have nerved her purpose to build on the new-born conception of the
Christ, as Jesus declared himself,--namely, "the way, the truth, and the
life." Living a true life, casting out evil, healing the sick, and
preaching the gospel of Truth,--these are the ends of Christianity. This
divine way impels a spiritualization of thought and method, beyond doctrine
and ritual; and in nothing else has she departed from the old landmarks.

The unveiled spiritual signification of the Word so enlarges our sense of
God that it makes both sense and Soul, man and Life, immaterial, though
still individual. It removes all limits from divine power. God must be
found all instead of a part of being, and man the reflection of His power
and goodness. This Science rebukes sin with its own nothingness, and thus
destroys sin quickly and utterly. It makes disease unreal, and this heals
it.

The demonstration of moral and physical growth, and a scientific deduction
from the Principle of all harmony, declare both the Principle and idea to
be divine. If this be true, then death must be swallowed up in Life, and
the prophecy of Jesus fulfilled, "Whosoever liveth and believeth in me
shall never die." Though centuries passed after those words were originally
uttered, before this reappearing of Truth, and though the hiatus be longer
still before that saying is demonstrated in Life that knows no death, the
declaration is nevertheless true, and remains a clear and profound
deduction from Christian Science.




IS CHRISTIAN SCIENCE OF THE SAME LINEAGE AS SPIRITUALISM OR
THEOSOPHY?


Science is not susceptible of being held as a mere theory. It is hoary with
time. It takes hold of eternity, voices the infinite, and governs the
universe. No greater opposites can be conceived of, physically, morally,
and spiritually, than Christian Science, spiritualism, and theosophy.

Science and Health has effected a revolution in the minds of thinkers on
the subject of mediumship, and given impulse to reason and revelation,
goodness and virtue. A theory may be sound in spots, and sparkle like a
diamond, while other parts of it have no lustre. Christian Science is
sound in every part. It is neither warped nor misconceived, when properly
demonstrated. If a spiritualist medium understood the Science of
Mind-healing, he would know that between those who have and those who have
not passed the transition called death, there can be no interchange of
consciousness, and that all sensible phenomena are merely subjective states
of mortal mind.

Theosophy is a corruption of Judaism. This corruption had a renewal in the
Neoplatonic philosophy; but it sprang from the Oriental philosophy of
Brahmanism, and blends with its magic and enchantments. Theosophy is no
more allied to Christian Science than the odor of the upas-tree is to the
sweet breath of springtide, or the brilliant coruscations of the northern
sky are to solar heat and light.




IS CHRISTIAN SCIENCE FROM BENEATH, AND NOT FROM ABOVE?


Hear the words of our Master: "Go ye into all the world"! "Heal the sick,
cast out devils"! Christian Scientists, perhaps more than any other
religious sect, are obeying these commands; and the injunctions are not
confined to Jesus' students in that age, but they extend to this age,--to
as many as shall believe on him. The demand and example of Jesus were not
from beneath. Are frozen dogmas, persistent persecution, and the doctrine
of eternal damnation, from above? Are the dews of divine Truth, falling on
the sick and sinner, to heal them, from beneath? "By their fruits ye shall
know them."

Reading my books, without prejudice, would convince all that their purpose
is right. The comprehension of my teachings would enable any one to prove
these books to be filled with blessings for the whole human family.
Fatiguing Bible translations and voluminous commentaries are employed to
explain and prop old creeds, and they have the civil and religious arms in
their defense; then why should not these be equally extended to support the
Christianity that heals the sick? The notions of personality to be found in
creeds are far more mystic than Mind-healing. It is no easy matter to
believe there are three persons in one person, and that one person is cast
out of another person. These conceptions of Deity and devil presuppose an
impotent God and an incredible Satan.


IS CHRISTIAN SCIENCE PANTHEISTIC?
