II. The universal sinfulness. Payment of the tax was a confession that
all were alike in this: not that all were equally sinful, but all were
sinful, whatever variations of degree might exist.

'There is no difference, for all have sinned and come short of the
glory of God.'

III. The one ransom. It was a prophecy of which _we_ know the meaning.
Recall the incident of the 'stater' in the fish's mouth.

Christ declares His exemption from the tax. Yet He voluntarily comes
under it, and He provides the payment of it for Himself and for Peter.

He does so by a miracle.

The Apostle has to 'take and give it'; so faith is called into exercise.

Thus there is but one Sacrifice for all; and the poorest can exercise
faith and the richest can do no more. 'None other name.'




THE GOLDEN CALF


    'And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come
    down out of the mount, the people gathered themselves
    together unto Aaron, and said unto him, Up, make us
    gods, which shall go before us; for as for this Moses,
    the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt,
    we wot not what is become of him. 2. And Aaron said
    unto them, Break off the golden earrings, which are in
    the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your
    daughters, and bring them unto me. 3. And all the people
    brake off the golden earrings which were in their ears,
    and brought them unto Aaron. 4. And he received them at
    their hand, and fashioned it with a graving-tool, after
    he had made it a molten calf: and they said, These be
    thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the
    land of Egypt. 5. And when Aaron saw it, he built an
    altar before it; and Aaron made proclamation, and said,
    To-morrow is a feast to the Lord. 6. And they rose up
    early on the morrow, and offered burnt offerings, and
    brought peace offerings; and the people sat down to eat
    and to drink, and rose up to play. 7. And the Lord said
    unto Moses, Go, get thee down; for thy people, which
    thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt, have corrupted
    themselves: 8. They have turned aside quickly out of the
    way which I commanded them: they have made them a molten
    calf, and have worshipped it, and have sacrificed
    thereunto, and said, These be thy gods, O Israel, which
    have brought thee up out of the land of Egypt.... 30. And
    it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses said unto the
    people, Ye have sinned a great sin: and now I will go up
    unto the Lord; peradventure I shall make an atonement
    for your sin. 31. And Moses returned unto the Lord, and
    said, Oh! this people have sinned a great sin, and have
    made them gods of gold. 32. Yet now, if Thou wilt forgive
    their sin--; and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of Thy
    book which Thou hast written. 33. And the Lord said unto
    Moses, Whosoever hath sinned against Me, him will I blot
    out of My book. 34. Therefore now go, lead the people
    unto the place of which I have spoken unto thee. Behold,
    Mine Angel shall go before thee: nevertheless in the day
    when I visit I will visit their sin upon them. 35. And
    the Lord plagued the people, because they made the calf,
    which Aaron made.'--EXODUS xxxii. 1-8; 30-35.

It was not yet six weeks since the people had sworn, 'All that the Lord
hath spoken will we do, and be obedient.' The blood of the covenant,
sprinkled on them, was scarcely dry when they flung off allegiance to
Jehovah. Such short-lived loyalty to Him can never have been genuine.
That mob of slaves was galvanised by Moses into obedience; and since
their acceptance of Jehovah was in reality only yielding to the power
of one strong will and its earnest faith, of course it collapsed as
soon as Moses disappeared.

We have to note, first, the people's universal revolt. The language of
verse 1 may easily hide to a careless reader the gravity and unanimity
of the apostasy. 'The people gathered themselves together.' It was a
national rebellion, a flood which swept away even some faithful, timid
hearts. No voices ventured to protest. What were the elders, who
shortly before 'saw the God of Israel,' doing to be passive at such a
crisis? Was there no one to bid the fickle multitude look up to the
summit overhead, where the red flames glowed, or to remind them of the
hosts of Egypt lying stark and dead on the shore? Was Miriam cowed too,
and her song forgotten?

We need not cast stones at these people; for we also have short
memories for either the terrible or the gracious revelations of God in
our own lives. But we may learn the lesson that God's lovers have to
set themselves sometimes dead against the rush of popular feeling, and
that there are times when silence or compliance is sin.

It would have been easy for the rebels to have ignored Aaron, and made
gods for themselves. But they desired to involve him in their apostasy,
and to get 'official sanction' for it. He had been left by Moses as his
lieutenant, and so to get him implicated was to stamp the movement as a
regular and entire revolt.

The demand 'to make gods' (or, more probably, 'a god') flew in the face
of both the first and second commandments. For Jehovah, who had
forbidden the forming of any image, was denied in the act of making it.
To disobey Him was to cast Him off. The ground of the rebellion was the
craving for a visible object of trust and a visible guide, as is seen
by the reason assigned for the demand for an image. Moses was out of
sight; they must have something to look at as their leader. Moses had
disappeared, and, to these people who had only been heaved up to the
height of believing in Jehovah by Moses, Jehovah had disappeared with
him. They sank down again to the level of other races as soon as that
strong lever ceased to lift their heavy apprehensions.

How ridiculous the assertion that they did not know what had become of
Moses! They knew that he was up there with Jehovah. The elders could
have told them that. The fire on the mount might have burned in on all
minds the confirmation. Note, too, the black ingratitude and plain
denial of Jehovah in 'the _man_ that brought us up out of the land of
Egypt.' They refuse to recognise God's part. It was Moses only who had
done it; and now that he is gone they must have a visible god, like
other nations.

Still sadder than their sense-bound wish is Aaron's compliance. He knew
as well as we do what he should have said, but, like many another man
in influential position, when beset by popular cries, he was
frightened, and yielded when he should have 'set his face like a
flint.' His compliance has in essentials been often repeated,
especially by priests and ministers of religion who have lent their
superior abilities or opportunities to carry out the wishes of the
ignorant populace, and debased religion or watered down its
prohibitions, to please and retain hold of them. The Church has
incorporated much from heathenism. Roman Catholic missionaries have
permitted 'converts' to keep their old usages. Protestant teachers have
acquiesced in, and been content to find the brains to carry out,
compromises between sense and soul, God's commands and men's
inclinations.

We need not discuss the metallurgy of verse 4. But clearly Aaron asked
for the earrings, not, as some would have it, hoping that vanity and
covetousness would hinder their being given, but simply in order to get
gold for the bad work which he was ready to do. The reason for making
the thing in the shape of a calf is probably the Egyptian worship of
Apis in that form, which would be familiar to the people.

We must note that it was the people who said, 'These be thy gods, O
Israel!' Aaron seems to keep in the rear, as it were. He makes the
calf, and hands it over, and leaves them to hail it and worship. Like
all cowards, he thought that he was lessening his guilt by thus keeping
in the background. Feeble natures are fond of such subterfuges, and
deceive themselves by them; but they do not shift their sin off their
shoulders.

Then he comes in again with an impotent attempt to diminish the gravity
of the revolt. 'When he _saw_ this,' he tried to turn the flood into
another channel, and so proclaimed a 'feast to Jehovah'!--as if He
could be worshipped by flagrant defiance of His commandments, or as if
He had not been disavowed by the ascription to the calf, made that
morning out of their own trinkets, of the deliverance from Egypt. A
poor, inconsequential attempt to save appearances and hallow sin by
writing God's name on it! The 'god' whom the Israelites worshipped
under the image of a calf, was no less another 'god before Me,' though
it was called by the name of Jehovah. If the people had their idol, it
mattered nothing to them, and it mattered as little to Jehovah, what
'name' it bore. The wild orgies of the morrow were not the worship
which He accepts.

What a contrast between the plain and the mountain! Below, the shameful
feast, with its parody of sacrifice and its sequel of lust-inflamed
dancing; above, the awful colloquy between the all-seeing righteous
Judge and the intercessor! The people had cast off Jehovah, and Jehovah
no more calls them 'My,' but '_thy_ people.' They had ascribed their
Exodus first to Moses, and next to the calf. Jehovah speaks of it as
the work of Moses.

A terrible separation of Himself from them lies in '_thy_ people, which
_thou_ broughtest up,' and Moses' bold rejoinder emphasises the
relation and act which Jehovah seems to suppress (verse 11). Observe
that the divine voice refuses to give any weight to Aaron's trick of
compromise. These are no worshippers of Jehovah who are howling and
dancing below there. They are 'worshipping _it_, and sacrificing to
it,' not to Him. The cloaks of sin may partly cover its ugliness here,
but they are transparent to His eyes, and many a piece of worship,
which is said to be directed to Him, is, in His sight, rank idolatry.

We do not deal with the magnificent courage of Moses, his single-handed
arresting of the wild rebellion, and the severe punishment by which he
trampled out the fire. But we must keep his severity in mind if we
would rightly judge his self-sacrificing devotion, and his
self-sacrificing devotion if we would rightly judge his severity.

No words of ours can make more sublime his utter self-abandonment for
the sake of the people among whom he had just been flaming in wrath,
and smiting like a destroying angel. That was a great soul which had
for its poles such justice and such love. The very words of his prayer,
in their abruptness, witness to his deep emotion. 'If Thou wilt forgive
their sin' stands as an incomplete sentence, left incomplete because
the speaker is so profoundly moved. Sometimes broken words are the best
witnesses of our earnestness. The alternative clause reaches the
high-water mark of passionate love, ready to give up everything for the
sake of its objects. The 'book of life' is often spoken of in
Scripture, and it is an interesting study to bring together the places
where the idea occurs (see Ps. lxix. 28; Dan. xii. 1; Phil. iv. 3; Rev.
iii. 5). The allusion is to the citizens' roll (Ps. lxxxvii. 6). Those
whose names are written there have the privileges of citizenship, and,
as it is the 'book of life' (or '_of the living_'), life in the widest
sense is secured to them. To blot out of it, therefore, is to cut a man
off from fellowship in the city of God, and from participation in life.

Moses was so absorbed in his vocation that his life was less to him
than the well-being of Israel. How far he saw into the darkness beyond
the grave we cannot say; but, at least, he was content, and desirous to
die on earth, if thereby Israel might continue to be God's people. And
probably he had some gleam of light beyond, which enhanced the
greatness of his offered sacrifice. To die, whatever loss of communion
with God that involved here or hereafter, would be sweet if thereby he
could purchase Israel's restoration to God's favour. We cannot but
think of Paul willing to be separated from Christ for his brethren's
sake.

We may well think of a greater than Moses or Paul, who did bear the
loss which they were willing to bear, and died that sin might be
forgiven. Moses was a true type of Christ in that act of supreme
self-sacrifice; and all the heroism, the identification of himself with
his people, the love which willingly accepts death, that makes his
prayer one of the greatest deeds on the page of history, are repeated
in infinitely sweeter, more heart-subduing fashion in the story of the
Cross. Let us not omit duly to honour the servant; let us not neglect
to honour and love infinitely more the Lord. 'This man was counted
worthy of more glory than Moses.' Let us see that we render Him

  'Thanks never ceasing,
   And infinite love.'




THE SWIFT DECAY OF LOVE


    'And Moses turned, and went down from the mount, and
    the two tables of the testimony were in his hand: the
    tables were written on both their sides; on the one
    side and on the other were they written. 16. And the
    tables were the work of God, and the writing was the
    writing of God, graven upon the tables. 17. And when
    Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted,
    he said unto Moses, There is a noise of war in the camp.
    18. And he said, It is not the voice of them that shout
    for mastery, neither is it the voice of them that cry
    for being overcome: but the noise of them that sing do
    I hear. 19. And it came to pass, as soon as he came nigh
    unto the camp, that he saw the calf, and the dancing:
    and Moses' anger waxed hot, and he cast the tables out
    of his hands, and brake them beneath the mount. 20. And
    he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it in
    the fire, and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon
    the water, and made the children of Israel drink of it.
    21. And Moses said unto Aaron, What did this people unto
    thee, that thou hast brought so great a sin upon them?
    22. And Aaron said, Let not the anger of my lord wax hot:
    thou knowest the people, that they are set on mischief.
    23. For they said unto me, Make us gods, which shall go
    before us: for as for this Moses, the man that brought
    us up out of the land of Egypt, we wot not what is become
    of him. 24. And I said unto them, Whosoever hath any
    gold, let them break it off. So they gave it me: then
    I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf.
    25. And when Moses saw that the people were naked; (for
    Aaron had made them naked unto their shame among their
    enemies:) 26. Then Moses stood in the gate of the camp,
    and said, Who is on the Lord's side? let him come unto
    me. And all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together
    unto him.'--EXODUS xxxii. 15-26.

Moses and Joshua are on their way down from the mountain, the former
carrying the tables in his hands and a heavier burden in his
heart,--the thought of the people's swift apostasy. Joshua's soldierly
ear interprets the shouts which are borne up to them as war-cries; 'He
snuffeth the battle afar off, and saith Aha!' But Moses knew that they
meant worse than war, and his knowledge helped his ear to distinguish a
cadence and unison in the noise, unlike the confused mingling of the
victors' yell of triumph and the shriek of the conquered. If we were
dealing with fiction, we should admire the masterly dramatic instinct
which lets the ear anticipate the eye, and so prepares us for the
hideous sight that burst on these two at some turn in the rocky descent.

I. Note, then, what they saw. The vivid story puts it all in two
words,--'the calf and the dancing.' There in the midst, perhaps on some
pedestal, was the shameful copy of the Egyptian Apis; and whirling
round it in mad circles, working themselves into frenzy by rapid motion
and frantic shouts, were the people,--men and women, mingled in the
licentious dance, who, six short weeks before, had sworn to the
Covenant. Their bestial deity in the centre, and they compassing it
with wild hymns, were a frightful contradiction of that grey altar and
the twelve encircling stones which they had so lately reared, and which
stood unregarded, a bowshot off, as a silent witness against them. Note
the strange, irresistible fascination of idolatry. Clearly the personal
influence of Moses was the only barrier against it. The people thought
that he had disappeared, and, if so, Jehovah had disappeared with him.
We wonder at their relapses into idolatry, but we forget that it was
then universal, that Israel was at the beginning of its long training,
that not even a divine revelation could produce harvest in seedtime,
and that to look for a final and complete deliverance from the 'veil
that was spread over all nations,' at this stage, is like expecting a
newly reclaimed bit of the backwoods to grow grass as thick and velvety
as has carpeted some lawn that has been mown and cared for for a
century. Grave condemnation is the due of these short-memoried rebels,
who set up their 'abomination' in sight of the fire on Sinai; but that
should not prevent our recognising the evidence which their sin affords
of the tremendous power of idolatry in that stage of the world's
history. Israel's proneness to fall back to heathenism makes it certain
that a supernatural revelation is needed to account for their
possession of the loftier faith which was so far above them.

That howling, leaping crowd tells what sort of religion they would have
'evolved' if left to themselves. Where did 'Thou shalt have none other
gods beside Me' come from? Note the confusion of thought, so difficult
for us to understand, which characterises idolatry. What a hopelessly
inconsequential cry that was, 'Make us gods, which shall go before us!'
and what a muddle of contradictions it was that men should say 'These
be thy gods,' though they knew that the thing was made yesterday out of
their own earrings! It took more than a thousand years to teach the
nation the force of the very self-evident argument, as it seems to us,
'the workman made it, therefore it is not God.' The theory that the
idol is only a symbol is not the actual belief of idolaters. It is a
product of the study, but the worshipper unites in his thought the
irreconcilable beliefs that it was made and is divine. A goldsmith will
make and sell a Madonna, and when it is put in the cathedral, will
kneel before it.

Note what was the sin here. It is generally taken for granted that it
was a breach of the second, not of the first, commandment, and Aaron's
proclamation of 'a feast to the Lord' is taken as proving this. Aaron
was probably trying to make an impossible compromise, and to find some
salve for his conscience; but it does not follow that the people
accepted the half-and-half suggestion. Leaders who try to control a
movement which they disapprove, by seeming to accept it, play a
dangerous game, and usually fail. But whether the people call the calf
'Jehovah' or 'Apis' matters very little. There would be as complete
apostasy to another god, though the other god was called by the same
name, if all that really makes his 'name' was left out, and foreign
elements were brought in. Such worship as these wild dances, offered to
an image, broke both the commandments, no matter by what name the image
was invoked.

The roots of idolatry are in all men. The gross form of it is
impossible to us; but the need for aid from sense, the dependence on
art for wings to our devotion, which is a growing danger to-day, is
only the modern form of the same dislike of a purely spiritual religion
which sent these people dancing round their calf.

II. Mark Moses' blaze of wrath and courageous, prompt action. He dashes
the tables on the rock, as if to break the record of the useless laws
which the people have already broken, and, with his hands free, flings
himself without pause into the midst of the excited mob. Verses 19 and
20 bear the impression of his rapid, decisive action in their
succession of clauses, each tacked on to the preceding by a simple
'and.' Stroke followed stroke. His fiery earnestness swept over all
obstacles, the base riot ceased, the ashamed dancers slunk away. Some
true hearts would gather about him, and carry out his commands; but he
did the real work, and, single-handed, cowed and controlled the mob. No
doubt, it took more time than the brief narrative, at first sight,
would suggest. The image is flung into the fire from which it had come
out. The fire made it, and the fire shall unmake it. We need not find
difficulty in 'burning' a golden idol. That does not mean 'calcined,'
and the writer is not guilty of a blunder, nor needed to be taught that
you cannot burn gold. The next clause says that after it was 'burned,'
it was still solid; so that, plainly, all that is meant is, that the
metal was reduced to a shapeless lump. That would take some time. Then
it was broken small; there were plenty of rocks to grind it up on. That
would take some more time, but not a finger was lifted to prevent it.
Then the more or less finely broken up fragments are flung into the
brook, and, with grim irony, the people are bid to drink. 'You shall
have enough of your idol, since you love him so. Here, down with him!
You will have to take the consequences of your sin. You must drink as
you have brewed.' It is at once a contemptuous demonstration of the
idol's impotence, and a picture of the sure retribution.

But we may learn two things from this figure of the indignant lawgiver.
One is, that the temper in which to regard idolatry is not one of
equable indifference nor of scientific investigation, but that some
heat of moral indignation is wholesome. We are all studying comparative
mythology now, and getting much good from it; but we are in some danger
of forgetting that these strange ideas and practices, which we examine
at our ease, have spread spiritual darkness and moral infection over
continents and through generations. Let us understand them, by all
means; let us be thankful to find fragments of truth in, or innocent
origins of, repulsive legends; but do not let the student swallow up
the Christian in us, nor our minds lose their capacity of wholesome
indignation at the systems, blended with Christ-like pity and effort
for the victims.

We may learn, further, how strong a man is when he is all aflame with
true zeal for God. The suddenness of Moses' reappearance, the very
audacity of his act, the people's habit of obedience, all helped to
carry him through the crisis; but the true secret of his swift victory
was his own self-forgetting faith. There is contagion in pure religious
enthusiasm. It is the strongest of all forces. One man, with God at his
back, is always in the majority. He whose whole soul glows with the
pure fire, will move among men like flame in stubble. 'All things are
possible to him that believeth.' Consecrated daring, animated by love
and fed with truth, is all-conquering.

III. Note the weaker nature of Aaron, taking refuge in a transparent
lie. Probably his dialogue with his brother came in before the process
described in the former verses was accomplished. But the narrative
keeps all that referred to the destruction of the idol together, and
goes by subject rather than by time. We do not learn how Moses had come
to know Aaron's share in the sin, but his question is one of
astonishment. Had they bewitched him anyhow? or what inducement had led
him so far astray? The stronger and devouter soul cannot conceive how
the weaker had yielded. Aaron's answer puts the people's wish forward.
'They said, Make us gods'; that was all which they had 'done.' A poor
excuse, as Aaron feels even while he is stammering it out. What would
Moses have answered if the people had 'said' so to him? Did he,
standing there, with the heat of his struggle on him yet, look like a
man that would acknowledge any demand of a mob as a reason for a
ruler's compliance? It is the coward's plea. How many ecclesiastics and
statesmen since then have had no better to offer for their acts! Such
fear of the Lord as shrivelled before the breath of popular clamour
could have had no deep roots. One of the first things to learn, whether
we are in prominent or in private positions, is to hold by our
religious convictions in supreme indifference to all surrounding
voices, and to let no threats nor entreaties lead us to take one step
beyond or against conscience.

Aaron feels the insufficiency of the plea, when he has to put it into
plain words to such a listener, and so he flies to the resource of
timid and weak natures, a lie. For what did he ask the gold, and put it
into the furnace, unless he meant to make a god? Perhaps he had told
the people the same story, as priests in all lands have been apt to
claim a miraculous origin for idols. And he repeats it now, as if, were
it true, he would plead the miracle as a vindication of the worship as
well as his absolution. But the lie is too transparent to deserve even
an answer, and Moses turns silently from him.

Aaron's was evidently the inferior nature, and was less deeply stamped
with the print of heaven than his brother's. His feeble compliance is
recorded as a beacon for all persons in places of influence or
authority, warning them against self-interested or cowardly yielding to
a popular demand, at the sacrifice of the purity of truth and the
approval of their own consciences. He was not the last priest who has
allowed the supposed wishes of the populace to shape his
representations of God, and has knowingly dropped the standard of duty
or sullied the clear brightness of truth in deference to the
many-voiced monster.

IV. Note the rallying of true hearts round Moses. The Revised Version
reads 'broken loose' instead of 'naked,' and the correction is
valuable. It explains the necessity for the separation of those who yet
remained bound by the restraints of God's law, and for the terrible
retribution that followed. The rebellion had not been stamped out by
the destruction of the calf; and though Moses' dash into their midst
had cowed the rebels for a time, things had gone too far to settle down
again at once. The camp was in insurrection. It was more than a riot,
it was a revolution. With the rapid eye of genius, Moses sees the
gravity of the crisis, and, with equally swift decisiveness, acts so as
to meet it. He 'stood in the gate of the camp,' and made the nucleus
for the still faithful. His summons puts the full seriousness of the
moment clearly before the people. They have come to a fork in the road.
They must be either for Jehovah or against Him. There can be no mixing
up of the worship of Jehovah and the images of Egypt, no tampering with
God's service in obedience to popular clamour. It must be one thing or
other. This is no time for the family of 'Mr. Facing-both-ways'; the
question for each man is, 'Under which King?' Moses' unhesitating
confidence that he is God's soldier, and that to be at his side is to
be on God's side, was warranted in him, but has often been repeated
with less reason by eager contenders, as they believed themselves to
be, for God. No doubt, it becomes us to be modest and cautious in
calling all true friends of God to rank themselves with us. But where
the issue is between foul wrong and plain right, between palpable
idolatry, error, or unbridled lust, and truth, purity, and
righteousness, the Christian combatant for these is entitled to send
round the fiery cross, and proclaim a crusade in God's name. There will
always be plenty of people with cold water to pour on enthusiasm. We
should be all the better for a few more, who would venture to feel that
they are fighting for God, and to summon all who love Him to come to
their and His help.

Moses' own tribe responded to the summons. And, no doubt, Aaron was
there too, galvanised into a nobler self by the courage and fervour of
his brother, and, let us hope, urged by penitence, to efface the memory
of his faithlessness by his heroism now.

We do not go on to the dreadful retribution, which must be regarded,
not as massacre, but as legal execution. It is folly to apply to it, or
to other analogous instances, the ideas of this Christian century. We
need not be afraid to admit that there has been a development of
morality. The retributions of a stern age were necessarily stern. But
if we want to understand the heart of Moses, or of Moses' God, we must
not look only at the ruler of a wild people trampling out a revolt at
the sacrifice of many lives, but listen to him, as the next section of
the narrative shows him, pleading with tears for the rebels, and
offering even to let his own name be blotted out of God's book if their
sin might be forgiven. So, coupling the two parts of his conduct
together, we may learn a little more clearly a lesson, of which this
age has much need,--the harmony of retributive justice and pitying
love; and may come to understand that Moses learned both the one and
the other by fellowship with the God in whom they both dwell in
perfection and concord.




THE MEDIATOR'S THREEFOLD PRAYER


    'And Moses said unto the Lord, See, Thou sayest unto me,
    Bring up this people: and Thou hast not let me know whom
    Thou wilt send with me. Yet Thou hast said, I know thee
    by name, and thou hast also found grace in My sight.
    13. Now therefore, I pray Thee, if I have found grace
    in Thy sight, show me now Thy way, that I may know Thee,
    that I may find grace in Thy sight: and consider that
    this nation is Thy people. 14. And He said, My presence
    shall go with thee, and I will give thee rest. 15. And
    he said unto Him, If Thy presence go not with me, carry
    us not up hence. 16. For wherein shall it be known here
    that I and Thy people have found grace in Thy sight? Is it
    not in that Thou goest with us! So shall we be separated, I
    and Thy people, from all the people that are upon the
    face of the earth, 17. And the Lord said unto Moses, I
    will do this thing also that thou hast spoken: for thou
    hast found grace in My sight, and I know thee by name.
    18. And he said, I beseech Thee, show me Thy glory.
    19. And He said, I will make all My goodness pass before
    thee, and I will proclaim the name of the Lord before
    thee; and will be gracious to whom I will be gracious,
    and will shew mercy on whom I will shew mercy. 20. And
    he said, Thou canst not see My face: for there shall no
    man see Me, and live. 21. And the Lord said, Behold,
    there is a place by Me, and thou shalt stand upon a rock:
    22. And it shall come to pass, while My glory passeth
    by, that I will put thee in a clift of the rock, and
    will cover thee with My hand while I pass by: 23. And
    I will take away Mine hand, and thou shall see My back
    parts; but My face shall not be seen.'--EXODUS xxxiii. 12-23.

The calf worship broke the bond between God and Israel. Instead of His
presence, 'an angel' is to lead them, for His presence could only be
destruction. Mourning spreads through the camp, in token of which all
ornaments are laid aside. The fate of the nation is in suspense, and
the people wait, in sad attire, till God knows 'what to do unto' them.
The Tabernacle is carried beyond the precincts of the camp, in witness
of the breach, and all the future is doubtful. The preceding context
describes (vs. 7-11) not one event, but the standing order of these
dark days, when the camp had to be left if God was to be found, and
when Moses alone received tokens of God's friendship, and the people
stood wistfully and tremblingly gazing from afar, while the cloudy
pillar wavered down to the Tabernacle door. Duty brought Moses back
from such communion; but Joshua did not need to come near the tents of
the evil-doers, and, in the constancy of devout desire, made his home
in the Tabernacle. In one of these interviews, so close and familiar,
the wonderful dialogue here recorded occurred. It turns round three
petitions, to each of which the Lord answers.

I. We have the leader's prayer for himself, with the over-abundant
answer of God. In the former chapter, we had the very sublimity of
intercession, in which the stern avenger of idolatry poured out his
self-sacrificing love for the stiff-necked nation whom he had had to
smite, and offered himself a victim for them. Here his first prayer is
mainly for himself, but it is not therefore a selfish prayer. Rather he
prays for gifts to himself, to fit him for his service to them. We may
note separately the prayer, and the pleas on which it is urged. 'Show
me now Thy way (or ways), that I may know Thee.' The desire immediately
refers to the then condition of things. As we have pointed out, it was
a time of suspense. In the strong metaphor of the context, God was
making up His mind on His course, and Israel was waiting with hushed
breath for the _denouement_. It was not the entrance of the nation into
the promised land which was in doubt, but the manner of their guidance,
and the penalties of their idolatry. These things Moses asked to know,
and especially, as verse 12 shows, to receive some more definite
communication as to their leader than the vague 'an angel.' But the
specific knowledge of God's 'way' was yearned for by him, mainly, as
leading on to a deeper and fuller and more blessed knowledge of God
Himself, and that again as leading to a fuller possession of God's
favour, which, as already in some measure possessed, lay at the
foundation of the whole prayer. The connection of thought here goes far
beyond the mere immediate blessing, which Moses needed at the moment.
That cry for insight into the purposes and methods of Him whom the soul
trusts, amid darkness and suspense, is the true voice of sonship. The
more deeply it sees into these, the more does the devout soul feel the
contrast between the spot of light in which it lives and the encircling
obscurity, and the more does it yearn for the further setting back of
the boundaries. Prayer does more than effort, for satisfying that
desire. Nor is it mere curiosity or the desire for intellectual
clearness that moves the longing. For the end of knowing God's ways is,
for the devout man, a deeper, more blessed knowledge of God Himself,
who is best known in His deeds; and the highest, most blessed issue of
the God-given knowledge of God, is the conscious sunshine of His favour
shining ever on His servant. That is not a selfish religion which,
beginning with the assurance that we have found grace in His sight,
seeks to climb, by happy paths of growing knowledge of Him as
manifested in His ways, to a consciousness of that favour which is made
stable and profound by clear insight into the depths of His purposes
and acts.

The pleas on which this prayer is urged are two: the suppliant's heavy
tasks, and God's great assurances to him. He boldly reminds God of what
He has set him to do, and claims that he should be furnished with what
is needful for discharging his commission. How can he lead if he is
kept in the dark? When we are as sure as Moses was of God's charge to
us, we may be as bold as he in asking the needful equipment for it. God
does not send His servants out to sow without seed, or to fight without
a sword. His command is His pledge. He smiles approval when His
servants' confidence assumes even bold forms, which sound like
remonstrance and a suspicion that He was forgetting, for He discerns
the underlying eagerness to do His will, and the trust in Him. The
second plea is built on God's assurances of intimate and distinguishing
knowledge and favour. He had said that He knew Moses 'by name,' by all
these calls and familiar interviews which gave him the certainty of his
individual relation to, and his special appointment from, the Lord.
Such prerogative was inconsistent with reserve. The test of friendship
is confidence. So pleads Moses, and God recognises the plea. 'I call
you not servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth; but
I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my
Father I have made known unto you.'

The plea based upon the relation of the people to God is subordinate in
this first prayer. It is thrown in at the end almost as an
afterthought; it boldly casts responsibility off Moses on to God, and
does so to enforce the prayer that he should be equipped with all
requisites for his work, as if he had said, 'It is more Thy concern
than mine, that I should be able to lead them.' The divine answer is a
promise to go not with the people, but with Moses. It is therefore not
yet a full resolving of the doubtful matter, nor directly a reply to
Moses' prayer. In one aspect it is less, and in another more, than had
been asked. It seals to the man and to the leader the assurance that
for himself he shall have the continual presence of God, in his soul
and in his work, and that, in all the weary march, he will have rest,
and will come to a fuller rest at its end. Thus God ever answers the
true hearts that seek to know Him, and to be fitted for their tasks.
Whether the precise form of desire be fulfilled or no, the issue of
such bold and trustful pleading is always the inward certainty of God's
face shining on us, and the experience of repose, deep and untroubled
in the midst of toil, so that we may be at once pilgrims towards, and
dwellers in, 'the house of the Lord,'

II. We have the intercessor's prayer for the people, with the answer
(vs. 15-17). If the promise of verse 14 is taken as referring to the
people, there is nothing additional asked in this second stage, and the
words of verse l7, 'this thing also,' are inexplicable. Observe that
'with me' in verse 15 is a supplement, and that the 'us' of the next
clause, as well as the whole cast of verse 16, suggests that we should
rather supply 'with us,' The substance, then, of the second petition,
is the extension of the promise, already given to Moses for himself, to
the entire nation. Observe how he identifies himself with them, making
them 'partakers' in his grace, and reiterating 'I and Thy people,' as
if he would have no blessing which was not shared by them. He seeks
that the withdrawal of God's presence, which had been the consequence
of Israel's withdrawal from God, should be reversed, and that not he
alone, but all the rebels, might still possess His presence.

The plea for this prayer is God's honour, which was concerned in making
it plain even in the remote wilderness, to the wandering tribes there,
that His hand was upon Israel. Moses expands the argument which he had
just touched before. The thought of His own glory as the motive of
God's acts, may easily be so put at to be repulsive; but at bottom it
is the same as to say that His motive is love--for the glory which He
seeks is the communication of true thoughts concerning His character,
that men may be made glad and like Himself thereby. Moses has learned
that God's heart must long to reveal its depth of mercy, and therefore
he pleads that even sinful Israel should not be left by God, in order
that some light from His face may strike into a dark world. There is
wide benevolence, as well as deep insight into the desires of God, in
the plea.

The divine answer yields unconditionally to the request, and rests the
reason for so doing wholly on the relation between God and Moses. The
plea which he had urged in lowly boldness as the foundation of both his
prayers is endorsed, and, for his sake, the divine presence is again
granted to the people.

Can we look at this scene without seeing in it the operation on a lower
field of the same great principle of intercession, which reaches its
unique example in Jesus Christ? It is not arbitrary forcing of the
gospel into the history, but simply the recognition of the essence of
the history, when we see in it a foreshadowing of our great
High-priest. He, too, knits Himself so closely with us, both by the
assumption of our manhood and by the identity of loving sympathy, that
He accepts nothing from the Father's hand for Himself alone. He, too,
presents Himself before God, and says 'I and Thy people.' The great
seal of proof for the world that He is the beloved of God, lies in the
divine guardianship and guidance of His servants. His prayer for them
prevails, and the reason for its prevalence is God's delight in Him.
The very sublime of self-sacrificing love was in the lawgiver, but the
height of his love, measured against the immeasurable altitude of
Christ's, is as a mole-hill to the Andes.

III. We have the last soaring desire which rises above the limits of
the present. These three petitions teach the insatiableness, if we may
use the word, of devout desires. Each request granted brings on a
greater. 'The gift doth stretch itself as 'tis received.' Enjoyment
increases capacity, and increase of capacity is increase of desire. God
being infinite, and man capable of indefinite growth, neither the
widening capacity nor the infinite supply can have limits. This is not
the least of the blessings of a devout life, that the appetite grows
with what it feeds on, and that, while there is always satisfaction,
there is never satiety.

Moses' prayer sounds presumptuous, but it was heard unblamed, and
granted in so far as possible. It was a venial error--if error it may
be called--that a soul, touched with the flame of divine love, should
aspire beyond the possibilities of mortality. At all events, it was a
fault in which he has had few imitators. _Our_ desires keep but too
well within the limits of the possible. The precise meaning of the
petition must be left undetermined. Only this is clear, that it was
something far beyond even that face-to-face intercourse which he had
had, as well as beyond that vision granted to the elders. If we are to
take 'glory' in its usual sense, it would mean the material symbol of
God's presence, which shone at the heart of the pillar, and dwelt
afterwards between the cherubim, but probably we must attach a loftier
meaning to it here, and rather think of what we should call the
uncreated and infinite divine essence. Only do not let us make Moses
talk like a metaphysician or a theological professor. Rather we should
hear in his cry the voice of a soul thrilled through and through with
the astounding consciousness of God's favour, blessed with love-gifts
in answered prayers, and yearning for more of that light which it feels
to be life.

And if the petition be dark, the answer is yet more obscure 'with
excess of light.' Mark how it begins with granting, not with refusing.
It tells how much the loving desire has power to bring, before it
speaks of what in it must be denied. There is infinite tenderness in
that order of response. It speaks of a heart that does not love to say
'no,' and grants our wishes up to the very edge of the possible, and
wraps the bitterness of any refusal in the sweet envelope of granted
requests. A broad distinction is drawn between that in God which can be
revealed, and that which cannot. The one is 'glory,' the other
'goodness,' corresponding, we might almost say, to the distinction
between the 'moral' and the 'natural' attributes of God. But, whatever
mysterious revelation under the guise of vision may be concealed in
these words, and in the fulfilment of them in the next chapter, they
belong to the 'things which it is impossible for a man to utter,' even
if he has received them. We are on more intelligible ground in the next
clause of the promise, the proclamation of 'the Name.' That expression
is, in Scripture, always used as meaning the manifested character of
God. It is a revelation addressed to the spirit, not to the sense. It
is the translation, so far as it is capable of translation, of the
vision which it accompanied; it is the treasure which Moses bore away
from Sinai, and has shared among us all. The reason for his prayer was
probably his desire to have his mediatorial office confirmed and
perfected; and it was so, by that proclamation of the Name. The reason
for this marvellous gift is next set forth as being God's own
unconditional grace and mercy. He is His own motive, His own reason.
Just as the independent and absolute fullness of His being is expressed
by the name 'I am that I am,' so the independent and absolute freeness
of His mercy, whether in granting Moses' prayer or in pardoning the
people, is expressed by 'I will shew mercy on whom I will shew mercy.'
Not till all this exuberance of gracious answer has smoothed the way
does the denial of the impossible request come; and even then it is so
worded as to lay all the emphasis on what is granted, and to show that
