
"A few days before my guru relinquished his body," Keshabananda told
me, "he materialized himself before me as I sat in my hermitage at
Hardwar.

"'Come at once to Benares.' With these words Lahiri Mahasaya
vanished.

"I entrained immediately for Benares. At my guru's home I found
many disciples assembled. For hours that day {FN36-7} the master
expounded the GITA; then he addressed us simply.

"'I am going home.'

"Sobs of anguish broke out like an irresistible torrent.

"'Be comforted; I shall rise again.' After this utterance Lahiri
Mahasaya thrice turned his body around in a circle, faced the north
in his lotus posture, and gloriously entered the final MAHA-SAMADHI.
{FN36-8}

"Lahiri Mahasaya's beautiful body, so dear to the devotees, was
cremated with solemn householder rites at Manikarnika Ghat by the
holy Ganges," Keshabananda continued. "The following day, at ten
o'clock in the morning, while I was still in Benares, my room was
suffused with a great light. Lo! before me stood the flesh and
blood form of Lahiri Mahasaya! It looked exactly like his old body,
except that it appeared younger and more radiant. My divine guru
spoke to me.

"'Keshabananda,' he said, 'it is I. From the disintegrated atoms
of my cremated body, I have resurrected a remodeled form. My
householder work in the world is done; but I do not leave the earth
entirely.  Henceforth I shall spend some time with Babaji in the
Himalayas, and with Babaji in the cosmos.'

"With a few words of blessing to me, the transcendent master
vanished.  Wondrous inspiration filled my heart; I was uplifted
in Spirit even as were the disciples of Christ and Kabir {FN36-9}
when they had gazed on their living gurus after physical death.

"When I returned to my isolated Hardwar hermitage," Keshabananda
went on, "I carried with me the sacred ashes of my guru. I know he
has escaped the spatio-temporal cage; the bird of omnipresence is
freed.  Yet it comforted my heart to enshrine his sacred remains."

Another disciple who was blessed by the sight of his resurrected
guru was the saintly Panchanon Bhattacharya, founder of the Calcutta
Arya Mission Institution. {FN36-10}

I visited Panchanon at his Calcutta home, and listened with delight
to the story of his many years with the master. In conclusion, he
told me of the most marvelous event in his life.

"Here in Calcutta," Panchanon said, "at ten o'clock of the morning
which followed his cremation, Lahiri Mahasaya appeared before me
in living glory."

Swami Pranabananda, the "saint with two bodies," also confided to
me the details of his own supernal experience.

"A few days before Lahiri Mahasaya left his body," Pranabananda told
me at the time he visited my Ranchi school, "I received a letter
from him, requesting me to come at once to Benares. I was delayed,
however, and could not leave immediately. As I was in the midst
of my travel preparations, about ten o'clock in the morning, I was
suddenly overwhelmed with joy to see the shining figure of my guru.

"'Why hurry to Benares?' Lahiri Mahasaya said, smiling. 'You shall
find me there no longer.'

"As the import of his words dawned on me, I sobbed broken-heartedly,
believing that I was seeing him only in a vision.

"The master approached me comfortingly. 'Here, touch my flesh,'
he said. 'I am living, as always. Do not lament; am I not with you
forever?'"

From the lips of these three great disciples, a story of wondrous
truth has emerged: At the morning hour of ten, on the day after
the body of Lahiri Mahasaya had been consigned to the flames, the
resurrected master, in a real but transfigured body, appeared before
three disciples, each one in a different city.

"So when this corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this
mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass
the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. O
death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?" {FN36-11}

{FN36-1} Sri Yukteswar was later formally initiated into the Swami
Order by the MAHANT (monastery head) of Buddh Gaya.

{FN36-2} "Great King"-a title of respect.

{FN36-3} A guru usually refers to his own disciple simply by his
name, omitting any title. Thus, Babaji said "Lahiri," not "Lahiri
Mahasaya."

{FN36-4} Literally, "eternal religion," the name given to the body
of Vedic teachings. SANATAN DHARMA has come to be called HINDUISM
since the time of the Greeks who designated the people on the banks
of the river Indus as INDOOS, or HINDUS. The word HINDU, properly
speaking, refers only to followers of SANATAN DHARMA or Hinduism.
The term INDIAN applies equally to Hindus and Mohammedans and other
INHABITANTS of the soil of India (and also through the confusing
geographical error of Columbus, to the American Mongoloid aboriginals).

The ancient name for India is ARYAVARTA, literally, "abode of the
Aryans." The Sanskrit root of ARYA is "worthy, holy, noble." The
later ethnological misuse of ARYAN to signify not spiritual, but
physical, characteristics, led the great Orientalist, Max Muller,
to say quaintly: "To me an ethnologist who speaks of an Aryan
race, Aryan blood, Aryan eyes and hair, is as great a sinner as a
linguist who speaks of a dolichocephalic dictionary or a brachycephalic
grammar."

{FN36-5} PARAM-GURU is literally "guru supreme" or "guru beyond,"
signifying a line or succession of teachers. Babaji, the GURU of
Lahiri Mahasaya, was the PARAM-GURU of Sri Yukteswar.

{FN36-6} My visit to Keshabananda's ashram is described on pp.
405-408.

{FN36-7} September 26, 1895 is the date on which Lahiri Mahasaya left
his body. In a few more days he would have reached his sixty-eighth
birthday.

{FN36-8} Facing the north, and thrice revolving the body, are parts
of a Vedic rite used by masters who know beforehand when the final
hour is about to strike for the physical body. The last meditation,
during which the master merges himself in the Cosmic AUM, is called
the MAHA, or great, SAMADHI.

{FN36-9} Kabir was a great sixteenth-century saint whose large
following included both Hindus and Mohammedans. At the time of his
death, the disciples quarreled over the manner of conducting the
funeral ceremonies. The exasperated master rose from his final sleep,
and gave his instructions. "Half of my remains shall be buried by
the Moslem rites;" he said, "let the other half be cremated with
a Hindu sacrament." He then vanished. When the disciples opened
the coffin which had contained his body, nothing was found but a
dazzling array of gold-colored champak flowers. Half of these were
obediently buried by the Moslems, who revere his shrine to this
day.

In his youth Kabir was approached by two disciples who wanted minute
intellectual guidance along the mystic path. The master responded
simply:

"Path presupposes distance;
If He be near, no path needest thou at all.
Verily it maketh me smile
To hear of a fish in water athirst!"

{FN36-10} Panchanon established, in a seventeen-acre garden
at Deogarh in Bihar, a temple containing a stone statue of Lahiri
Mahasaya.  Another statue of the great master has been set by
disciples in the little parlor of his Benares home.

{FN36-11} I CORINTHIANS 15:54-55.



CHAPTER: 37

I GO TO AMERICA

"America! Surely these people are Americans!" This was my thought
as a panoramic vision of Western faces passed before my inward
view.

Immersed in meditation, I was sitting behind some dusty boxes in
the storeroom of the Ranchi school. A private spot was difficult
to find during those busy years with the youngsters!

The vision continued; a vast multitude, {FN37-1} gazing at me
intently, swept actorlike across the stage of consciousness.

The storeroom door opened; as usual, one of the young lads had
discovered my hiding place.

"Come here, Bimal," I cried gaily. "I have news for you: the Lord
is calling me to America!"

"To America?" The boy echoed my words in a tone that implied I had
said "to the moon."

"Yes! I am going forth to discover America, like Columbus. He
thought he had found India; surely there is a karmic link between
those two lands!"

Bimal scampered away; soon the whole school was informed by the
two-legged newspaper. {FN37-2} I summoned the bewildered faculty
and gave the school into its charge.

"I know you will keep Lahiri Mahasaya's yoga ideals of education ever
to the fore," I said. "I shall write you frequently; God willing,
someday I shall be back."

Tears stood in my eyes as I cast a last look at the little boys
and the sunny acres of Ranchi. A definite epoch in my life had now
closed, I knew; henceforth I would dwell in far lands. I entrained
for Calcutta a few hours after my vision. The following day I
received an invitation to serve as the delegate from India to an
International Congress of Religious Liberals in America. It was
to convene that year in Boston, under the auspices of the American
Unitarian Association.

My head in a whirl, I sought out Sri Yukteswar in Serampore.

"Guruji, I have just been invited to address a religious congress
in America. Shall I go?"

"All doors are open for you," Master replied simply. "It is now or
never."

"But, sir," I said in dismay, "what do I know about public speaking?
Seldom have I given a lecture, and never in English."

"English or no English, your words on yoga shall be heard in the
West."

I laughed. "Well, dear guruji, I hardly think the Americans will
learn Bengali! Please bless me with a push over the hurdles of the
English language." {FN37-3}

When I broke the news of my plans to Father, he was utterly taken
aback. To him America seemed incredibly remote; he feared he might
never see me again.

"How can you go?" he asked sternly. "Who will finance you?" As he
had affectionately borne the expenses of my education and whole
life, he doubtless hoped that his question would bring my project
to an embarrassing halt.

"The Lord will surely finance me." As I made this reply, I thought
of the similar one I had given long ago to my brother Ananta in
Agra.  Without very much guile, I added, "Father, perhaps God will
put it into your mind to help me."

"No, never!" He glanced at me piteously.

I was astounded, therefore, when Father handed me, the following
day, a check made out for a large amount.

"I give you this money," he said, "not in my capacity as a father,
but as a faithful disciple of Lahiri Mahasaya. Go then to that far
Western land; spread there the creedless teachings of KRIYA YOGA."

I was immensely touched at the selfless spirit in which Father
had been able to quickly put aside his personal desires. The just
realization had come to him during the preceding night that no
ordinary desire for foreign travel was motivating my voyage.

"Perhaps we shall not meet again in this life." Father, who was
sixty-seven at this time, spoke sadly.

An intuitive conviction prompted me to reply, "Surely the Lord will
bring us together once more."

As I went about my preparations to leave Master and my native
land for the unknown shores of America, I experienced not a little
trepidation.  I had heard many stories about the materialistic
Western atmosphere, one very different from the spiritual background
of India, pervaded with the centuried aura of saints. "An Oriental
teacher who will dare the Western airs," I thought, "must be hardy
beyond the trials of any Himalayan cold!"

One early morning I began to pray, with an adamant determination
to continue, to even die praying, until I heard the voice of God.
I wanted His blessing and assurance that I would not lose myself
in the fogs of modern utilitarianism. My heart was set to go to
America, but even more strongly was it resolved to hear the solace
of divine permission.

I prayed and prayed, muffling my sobs. No answer came. My silent
petition increased in excruciating crescendo until, at noon, I had
reached a zenith; my brain could no longer withstand the pressure
of my agonies. If I cried once more with an increased depth of my
inner passion, I felt as though my brain would split. At that moment
there came a knock outside the vestibule adjoining the Gurpar Road
room in which I was sitting. Opening the door, I saw a young man
in the scanty garb of a renunciate. He came in, closed the door
behind him and, refusing my request to sit down, indicated with a
gesture that he wished to talk to me while standing.

"He must be Babaji!" I thought, dazed, because the man before me
had the features of a younger Lahiri Mahasaya.

He answered my thought. "Yes, I am Babaji." He spoke melodiously
in Hindi. "Our Heavenly Father has heard your prayer. He commands
me to tell you: Follow the behests of your guru and go to America.
Fear not; you will be protected."

After a vibrant pause, Babaji addressed me again. "You are the one
I have chosen to spread the message of KRIYA YOGA in the West. Long
ago I met your guru Yukteswar at a KUMBHA MELA; I told him then I
would send you to him for training."

I was speechless, choked with devotional awe at his presence, and
deeply touched to hear from his own lips that he had guided me
to Sri Yukteswar. I lay prostrate before the deathless guru. He
graciously lifted me from the floor. Telling me many things about
my life, he then gave me some personal instruction, and uttered a
few secret prophecies.

"KRIYA YOGA, the scientific technique of God-realization," he finally
said with solemnity, "will ultimately spread in all lands, and aid
in harmonizing the nations through man's personal, transcendental
perception of the Infinite Father."

With a gaze of majestic power, the master electrified me by a
glimpse of his cosmic consciousness. In a short while he started
toward the door.

"Do not try to follow me," he said. "You will not be able to do
so."

"Please, Babaji, don't go away!" I cried repeatedly. "Take me with
you!"

Looking back, he replied, "Not now. Some other time."

Overcome by emotion, I disregarded his warning. As I tried to pursue
him, I discovered that my feet were firmly rooted to the floor.
From the door, Babaji gave me a last affectionate glance. He raised
his hand by way of benediction and walked away, my eyes fixed on
him longingly.

After a few minutes my feet were free. I sat down and went into a
deep meditation, unceasingly thanking God not only for answering my
prayer but for blessing me by a meeting with Babaji. My whole body
seemed sanctified through the touch of the ancient, ever-youthful
master.  Long had it been my burning desire to behold him.

Until now, I have never recounted to anyone this story of my meeting
with Babaji. Holding it as the most sacred of my human experiences,
I have hidden it in my heart. But the thought occurred to me that
readers of this autobiography may be more inclined to believe in
the reality of the secluded Babaji and his world interests if I
relate that I saw him with my own eyes. I have helped an artist to
draw a true picture of the great Yogi-Christ of modern India; it
appears in this book.

The eve of my departure for the United States found me in Sri
Yukteswar's holy presence.

"Forget you were born a Hindu, and don't be an American. Take the
best of them both," Master said in his calm way of wisdom. "Be your
true self, a child of God. Seek and incorporate into your being
the best qualities of all your brothers, scattered over the earth
in various races."

Then he blessed me: "All those who come to you with faith, seeking
God, will be helped. As you look at them, the spiritual current
emanating from your eyes will enter into their brains and change
their material habits, making them more God-conscious."

He went on, "Your lot to attract sincere souls is very good.
Everywhere you go, even in a wilderness, you will find friends."

Both of his blessings have been amply demonstrated. I came alone
to America, into a wilderness without a single friend, but there
I found thousands ready to receive the time-tested soul-teachings.

I left India in August, 1920, on THE CITY OF SPARTA, the first
passenger boat sailing for America after the close of World War
I. I had been able to book passage only after the removal, in ways
fairly miraculous, of many "red-tape" difficulties concerned with
the granting of my passport.

During the two-months' voyage a fellow passenger found out that I
was the Indian delegate to the Boston congress.

"Swami Yogananda," he said, with the first of many quaint
pronunciations by which I was later to hear my name spoken by the
Americans, "please favor the passengers with a lecture next Thursday
night. I think we would all benefit by a talk on 'The Battle of
Life and How to Fight It.'"

Alas! I had to fight the battle of my own life, I discovered on
Wednesday. Desperately trying to organize my ideas into a lecture
in English, I finally abandoned all preparations; my thoughts, like
a wild colt eyeing a saddle, refused any cooperation with the laws
of English grammar. Fully trusting in Master's past assurances,
however, I appeared before my Thursday audience in the saloon of
the steamer.  No eloquence rose to my lips; speechlessly I stood
before the assemblage. After an endurance contest lasting ten
minutes, the audience realized my predicament and began to laugh.

[Illustration: I stand on the dais before one of my classes
in America.  This class of a thousand yoga students was held in
Washington, D.C.--see dc.jpg]

The situation was not funny to me at the moment; indignantly I sent
a silent prayer to Master.

"You CAN! Speak!" His voice sounded instantly within my consciousness.

My thoughts fell at once into a friendly relation with the English
language. Forty-five minutes later the audience was still attentive.
The talk won me a number of invitations to lecture later before
various groups in America.

I never could remember, afterward, a word that I had spoken. By
discreet inquiry I learned from a number of passengers: "You gave
an inspiring lecture in stirring and correct English." At this
delightful news I humbly thanked my guru for his timely help,
realizing anew that he was ever with me, setting at naught all
barriers of time and space.

Once in awhile, during the remainder of the ocean trip, I experienced
a few apprehensive twinges about the coming English-lecture ordeal
at the Boston congress.

"Lord," I prayed, "please let my inspiration be Thyself, and not
again the laughter-bombs of the audience!"

THE CITY OF SPARTA docked near Boston in late September. On the
sixth of October I addressed the congress with my maiden speech in
America.  It was well received; I sighed in relief. The magnanimous
secretary of the American Unitarian Association wrote the following
comment in a published account {FN37-4} of the congress proceedings:

"Swami Yogananda, delegate from the Brahmacharya Ashram of Ranchi,
India, brought the greetings of his Association to the Congress.
In fluent English and a forcible delivery he gave an address of
a philosophical character on 'The Science of Religion,' which has
been printed in pamphlet form for a wider distribution. Religion,
he maintained, is universal and it is one. We cannot possibly
universalize particular customs and convictions, but the common
element in religion can be universalized, and we can ask all alike
to follow and obey it."

Due to Father's generous check, I was able to remain in America
after the congress was over. Four happy years were spent in humble
circumstances in Boston. I gave public lectures, taught classes,
and wrote a book of poems, SONGS OF THE SOUL, with a preface by
Dr.  Frederick B. Robinson, president of the College of the City
of New York. {FN37-5}

Starting a transcontinental tour in the summer of 1924, I spoke
before thousands in the principal cities, ending my western trip
with a vacation in the beautiful Alaskan north.

With the help of large-hearted students, by the end of 1925 I had
established an American headquarters on the Mount Washington Estates
in Los Angeles. The building is the one I had seen years before in
my vision at Kashmir. I hastened to send Sri Yukteswar pictures of
these distant American activities. He replied with a postcard in
Bengali, which I here translate:

11th August, 1926

Child of my heart, O Yogananda!

Seeing the photos of your school and students, what joy comes in
my life I cannot express in words. I am melting in joy to see your
yoga students of different cities. Beholding your methods in chant
affirmations, healing vibrations, and divine healing prayers, I
cannot refrain from thanking you from my heart. Seeing the gate,
the winding hilly way upward, and the beautiful scenery spread out
beneath the Mount Washington Estates, I yearn to behold it all with
my own eyes.

Everything here is going on well. Through the grace of God, may
you ever be in bliss.

SRI YUKTESWAR GIRI

Years sped by. I lectured in every part of my new land, and
addressed hundreds of clubs, colleges, churches, and groups of
every denomination. Tens of thousands of Americans received yoga
initiation.  To them all I dedicated a new book of prayer thoughts
in 1929-WHISPERS FROM ETERNITY, with a preface by Amelita Galli-Curci.
{FN37-6} I give here, from the book, a poem entitled "God! God!
God!", composed one night as I stood on a lecture platform:

  From the depths of slumber,
  As I ascend the spiral stairway of wakefulness,
  I whisper:
  God! God! God!

  Thou art the food, and when I break my fast
  Of nightly separation from Thee,
  I taste Thee, and mentally say:
  God! God! God!

  No matter where I go, the spotlight of my mind
  Ever keeps turning on Thee;
  And in the battle din of activity
  My silent war cry is ever: God! God! God!

  When boisterous storms of trials shriek,
  And when worries howl at me,
  I drown their clamor, loudly chanting:
  God! God! God!

  When my mind weaves dreams
  With threads of memories,
  Then on that magic cloth I find embossed:
  God! God! God!

  Every night, in time of deepest sleep,
  My peace dreams and calls, Joy! Joy! Joy!
  And my joy comes singing evermore:
  God! God! God!

  In waking, eating, working, dreaming, sleeping,
  Serving, meditating, chanting, divinely loving,
  My soul constantly hums, unheard by any:
  God! God! God!

Sometimes-usually on the first of the month when the bills rolled
in for upkeep of the Mount Washington and other Self-Realization
Fellowship centers!-I thought longingly of the simple peace of
India.  But daily I saw a widening understanding between West and
East; my soul rejoiced.

I have found the great heart of America expressed in the wondrous
lines by Emma Lazarus, carved at the base of the Statue of Liberty,
the "Mother of Exiles":

                       From her beacon-hand
  Glows world-wide welcome; her mild eyes command
  The air-bridged harbor that twin cities frame.
  "Keep, ancient lands, your storied pomp!" cries she
  With silent lips. "Give me your tired, your poor,
  Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,
  The wretched refuse of your teeming shore.
  Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me,
  I lift my lamp beside the golden door.

{FN37-1} Many of those faces I have since seen in the West, and
instantly recognized..

{FN37-2} Swami Premananda, now the leader of the Self-Realization
Church of All Religions in Washington, D.C., was one of the students
at the Ranchi school at the time I left there for America. (He was
then Brahmachari Jotin.)

{FN37-3} Sri Yukteswar and I ordinarily conversed in Bengali.

{FN37-4} NEW PILGRIMAGES OF THE SPIRIT (Boston: Beacon Press, 1921).

{FN37-5} Dr. and Mrs. Robinson visited India in 1939, and were
honored guests at the Ranchi school.

{FN37-6} Mme. Galli-Curci and her husband, Homer Samuels,
the pianist, have been Kriya Yoga students for twenty years. The
inspiring story of the famous prima donna's years of music has been
recently published (GALLI-CURCI'S LIFE OF SONG, by C. E. LeMassena,
Paebar Co., New York, 1945).



CHAPTER: 38

LUTHER BURBANK--A SAINT AMIDST THE ROSES

"The secret of improved plant breeding, apart from scientific
knowledge, is love." Luther Burbank uttered this wisdom as I walked
beside him in his Santa Rosa garden. We halted near a bed of edible
cacti.

"While I was conducting experiments to make 'spineless' cacti," he
continued, "I often talked to the plants to create a vibration of
love. 'You have nothing to fear,' I would tell them. 'You don't need
your defensive thorns. I will protect you.' Gradually the useful
plant of the desert emerged in a thornless variety."

I was charmed at this miracle. "Please, dear Luther, give me a few
cacti leaves to plant in my garden at Mount Washington."

A workman standing near-by started to strip off some leaves; Burbank
prevented him.

"I myself will pluck them for the swami." He handed me three leaves,
which later I planted, rejoicing as they grew to huge estate.

The great horticulturist told me that his first notable triumph was
the large potato, now known by his name. With the indefatigability
of genius, he went on to present the world with hundreds of crossed
improvements on nature-his new Burbank varieties of tomato, corn,
squash, cherries, plums, nectarines, berries, poppies, lilies,
roses.

I focused my camera as Luther led me before the famous walnut tree
by which he had proved that natural evolution can be telescopically
hastened.

"In only sixteen years," he said, "this walnut tree reached a state
of abundant nut production to which an unaided nature would have
brought the tree in twice that time."

[Illustration: Luther Burbank, beloved friend, poses with me in
his Santa Rosa garden.--see burbank.jpg]

[Illustration: Luther Burbank--see burbank2.jpg]

Burbank's little adopted daughter came romping with her dog into
the garden.

"She is my human plant." Luther waved to her affectionately. "I see
humanity now as one vast plant, needing for its highest fulfillments
only love, the natural blessings of the great outdoors, and
intelligent crossing and selection. In the span of my own lifetime
I have observed such wondrous progress in plant evolution that I
look forward optimistically to a healthy, happy world as soon as its
children are taught the principles of simple and rational living.
We must return to nature and nature's God."

"Luther, you would delight in my Ranchi school, with its outdoor
classes, and atmosphere of joy and simplicity."

My words touched the chord closest to Burbank's heart-child
education.  He plied me with questions, interest gleaming from his
deep, serene eyes.

"Swamiji," he said finally, "schools like yours are the only hope
of a future millennium. I am in revolt against the educational systems
of our time, severed from nature and stifling of all individuality.
I am with you heart and soul in your practical ideals of education."

As I was taking leave of the gentle sage, he autographed a small volume
and presented it to me. {FN38-1} "Here is my book on THE TRAINING
OF THE HUMAN PLANT," {FN38-2} he said. "New types of training are
needed-fearless experiments. At times the most daring trials have
succeeded in bringing out the best in fruits and flowers. Educational
innovations for children should likewise become more numerous, more
courageous."

I read his little book that night with intense interest. His eye
envisioning a glorious future for the race, he wrote: "The most
stubborn living thing in this world, the most difficult to swerve,
is a plant once fixed in certain habits. . . . Remember that this
plant has preserved its individuality all through the ages; perhaps
it is one which can be traced backward through eons of time in the
very rocks themselves, never having varied to any great extent in
all these vast periods. Do you suppose, after all these ages of
repetition, the plant does not become possessed of a will, if you
so choose to call it, of unparalleled tenacity? Indeed, there are
plants, like certain of the palms, so persistent that no human
power has yet been able to change them. The human will is a weak
thing beside the will of a plant. But see how this whole plant's
lifelong stubbornness is broken simply by blending a new life with
it, making, by crossing, a complete and powerful change in its life.
Then when the break comes, fix it by these generations of patient
supervision and selection, and the new plant sets out upon its new
way never again to return to the old, its tenacious will broken
and changed at last.

"When it comes to so sensitive and pliable a thing as the nature
of a child, the problem becomes vastly easier."

Magnetically drawn to this great American, I visited him again and
again. One morning I arrived at the same time as the postman, who
deposited in Burbank's study about a thousand letters. Horticulturists
wrote him from all parts of the world.

"Swamiji, your presence is just the excuse I need to get out into
the garden," Luther said gaily. He opened a large desk-drawer
containing hundreds of travel folders.

"See," he said, "this is how I do my traveling. Tied down by my
plants and correspondence, I satisfy my desire for foreign lands
by a glance now and then at these pictures."
