"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of Arjuna, Bhima was fired
with rage and dashing the Rakshasa on the ground with all his might slew
him as if he were an animal. The Rakshasa, while dying, sent forth a
terrible yell that filled the whole forest, and was deep as the sound of a
wet drum. Then the mighty Bhima, holding the body with his hands, bent it
double, and breaking it in the middle, greatly gratified his brothers.
Beholding Hidimva slain, they became exceedingly glad and lost no time in
offering their congratulations to Bhima, that chastiser of all foes. Then
Arjuna worshipping the illustrious Bhima of terrible prowess, addressed
him again and said, "Revered senior, I think there is a town not far off
from this forest. Blest be thou, let us go hence soon, so that Duryodhana
may not trace us."

"'Then all those mighty car-warriors, those tigers among men, saying, "So
be it," proceeded along with their mother, followed by Hidimva, the
Rakshasa woman.'"


SECTION CLVII

(Hidimva-vadha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Bhima, beholding Hidimva following them, addressed
her, saying, "Rakshasas revenge themselves on their enemies by adopting
deceptions that are incapable of being penetrated. Therefore, O Hidimva,
go thou the way on which thy brother hath gone." Then Yudhishthira
beholding Bhima in rage, said, "O Bhima, O tiger among men, however
enraged, do not slay a woman. O Pandava, the observance of virtue is a
higher duty than the protection of life. Hidimva, who had come with the
object of slaying us, thou hast already slain. This woman is the sister of
that Rakshasa, what can she do to us even if she were angry?"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then Hidimva reverentially saluting Kunti and
her son Yudhishthira also, said, with joined palms, "O revered lady, thou
knowest the pangs that women are made to feel at the hands of the deity of
love. Blessed dame, these pangs, of which Bhimasena hath been the cause,
are torturing me. I had hitherto borne these insufferable pangs, waiting
for the time (when thy son could assuage them). That time is now come,
when I expected I would be made happy. Casting off my friends and
relations and the usage of my race, I have, O blessed lady, chosen this
son of thine, this tiger among men, as my husband. I tell thee truly, O
illustrious lady, that if I am cast off by that hero or by thee either, I
will no longer bear this life of mine. Therefore, O thou of the fairest
complexion, it behoveth thee to show me mercy, thinking me either as very
silly or thy obedient slave. O illustrious dame, unite me with this thy
son, my husband. Endued as he is with the form of a celestial, let me go
taking him with me wherever I like. Trust me, O blessed lady, I will again
bring him back unto you all. When you think of me I will come to you
immediately and convey you whithersoever ye may command. I will rescue you
from all dangers and carry you across inaccessible and uneven regions. I
will carry you on my back whenever ye desire to proceed with swiftness. O,
be gracious unto me and make Bhima accept me. It hath been said that in a
season of distress one should protect one's life by any means. He, that
seeketh to discharge that duty should not scruple about the means. He,
that in a season of distress keepeth his virtue, is the foremost of
virtuous men. Indeed, distress is the greatest danger to virtue and
virtuous men. It is virtue that protecteth life; therefore is virtue
called the giver of life. Hence the means by which virtue or the
observance of a duty is secured can never be censurable."

"'Hearing these words of Hidimva, Yudhishthira said. "It is even so, O
Hidimva, as thou sayest. There is no doubt of it. But, O thou of slender
waist, thou must act even as thou hast said. Bhima will, after he hath
washed himself and said his prayers and performed the usual propitiatory
rites, pay his attentions to thee till the sun sets. Sport thou with him
as thou likest during the day, O thou that art endued with the speed of
the mind! But thou must bring back Bhimasena hither every day at night-
fall."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then Bhima, expressing his assent to all that
Yudhishthira said, addressed Hidimva, saying, "Listen to me, O Rakshasa
woman! Truly do I make this engagement with thee that I will stay with
thee, O thou of slender waist, until thou obtainest a son." Then Hidimva,
saying, "So be it," took Bhima upon her body and sped through the skies.
On mountain peaks of picturesque scenery and regions sacred to the gods,
abounding with dappled herds and echoing with the melodies of feathered
tribes, herself assuming the handsomest form decked with every ornament
and pouring forth at times mellifluous strains, Hidimva sported with the
Pandava and studied to make him happy. So also, in inaccessible regions of
forests, and on mountain-breasts overgrown with blossoming trees on lakes
resplendent with lotuses and lilies, islands of rivers and their pebbly
banks, on sylvan streams with beautiful banks and mountain-currents, in
picturesque woods with blossoming trees and creepers in Himalayan bowers,
and various caves, on crystal pools smiling with lotuses, on sea-shores
shining with gold and pearls, in beautiful towns and fine gardens, in
woods sacred to the gods and on hill-sides, in the regions of Guhyakas and
ascetics, on the banks of Manasarovara abounding with fruits and flowers
of every season Hidimva, assuming the handsomest form, sported with Bhima
and studied to make him happy. Endued with the speed of the mind, she
sported with Bhima in all these regions, till in time, she conceived and
brought forth a mighty son begotten upon her by the Pandava. Of terrible
eyes and large mouth and straight arrowy ears, the child was terrible to
behold. Of lips brown as copper and sharp teeth and loud roar, of mighty
arms and great strength and excessive prowess, this child became a mighty
bowman. Of long nose, broad chest, frightfully swelling calves, celerity
of motion and excessive strength, he had nothing human in his countenance,
though born of man. And he excelled (in strength and prowess) all Pisachas
and kindred tribes as well as all Rakshasas. And, O monarch, though a
little child, he grew up a youth the very hour he was born. The mighty
hero soon acquired high proficiency in the use of all weapons. The
Rakshasa women bring forth the very day they conceive, and capable of
assuming any forms at will, they always change their forms. And the bald-
headed child, that mighty bowman, soon after his birth, bowing down to his
mother, touched her feet and the feet also of his father. His parents then
bestowed upon him a name. His mother having remarked that his head was
(bald) like unto a Ghata (water-pot), both his parents thereupon called
him Ghatotkacha (the pot-headed). And Ghatotkacha who was exceedingly
devoted to the Pandavas, became a great favourite with them, indeed almost
one of them.

"'Then Hidimva, knowing that the period of her stay (with her husband) had
come to an end, saluted the Pandavas and making a new appointment with
them went away whithersoever she liked. And Ghatotkacha also--that
foremost of Rakshasas--promising unto his father that he would come when
wanted on business, saluted them and went away northward. Indeed, it was
the illustrious Indra who created (by lending a portion of himself) the
mighty car-warrior Ghatotkacha as a fit antagonist of Karna of unrivalled
energy, in consequence of the dart he had given unto Karna (and which was
sure to kill the person against whom it would be hurled).'"


SECTION CLVIII

(Hidimva-vadha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Those mighty car-warriors, the heroic Pandavas, then
went, O king, from forest to forest killing deer and many animals (for
their food). And in the course of their wanderings they saw the countries
of the Matsyas, the Trigartas, the Panchalas and then of the Kichakas, and
also many beautiful woods and lakes therein. And they all had matted locks
on their heads and were attired in barks of trees and the skins of animals.
Indeed, with Kunti in their company those illustrious heroes were attired
in the garbs of ascetics. And those mighty car-warriors sometimes
proceeded in haste, carrying their mother on their backs; and sometimes
they proceeded in disguise, and sometimes again with great celerity. And
they used to study the Rik and the other Vedas and also all the Vedangas
as well as the sciences of morals and politics. And the Pandavas,
conversant with the science of morals, met, in course of their wanderings
their grandfather (Vyasa). And saluting the illustrious Krishna-Dwaipayana,
those chastisers of enemies, with their mother, stood before him with
joined hands.

"'Vyasa then said, "Ye bulls of Bharata's race, I knew beforehand of this
affliction of yours consisting in your deceitful exile by the son of
Dhritarashtra. Knowing this, I have come to you, desirous of doing you
some great good. Do not grieve for what hath befallen you. Know that all
this is for your happiness. Undoubtedly, the sons of Dhritarashtra and you
are all equal in my eye. But men are always partial to those who are in
misfortune or of tender years. It is therefore, that my affection for you
is greater now. And in consequence of that affection, I desire to do you
good. Listen to me! Not far off before you is a delightful town where no
danger can overtake you. Live ye there in disguise, waiting for my
return."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Vyasa, the son of Satyavati, thus comforting the
Pandavas, led them into the town of Ekachakra. And the master also
comforted Kunti, saying, "Live, O daughter! This son of thine,
Yudhishthira, ever devoted to truth, this illustrious bull among men,
having by his justice conquered the whole world, will rule over all the
other monarchs of the earth. There is little doubt that, having by means
of Bhima's and Arjuna's prowess conquered the whole earth with her belt of
seas, he will enjoy the sovereignty thereof. Thy sons as well as those of
Madri--mighty car-warriors all--will cheerfully sport as pleaseth them in
their dominions. These tigers among men will also perform various
sacrifices, such as the Rajasuya and the horse-sacrifice, in which the
presents unto the Brahmanas are very large. And these thy sons will rule
their ancestral kingdom, maintaining their friends and relatives in luxury
and affluence and happiness."

"Vaisampayana continued, 'With these words Vyasa introduced them into the
dwelling of a Brahmana. And the island-born Rishi, addressing the eldest
of the Pandavas, said, "Wait here for me! I will come back to you! By
adapting yourselves to the country and the occasion you will succeed in
becoming very happy."

"'Then, O king, the Pandavas with joined hands said unto the Rishi, "So be
it." And the illustrious master, the Rishi Vyasa, then went away to the
region whence he had come.'"


SECTION CLIX

(Vaka-vadha Parva)

"Janamejaya asked, 'O first of Brahmanas, what did the Pandavas, those
mighty car-warriors, the sons of Kunti, do after arriving at Ekachakra?'

"Vaisampayana said, 'Those mighty car-warriors, the sons of Kunti, on
arriving at Ekachakra, lived for a short time in the abode of a Brahmana.
Leading an eleemosynary life, they beheld (in course of their wanderings)
various delightful forests and earthly regions, and many rivers and lakes,
and they became great favourites of the inhabitants of that town in
consequence of their own accomplishments. At nightfall they placed before
Kunti all they gathered in their mendicant tours, and Kunti used to divide
the whole amongst them, each taking what was allotted to him. And those
heroic chastisers of foes, with their mother, together took one moiety of
the whole, while the mighty Bhima alone took the other moiety. In this way,
O bull of Bharata's race, the illustrious Pandavas lived there for some
time.

"'One day, while those bulls of the Bharata race were out on their tour of
mendicancy, it so happened that Bhima was (at home) with (his mother)
Pritha. That day, O Bharata, Kunti heard a loud and heart-rending wail of
sorrow coming from within the apartments of the Brahmana. Hearing the
inmates of the Brahmana's house wailing and indulging in piteous
lamentations, Kunti, O king, from compassion and the goodness of her heart,
could not bear it with indifference. Afflicted with sorrow, the amiable
Pritha, addressing Bhima, said these words full of compassion. "Our woes
assuaged, we are, O son, living happily in the house of this Brahmana,
respected by him and unknown to Dhritarashtra's son. O son, I always think
of the good I should do to this Brahmana, like what they do that live
happily in others' abodes! O child, he is a true man upon whom favours are
never lost. He payeth back to others more than what he receiveth at their
hands. There is no doubt, some affliction hath overtaken this Brahmana. If
we could be of any help to him, we should then be requiting his services."

"'Hearing these words of his mother, Bhima said, "Ascertain, O mother the
nature of the Brahmana's distress and whence also it hath arisen. Learning
all about it, relieve it I will however difficult may the task prove."

"Vaisampayana continued 'While mother and son were thus talking with each
other, they heard again, O king, another wail of sorrow proceeding from
the Brahmana and his wife. Then Kunti quickly entered the inner apartments
of that illustrious Brahmana, like unto a cow running towards her tethered
calf. She beheld the Brahmana with his wife, son and daughter, sitting
with a woeful face, and she heard the Brahmana say, "Oh, fie on this
earthly life which is hollow as the reed and so fruitless after all which
is based on sorrow and hath no freedom, and which hath misery for its lot!
Life is sorrow and disease; life is truly a record of misery! The soul is
one: but it hath to pursue virtue, wealth and pleasure. And because these
are pursued at one and the same time, there frequently occurs a
disagreement that is the source of much misery. Some say that salvation is
the highest object of our desire. But I believe it can never be attained.
The acquisition of wealth is hell; the pursuit of wealth is attended with
misery; there is more misery after one has acquired it, for one loves
one's possessions, and if any mishap befalls them, the possessor becomes
afflicted with woe. I do not see by what means I can escape from this
danger, nor how I can fly hence, with my wife to some region free from
danger. Remember, O wife, that I endeavoured to migrate to some other
place where we would be happy, but thou didst not then listen to me.
Though frequently solicited by me, thou, O simple woman, said to me, 'I
have been born here, and here have I grown old; this is my ancestral
homestead.' Thy venerable father, O wife, and thy mother also, have, a
long time ago, ascended to heaven. Thy relations also had all been dead.
Oh why then didst thou yet like to live here? Led by affection for thy
relatives thou didst not then hear what I said. But the time is now come
when thou art to witness the death of a relative. Oh, how sad is that
spectacle for me! Or perhaps the time is come for my own death, for I
shall never be able to abandon cruelly one of my own as long as I myself
am alive. Thou art my helpmate in all good deeds, self-denying and always
affectionate unto me as a mother. The gods have given thee to me as a true
friend and thou art ever my prime stay. Thou hast, by my parents, been
made the participator in my domestic concerns. Thou art of pure lineage
and good disposition, the mother of children, devoted to me, and so
innocent; having chosen and wedded thee with due rites, I cannot abandon
thee, my wife, so constant in thy vows, to save my life. How shall I
myself be able to sacrifice my son a child of tender years and yet without
the hirsute appendages (of manhood)? How shall I sacrifice my daughter
whom I have begotten myself, who hath been placed, as a pledge, in my
hands by the Creator himself for bestowal on a husband and through whom I
hope to enjoy, along with my ancestors, the regions attainable by those
only that have daughters' sons? Some people think that the father's
affection for a son is greater; others, that his affection for a daughter
is greater; mine, however, is equal. How can I be prepared to give up the
innocent daughter upon whom rest the regions of bliss obtainable by me in
after life and my own lineage and perpetual happiness? If, again, I
sacrifice myself and go to the other world, I should scarcely know any
peace, for, indeed, it is evident that, left by me these would not be able
to support life. The sacrifice of any of these would be cruel and
censurable. On the other hand, if I sacrifice myself, these, without me,
will certainly perish. The distress into which I have fallen is great; nor
do I know the means of escape. Alas, what course shall I take today with
my near ones. It is well that I should die with all these, for I can live
no longer."'"


SECTION CLX

(Vaka-vadha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'On hearing these words of the Brahmana, his wife said,
"Thou shouldst not, O Brahmana, grieve like an ordinary man. Nor is this
the time for mourning. Thou hast learning; thou knowest that all men are
sure to die; none should grieve for that which is inevitable. Wife, son,
and daughter, all these are sought for one's own self. As thou art
possessed of a good understanding, kill thou thy sorrows. I will myself go
there. This indeed, is the highest and the eternal duty of a woman, viz.,
that by sacrificing her life she should seek the good of her husband. Such
an act done by me will make thee happy, and bring me fame in this world
and eternal bliss hereafter. This, indeed, is the highest virtue that I
tell thee, and thou mayest, by this, acquire both virtue and happiness.
The object for which one desireth a wife hath already been achieved by
thee through me. I have borne thee a daughter and a son and thus been
freed from the debt I had owed thee. Thou art well able to support and
cherish the children, but I however, can never support and cherish them
like thee. Thou art my life, wealth, and lord; bereft of thee, how shall
these children of tender years--how also shall I myself, exist? Widowed
and masterless, with two children depending on me, how shall I, without
thee, keep alive the pair, myself leading an honest life? If the daughter
of thine is solicited (in marriage) by persons dishonourable and vain and
unworthy of contracting an alliance with thee, how shall I be able to
protect the girl? Indeed, as birds seek with avidity for meat that hath
been thrown away on the ground, so do men solicit a woman that hath lost
her husband. O best of Brahmanas, solicited by wicked men, I may waver and
may not be able to continue in the path that is desired by all honest men.
How shall I be able to place this sole daughter of thy house--this
innocent girl--in the way along which her ancestors have always walked?
How shall I then be able to impart unto this child every desirable
accomplishment to make him virtuous as thyself, in that season of want
when I shall become masterless? Overpowering myself who shall be
masterless, unworthy persons will demand (the hand of) this daughter of
thine, like Sudras desiring to hear the Vedas. And if I bestow not upon
them this girl possessing thy blood and qualities, they may even take her
away by force, like crows carrying away the sacrificial butter. And
beholding thy son become so unlike to thee, and thy daughter placed under
the control of some unworthy persons, I shall be despised in the world by
even persons that are dishonourable, and I will certainly die. These
children also, bereft of me and thee, their father, will, I doubt not,
perish like fish when the water drieth up. There is no doubt that bereft
of thee the three will perish: therefore it behoveth thee to sacrifice me.
O Brahmana, persons conversant with morals have said that for women that
have borne children, to predecease their lords is an act of the highest
merit. Ready am I to abandon this son and this daughter, these my
relations, and life itself, for thee. For a woman to be ever employed in
doing agreeable offices to her lord is a higher duty than sacrifices,
asceticism, vows, and charities of every description. The act, therefore,
which I intend to perform is consonant with the highest virtue and is for
thy good and that of thy race. The wise have declared that children and
relatives and wife and all things held dear are cherished for the purpose
of liberating one's self from danger and distress. One must guard one's
wealth for freeing one's self from danger, and it is by his wealth that he
should cherish and protect his wife. But he must protect his own self both
by (means of) his wife and his wealth. The learned have enunciated the
truth that one's wife, son, wealth, and house, are acquired with the
intention of providing against accidents, foreseen or unforeseen. The wise
have also said that all one's relations weighed against one's own self
would not be equal unto one's self. Therefore, revered sir, protect thy
own self by abandoning me. O, give me leave to sacrifice myself, and
cherish thou my children. Those that are conversant with the morals have,
in their treatises, said, that women should never be slaughtered and that
Rakshasas are not ignorant of the rules of morality. Therefore, while it
is certain that the Rakshasa will kill a man, it is doubtful whether he
will kill a woman. It behoveth thee, therefore, being conversant with the
rules of morality, to place me before the Rakshasa. I have enjoyed much
happiness, have obtained much that is agreeable to me, and have also
acquired great religious merit. I have also obtained from thee children
that are so dear to me. Therefore, it grieveth not me to die. I have borne
thee children and have also grown old; I am ever desirous of doing good to
thee; remembering all these I have come to this resolution. O revered sir,
abandoning me thou mayest obtain another wife. By her thou mayest again
acquire religious merit. There is no sin in this. For a man polygamy is an
act of merit, but for a woman it is very sinful to betake herself to a
second husband after the first. Considering all this, and remembering too
that sacrifice of thy own self is censurable, O, liberate today without
loss of time thy own self, thy race, and these thy children (by abandoning
me)."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by her, O Bharata, the Brahmana
embraced her, and they both began to weep in silence, afflicted with
grief.'"


SECTION CLXI

(Vaka-vadha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'On hearing these words of her afflicted parents, the
daughter was filled with grief, and she addressed them, saying, "Why are
you so afflicted and why do you so weep, as if you have none to look after
you? O, listen to me and do what may be proper. There is little doubt that
you are bound in duty to abandon me at a certain time. Sure to abandon me
once, O, abandon me now and save every thing at the expense of me alone.
Men desire to have children, thinking that children would save them (in
this world as well as in the region hereafter). O, cross the stream of
your difficulties by means of my poor self, as if I were a raft. A child
rescueth his parents in this and the other regions; therefore is the child
called by the learned Putra (rescuer). The ancestors desire daughter's
sons from me (as a special means of salvation). But (without waiting for
my children) I myself will rescue them by protecting the life of my father.
This my brother is of tender years, so there is little doubt that he will
perish if thou diest now. If thou, my father, diest and my brother
followeth thee, the funeral cake of the Pitris will be suspended and they
will be greatly injured. Left behind by my father and brother, and by my
mother also (for she will not survive her husband and son) I shall be
plunged deeper and deeper in woe and ultimately perish in great distress.
There can be little doubt that if thou escape from this danger as also my
mother and infant brother, then thy race and the (ancestral) cake will be
perpetuated. The son is one's own self; the wife is one's friend; the
daughter, however, is the source of trouble. Do thou save thyself,
therefore, by removing that source of trouble, and do thou thereby set me
in the path of virtue. As I am a girl, O father, destitute of thee, I
shall be helpless and plunged in woe, and shall have to go everywhere. It
is therefore that I am resolved to rescue my father's race and share the
merit of that act by accomplishing this difficult task. If thou, O best of
Brahmanas, goest thither (unto the Rakshasa), leaving me here, then I
shall be very much pained. Therefore, O father, be kind to me. O thou best
of men, for our sake, for that of virtue and also thy race, save thyself,
abandoning me, whom at one time thou shall be constrained to part from.
There need be no delay, O father, in doing that which is inevitable. What
can be more painful than that, when thou hast ascended to heaven, we shall
have to go about begging our food, like dogs, from strangers. But if thou
art with thy relations from these difficulties, I shall then live happily
in the region of the celestials. It hath been heard by us that if after
bestowing thy daughter in this way, thou offerest oblations to the gods
and the celestials, they will certainly be propitious."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'The Brahmana and his wife, hearing these various
lamentations of their daughter, became sadder than before and the three
began to weep together. Their son, then, of tender years, beholding them
and their daughter thus weeping together, lisped these words in a sweet
tone, his eyes having dilated with delight, "Weep not, O father, nor thou,
O mother, nor thou O sister!" And smilingly did the child approach each of
them, and at last taking up a blade of grass said in glee, "With this will
I slay the Rakshasa who eateth human beings!" Although all of them had
been plunged in woe, yet hearing what the child lisped so sweetly, joy
appeared on their faces. Then Kunti thinking that to be the proper
opportunity, approached the group and said these words. Indeed, her words
revived them as nectar reviveth a person that is dead.'"


SECTION CLXII

(Vaka-vadha Parva continued)

"'Kunti said, 'I desire to learn from you the cause of this grief, for I
will remove it, if possible.'

"'The Brahmana replied, 'O thou of ascetic wealth, thy speech is indeed
worthy of thee. But this grief is incapable of being removed by any human
being. Not far from this town, there liveth a Rakshasa of the name of Vaka,
which cannibal is the lord of this country and town. Thriving on human
flesh, that wretched Rakshasa endued with great strength ruleth this
country. He being the chief of the Asuras, this town and the country in
which it is situate are protected by his might. We have no fear from the
machinations of any enemy, or indeed from any living soul. The fee,
however, fixed for that cannibal is his food, which consists of a cart-
load of rice, two buffaloes, and a human being who conveyeth them unto him.
One after another, the house-holders have to send him this food. The turn,
however, cometh to a particular family at intervals of many long years. If
there are any that seek to avoid it, the Rakshasa slayeth them with their
children and wives and devoureth them all. There is, in this country, a
city called Vetrakiya, where liveth the king of these territories. He is
ignorant of the science of government, and possessed of little
intelligence, he adopts not with care any measure by which these
territories may be rendered safe for all time to come. But we certainly
deserve it all, inasmuch as we live within the dominion of that wretched
and weak monarch in perpetual anxiety. Brahmanas can never be made to
dwell permanently within the dominions of any one, for they are dependent
on nobody, they live rather like birds ranging all countries in perfect
freedom. It hath been said that one must secure a (good) king, then a wife,
and then wealth. It is by the acquisition of these three that one can
rescue his relatives and sons. But as regards the acquisition of these
three, the course of my actions hath been the reverse. Hence, plunged into
a sea of danger, I am suffering sorely. That turn, destructive of one's
family, hath now devolved upon me. I shall have to give unto the Rakshasa
as his fee the food of the aforesaid description and one human being to
boot. I have no wealth to buy a man with. I cannot by any means consent to
part with any one of my family, nor do I see any way of escape from (the
clutches of) that Rakshasa. I am now sunk in an ocean of grief from which
there is no escape. I shall go to that Rakshasa today, attended by all my
family in order that that wretch might devour us all at once.'"


SECTION CLXIII

(Vaka-vadha Parva continued)

"'Kunti said, "Grieve not at all, O Brahmana, on account of this danger. I
see a way by which to rescue thee from that Rakshasa. Thou hast only one
son, who, besides, is of very tender years, also only one daughter, young
and helpless, so I do not like that any of these, or thy wife, or even
thyself should go unto the Rakshasa. I have five sons, O Brahmana, let one
of them go, carrying in thy behalf tribute of that Rakshasa."

"'Hearing this, the Brahmana replied, "To save my own life I shall never
suffer this to be done. I shall never sacrifice, to save myself, the life
of a Brahmana or of a guest. Indeed, even those that are of low origin and
of sinful practices refuse to do (what thou askest me to do). It is said
that one should sacrifice one's self and one's offspring for the benefit
of a Brahmana. I regard this advice excellent and I like to follow it too.
When I have to choose between the death of a Brahmana and that of my own,
I would prefer the latter. The killing of a Brahmana is the highest sin,
and there is no expiation for it. I think a reluctant sacrifice of one's
own self is better than the reluctant sacrifice of a Brahmana. O blessed
lady, in sacrificing myself I do not become guilty of self-destruction. No
sin can attach to me when another will take my life. But if I deliberately
consent to the death of a Brahmana, it would be a cruel and sinful act,
from the consequence of which there is no escape. The learned have said
that the abandonment of one who hath come to thy house or sought thy
protection, as also the killing of one who seeketh death at thy hands, is
both cruel and sinful. The illustrious among those conversant with
practices allowable in seasons of distress, have before now said that one
should never perform an act that is cruel and censurable. It is well for
me that I should today perish myself with my wife, but I would never
sanction the death of a Brahmana."

"'Kunti said, "I too am firmly of opinion, O Brahmana, that Brahmanas
should ever be protected. As regards myself, no son of mine would be less
dear to me even if I had a hundred instead of the five I have. But this
Rakshasa will not be able to kill my son, for that son of mine is endued
with great prowess and energy, and skilled in mantras. He will faithfully
deliver to the Rakshasa his food, but will, I know to a certainty, rescue
himself. I have seen before many mighty Rakshasas of huge bodies engaged
in combat with my heroic son and killed too by him. But, O Brahmana, do
not disclose this fact to anybody, for if it be known, persons desirous of
obtaining this power, will, from curiosity, always trouble my sons. The
wise have said that if my son imparteth any knowledge, without the assent
of his preceptor, unto any person, my son himself will no longer be able
to profit by that knowledge."

"'Thus addressed by Pritha, the Brahmana with his wife became exceedingly
glad and assented to Kunti's speech, which was unto them as nectar. Then
Kunti, accompanied by the Brahmana, went unto the son of Vayu (Bhima) and
asked him to accomplish (that difficult task). Bhima replied unto them,
saying, "So be it."'"


SECTION CLXIV

(Vaka-vadha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'After Bhima had pledged himself to accomplish the
task, saying, "I will do it," the Pandavas, O Bharata, returned home with
the alms they had obtained during the day. Then Yudhishthira, the son of
Pandu from Bhima's countenance alone, suspected the nature of the task he
had undertaken to accomplish. Sitting by the side of his mother,
Yudhishthira asked her in private, "What is the task, O mother, that Bhima
of terrible prowess seeketh to accomplish? Doth he do so at thy command or
of his own accord?" Kunti replied, "Bhima, that chastiser of foes, will at
my command, do this great deed for the good of the Brahmana and the
liberation of this town."

"'Yudhishthira said, "What rash act hast thou done, O mother! It is
difficult of being performed and almost amounteth to suicide! The learned
never applaud the abandonment of one's own child. Why dost thou, O mother,
wish to sacrifice thy own child for the sake of another's? Thou hast, O
mother, by this abandonment of thy child, acted not only against the
course of human practices but also against the teachings of the Vedas.
That Bhima, relying on whose arms we sleep happily in the night and hope
to recover the kingdom of which we have been deprived by the covetous son
of Dhritarashtra, that hero of immeasurable energy, remembering whose
prowess Duryodhana and Sakuni do not sleep a wink during the whole night
and by whose prowess we were rescued from the palace of lac and various
other dangers, that Bhima who caused the death of Purochana, and relying
on whose might we regard ourselves as having already slain the sons of
Dhritarashtra and acquired the whole earth with all her wealth, upon what
considerations, O mother, hast thou resolved upon abandoning him? Hast
thou been deprived of thy reason? Hath thy understanding been clouded by
the calamities thou hast undergone?"

"'On hearing these words of her son, Kunti said, "O Yudhishthira, thou
needst not be at all anxious on account of Vrikodara. I have not come to
this resolve owing to any weakness of understanding. Respected by him, and
with our sorrows assuaged, we have, O son, been living in the house of
this Brahmana, unknown to the sons of Dhritarashtra. For requiting, O son,
that Brahmana, I have resolved to do this. He, indeed, is a man upon whom
good offices are never lost. The measure of his requital becometh greater
than the measure of the services he receiveth. Beholding the prowess of
Bhima on the occasion of (our escape from) the house of lac, and from the
destruction also of Hidimva, my confidence in Vrikodara is great. The
might of Bhima's arms is equal unto that of ten thousand elephants. It was,
therefore, that he succeeded in carrying you all, each heavy as an
elephant, from Varanavata. There is no one on earth equal unto Bhima in
might; he may even overcome that foremost of warriors, the holder of the
thunderbolt himself. Soon after his birth he fell from my lap on the
breast of the mountain. By the weight of his body the mass of stone on
which he fell down broke in pieces. From this also, O son of Pandu, I have
come to know Bhima's might. For this reason have I resolved to set him
against the Brahmana's foe. I have not acted in this from foolishness or
ignorance or from motive of gain. I have deliberately resolved to do this
virtuous deed. By this act, O Yudhishthira, two objects will be
accomplished; one is a requital of the services rendered by the Brahmana
and the other is the acquisition of high religious merit. It is my
conviction that the Kshatriya who rendereth help unto a Brahmana in
anything acquireth regions of bliss hereafter. So also a Kshatriya who
saveth the life of a Kshatriya achieveth that great fame in this world as
in the other. A Kshatriya rendering help unto a Vaisya also on this earth
certainly acquires world-wide popularity. One of the kingly tribe should
protect even the Sudra who cometh to him for protection. If he doeth so,
in his next life he receiveth his birth in a royal line, commanding
prosperity and the respect of other kings. O scion of Puru's race, the
illustrious Vyasa of wisdom acquired by hard ascetic toil told me so in
bygone days. It is therefore, that I have resolved upon accomplishing
this."'"


SECTION CLXV

(Vaka-vadha Parva continued)

"'Having heard these words of his mother, Yudhishthira said, "What thou, O
mother, hast deliberately done, moved by compassion for the afflicted
Brahmana, is, indeed, excellent. Bhima will certainly come back with life,
after having slain the cannibal, inasmuch as thou art, O mother, always
compassionate unto Brahmanas. But tell the Brahmana, O mother, that he
doth not do anything whereby the dwellers in this town may know all about
it, and make him promise to keep thy request."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then, when the night passed away, Bhimasena, the
son of Pandu, taking with him the Rakshasa's food set out for the place
where the cannibal lived. The mighty son of Pandu, approaching the forest
where the Rakshasa dwelt, began to eat himself the food he carried,
calling loudly to the Rakshasa by name. The Rakshasa, inflamed with anger
at Bhima's words, came out and approached the place where Bhima was.

"'Of huge body and great strength, of red eyes, red beard, and red hair, he
was terrible to behold, and he came, pressing deep the earth with his
tread. The opening of his mouth, was from ear to ear and his ears
themselves were straight as arrows. Of grim visage, he had a forehead
furrowed into three lines. Beholding Bhima eating his food, the Rakshasa
advanced, biting his nether lip and expanding his eyes in wrath. And
addressing Bhima he said, "Who is this fool, who desiring to go to the
abode of Yama, eateth in my very sight the food intended for me?" Hearing
these words, Bhima, O Bharata, smiled in derision and disregarding the
Rakshasa, continued eating with averted face. Beholding this, the cannibal
uttered a frightful yell and with both arms upraised ran at Bhima desiring
to kill him, there and then. Even then disregarding the Rakshasa and
casting only a single glance at him, Vrikodara, that slayer of hostile
heroes continued to eat the Rakshasa's food. Filled with wrath at this,
the Rakshasa struck from behind with both his arms a heavy blow on the
back of Vrikodara, the son of Kunti. But Bhima, though struck heavily by
the mighty Rakshasa, with both his hands, did not even look up at the
Rakshasa but continued to eat as before. Then the mighty Rakshasa,
inflamed with wrath, tore up a tree and ran at Bhima for striking him
again. Meanwhile the mighty Bhima, that bull among men had leisurely eaten
up the whole of that food and washing himself stood cheerfully for fight.
Then, O Bharata, possessed of great energy, Bhima, smiling in derision,
caught with his left hand the tree hurled at him by the Rakshasa in wrath.
Then that mighty Rakshasa, tearing up many more trees, hurled them at
Bhima, and the Pandava also hurled as many at the Rakshasa. Then, O king,
the combat with trees between that human being and the Rakshasa, became so
terrible that the region around soon became destitute of trees. Then the
Rakshasa, saying that he was none else than Vaka, sprang upon the Pandava
and seized the mighty Bhima with his arms. That mighty hero also clasping
with his own strong arms the strong-armed Rakshasa, and exerting himself
actively, began to drag him violently. Dragged by Bhima and dragging Bhima
also, the cannibal was overcome with great fatigue. The earth began to
tremble in consequence of the strength they both exerted, and large trees
that stood there broke in pieces. Then Bhima, beholding the cannibal
overcome with fatigue, pressed him down on the earth with his knees and
began to strike him with great force. Then placing one knee on the middle
of the Rakshasa's back, Bhima seized his neck with his right hand and the
cloth on his waist with his left, and bent him double with great force.
The cannibal then roared frightfully. And, O monarch, he also began to
vomit blood while he was being thus broken on Bhima's knee.'"


SECTION CLXVI

(Vaka-vadha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said 'Then Vaka, huge as a mountain, thus broken (on Bhima's
knee), died, uttering frightful yells. Terrified by these sounds, the
relatives of that Rakshasa came out, O king, with their attendants. Bhima,
that foremost of smiters, seeing them so terrified and deprived of reason,
comforted them and made them promise (to give up cannibalism), saying, "Do
not ever again kill human beings. If ye kill men, ye will have to die even
as Vaka." Those Rakshasas hearing this speech of Bhima, said, "So be it,"
and gave, O king, the desired promise. From that day, O Bharata, the
Rakshasas (of the region) were seen by the inhabitants of that town to be
very peaceful towards mankind. Then Bhima, dragging the lifeless cannibal,
placed him at one of the gates of the town and went away unobserved by any
one. The kinsmen of Vaka, beholding him slain by the might of Bhima,
became frightened and fled in different directions.

"'Meanwhile Bhima, having slain the Rakshasa, returned to the Brahmana's
abode and related to Yudhishthira all that had happened, in detail. The
next morning the inhabitants of the town in coming out saw the Rakshasa
lying dead on the ground, his body covered with blood. Beholding that
terrible cannibal, huge as a mountain cliff, thus mangled and lying on the
ground, the hair of the spectators stood erect. Returning to Ekachakra,
they soon gave the intelligence. Then, O king, the citizens by thousands
accompanied by their wives, young and old, all began to come to the spot
for beholding the Vaka and they were all amazed at seeing that superhuman
feat. Instantly, O monarch, they began to pray to their gods. Then they
began to calculate whose turn it had been the day before to carry food to
the Rakshasa. And ascertaining this, they all came to that Brahmana and
asked him (to satisfy their curiosity). Thus asked by them repeatedly,
that bull among Brahmanas, desirous of concealing the Pandavas, said these
words unto all the citizens, "A certain high-souled Brahmana, skilled in
mantras, beheld me weeping with my relatives after I had been ordered to
supply the Rakshasa's food. Asking me the cause and ascertaining the
distress of the town, that first of Brahmanas gave me every assurance and
with smiles said, 'I shall carry the food for that wretched Rakshasa today.
Do not fear for me.' Saying this he conveyed the food towards the forest
of Vaka. This deed, so beneficial unto us all, hath very certainly been
done by him."

"'Then those Brahmanas and Kshatriyas (of the city), hearing this, wondered
much. And the Vaisyas and the Sudras also became exceedingly glad, and
they all established a festival in which the worship of Brahmanas was the
principal ceremony (in remembrance of this Brahmana who had relieved them
from their fears of Vaka).'"


SECTION CLXVII

(Chaitraratha Parva)

"'After this citizens returned to their respective houses and the Pandavas
continued to dwell at Ekachakra as before.'

"Janamejaya said, 'O Brahmana, what did those tigers among men, the
Pandavas, do after they had slain the Rakshasa Vaka?'

"Vaisampayana said, 'The Pandavas, O king, after slaying the Rakshasa Vaka,
continued to dwell in the abode of that Brahmana, employed in the study of
the Vedas. Within a few days there came a Brahmana of rigid vows unto the
abode of their host to take up his quarters there. Their host, that bull
among Brahmanas, ever hospitable unto all guests, worshipping the newly-
arrived Brahmana with due ceremonies, gave him quarters in his own abode.
Then those bulls among men, the Pandavas, with their mother Kunti,
solicited the new lodger to narrate to them his interesting experiences.
The Brahmana spake to them of various countries and shrines and (holy)
rivers, of kings and many wonderful provinces and cities. And after this
narration was over, that Brahmana, O Janamejaya, also spoke of the
wonderful self-choice of Yajnasena's daughter, the princess of Panchala,
and of the births of Dhrishtadyumna and Sikhandi, and of the birth,
without the intervention of a woman, of Krishna (Draupadi) at the great
sacrifice of Drupada.

"'Then those bulls among men, the Pandavas, hearing of these extraordinary
facts regarding that illustrious monarch (Drupada), and desiring to know
the details thereof, asked the Brahmana, after his narration was concluded,
to satisfy their curiosity. The Pandavas said, "How, O Brahmana, did the
birth of Dhrishtadyumna the son of Drupada, take place from the
(sacrificial) fire? How also did the extraordinary birth of Krishna take
place from the centre of the sacrificial platform? How also did Drupada's
son learn all weapons from the great bowman Drona? And, O Brahmana, how
and for whom and for what reason was the friendship between Drona and
Drupada broken off?"'

