said the handful of lepers in the camp. 'If we are silent some mischief
will come to us.' 'Thy word, when I shut it up in my bones and said, I
will speak no more in Thy name, was like a fire, and was weary of
forbearing and could not stay.' Brother, do you know anything of the
divine necessity to share your blessing with the men around you? Did
you ever feel what it was to carry a burden of the Lord that drove you
to speech, and left you no rest until you had done what it impelled you
to do? If not, I beseech you to ask yourselves whether you cannot get
nearer to the sun than away out there on the very edge of its system,
receiving so few of its beams, and these so impotent that they can
scarcely do more than melt the surface of the thick-ribbed ice that
warps your spirit. If we are light we shall be enabled, we shall be
bound, we shall wish, to shine. Christian men and women, is this true
of you?

III. Lastly, notice here the confident promise.

'The Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of
thy rising.' If we have the light we shall be light; if we are light we
shall shine, and if we shine we shall attract. Certainly men and women
with the light of Christ in them will draw others to them, just as many
an eye that cannot look undazzled upon the sun can look upon it
mirrored upon some polished surface. A painter will fling upon his
canvas a scene that you and I, with our purblind eyes, have looked at
hundreds of times, and seen no beauty; but when we gaze on the picture,
then we know how fair it is. There is an attractive power in the light
of Christ shining from the face of a man. Of course, we have to
moderate our expectations. We have to remember that whilst it is true
that some men will come to the light, it is also true that some men
'love the darkness, and will not come to the light because their deeds
are evil'; and we have to remember that we have no right to anticipate
rapid results. 'An inheritance may be begotten hastily at the
beginning, but the end thereof shall not be blessed,' said the wise
man; and the history of the Christian Church in many of its missionary
operations is a sad commentary upon the saying. We must remember that
we cannot estimate how long the preparation for a change, which will be
developed swiftly, may be. The sun on autumn mornings shines upon the
fog; and the people below, because there is a fog, do not know that it
is shining; but it is doing its work on the upper layer all the while,
and at length eats its way through the fleecy obstruction, which then
swiftly disappears. That must be a very, very long day of which the
morning twilight has been nineteen hundred years. Therefore, although
the vision tarries, we may fall back with unswerving confidence on
these words of my text--'The Gentiles shall come to the brightness of
thy rising.'

But after all this has been said, are you satisfied with the rate of
progress, are you satisfied with the swiftness of the fulfilment of
such hopes? Whose fault is it that the rate of progress is what it is?
Yours and mine and our predecessors'. There is such a thing as 'hasting
the day of the Lord,' and there is such a thing as protracting the time
of waiting. Dear brethren, the secret of our slow growth at home and
abroad lies in my text. Fulfil the conditions and you will get the
result; but if you are not shining by a light which is Christ's light,
who promised that _it_ would have attraction or draw men to it? A great
deal of the work of the Christian Church--but do not let us hide
ourselves in the generality of that word--a great deal of _our_ work is
artificial light, brewed out of retorts, and smelling sulphureous; and
a great deal more of it is the phosphorescence that glimmers above
decay. If the Christian Church has ceased in any measure, or in any of
its members, to be able to attract by the exhibition of its light, let
the Christian Church sit down and bethink itself of the sort of light
it gives, and perhaps it will find a reason for its failure. It is
Christ, the holy Christ, the loving Christ, the Christ in us making us
wise and gentle, it is the Christ manifested by word and by work, who
will draw the nations to Him.

So, men and brethren, do you keep near your Master and live close by
His side till you are drenched and saturated with His glory, and all
your cold vapours turned into visible divinity and manifested Jesus.
Keep near to Him. As long as a bit of scrap-iron touches a magnet, _it_
is a magnet: as soon as the contact is broken it ceases to attract. If
you live in the full sunshine of Christ and have Him, not merely
playing upon the surface of your mind, but sinking deep down into it
and transforming your whole being, then some men will, as they look at
you, be filled with strange longings, and will say: 'Come, let us walk
in the light of the Lord.' So may you and I live, like the morning
star, which, from its serene altitudes, touched into radiance by the
sun unseen from the darkened plains, prophesies its rising to a
sleeping world, and is content to be lost in the lustre of that
unsetting Light!




WALLS AND GATES

'Thou shalt call thy walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise'--ISAIAH lx.
18.


The prophet reaches the height of eloquence in his magnificent picture
of the restored Jerusalem, 'the city of the Lord, the Zion of the Holy
One of Israel.' To him the city stands for the embodiment of the
nation, and his vision of the future is moulded by his knowledge of the
past. Israel and Jerusalem were to him the embodiments of the divine
idea of God's dwelling with men, and of a society founded on the
presence of God in its midst. We are not forcing meanings on his words
which they will not bear, when we see in the society of men redeemed by
Christ the perfect embodiment of his vision. Nor is the prophet of the
New Testament doing so when he casts his vision of the future which is
to follow Resurrection and Judgment into a like form, and shows us the
new Jerusalem coming down out of heaven.

The end of the world's history is to be, not a garden but a city, a
visible community, bound together because God dwells in it, and yet not
having lost the blessed characteristics of the Garden from which man
set out on his long and devious march.

The Christian form of the prophet's vision is the Christian Society,
and in that society, each individual member possesses his own portion
of the common blessings, so that the great words of this text have a
personal as well as a general application. We shall best bring out
their rich contents by simply taking them as they stand, and
considering what is promised by the two eloquent metaphors, which liken
salvation to the walls and praise to the gates of the City of God.

I. Salvation is to be the city's wall.

Another prophet foretold that the returning exiles would dwell in a
Jerusalem that had no walls, 'for I, saith the Lord, will be unto her a
wall of fire round about'; and Isaiah sang, 'We have a strong city;
salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks.' There is no need
for material defences for the community or the individual whom God
defends. Would that the Church had lived up to the height of that great
thought! Would that we each believed it true in regard to our own
lives! There are three ways in which this promise may be viewed. We may
think of 'salvation' as meaning God's purpose to save. And then the
comfort and sense of security will be derived from the thought that
what He intends He performs, and that nothing can traverse that purpose
except our own rebellions self-will. They whom God designs to keep are
kept; they whom God wills to save are saved, unless they oppose His
will, which opposition is in itself to be lost, and leads to ultimate
and irreparable loss.

We may think of salvation as an actually begun work. Then the comfort
and sense of security will be derived from that great work by which
salvation has begun to be ours. The work of Christ keeps us from all
danger, and no foes can make a breach in that wall, nor reach those who
stand safe behind its strong towers.

We may think of salvation as a personal experience, and then the
comfort and sense of security will be derived from that blessed
consciousness of possessing in some measure at least the spirit, not of
bondage, but of a son. The consciousness of having 'salvation' is our
best defence against spiritual foes and our best shield against
temporal calamities.

It is good for us to live by faith, to be thrown back on our unseen
protector, to feel with the psalmist, 'Thou, Lord, makest me to dwell
in safety, though alone,' and to see the wall great and high that is
drawn round our defenceless tent pitched on the sands of the flat
desert.

II. Praise is to be the city's gate.

As to the Church, this prophecy anticipates the Apostle's teaching that
the whole divine work of Redemption, from its fore-ordination before
the foundation of the world, to its application to each sinful soul, is
'to the end that we should be unto the praise of His glory' or, as he
elsewhere expands and enriches the expression, 'to the praise of the
glory of His grace.'

We are 'secretaries of His praise.' A gate is that by which the safe
inhabitants go out into the region beyond, and the outgoings of the
active life of every Christian should be such as to make manifest the
blessings that he enjoys within the shelter of the city's walls. Only
if our hidden life is blessed with a begun salvation will our outward
life be vocal with the music of praise. The gate will be praise if, and
only if, the wall is salvation.

And praise is the gate by which we should go out into the world, even
when the world into which we go is dark and the ways rough and hard. If
we have the warm glow of a realised salvation in our hearts, sorrows
that are but for a moment will not silence the voice of praise, though
they may cast it into a minor key. The praise that rises from a sad
heart is yet more melodious in God's ear than that which carols when
all things go well. The bird that sings in a darkened cage makes music
to its owner. 'Songs in the night' have a singular pathos and thrill
the listeners. When we 'take the cup of salvation' and call on the name
of the Lord, we shall offer to Him the sacrifices of thanksgiving,
though He may recall some of the precious gifts that He gave. For He
never takes away the wall of salvation which He has built around us,
and as long as that wall stands, its gates will be praise. Submission,
recognition of His will, and even 'silence because Thou didst it,' are
praise to His ear.




THE JOY-BRINGER

'To appoint unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for
ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the
spirit of heaviness.'--ISAIAH lxi. 3.


In the little synagogue of Nazareth Jesus began His ministry by laying
His hand upon this great prophecy and saying, 'It is Mine! I have
fulfilled it.' The prophet had been painting the ideal Messianic
Deliverer, with special reference to the return from the Babylonian
captivity. That was 'the liberty to the captives, and the opening of
the prison to them that are bound,' and about which he was thinking.
But no external deliverance of that sort could meet the needs, nor
satisfy the aspirations, of a soul that knows itself and its
circumstances. Isaiah, or the man who goes by his name, spoke greater
things than he knew. I am not going to enter upon questions of
interpretation; but I may say, that no conception of Jewish prophecy
can hold its ground which is not framed in the light of that great
saying in the synagogue of Nazareth. So, then, we have here the 'Man of
Sorrows,' as this very prophet calls Him in another place, presenting
Himself as the Transformer of sorrow and the Bringer of joy, in regard
to infinitely deeper griefs than those which sprang in the heart of the
nation because of the historical captivity.

There is another beautiful thing in our text, which comes out more
distinctly if we follow the Revised Version, and read 'to give unto
them a _garland_ for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, the garment of
praise for the spirit of heaviness.' There we have two contrasted
pictures suggested: one of a mourner with grey ashes strewed upon his
dishevelled locks, and his spirit clothed in gloom like a black robe;
and to him there comes One who, with gentle hand, smoothes the ashes
out of his hair, trains a garland round his brow, anoints his head with
oil, and, stripping off the trappings of woe, casts about him a bright
robe fit for a guest at a festival. That is the miracle that Jesus
Christ can do for every one, and is ready to do for us, if we will let
Him. Let us look at this wonderful transformation, and at the way by
which it is effected.

The first point I would make is that--

I. Jesus Christ is the Joy-bringer to men because He is the Redeemer of
men.

Remember that in the original application of my text to the deliverance
from captivity, this gift of joy and change of sorrow into gladness was
no independent and second bestowment, but was simply the issue of the
one that preceded it, viz., the gift of liberty to the captives, and
the opening of the prison to them that were bound. The gladness was a
gladness that welled up in the heart of the captives set free, and
coming out from the gloom of the Babylonian dungeon into the sunshine
of God's favour, with their faces set towards Zion 'with songs and
everlasting joy upon their heads.'

Now you have only to keep firm hold of this connection between these
two thoughts to come to the crown and centre-point of this great
prophecy, as far as it applies to us, and that is that it is Christ as
the Emancipator, Christ as the Deliverer, Christ as He who brings us
out of the prison of bondage of the tyranny of sin, who is the great
Joy-Giver. For there is no real, deep, fundamental and impregnable
gladness possible to a man until his relations to God have been
rectified, and until, with these rectified relations, with the
consciousness of forgiveness and the divine love nestling warm at his
heart, he has turned himself away from his dread and his sin, and has
recognised in his Father God 'the gladness of his joy.'

Of course, there are many of us who feel that life is sufficiently
comfortable and moderately happy, or at least quite tolerable, without
any kind of reference to God at all. And in this day of growing
materialism, and growing consequent indifference to the deepest needs
of the spirit and the claims of religion, more and more men are
finding, or fancying that they find, that they can rub along somehow,
and have a fair share of gladness and satisfaction, without any need
for a redeeming gospel and a forgiving Christ. But about all that kind
of surface-joy the old words are true, 'even in laughter the heart is
sorrowful,' and hosts of us are satisfied with joys which Jesus has no
part in bringing, simply because our truest self has never once
awakened. When it does-and perhaps it will do so with some of you, like
the sleeping giant that is fabled to lie beneath the volcano whose
sunny slopes are smiling with flowers--then you will find out that no
one can bring real joy who does not take away guilt and sin.

Jesus Christ is the Joy-bringer, because Jesus Christ is the
Emancipator. And true gladness is the gladness that springs from the
conscious possession of liberty from the captivity which holds men
slaves to evil and to their worst selves. Brethren, let us not fancy
that these surface-joys are the joys adequate to a human spirit. They
are ignoble, and they are infinitely foolish, because a touch of an
awakened conscience, a stirring of one's deeper self, can scatter them
all to pieces. So then, that is my first thought.

Let us suggest a second, that--

II. Jesus Christ transforms sorrow because He transforms the mourner.

In my text, all that this Joy-bringer and Transmuter of grief into its
opposite is represented as doing is on the man who feels the sorrow.
And although, as I have said, the text, in its original position, is
simply a deduction from the previous great prophecy which did point to
a change of circumstances, and although Jesus does bring the 'joy of
salvation' by a great change in a man's relations, yet in regard to the
ordinary sorrows of life, He affects these not so much by an operation
upon our circumstances as by an operation upon ourselves, and
transforms sorrow and brings gladness, because He transforms the man
who endures it. The landscape remains the same, the difference is in
the colour of the glass through which we look at it. Instead of having
it presented through some black and smoked medium, we see it through
what the painter calls a 'Claude Lorraine' glass, tinged golden, and
which throws its own lovely light upon all that it shows us. It is
possible--the eye that looks being purged and cleansed, so as to see
more clearly-that the facts remaining identical, their whole aspect and
bearing may be altered, and that which was felt, and rightly felt, to
be painful and provocative of sadness and gloom, may change its
character and beget a solemn joy. It would be but a small thing to
transform the conditions; it is far better and higher to transform us.
We all need, and some of us, I have no doubt, do especially need, to
remember that the Lord who brings this sudden transformation for us,
does so by His operation within us, and, therefore, to that operation
we should willingly yield ourselves.

How does He do this? One answer to that question is--by giving to the
man with ashes on his head and gloom wrapped about his spirit, sources
of joy, if he will use them, altogether independent of external
circumstances.' Though the fig-tree shall not blossom, and there be no
fruit in the vine ... yet will I rejoice in the Lord.' And every
Christian man, especially when days are dark and clouds are gathering,
has it open to him, and is bound to use the possibility, to turn away
his mind from the external occasions of sadness, and fix it on the
changeless reason for deep and unchanging joy--the sweet presence, the
strong love, the sustaining hand, the infinite wisdom, of his Father
God.

Brethren, "the paradox of the Christian life" is, 'as sorrowful, yet
always rejoicing.' Christ calls for no hypocritical insensibility to
'the ills that flesh is heir to.' He has sanctioned by His example the
tears that flow when death hurts loving hearts. He commanded the women
of Jerusalem to 'weep for themselves and for their children.' He means
that we should feel the full bitterness and pain of sorrows which will
not be medicinal unless they are bitter, and will not be curative
unless they cut deep. But He also means that whilst thus we suffer as
men, in the depths of our own hearts we should, at the same time, be
turning away from the sufferings and their cause, and fixing our
hearts, quiet even then amidst the distractions, upon God Himself. Ah!
it is hard to do, and because we do not do it, the promise that He will
turn the sorrow into joy often seems to be a vain word for us.

It is not ours to rejoice as the world does, nor is it ours to sorrow
as those who have no hope, or as those who have no God with them. But
the two opposite emotions may, to a large extent, be harmonised and
co-existent in a Christian heart, and, since they can be, they should
be. The Christian in sorrow should be as an island set in some stormy
sea, with wild waves breaking against its black, rocky coast, and the
wind howling around it, but in the centre of it there is a deep and
shady dell 'that heareth not the loud winds when they call,' and where
not a leaf is moved by the tempest. In a like depth of calm and central
tranquillity it is possible for us to live, even while the storm
hurtles its loudest on the outermost coasts of our being; 'as
sorrowful, yet always rejoicing,' because the Joy-bringer has opened
for us sources of gladness independent of externals.

And then there is another way by which, for us, if we will use our
privileges, the sorrows of life may be transmuted, because we,
contemplating them, have come to a changed understanding of their
meaning. That is, after all, the secret charm to be commended to us at
all times, but to be commended to us most when our hearts are heavy and
the days are dark around us. We shall never understand life if we class
its diverse events simply under the two opposite categories of
good--evil; prosperity--adversity; gains--losses; fulfilled
expectations--disappointed hopes, Put them all together under one
class--discipline and education; means for growth; means for
Christlikeness. When we have found out, what it takes a long while for
us to learn, that the lancet and the bandage are for the same purpose,
and that opposite weathers conspire to the same end, that of the
harvest, the sting is out of the sorrow, the poison is wiped off the
arrow. We can have, if not a solemn joy, at least a patient
acquiescence, in the diversities of operation, when we learn that the
same hand is working in all for the same end, and that all that
contributes to that end is good.

Here we may suggest a third way by which a transformation wrought upon
ourselves transforms the aspect of our sorrows, and that is, that
possessing independent sources of joy, and having come to learn the
educational aspect of all adversity, we hereby are brought by Jesus
Christ Himself to the position of submission. And that is the most
potent talisman to transform mourning into praise. An accepted grief is
a conquered grief; a conquered grief will very soon be a comforted
grief; and a comforted grief is a joy. By all these means Jesus Christ,
here and now, is transmuting the lead and iron of our griefs into the
gold of a not ignoble nor transient gladness.

And may I say one last word? My text suggests not only these two points
to which I have already referred--viz. that Jesus Christ is the
Joy-bringer because He is the Emancipator, and that He transforms
sorrow by transforming the mourner--but, lastly, that

III. Jesus gives joy after sorrow.

'Nevertheless, afterward' is a great word of glowing encouragement for
all sad hearts. 'Fools and children,' says the old proverb, 'should not
see half-done work '; at least, they should not judge it. When the
ploughshare goes deep into the brown, frosty ground, the work is only
begun. The earth may seem to be scarped and hurt, and, if one might
say, to bleed, but in six months' time 'you scarce can see' the soil
for waving corn. Yes; and sorrow, as some of us could witness, is the
forecast of purest joy. I have no doubt that there are men and women
here who could say, 'I never knew the power of God, and the blessedness
of Christ as a Saviour, until I was in deep affliction, and when
everything else went dark, then in His light I saw light.' Do not some
of you know the experience? and might we not all know it? and why do we
not know it?

Jesus Christ, even here and now, gives these blessed results of our
sorrows, if they are taken to the right place, and borne in right
fashion. For it is they 'that mourn in Zion' that He thus blesses.
There are some of us, I fear, whose only resource in trouble is to
fling ourselves into some work, or some dissipation. There are people
who try to work away their griefs, as well as people who try feverishly
to drink them away. And there are some of us whose only resource for
deliverance from our sorrows is that, after the wound has bled all it
can, it stops bleeding, and the grief simply dies by lapse of time and
for want of fuel. An affliction wasted is the worst of all waste. But
if we carry our grief into the sanctuary, then, here and now, it will
change its aspect and become a solemn joy.

I say nothing about the ultimate result where every sorrow rightly
borne shall be represented in the future life by some stage in grace or
glory, where every tear shall be crystallised, if I might say so, into
a flashing diamond, which flings off the reflection of the divine
light, where 'there shall be no sorrow nor sighing, nor any more pain,
for the former things are passed away.' When the lesson has been
learned, God burns the rod.

But, brethren, there is another sadder transformation. I have been
speaking about the transformation of sorrow into joy. There is also the
transformation of joy into sorrow. I spoke a little while ago about the
'laughter' in which the heart is 'sorrowful,' and the writer from whom
I quoted the words goes on to say, 'The end of that mirth is
heaviness.' 'Thereof cometh in the end despondency and madness.' I saw,
on a hilltop, a black circle among the grass and heather. There had
been a bonfire there on Coronation Night, and it had all died down, and
that was the end--a hideous ring of scorched barrenness amidst the
verdure. Take care that your gladnesses do not die down like that, but
that they are pure, and being pure are undying. Union with Jesus Christ
makes sorrow light, and secures that it shall merge at last into 'joy
unspeakable and full of joy.' I believe that separation from Christ
makes joy shallow, and makes it certain that at last, instead of a
garland, shall be ashes on the head, and that, instead of a festal
robe, the spirit shall be wrapped in a garment of heaviness.




THE HEAVENLY WORKERS AND THE EARTHLY WATCHERS

'For Zion's sake will I not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I
will not rest ... I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem,
which shall never hold their peace day nor night: ye that make mention
of the Lord, keep not silence, and give Him no rest'--ISAIAH lxii. 1,
6, 7.


Two remarks of an expository nature will prepare the way for the
consideration of these words. The first is that the speaker is the
personal Messiah. The second half of Isaiah's prophecies forms one
great whole, which might be called The Book of the Servant of the Lord.
One majestic figure stands forth on its pages with ever-growing
clearness of outline and form. The language in which He is described
fluctuates at first between the collective Israel and the one Person
who is to be all that the nation had failed to attain. But even near
the beginning of the prophecy we read of 'My servant whom I uphold,'
whose voice is to be low and soft, and whose meek persistence is not to
fail till He have 'set judgment in the earth.' And as we advance the
reference to the nation becomes less and less possible, and the
recognition of the person more and more imperative. At first the music
of the prophetic song seems to move uncertainly amid sweet sounds, from
which the true theme by degrees emerges, and thenceforward recurs over
and over again with deeper, louder harmonies clustering about it, till
it swells into the grandeur of the choral close.

In the chapter before our text we read, 'The Spirit of the Lord God is
upon me, because the Lord hath anointed me to preach good tidings unto
the meek.' Throughout the remainder of the prophecy, with the exception
of one section which contains the prayer of the desolate Israel, this
same person continues to speak; and who he is was taught in the
synagogue of Nazareth. Whilst the preceding chapter, then, brings in
Christ as proclaiming the great work of deliverance for which He is
anointed of God, the following chapter presents Him as 'treading the
wine-press alone,' which is a symbol of the future judgment by the
glorified Saviour. Between these two prophecies of the earthly life and
of the still future judicial energy, this chapter of our text lies,
referring, as I take it, to the period between these two--that is, to
all the ages of the Church's development on earth. For these Christ
here promises His continual activity, and His continual bestowment of
grace to His servants who watch the walls of His Jerusalem.

The second point to be noticed is the remarkable parallelism in the
expressions selected as the text: 'I will not hold _My_ peace'; the
watchmen 'shall never hold _their peace_.' And His command to them is
literally, 'Ye that remind Jehovah--no _rest_ (or silence) to you, and
give not _rest_ to Him.'

So we have here Christ, the Church, and God all represented as
unceasingly occupied in the one great work of establishing 'Zion' as
the centre of light, salvation, and righteousness for the whole world.
The consideration of these three perpetual activities may open for us
some great truths and stimulating lessons.

I. First, then, The glorified Christ is constantly working for His
Church.

We are too apt to regard our Lord's real work as all lying in the past,
and, from the very greatness of our estimate of what He has done, to
forget the true importance of what He evermore does. 'Christ that died'
is the central object of trust and contemplation for devout souls--and
that often to the partial hiding of Christ that is 'risen again, who is
even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us.'
But Scripture sets forth the present glorious life of our ascended Lord
under two contrasted and harmonious aspects--as being rest, and as
being continuous activity in the midst of rest. He was 'received up
into heaven, and sat on the right hand of God.' In that session on the
throne manifold and mighty truths are expressed. It proclaims the full
accomplishment of all the purposes of His earthly ministry; it
emphasises the triumphant completion of His redeeming work by His
death; it proclaims the majesty of His nature, which returns to the
'glory which He had with the Father before the world was'; it shows to
the world, as on some coronation day, its King on His throne, girded
with power and holding the far-reaching sceptre of the universe; it
prophesies for men, in spite of all present sin and degradation, a
share in the dominion which manhood has in Christ attained, for though
we see not yet all things put under Him, we see Jesus crowned with
glory and honour. It prophesies, too, His final victory over all that
sets itself in unavailing antagonism to His love. It points us backward
to an historical fact as the basis of all our hopes for ourselves and
for our fellows, giving us the assurance that the world's deliverance
will come from the slow operation of the forces already lodged in its
history by Christ's finished work. It points us forwards to a future as
the goal of all these hopes, giving us that confidence of victory which
He has who, having kindled the fire on earth, henceforward sits at
God's right hand, waiting in the calm and sublime patience of conscious
omnipotence and clear foreknowledge 'until His enemies become His
footstool.'

But whilst on the one side Christ rests as from a perfected work which
needs no addition nor repetition, on the other He 'rests not day nor
night.' And this aspect of His present state is as distinctly set forth
in Scripture as that is. Indeed the words already quoted as embodying
the former phase contain the latter also. For is not 'the right hand of
God' the operative energy of the divine nature? And is not 'sitting at
the right hand of God' equivalent to possessing and wielding that
unwearied, measureless power? Are there not blended together in this
pregnant phrase the ideas of profoundest calm and of intensest action,
that being expressed by the attitude, and this by the locality?
Therefore does the evangelist who uses the expression expand it into
words which wonderfully close his gospel, with the same representation
of Christ's swift and constant activity as he had been all along
pointing out as characterising His life on earth. 'They went forth,'
says he, 'and preached everywhere'--so far the contrast between the
Lord seated in the heavens and His wandering servants fighting on earth
is sharp and almost harsh. But the next words tone it down, and weave
the two apparently discordant halves of the picture into a whole: 'the
Lord _working_ with them.' Yes! in all His rest He is full of work, in
all their toils He shares, in all their journeys His presence goes
beside them. Whatever they do is His deed, and the help that is done
upon the earth He doeth it all Himself.

Is not this blessed conviction of Christ's continuous operation in and
for His Church that which underlies, as has often been pointed out, the
language of the introduction to the Acts of the Apostles, where mention
is made of the former treatise that told 'all which Jesus began both to
do and teach'? The gospel records the beginning, the Book of the Acts
the continuance; it is one biography in two volumes. Being yet present
with them He spoke and acted. Being exalted He 'speaketh from heaven,'
and from the throne carries on the endless series of His works of power
and healing. The whole history is shaped by the same conviction.
Everywhere 'the Lord' is the true actor, the source of all the life
which is in the Church, the arranger of all the providences which
affect its progress. The Lord adds to the Church daily. His name works
miracles. To the Lord believers are added. His angel, His Spirit, bring
messages to His servants. He appears to Paul, and speaks to Ananias.
The Gentiles turn to the Lord because the hand of the Lord is with the
preachers. The Lord calls Paul to carry the gospel to Macedonia. The
Lord opens the heart of Lydia, and so throughout. Not 'the Acts of the
Apostles,' but 'the Acts of the Lord in and by His servants,' is the
accurate title of this book. The vision which flashed angel radiance on
the face, and beamed with divine comfort into the heart, of Stephen,
was a momentary revelation of an abiding reality, and completes the
representation of the Saviour throned beside Almighty power. He beheld
his Lord, not seated, as if careless or resting, while His servant's
need was so sore, but as if risen with intent to help, and ready to
defend--'_standing_ on the right hand of God.'

And when once again the heavens opened to the rapt eyes of John in
Patmos, the Lord whom he beheld was not only revealed as glorified in
the lustre of the inaccessible light, but as actively sustaining and
guiding the human reflectors of it. He 'holdeth the seven stars in His
right hand,' and '_walketh_ in the midst of the seven golden
candlesticks.'

Not otherwise does my text represent the present relation of Christ to
His Church. It speaks of a continuous forth-putting of power, which it
is, perhaps, not over-fanciful to regard as dimly set forth here in a
twofold form--namely, work and word. At all events, that division
stands out clearly on the pages of the New Testament, which ever holds
forth the double truth of our Lord's constant action on, in, through,
and for His Zion, and of our High Priest's constant intercession.

'I will not rest.' Through all the ages His power is in exercise. He
inspires in good men all their wisdom, and every grace of life and
character. He uses them as His weapons in the contest of His love with
the world's hatred; but the hand that forged, and tempered, and
sharpened the blade is that which smites with it; and the axe must not
boast itself against him that heweth. He, the Lord of lords, orders
providences, and shapes the course of the world for that Church which
is His witness: 'Yea, He reproved kings for their sake, saying, Touch
not Mine anointed, and do My prophets no harm.' The ancient legend
which told how, on many a well-fought field, the ranks of Rome
discerned through the battle-dust the gleaming weapons and white steeds
of the Great Twin Brethren far in front of the solid legions, is true
in loftier sense in our Holy War. We may still see the vision which the
leader of Israel saw of old, the man with the drawn sword in his hand,
and hear the majestic word, 'As Captain of the Lord's host am I now
come.' The Word of God, with vesture dipped in blood, with eyes alit
with His flaming love, with the many crowns of unlimited sovereignty
upon His head, rides at the head of the armies of heaven; 'and in
righteousness doth He judge and make war.' For the single soul
struggling with daily tasks and petty cares, His help is near and real,
as for the widest work of the collective whole. He sends none of us
tasks in which He has no share. The word of this Master is never 'Go,'
but 'Come.' He unites Himself with all our sorrows, with all our
efforts. 'The Lord also working with them' is a description of all the
labours of Christian men, be they great or small.

Nor is this all. There still remains the wonderful truth of His
continuous intercession for us. In its widest meaning that word
expresses the whole of the manifold ways by which Christ undertakes and
maintains our cause. But the narrower signification of prayer on our
behalf is applicable, and is in Scripture applied, to our Lord. As on
earth, the climax of all His intercourse with His disciples was that
deep yet simple prayer which forms the Holy of Holies of John's Gospel,
so in heaven His loftiest office for us is set forth under the figure
of His intercession. Before the Throne stands the slain Lamb, and
therefore do the elders in the outer circle bring acceptable praises.
Within the veil stands the Priest, with the names of the tribes blazing
on the breastplate and on the shoulders of His robes, near the seat of
love, near the arm of power. And whatever difficulty may surround that
idea of Christ's priestly intercession, this at all events is implied
in it, that the mighty work which He accomplished on earth is ever
present to the divine mind as the ground of our acceptance and the
channel of our blessings; and this further, that the utterance of
Christ's will is ever in harmony with the divine purpose. Therefore His
prayer has in it a strange tone of majesty, and, if we may so say, of
command, as of one who knows that He is ever heard: '_I will_ that they
whom Thou hast given Me, be with Me where I am.'

The instinct of the Church has, from of old, laid hold of an event in
His earthly life to shadow forth this great truth, and has bid us see a
pledge and a symbol of it in that scene on the Lake of Galilee: the
disciples toiling in the sudden storm, the poor little barque tossing
on the waters tinged by the wan moon, the spray dashing over the
wearied rowers. They seem alone, but up yonder, in some hidden cleft of
the hills, their Master looks down on all the weltering storm, and
lifts His voice in prayer. Then when the need is sorest, and the hope
least, He comes across the waves, making their surges His pavement, and
using all opposition as the means of His approach, and His presence
brings calmness, and immediately they are at the land.

So we have not only to look back to the Cross, but up to the Throne.
From the Cross we hear a voice, 'It is finished.' From the Throne a
voice, 'For Zion's sake I will not hold My peace, and for Jerusalem's
sake I will not rest.'

II. Secondly, Christ's servants on earth derive from Him a like
perpetual activity for the same object.

The Lord, who in the former portion of these verses declares His own
purpose of unwearied action for Zion, associates with Himself in the
latter portion the watchmen, whom He appoints and endows for functions
in some measure resembling His own, and exercised with constancy
derived from Him. 'I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem,
which shall never hold their peace day nor night.' On the promise
follows, as ever, a command (for all divine gifts involve the
responsibility of their use, and it is not His wont either to bestow
without requiring, or to require before bestowing), 'Ye that remind
Jehovah, keep not silence.'

There is distinctly traceable before a reference to a two-fold form of
occupation devolving on these Christ-sent servants. They are watchmen,
and they are also God's remembrancers. In the one capacity as in the
other, their voices are to be always heard. The former metaphor is
common in the Old Testament, as a designation of the prophetic office,
but, in the accordance with the genius of the New Testament, as
expressed on Pentecost, when the Spirit was poured out on the lowly as
well as on the high, on the young as on the old, and all prophesied, it
may be fairly extended to designated not to some selected few, but the
whole mass of Christian people. The watchman's office falls to be done
by all who see the coming peril, and have a tongue to echo it forth.
The remembrancer's priestly office belongs to every member of Christ's
priestly kingdom, the lowest and least of whom has the privilege of
unrestrained entry into God's presence-chamber, and the power of
blessing the world by faithful prayer. What should we think of a
citizen in a beleaguered city, who saw enemy mounting the very
ramparts, and gave no alarm because that was the sentry's business? In
such extremity every man is a soldier, and women and children can at
least keep watch and raise shrill cries of warning. The gifts, then,
here promised, and the duties that flow from them, are not the
prerogatives or the tasks of any class or order, but the heritage and
the burden of the Lord to every member of His Church.

Our voices should ever be heard on earth. A solemn message is committed
to us, by the very fact of our belief in Jesus Christ and His work.
With that faith come responsibilities of which no Christian can denude
himself. To warn the wicked man to turn from His wickedness; to blow
the trumpet when we see the sword coming; to catch ever gleaming on the
horizon, like the spears of an army through the dust of the march, the
outriders and advance-guard of the coming of Him whose coming is life
or death to all, and to lift up our voices with strength and say,
'Behold your God'; to peal into the ears of men, sunken in earthliness
and dreaming of safety, the cry which may startle and save; to ring out
in glad tones to all who wearily ask, 'Watchman, what of the night?
will the night soon pass?' the answer which the slow dawning east has
breathed into our else stony lips, 'The morning cometh'; to proclaim
Christ, who came once to put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself, who
comes ever, through the ages, to bless and uphold the righteousness
which He loves and to destroy the iniquity which He hates, who will
come at the last to judge the world--this is the never-ending task of
the watchmen on the walls of Jerusalem. The New Testament calls it
'preaching,' proclaiming as a herald does. And both metaphors carry one
common lesson of the manner in which the work should be done. With
clear loud voice, with earnestness and decision, with faithfulness and
self-oblivion, forgetting himself in his message, must the herald sound
out the will of his King, the largess of his Lord. And the watchman who
stands on his watch-tower whole nights, and sees foemen creeping
through the gloom, or fire bursting out among the straw-roofed cottages
within the walls, shouts with all his might the short, sharp alarm,
that wakes the sleepers to whom slumber were death. Let us ponder the
pattern.

Our voices should ever be heard in heaven. They who trust God remind
Him of His promises by their very faith; it is a mute appeal to His
faithful love, which He cannot but answer. And, beyond that, their
prayers come up for a memorial before God, and have as real an effect
in furthering Christ's kingdom on earth as is exercised by their
entreaties and proclamations to men.

How distinctly these words of our text define the region within which
our prayers should ever move, and the limits which bound their
efficacy! They _remind_ God. Then the truest prayer is that which bases
itself on God's uttered will, and the desires which are born of our own
fancies or heated enthusiasms have no power with Him. The prayer that
prevails is a reflected promise. Our office in prayer is but to receive
on our hearts the bright rays of His word, and to flash them back from
the polished surface to the heaven from whence they came.

These two forms of action ought to be inseparable. Each, if genuine,
will drive us to the other, for who could fling himself into the
watchman's work, with all its solemn consequences, knowing how weak his
voice was, and how deaf the ears that should hear, unless he could
bring God's might to his help? and who could honestly remind God of His
promises and forget his own responsibilities? Prayerless work will soon
slacken, and never bear fruit; idle prayer is worse than idle. You
cannot part them if you would. How much of the busy occupation which is
called 'Christian work' is detected to be spurious by this simple test!
How much so-called prayer is reduced by it to mere noise, no better
than the blaring trumpet or the hollow drum!

The power for both is derived from Christ. He sets the watchmen; He
commands the remembrancers. From Him flows the power, from His good
Spirit comes the desire, to proclaim the message. That message is the
story of His life and death. But for what He does and is we should have
nothing to say; but for His gift we should have no power to say it; but
for His influence we should have no will to say it. He commands and
fits us to be intercessors, for His mighty work brings us near to God;
He opens for us access with confidence to God. He inspires our prayers.
He 'hath made us priests to God.'

And, as the Christian power of discharging these twofold duties is
drawn from Christ, so our pattern is His manner of discharging them,
and the condition of receiving the power is to abide in Him. He
proposes Himself as our Example. He calls us to no labours which He has
not Himself shared, nor to any earnestness or continuance in prayer
which He has not Himself shown forth. This Master works in front of His
men. The farmer that goes first among all the sowers, and heads the
