home to the non-Buddhistic portion of my present audience the
conviction that, in considering the life of Sakya Muni and the
lessons it teaches, they must not make his followers of to-day
responsible for any extravagant exuberances of past biographers. The
doctrine of Buddha and its effects are to be judged quite apart
from the man, just as the doctrine ascribed to Jesus and its effects
are to be considered quite irrespectively of his personal history.
And--as I hope I have shown--the actual doings and sayings of every
founder of a Faith or a school of philosophy must be sought for under
a heap of tinsel and rubbish contributed by successive generations of
followers.

Approaching the question of the hour in this spirit of precaution,
what do we find are the probabilities respecting the life of Sakya
Muni? Who was he? When did he live? How did he live? What did he
teach? A most careful comparison of authorities and analysis of
evidence establishes, I think, the following data:

1. He was the son of a king.

2. He lived between six and seven centuries before Christ.

3. He resigned his royal state and went to live in the jungle, and
among the lowest and most unhappy classes, so as to learn the secret
of human pain and misery by personal experience: tested every known
austerity of the Hindu ascetics and excelled them all in his power
of endurance: sounded every depth of woe in search of the means to
alleviate it: and at last came out victorious, and showed the world
the way to salvation.

4. What he taught may be summed up in a few words, as the perfume of
many roses may be distilled into a few drops of _attar_: Everything in
the world of Matter is unreal; the only reality is in the world of
Spirit. Emancipate yourselves from the tyranny of the former; strive
to attain the latter. The Rev. Samuel Beal, in his _Catena of
Buddhist Scriptures from the Chinese_ puts it differently. "The
idea underlying the Buddhist religious system is," he says, "simply
this: 'all is vanity'. Earth is a show, and Heaven is a vain reward."
Primitive Buddhism was engrossed, absorbed, by one thought--the
vanity of finite existence, the priceless value of the one condition
of Eternal Rest.

If I have the temerity to prefer my own definition of the spirit of
Buddha's doctrine, it is because I think that all the misconceptions of
it have arisen from a failure to understand his idea of what is real and
what is unreal, what worth longing and striving for and what not. From
this misconception have come all the unfounded charges that Buddhism is
an "atheistical," that is to say, a grossly materialistic, a nihilistic,
a negative, a vice-breeding religion. Buddhism denies the existence of a
personal God--true: therefore--well, therefore, and notwithstanding all
this, its teaching is neither what may be called properly atheistical,
nihilistic, negative, nor provocative of vice. I will try to make my
meaning clear, and the advancement of modern scientific research helps
in this direction. Science divides the universe for us into two
elements--matter and force; accounting for their phenomena by their
combinations, and making both eternal and obedient to eternal and
immutable law. The speculations of men of science have carried them to
the outermost verge of the physical universe. Behind them lie not only a
thousand brilliant triumphs by which a part of Nature's secrets have
been wrung from her, but also more thousands of failures to fathom her
deep mysteries. They have proved thought material, since it is the
evolution of the gray tissue of the brain, and a recent German
experimentalist, Professor Dr. Jaeger, claims to have proved that man's
soul is "a volatile odoriferous principle, capable of solution in
glycerine". Psychogen is the name he gives to it, and his experiments
show that it is present not merely in the body as a whole, but in every
individual cell, in the ovum, and even in the ultimate elements of
protoplasm. I need hardly say to so intelligent an audience as this,
that these highly interesting experiments of Dr. Jaeger are corroborated
by many facts, both physiological and psychological, that have been
always noticed among all nations; facts which are woven into popular
proverbs, legends, folk-lore fables, mythologies and theologies, the
world over. Now, if thought is matter and soul is matter, then Buddha,
in recognising the impermanence of sensual enjoyment or experience of
any kind, and the instability of every material form, the human soul
included, uttered a profound and scientific truth, And since the very
idea of gratification or suffering is inseparable from that of material
being--absolute SPIRIT alone being regarded by common consent as
perfect, changeless and Eternal--therefore, in teaching the doctrine
that conquest of the material self, with all its lusts, desires, loves,
hopes, ambitions and hates, frees one from pain, and leads to Nirvana,
the state of Perfect Rest, he preached the rest of an untinged,
