
It were fitter for a volume than a preface, but so much as to repeat the
contents of their cruel sufferings; from professors as well as from
profane, and from magistrates as well as the rabble: that it may be said
of this abused and despised people, they went forth weeping, and sowed in
tears, bearing testimony to the precious seed, even the seed of the
kingdom, which stands not in words, the finest, the highest that man's
wit can use; but in power, the power of Christ Jesus, to whom God the
Father hath given all power in heaven and in earth, that he might rule
angels above, and men below.  Who empowered them, as their work
witnesseth, by the many that were turned through their ministry, from
darkness to light, and out of the broad into the narrow way of life and
peace: bringing people to a weighty, serious, and God-like conversation;
the practice of that doctrine which they taught.

And as without this secret divine power, there is no quickening and
regenerating of dead souls, so the want of this generating and begetting
power and life, is the cause of the little fruit that the many
ministries, that have been and are in the world, bring forth.  O that
both ministers and people were sensible of this!  My soul is often
troubled for them, and sorrow and mourning compass me about for their
sakes.  O that they were wise!  O that they would consider, and lay to
heart the things that truly and substantially make for their lasting
peace!

Two things are to be considered; the doctrine they taught, and the
example they led among all people.  I have already touched upon their
fundamental principle, which is as the corner-stone of their fabric: and,
indeed, to speak eminently and properly, their characteristic, or main
distinguishing point or principle, viz. the light of Christ within, as
God's gift for man's salvation.  This, I say, is as the root of the
goodly tree of doctrines that grew and branched out from it, which I
shall now mention in their natural and experimental order.

First, repentance from dead works to serve the living God.  Which
comprehends three operations.  First, a sight of sin.  Secondly, a sense
and godly sorrow for sin.  Thirdly, an amendment for the time to come.
This was the repentance they preached and pressed, and a natural result
from the principle they turned all people unto.  For of light came sight;
and of sight came sense and sorrow; and of sense and sorrow came
amendment of life.  Which doctrine of repentance leads to justification;
that is, forgiveness of the sins that are past, through Christ the alone
propitiation, and the sanctification or purgation, of the soul from the
defiling nature and habits of sin present, by the Spirit of Christ in the
soul; which is justification in the complete sense of that word:
comprehending both justification from the guilt of the sins that are
past, as if they had never been committed, through the love and mercy of
God in Christ Jesus; and the creature's being made inwardly just, through
the cleansing and sanctifying power and Spirit of Christ revealed in the
soul; which is commonly called sanctification.  But none can come to know
Christ to be their sacrifice, that reject him as their sanctifier: the
end of his coming being to save his people from the nature and
defilement, as well as guilt of sin; and, therefore, those that resist
his light and Spirit, make his coming and offering of none effect to
them.

From hence sprang a second doctrine they were led to declare, as the mark
of the prize of the high calling to all true Christians, viz. Perfection
from sin, according to the scriptures of truth; which testify it to be
the end of Christ's coming, and the nature of his kingdom, and for which
his Spirit was and is given, viz. to be perfect as our Heavenly Father is
perfect, and holy, because God is holy.  And this the apostles laboured
for, that the Christians should be sanctified throughout in body, soul,
and spirit; but they never held a perfection in wisdom and glory in this
life, or from natural infirmities, or death, as some have, with a weak or
ill mind, imagined and insinuated against them.

This they called a redeemed state, regeneration, or the new birth:
teaching everywhere, according to their foundation, that unless this work
was known, there was no inheriting of the kingdom of God.

Thirdly, this leads to an acknowledgment of eternal rewards and
punishments, as they have good reason; for else, of all people, certainly
they must be most miserable, who, for above forty years, have been
exceeding great sufferers for their profession; and, in some cases,
treated worse than the worst of men; yea, as the refuse and off-scouring
of all things.

This was the purport of their doctrine and ministry; which for the most
part, is what other professors of Christianity pretend to hold in words
and forms, but not in the power of godliness; which, generally speaking,
has been long lost by men's departing from that principle and seed of
life that is in man, and which man has not regarded, but lost the sense
of; and in and by which he can only be quickened in his mind to serve the
living God in newness of life.  For as the life of religion was lost, and
the generality lived and worshipped God after their own wills, and not
after the will of God, nor the mind of Christ, which stood in the works
and fruits of the Holy Spirit; so that which these pressed, was not
notion, but experience; not formality, but godliness; as being sensible
in themselves, through the work of God's righteous judgments, that
without holiness no man shall ever see the Lord with comfort.

Besides these general doctrines, as the larger branches, there sprang
forth several particular doctrines, that did exemplify and farther
explain the truth and efficacy of the general doctrine before observed,
in their lives and examples.  As,

I.  Communion and loving one another.  This is a noted mark in the mouths
of all sorts of people concerning them: they will meet, they will help
and stick one to another: whence it is common to hear some say, "Look how
the Quakers love and take care of one another."  Others, less moderate,
will say, "The Quakers love none but themselves:" and if loving one
another, and having an intimate communion in religion, and constant care
to meet to worship God, and help one another, be any mark of primitive
Christianity, they had it, blessed be the Lord, in an ample manner.

II.  To love enemies.  This they both taught and practised.  For they did
not only refuse to be revenged for injuries done them, and condemned it
as of an unchristian spirit; but they did freely forgive, yea, help and
relieve those that had been cruel to them, when it was in their power to
have been even with them: of which many and singular instances might be
given: endeavouring, through faith and patience, to overcome all
injustice and oppression, and preaching this doctrine as Christian, for
others to follow.

III.  Another was, the sufficiency of truth-speaking, according to
Christ's own form of sound words, of yea, yea, and nay, nay, among
Christians, without swearing, both from Christ's express prohibition to
swear at all; (Mat. v.) and for that, they being under the tie and bond
of truth in themselves, there was no necessity for an oath; and it would
be a reproach to their Christian veracity to assure their truth by such
an extraordinary way of speaking; simple and uncompounded answers, as yea
and nay, without asseveration, attestation, or supernatural vouchers,
being most suitable to evangelical righteousness.  But offering, at the
same time, to be punished to the full for false-speaking, as others for
perjury, if ever guilty of it: and hereby they exclude with all true, all
false and profane swearing; for which the land did and doth mourn, and
the great God was, and is, not a little offended with it.

IV.  Not fighting, but suffering, is another testimony peculiar to this
people: they affirm that Christianity teacheth people to beat their
swords into plough-shares, and their spears into pruning-hooks, and to
learn war no more; that so the wolf may lie down with the lamb, and the
lion with the calf, and nothing that destroys be entertained in the
hearts of people: exhorting them to employ their zeal against sin, and
turn their anger against Satan, and no longer war one against another;
because all wars and fightings come of men's own hearts' lusts, according
to the apostle James, and not of the meek Spirit of Christ Jesus, who is
captain of another warfare, and which is carried on with other weapons.
Thus, as truth-speaking succeeded swearing, so faith and patience
succeeded fighting, in the doctrine and practice of this people.  Nor
ought they for this to be obnoxious to civil government, since, if they
cannot fight for it, neither can they fight against it; which is no mean
security to any state.  Nor is it reasonable, that people should be
blamed for not doing more for others than they can do for themselves.
And, Christianity set aside, if the costs and fruits of war were well
considered, peace, with all its inconveniencies, is generally preferable.
But though they were not for fighting, they were for submitting to
government, and that, not only for fear, but for conscience-sake, where
government doth not interfere with conscience; believing it to be an
ordinance of God, and where it is justly administered, a great benefit to
mankind.  Though it has been their lot, through blind zeal in some, and
interest in others, to have felt the strokes of it with greater weight
and rigour than any other persuasion in this age; whilst they of all
others, religion set aside, have given the civil magistrate the least
occasion of trouble in the discharge of his office.

V.  Another part of the character of this people was, and is, they refuse
to pay tithes or maintenance to a national ministry; and that for two
reasons: the one is, they believe all compelled maintenance, even to
gospel-ministers, to be unlawful, because expressly contrary to Christ's
command, who said, "Freely you have received, freely give:" at least,
that the maintenance of gospel-ministers should be free, and not forced.
The other reason of their refusal is, because these ministers are not
gospel ones, in that the Holy Ghost is not their foundation, but human
arts and parts.  So that it is not matter of humour or sullenness, but
pure conscience towards God, that they cannot help to support national
ministries where they dwell, which are but too much and too visibly
become ways of worldly advantage and preferment.

VI.  Not to respect persons, was, and is, another of their doctrines and
practices, for which they were often buffeted and abused.  They affirmed
it to be sinful to give flattering titles, or to use vain gestures and
compliments of respect.  Though to virtue and authority they ever made a
deference; but after their plain and homely manner, yet sincere and
substantial way: well remembering the examples of Mordecai and Elihu; but
more especially the command of their Lord and Master Jesus Christ, who
forbade his followers to call men Rabbi, which implies Lord or Master;
also the fashionable greetings and salutations of those times; that so
self-love and honour, to which the proud mind of man is incident, in his
fallen state, might not be indulged, but rebuked.  And though this
rendered their conversation disagreeable, yet they that will remember
what Christ said to the Jews, "How can you believe which receive honour
one of another?" will abate of their resentment, if his doctrine has any
credit with them.

VII.  They also used the plain language of Thee and Thou, to a single
person, whatever was his degree among men.  And, indeed, the wisdom of
God was much seen in bringing forth this people in so plain an
appearance.  For it was a close and distinguishing test upon the spirits
of those they came among; showing their insides, and what predominated,
notwithstanding their high and great profession of religion.  This among
the rest sounded harsh to many of them, and they took it ill, forgetting
the language they use to God in their own prayers, and the common style
of the scriptures, and that it is an absolute and essential propriety of
speech.  And what good, alas! had their religion done them, who were so
sensibly touched with indignation for the use of this plain, honest, and
true speech?

VIII.  They recommended silence by their example, having very few words
upon all occasions.  They were at a word in dealing: nor could their
customers, with many words, tempt them from it, having more regard to
truth than custom, to example than gain.  They sought solitude: but when
in company, they would neither use, nor willingly hear unnecessary or
unlawful discourses: whereby they preserved their minds pure and
undisturbed from unprofitable thoughts, and diversions.  Nor could they
humour the custom of Good Night, Good Morrow, God Speed; for they knew
the night was good, and the day was good, without wishing of either; and
that in the other expression, the holy name of God was too lightly and
unthankfully used, and therefore taken in vain.  Besides, they were words
and wishes of course, and are usually as little meant, as are love and
service in the custom of cap and knee; and superfluity in those, as well
as in other things, was burthensome to them; and therefore, they did not
only decline to use them, but found themselves often pressed to reprove
the practice.

IX.  For the same reason they forbore drinking to people, or pledging of
them, as the manner of the world is: a practice that is not only
unnecessary, but they thought evil in the tendencies of it, being a
provocation to drink more than did people good, as well as that it was in
itself vain and heathenish.

X.  Their way of marriage is peculiar to them; and shows a distinguishing
care above other societies professing Christianity.  They say, that
marriage is an ordinance of God, and that God only can rightly join man
and woman in marriage.  Therefore, they use neither priest nor
magistrate; but the man and woman concerned take each other as husband
and wife, in the presence of divers credible witnesses, promising to each
other, with God's assistance, to be loving and faithful in that relation,
till death shall separate them.  But antecedent to this, they first
present themselves to the monthly meeting for the affairs of the church
where they reside; there declaring their intentions to take one another
as husband and wife, if the said meeting have nothing material to object
against it.  They are constantly asked the necessary questions, {25} as
in case of parents or guardians, if they have acquainted them with their
intention, and have their consent, &c.  The method of the meeting is, to
take a minute thereof, and to appoint proper persons to inquire of their
conversation and clearness from all others, and whether they have
discharged their duty to their parents or guardians; and to make report
thereof to the next monthly meeting, where the same parties are desired
to give their attendance. {26}  In case it appears they have proceeded
orderly, the meeting passes their proposal, and so records it in their
meeting book.  And in case the woman be a widow, and hath children, due
care is there taken that provision also be made by her for the orphans,
before the meeting pass the proposals of marriage: advising the parties
concerned, to appoint a convenient time and place, and to give fitting
notice to their relations, and such friends and neighbours, as they
desire should be the witnesses of their marriage: where they take one
another by the hand, and by name promise reciprocally, love and fidelity,
after the manner before expressed.  Of all which proceedings, a narrative
in way of certificate is made, to which the said parties first set their
hands, thereby confirming it as their act and deed; and then divers
relations, spectators, and auditors, set their names as witnesses of what
they said and signed.  And this certificate is afterward registered in
the record belonging to the meeting, where the marriage is solemnized.
Which regular method has been, as it deserves, adjudged in courts of law
a good marriage, where it has been by cross and ill people disputed and
contested, for want of the accustomed formalities of priest and ring,
&c.--ceremonies they have refused, not out of humour, but conscience
reasonably grounded; inasmuch as no scripture example tells us, that the
priest had any other part, of old time, than that of a witness among the
rest, before whom the Jews used to take one another: and, therefore, this
people look upon it as an imposition, to advance the power and profits of
the clergy: and for the use of the ring, it is enough to say, that it was
a heathenish and vain custom, and never in practice among the people of
God, Jews, or primitive Christians.  The words of the usual form, as
"with my body I thee worship," &c. are hardly defensible.  In short, they
are more careful, exact, and regular, than any form now used; and it is
free of the inconveniences, with which other methods are attended; their
care and checks being so many, and such, as that no clandestine marriages
can be performed among them.

XI.  It may not be unfit to say something here of their births and
burials, which make up so much of the pomp of too many called Christians.
For births, the parents name their own children; which is usually some
days after they are born, in the presence of the midwife, if she can be
there, and those that were at the birth, who afterwards sign a
certificate for that purpose prepared, of the birth and name of the child
or children; which is recorded in a proper book, in the monthly-meeting
to which the parents belong; avoiding the accustomed ceremonies and
festivals.
