           indeed have been to tempt a disaster.

           While it is true that the testimony of the various
           _kumu-hula_, teachers of the hula, and devotees of the art of
           the hula, so far as the author has talked with them, has been
           overwhelmingly to the effect that Laka was the one and only
           divine patron of the art known to them, there has been a
           small number equally ready to assert that there were those
           who observed the cult of the goddess Kapo and worshiped her
[Page 25]  as the patron of the hula. The positive testimony of these
           witnesses must be reckoned as of more weight than the
           negative testimony of a much larger number, who either have
           not seen or will not look at the other side of the shield. At
           any rate, among the prayers before the kuahu, of which there
           are others yet to be presented, will be found several
           addressed to Kapo as the divine patron of the hula.

           [Footnote 25: The teacher, a leader and priest of the hula.
           The modern school-master is called _kumu-hula_.]

           [Footnote 25: _Kanaloa_. Kane, Ku, Kanaloa, and Lono were the
           major gods of the Hawaiian pantheon.]

           [Footnote 27: _Ku-pulupulu_. A god of the canoe-makers.]

           [Footnote 28: _Kini Akua_. A general expression--often used
           together with the ones that follow--meaning the countless
           swarms of brownies, elfs, kobolds, sprites, and other
           godlings (mischievous imps) that peopled the wilderness.
           _Kini_ means literally 40,000, _lehu_ 400,000, and _mano_
           4,000. See the _Pule Kuahu_--altar-prayer--on page 21. The
           Hawaiians, curiously enough, did not put the words _mano_,
           _kini_, and _lehu_ in the order of their numerical value.]

[Illustration:
BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY BULLETIN 38 PLATE III
HALA-PEPE (DRACAENA AUREA) ]

           Kapo was sister of Pele and the daughter of Haumea.[29] Among
           other roles played by her, like Laka she was at times a
           sylvan deity, and it was in the garb of woodland
           representations that she was worshiped by hula folk. Her
           forms of activity, corresponding to her different
           metamorphoses, were numerous, in one of which she was at
           times "employed by the _kahuna_[30] as a messenger in their
           black arts, and she is claimed by many as an _aumakua,_" [31]
           said to be the sister of Kalai-pahoa, the poison god.

           [Footnote 29: _Haumea_. The ancient goddess, or ancestor, the
           sixth in line of descent from Wakea.]

           [Footnote 30: _Kahuna._ A sorcerer; with a qualifying
           adjective it meant a skilled craftsman; _Kahuna-kalai-wa'a_
           was a canoe-builder; _kahuna lapaau_ was a medicine-man, a
           doctor, etc.]

           [Footnote 31: The Lesser Gods of Hawaii, a paper by Joseph S.
           Emerson, read before the Hawaiian Historical Society, April
           7, 1892.]

           Unfortunately Kapo had an evil name on account of a
           propensity which led her at times to commit actions that seem
           worthy only of a demon of lewdness. This was, however, only
           the hysteria of a moment, not the settled habit of her life.
           On one notable occasion, by diverting the attention of the
           bestial pig-god Kama-pua'a, and by vividly presenting to him
           a temptation well adapted to his gross nature, she succeeded
           in enticing him away at a critical moment, and thus rescued
           her sister Pele at a time when the latter's life was
           imperiled by an unclean and violent assault from the
           swine-god.

           Like Catherine of Russia, who in one mood was the patron of
           literature and of the arts and sciences and in another mood a
           very satyr, so the Hawaiian goddess Kapo seems to have lived
           a double life whose aims were at cross purposes with one
           another-now an angel of grace and beauty, now a demon of
           darkness and lust.

           Do we not find in this the counterpart of nature's twofold
           aspect, who presents herself to dependent humanity at one
           time as an alma mater, the food-giver, a divinity of joy and
           comfort, at another time as the demon of the storm and
           earthquake, a plowshare of fiery destruction?

           The name of Hiiaka, the sister of Pele, is one often
           mentioned in the prayers of the hula.
[Page 26]




                   IV.--SUPPORT AND ORGANIZATION OF THE HULA


           In ancient times the hula to a large extent was a creature of
           royal support, and for good reason. The actors in this
           institution were not producers of life's necessaries. To the
           _alii_ belonged the land and the sea and all the useful
           products thereof. Even the jetsam whale-tooth and wreckage
           scraps of iron that ocean cast up on the shore were claimed
           by the lord of the land. Everything was the king's. Thus it
           followed of necessity that the support of the hula must in
           the end rest upon the alii. As in ancient Rome it was a
           senator or general, enriched by the spoil of a province, who
           promoted the sports of the arena, so in ancient Hawaii it was
           the chief or headman of the district who took the initiative
           in the promotion of the people's communistic sports and of
           the hula.

           We must not imagine that the hula was a thing only of kings'
           courts and chiefish residences. It had another and democratic
           side. The passion for the hula was broadspread. If other
           agencies failed to meet the demand, there was nothing to
           prevent a company of enthusiasts from joining themselves
           together in the pleasures and, it might be, the profits of
           the hula. Their spokesman--designated as the _po'o-puaa_,
           from the fact that a pig, or a boar's head, was required of
           him as an offering at the kuahu--was authorized to secure the
           services of some expert to be their kumu. But with the hula
           all roads lead to the king's court.

           Let us imagine a scene at the king's residence. The alii,
           rousing from his sloth and rubbing his eyes, rheumy with
           debauch and _awa_, overhears remark on the doings of a new
           company of hula dancers who have come into the neighborhood.
           He summons his chief steward.

           "What is this new thing of which they babble?" he demands.

           "It is nothing, son of heaven," answers the kneeling steward.

           "They spoke of a hula. Tell me, what is it?"

           "Ah, thou heaven-born (_lani_), it was but a trifle--a new
           company, young graduates of the halau, have set themselves up
           as great ones; mere rustics; they have no proper acquaintance
           with the traditions of the art as taught by the bards of...
           your majesty's father. They mouth and twist the old songs
           all awry, thou son of heaven."

           "Enough. I will hear them to-morrow. Send a messenger for
           this new kumu. Fill again my bowl with awa."
[Page 27]
           Thus it comes about that the new hula company gains audience
           at court and walks the road that, perchance, leads to
           fortune. Success to the men and women of the hula means not
           merely applause, in return for the incense of flattery; it
           means also a shower of substantial favors--food, garments,
           the smile of royalty, perhaps land--things that make life a
           festival. If welcome grows cold and it becomes evident that
           the harvest has been reaped, they move on to fresh woods and
           pastures new.

           To return from this apparent digression, it was at the king's
           court--if we may extend the courtesy of this phrase to a
           group of thatched houses--that were gathered the bards and
           those skilled in song, those in whose memories were stored
           the mythologies, traditions, genealogies, proverbial wisdom,
           and poetry that, warmed by emotion, was the stuff from which
           was spun the songs of the hula. As fire is produced by
           friction, so it was often by the congress of wits rather than
           by the flashing of genius that the songs of the hula were
           evolved.

           The composition and criticism of a poetical passage were a
           matter of high importance, often requiring many suggestions
           and much consultation. If the poem was to be a _mele-inoa_, a
           name-song to eulogize some royal or princely scion, it must
           contain no word of ill-omen. The fate-compelling power of
           such a word, once shot from the mouth, was beyond recall.
           Like the incantation of the sorcerer, the _kahuna anaana_, it
           meant death to the eulogized one. If not, it recoiled on the
           life of the singer.

           The verbal form once settled, it remained only to stereotype
           it on the memories of the men and women who constituted the
           literary court or conclave. Think not that only thus were
           poems produced in ancient Hawaii. The great majority of songs
           were probably the fruit of solitary inspiration, in which the
           bard poured out his heart like a song-bird, or uttered his
           lone vision as a seer. The method of poem production in
           conclave may be termed the official method. It was often done
           at the command of an alii. So much for the fabrication, the
           weaving, of a song.

           If the composition was intended as a eulogy, it was
           cantillated ceremoniously before the one it honored; if in
           anticipation of a prince yet unborn, it was daily recited
           before the mother until the hour of her delivery; and this
           cantillation published it abroad. If the song was for
           production in the hula, it lay warm in the mind of the kumu,
           the master and teacher of the hula, until such time as he had
           organized his company.

           The court of the alii was a vortex that drew in not only the
           bards and men of lore, but the gay and fashionable rout of
           pleasure-seekers, the young men and women of shapely form and
           gracious presence, the sons and daughters of the king's
[Page 28]  henchmen and favorites; among them, perhaps, the offspring of
           the king's morganatic alliances and amours--the flower and
           pick of Hawaii's youth. From these the kumu selected those
           most fitted by beauty and grace of form, as well as quickness
           of wit and liveliness of imagination, to take part in the
           hula.

           The performers in the hula were divided into two classes, the
           _olapa_--agile ones--and the _ho'o-paa_--steadfast ones. The
           role of olapa, as was fitting, was assigned to the young men
           and young women who could best illustrate in their persons
           the grace and beauty of the human form. It was theirs,
           sometimes while singing, to move and pose and gesture in the
           dance; sometimes also to punctuate their song and action with
           the lighter instruments of music. The role of ho'o-paa, on
           the other hand, was given to men and women of greater
           experience and of more maturity. They handled the heavier
           instruments and played their parts mostly while sitting or
           kneeling, marking the time with their instrumentation. They
           also lent their voices to swell the chorus or utter the
           refrain of certain songs, sometimes taking the lead in the
           song or bearing its whole burden, while the light-footed
           olapa gave themselves entirely to the dance. The part of the
           ho'o-paa was indeed the heavier, the more exacting duty.

           Such was the personnel of a hula troupe when first gathered
           by the hula-master for training and drill in the halau, now
           become a school for the hula. Among the pupils the kumu was
           sure to find some old hands at the business, whose presence,
           like that of veterans in a squad of recruits, was a leaven to
           inspire the whole company with due respect for the spirit and
           traditions of the historic institution and to breed in the
           members the patience necessary to bring them to the highest
           proficiency.

           The instruction of the kumu, as we are informed, took a wide
           range. It dealt in elaborate detail on such matters as
           accent, inflection, and all that concerns utterance and
           vocalization. It naturally paid great attention to gesture
           and pose, attitude and bodily action. That it included
           comment on the meaning that lay back of the words may be
           gravely doubted. The average hula dancer of modern times
           shows great ignorance of the mele he recites, and this is
           true even of the kumu-hula. His work too often is largely
           perfunctory, a matter of sound and form, without appeal to
           the intellect.

           It would not be legitimate, however, to conclude from this
           that ignorance of the meaning was the rule in old times;
           those were the days when the nation's traditional songs,
           myths, and lore formed the equipment of every alert and
           receptive mind, chief or commoner. There was no printed page
           to while away the hours of idleness. The library was stored
           in one's memory. The language of the mele, which now has
[Page 29]  become antiquated, then was familiar speech. For a kumu-hula
           to have given instruction in the meaning of a song would have
           been a superfluity, as if one at the present day were to
           inform a group of well-educated actors and actresses who was
           Pompey or Julius Caesar.

           "Speak the speech, I pray you, as I pronounced it to you,
           trippingly on the tongue." Hamlet's words to the players
           were, it may be supposed, the substance of the kumu's
           instructions to the pupils in his halau.

           The organization of a hula company was largely democratic.
           The kumu--in modern sense, the teacher--was the leader and
           conductor, responsible for the training and discipline of the
           company. He was the business manager of the enterprise; the
           priest, _kahuna_, the leader in the religious exercises, the
           one who interpreted the will of heaven, especially of the
           gods whose favor determined success. He might be called to
           his position by the choice of the company, appointed by the
           command of the alii who promoted the enterprise, or
           self-elected in case the enterprise was his own. He had under
           him a _kokua kumu_, a deputy, who took charge during his
           absence.

           The _po'o-puaa_ was an officer chosen by the pupils to be
           their special agent and mouthpiece. He saw to the execution
           of the kumu's judgments and commands, collected the fines,
           and exacted the penalties imposed by the kumu. It fell to him
           to convey to the altar the presents of garlands, awa, and the
           like that were contributed to the halau.

           The _paepae_, also chosen by the pupils, subject to
           confirmation by the kumu, acted as an assistant of the
           po'o-puaa. During the construction of the kuahu the po'o-puaa
           stood to the right, the paepae at his left. They were in a
           general sense guardians of the kuahu.

           The _ho'o-ulu_ was the guard stationed at the door. He
           sprinkled with sea-water mixed with turmeric everyone who
           entered the halau. He also acted as sergeant-at-arms to keep
           order and remove anyone who made a disturbance. It was his
           duty each day to place a fresh bowl of awa on the altar of
           the goddess (_hanai kuahu_), literally to feed the altar.

           In addition to these officials, a hula company naturally
           required the services of a miscellaneous retinue of stewards,
           cooks, fishermen, hewers of wood, and drawers of water.


                           RULES OF CONDUCT AND TABUS

           Without a body of rules, a strict penal code, and a firm hand
           to hold in check the hot bloods of both sexes, it would have
           been impossible to keep order and to accomplish the business
           purpose of the organization. The explosive force of passion
           would have made the gathering a signal for the breaking loose
           of pandemonium. That it did not always so result is a
[Page 30]   compliment alike to the self-restraint of the people and to
           the sway that artistic ideals held over their minds, but,
           above all, to a peculiar system of discipline wisely adapted
           to the necessities of human nature. It does not seem likely
           that a Thespian band of our own race would have held their
           passions under equal check if surrounded by the same
           temptations and given the same opportunities as these
           Polynesians. It may well be doubted if the bare authority of
           the kumu would have sufficed to maintain discipline and to
           keep order, had it not been reenforced by the dread powers of
           the spirit world in the shape of the _tabu_.

           The awful grasp of this law; this repressive force, the tabu,
           held fast the student from the moment of his entrance into
           the halau. It denied this pleasure, shut off that innocent
           indulgence, curtailed liberty in this direction and in that.
           The tabu waved before his imagination like a flaming sword,
           barring approach to the Eden of his strongest propensity.

           The rules and discipline of the halau, the school for the
           hula, from our point of view, were a mixture of shrewd common
           sense and whimsical superstition. Under the head of tabus
           certain articles of food were denied; for instance, the
           sugar-cane--_ko_--was forbidden. The reason assigned was that
           if one indulged in it his work as a practitioner would amount
           to nothing; in the language of the kumu, _aohe e leo ana kana
           mau hana_, his work will be a failure. The argument turned on
           the double meaning of the word _ko_, the first meaning being
           sugar cane, the second, accomplishment. The Hawaiians were
           much impressed by such whimsical nominalisms. Yet there is a
           backing of good sense to the rule. Anyone who has chewed the
           sweet stalk can testify that for some time thereafter his
           voice is rough, ill-fitted for singing or elocution.

           The strictest propriety and decorum were exacted of the
           pupils; there must be no license whatever. Even married
           people during the weeks preceding graduation must observe
           abstinence toward their partners. The whole power of one's
           being must be devoted to the pursuit of art.

           The rules demanded also the most punctilious personal
           cleanliness. Above all things, one must avoid contact with a
           corpse. Such defilement barred one from entrance to the halau
           until ceremonial cleansing had been performed. The offender
           must bathe in the ocean; the kumu then aspersed him with holy
           water, uttered a prayer, ordered a penalty, an offering to
           the kuahu, and declared the offender clean. This done, he
           was again received into fellowship at the halau.

           The ordinary penalty for a breach of ceremony or an offense
           against sexual morality was the offering of a baked porkling
           with awa. Since the introduction of money the penalty has
           generally been reckoned on a commercial basis; a money fine
           is imposed. The offering of pork and awa is retained as a
           concession to tradition.

[Page 31]




                 V--CEREMONIES OF GRADUATION; DEBUT OF A HULA DANCER


                               CEREMONIES OF GRADUATION

           The _ai-lolo_ rite and ceremony marked the consummation of a
           pupil's readiness for graduation from the school of the halau
           and his formal entrance into the guild of hula dancers. As
           the time drew near, the kumu tightened the reins of
           discipline, and for a few days before that event no pupil
           might leave the halau save for the most stringent necessity,
           and then only with the head muffled (_pulo'u_) to avoid
           recognition, and he might engage in no conversation whatever
           outside the halau.

           The night preceding the day of ai-lolo was devoted to special
           services of dance and song. Some time after midnight the
           whole company went forth to plunge into the ocean, thus to
           purge themselves of any lurking ceremonial impurity. The
           progress to the ocean and the return they made in complete
           nudity. "Nakedness is the garb of the gods." On their way to
           and from the bath they must not look back, they must not turn
           to the right hand or to the left.

           The kumu, as the priest, remained at the halau, and as the
           procession returned from the ocean he met it at the door and
           sprinkled each one (_pikai_) with holy water. Then came
           another period of dance and song; and then, having
           cantillated a _pule hoonoa_, to lift the tabu, the kumu went
           forth to his own ceremonial cleansing bath in the sea. During
           his absence his deputy, the _kokua kumu_, took charge of the
           halau. When the kumu reached the door on his return, he made
           himself known by reciting a _mele wehe puka_, the
           conventional password.

           Still another exercise of song and dance, and the wearied
           pupils are glad to seek repose. Some will not even remove the
           short dancing, skirts that are girded about them, so eager
           are they to snatch an hour of rest; and some lie down with
           bracelets and anklets yet unclasped.

           At daybreak the kumu rouses the company with the tap of the
           drum. After ablutions, before partaking of their simple
           breakfast, the company stand before the altar and recite a
           tabu-removing prayer, accompanying the cantillation with a
           rhythmic tapping of feet and clapping of hands:


                   _Pule Hoonoa_

                Pupu we'uwe'u e, Laka e!
                O kona we'uwe'u ke ku nei.
[Page 32]       Kaumaha a'e la ia Laka.
                O Laka ke akua pule ikaika.
            5   Ua ku ka maile a Laka a imua;
                Ua lu ka liua[32] o ka maile.
                Noa, noa ia'u, ia Kahaula--
                Papalua noa.
                Noa, a ua noa.
           10   Eli-eli kapu! eli-eli noa!
                Kapu oukou, ke akua!
                Noa makou, ke kanaka'.


                          [Translation]

                      _Tabu-lifting Prayer_

                Oh wildwood bouquet, oh Laka!
                Hers are the growths that stand here.
                Suppliants we to Laka.
                The prayer to Laka has power;
            5   The maile of Laka stands to the fore.
                The maile vine casts now its seeds.
                Freedom, there's freedom to me, Kahaula--
                A freedom twofold.
           10   Freedom, aye freedom!
                A tabu profound, a freedom complete.
                Ye gods are still tabu;
                We mortals are free.

           [Footnote 32: _Lu ka hua_. Casts now its seeds. The maile vine
           (pl. IV), one of the goddess's emblems, casts its seeds,
           meaning that the goddess gives the pupils skill and inspires
           them.]

           At the much-needed repast to which the company now sit down
           there may be present a gathering of friends and relatives and
           of hula experts, called _olohe_. Soon the porkling chosen to
           be the _ai-lolo_ offering is brought in--a black suckling
           without spot or blemish. The kumu holds it down while all the
           pupils gather and lay their hands upon his hands; and he
           expounds to them the significance of the ceremony. If they
           consecrate themselves to the work in hand in sincerity and
           with true hearts, memory will be strong and the training, the
           knowledge, and the songs that have been intrusted to the
           memory will stay. If they are heedless, regardless of their
           vows, the songs they have learned will fly away.

           The ceremony is long and impressive; many songs are used.
           Sometimes, it was claimed, the prayers of the kumu at this
           laying on of hands availed to cause the death of the little
           animal. On the completion of the ceremony the offering is
           taken out and made ready for the oven.

           One of the first duties of the day is the dismantling of the
           old kuahu, the shrine, and the construction of another from
           new materials as a residence for the goddess. While night yet
           shadows the earth the attendants and friends of the pupils
[Page 33]  have gone up into the mountains to collect the material for
           the new shrine. The rustic artists, while engaged in this
           loving work of building and weaving the new kuahu, cheer and
           inspire one another with joyful songs vociferous with the
           praise of Laka. The halau also they decorate afresh, strewing
           the floor with clean rushes, until the whole place enthralls
           the senses like a bright and fragrant temple.

[Illustration:
BUREAU OF AMERICAN ETHNOLOGY
BULLETIN 38 PLATE IV
MAILE (ALYXIA MYRTILLIFOLIA) WREATH]

           The kumu now grants special dispensation to the pupils to go
           forth that they may make good the results of the neglect of
           the person incident to long confinement in the halau. For
           days, for weeks, perhaps for months, they have not had full
           opportunity to trim hair, nails, or beard, to anoint and
           groom themselves. They use this short absence from the hall
           also to supply themselves with wreaths of fragrant maile,
           crocus-yellow ilima, scarlet-flaming Jehua, fern, and what
           not.

           At the appointed hour the pupils, wreathed and attired like
           nymphs and dryads, assemble in the halau, sweet with woodsy
           perfumes. At the door they receive aspersion with consecrated
           water.

           The ai-lolo offering, cooked to a turn--no part raw, no part
           cracked or scorched--is brought in from the _imu_, its bearer
           sprinkled by the guard at the entrance. The kumu, having
           inspected the roast offering and having declared it
           ceremonially perfect, gives the signal, and the company break
           forth in songs of joy and of adulation to goddess Laka:

                        _Mele Kuau_

                Noho ana Laka I ka ulu wehi-wehi,
                Ku ana iluna I Mo'o-helaia,[33]
                Ohia-Ku[34] ouna o Mauna-loa.[35]
                Aloha mai Kaulana-ula[36] ia'u.
            5   Eia ka ula la, he ula leo,[37]
                He uku, he modai, he kanaenae,
                He alana na'u ia oe.
                E Laka e, e maliu mai;
                E maliu mai oe, i pono au,
           10   A pono au, a pono kaua.

           [Footnote 33: _Mo'o-helaia_. A female deity, a _kupua_, who at
           death became one of the divinities, _au-makua_, of the hula.
           Her name was conferred on the place claimed as her residence,
           on Mauna-loa, island of Molokai.]

           [Footnote 34: _Ohia-Ku_. Full name _ohia-ku-makua_; a variety
           of the ohia, or lehua (pl. XIII), whose wood was used in
           making temple gods. A rough stem of this tree stood on each
           side near the _hala-pepe_. (See pl. III, also pp. 19-20.)]

           [Footnote 35: _Mauna-loa_. Said to be the mountain of that
           name on Molokai, not that on Hawaii.]

           [Footnote 36: _Kaulana-ula_. Full form _Kaulana-a-ula_; the
           name of a deity belonging to the order, _papa_, of the hula.
           Its meaning is explained in the expression _ula leo_, in the
           next line.]

           [Footnote 37: _Ula leo_. A singing or trilling sound, a
           _tinnitus aurium_, a sign that the deity Kaulanaula was
           making some communication to the one who heard it.

                "By the pricking of my thumbs
                Something wicked this way comes."]

[Page 34]

                           [Translation]

                         _Altar-Prayer_

                Laka sits in her shady grove,
                Stands on her terrace, at Mo'o-helaia;
                Like the tree of God Ku on Mauna-loa.
                Kaulana-ula trills in my ear;
            5   A whispered suggestion to me,
                Lo, an offering, a payment,
                A eulogy give I to thee.
                O Laka, incline to me!
                Have compassion, let it be well--
           10   Well with me, well with us both.

           There is no stint of prayer-song. While the offering rests on
           the Imahu, the Joyful service continues:

                  _Mele Kualiu_

                E Laka, e!
                Pupu we'uwe'u e, Laka e!
                E Laka i ka leo;
