see the meaning of the limitations, the shortcomings, the
disappointments of life. They feel no abiding smart of a thorn in the
flesh, and so are never forced back upon a higher strength than their
own. And yet it is when a nature richly endowed with all the elements of
vitality, and living from the first, living to the last, devotes itself
to the highest aims and is supported by the highest helps, that we see
what I will venture to call the finest triumph of grace. Or if the word
triumph seem to imply a struggle, which is not always necessary, and
difficulties which may never have vexed the development of a vigorous
life, I will describe the result as the richest and sweetest harvest of
the Spirit's husbandry. Great things can be accomplished only by great
natures, and even then by the help and under the eye of God.

"I came that they may have life, and may have it abundantly." Life is
the characteristic word of the great spiritual Gospel from which my text
is taken. And no word can penetrate more deeply into the secret of
Christ than this does. He was the sweetest, the most persuasive of moral
teachers; but ethical principles and precepts are the common possession
of humanity; and that in which Christ is pre-eminent over all sages is
not so much that he gives us new matter of obedience, as that he infuses
into us a fresh power to obey. I fail to see that he anywhere presents
to us a dogmatic theological system: I do not believe that his apostles
succeed in throwing his teaching into this shape. But supposing that it
were so, as so many men believe, life is still the ultimate object, the
life of God in man, the life which quickens all faculties, and casts off
all impurities, and rises into a higher stage of vitality from year to
year. "I am the way, the truth, and the life." "I came that they may
have life, and may have it abundantly." "The bread of God is he which
cometh down from heaven and giveth life unto the world." "I am the bread
of life." So, too, the author of this Gospel, speaking in his own
person: "In him was life, and the life was the light of men." So Paul:
"The law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus." "Your life is hid with
Christ in God." And last of all, in that antithesis so full of
instruction: "The first man Adam was made a living soul, the last Adam
was made a life-giving spirit."

Adam's children we all are in the possession of a physical nature full
of possibilities of moral good and evil: the question for us is, shall
we be Christ's children too? I cannot assert that this is the only line
in which we can inherit life: heroes and saints before and apart from
Christ would rise up to rebuke me if I did. God's tender mercies, even
of the most intimately spiritual kind, are over all His human children.
But it is the line in which we naturally stand; and to stand in it I
count the highest privilege of our humanity. I will lay down no
conditions of salvation where I believe Christ has laid none down: I
will not attempt to compare his disciples with those of other masters: I
am content to know that here is a fountain of living waters, which flows
for us, and at which those who drink shall never thirst again. I will
not even try to define the process by which a strong, bright,
master-soul pours itself into poorer and narrower spirits, for I rest
joyfully in the certain knowledge that it is so. Is it not possible to
forget the fact too much in discussing the rationale of the process? "In
the last day, that great day of the feast," when the silver trumpets
were sounding, and the priests were bearing up to the temple court the
water which they had drawn from that brook Siloam which "flows fast by
the oracles of God," "Jesus stood and cried, 'If any man thirst, let him
come unto me and drink. He that believeth in me, as the Scripture has
said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water.'" There is the
whole secret. All true life is contagious. Not the dull and dead, but
only the living, can quicken. Fragrance makes fragrant: sweetness
imparts sweetness: strength begets strength. How many of us have
learned integrity from an upright father, and breathed in the confidence
of faith at a mother's knee? They gave because they had; and Christ was
their fountain-head.

The religious life, to some imaginations, presents itself as inclining
largely to the side of the passive and the negative. It is abstinence
from evil quite as much as eager realization of good. On this view, an
air of cloistered sanctity hangs about it: it is full of prayers and
