in him alone that we are blessed: "Blessed is he whose transgression is
forgiven, and whose sin is covered:" And for the sake of Christ alone it
is, that the Lord imputeth not iniquity to us. Now pray "Examine
yourselves, whether you be in the faith," 2 Cor. xiii. 5. "Prove your
own selves, how that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be reprobates."
Examine yourselves, whether you have chosen the Lord for your God, and
Christ for your Redeemer? And whether you have forsaken your sins, and
returned from your evil ways, and answered the visitation of the love of
God in your souls? Do you believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, who came to
seek and to save them that were lost? He is the Physician of value, that
was wounded to heal our wounds: "He was wounded for our transgressions,
bruised for our iniquities, and had the chastisement of our peace upon
him; that by his stripes we might be healed:" It is he alone that could
do this. Who is sufficient for these things? The Lord found out one that
is sufficient; he hath "laid help upon one that is mighty," that is
"able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him." God hath
given him the Spirit without measure, and filled him with grace and
truth, that of his fullness we might all receive, and grace for grace:
He is mighty to save the sons and daughters of men, and to give them
power to become the children of God.

This was testified of old, John i. 12. "But as many as received him, to
them gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them who believe
on his name." Men want power over their sins: When sin appears to be
exceeding sinful, they would overcome it, and be rid of it, when it is
troublesome: And when they are under a deep conviction of the evil of
it, and see the woful and miserable state that sin hath brought mankind
into how they have lost the image of God and the favour of God; they
then desire to be restored, and brought back again into their primitive
state. You that know the truth of God, see how the work goes on in your
hearts, see how the image of God is carrying on upon you. Consider, that
the Lord is a holy God, of purer eyes than to behold iniquity with
approbation: "There is no peace to the wicked," that walk in the broad
way, and grieve the Holy Spirit, and do not answer his divine call.
There is a two-fold call concerning man, a call to repentance, and a
call to judgment. The call to repentance is in this day of God's
visitation; they that receive it now, that are so wise, as to answer
God's call, and believe in the Son of God, and in his inward appearance,
that obey his voice, when they hear his call, saying, Come away, come
out of thy sins, come out of the wickedness, filthiness, and pollution
of the world; come into the divine nature of the Son of God; come into
his life: Into what life? Into the spiritual life, the divine life? Thou
hast been dead to God and alive to the world: Now that thou mayst
[_sic._] be dead to sin, and alive to God, come unto him that hath all
power in heaven and in earth committed to him. O come unto Christ, the
dear and blessed Son of God, in this day of grace and salvation, and
receive power to overcome thy sins! Then thou wilt be a conqueror, and
overcome the Devil.

We are of ourselves altogether insufficient for these things, we are
weak and impotent; and our Saviour hath told us, "Without me ye can do
nothing:" We are justified freely by God's grace, through the redemption
that is in Jesus Christ; not justified by our own works. How great a
contradiction is it to charge them with the contrary, that say, They
cannot preach nor pray, but as the Spirit of God moveth them. Blessed be
God that hath made us sensible of our own weakness, emptiness, and
poverty. Our help hath been in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and
earth, who hath given his Son to be an helper, and an all-sufficient
Saviour to us; with him he hath given sufficient power and strength,
whereby we are enabled to overcome the Devil, the enemy of our souls: So
that we may be enabled to stand against principalities and powers,
against spiritual wickedness, and conquer all the powers, of darkness,
and fight the good fight of faith, and finish our course with joy, and
keep the faith: seeing there is laid up for us a crown of righteousness,
which the Lord, the righteous Judge, shall give us at that day; "and not
only to us, (saith the Apostle,) but unto all them that love his
appearing." We have not an High-Priest which cannot be touched with the
feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we
are, yet without sin: Christ, our Redeemer, was tempted, that he might
succour those that are tempted. When the Devil tempted our Saviour in
the wilderness, and could not prevail, he went away and left him: The
prince of this world found nothing in him, upon which he could fasten
his temptation. Christ will enable those that believe in him to overcome
the Devil, and to be more than conquerors, through him that loved them:
He came into the world to purge and purify his people, and to be the
author of eternal salvation to all them that believe in him, and obey
him. But it is said, "He did not many mighty works" among some to whom
he preached the everlasting Gospel, because of their unbelief: Many will
not believe in the inward and spiritual appearance of Jesus Christ the
Son of God, who is the light of the world; they will neither believe in
the light, nor walk in the light, which will enable them to conquer the
evil one, who is the prince of darkness: It is only through Christ
Jesus, the great captain of our salvation, that we are victorious.

Therefore, my friends, open your hearts to the Lord Jesus Christ,
