the wrathful Koreish, but in vain. Those who remained at Mecca were
subject to all sorts of indignities, malignity and a deprivation of all
religious and social liberty, because they had forsaken the inferior
deities of the Koreish, and believed in the only ONE GOD of Mohammad, in
whose mission they had full belief. Mohammad and his followers had every
sanction, under the natural and international law, then and there to
wage war against their persecutors with the object of removing the
(_fitnah_) persecution and obtaining their civil rights of freedom and
religious liberty in their native city.


[Sidenote: Commencement of the state of war.]

[Sidenote: The Koreish being public enemies were liable to be
treated as such.]

3. The fierce persecutions renewed by the Koreish at the time of the
expulsion of the Moslems from Mecca were acts of hostility tantamount to
a declaration of war. From that time commenced the state of war between
the parties. In the Arab society at Mecca there was neither an organized
Government, nor any distinction between a public and private person and
property. There was no regular army in the State, and what existed was
not a permanently organized body, so provided with external marks that
it could be readily identified. The form of Government at Mecca was
patriarchal, and the chiefs of the Koreish and the citizens of Medina
themselves constituted an army when occasion arose. Therefore, since the
commencement of hostilities or the state of war, every individual of the
Koreish or the Meccans was a public enemy of the Moslems, and liable to
be treated as such in his person and property, except those who were
unable to take part in the hostilities, or, as a matter of fact,
abstained from engaging in them. Therefore it was lawful for the Moslems
to threaten or to waylay the caravans of the enemy, which passed to and
from Mecca close to Medina, and also to attack the Koreish at Mecca, if
they could possibly do so.


[Sidenote: But the Moslems could not take up arms to redress their
wrongs under certain circumstances.]

4. But as the people amongst whom the Prophet and his fugitive Moslems
now sojourned had only pledged to defend them at Medina, the flying
Mohammadans could not take up arms against their aggressors, the
Koreish, to defend their rights of religious liberty and citizenship,
much less of taking arms to compel the non-believers to believe in
Moslem faith, and so they preferred to live in peace at Medina, and
enjoy the blessings of their new religion without any disturbance from
without, if possible.


[Sidenote: Moslems otherwise engaged at Medina had no intention of
suffering the horrors of war by taking the initiative.]

[Sidenote: But were in imminent danger from the enemy.]

5. In fact, the Moslems, after suffering so long such heavy persecutions
at Mecca, had at length got an asylum of peace at Medina, where they had
very little desire left to entertain any idea of commencing hostilities
or undergoing once more the horrors of war, and were too glad to live in
peace after their last escape. The people of Medina had only agreed to
defend the Prophet from attack, not to join him in any aggressive steps
towards the Koreish. The attention of Mohammad and his followers who had
fled with him was mainly occupied in preaching and teaching the tenets
of Islam, in establishing a fraternity between the refugees and the
citizens, in building a house for prayer, in providing houses for
refugees, in contracting treaties of neutrality with the Jews of Medina
and other surrounding tribes, Bani Zamra (a tribe connected with Mecca)
and also with Bani Mudlij (a tribe of Kinana related to the Koreish), in
anticipation of the impending danger[2] from the Koreish, who had
pursued them on the similar occasions before, and in organizing, above
all these, some of the religious and civil institutions for the
Moslems, who were now fast assuming the position of an independent
society or commonwealth. Under such circumstances, it was next to
impossible for Mohammad or his adherents to think of anything like an
offensive war with their inveterate foes, or to take up arms for
proselytizing purposes.

[Footnote 2: See Sura XXIV, verse 54.]


[Sidenote: The Koreish first attacked the Moslems at Medina. They could
not forbear the escape of the Moslems.]

6. The Koreish, seeing the persecuted had left almost all their native
lands for a distant city out of their approach, except by a military
expedition, and losing Mohammad, for whose arrest they had tried their
utmost, as well as upon hearing the reception, treatment, religious
freedom and brotherly help the Moslems received and enjoyed at Medina,
could not subdue their ferocious animosity against the exiles. The
hostility of the Koreish had already been aroused. The severity and
injustice of the Koreish was so great, that when, in 615 A.D., a party
of 11 Moslems had emigrated to Abyssinia, they had pursued them to
overtake them. And again, in 616 A.D., when the persecution by the
Koreish was hotter than before, a party of about 100 Moslems had fled
from Mecca to Abyssinia, the Koreish sent an embassy to Abyssinia to
obtain the surrender of the emigrants. There is every reason to believe
that the Koreish, enraged as they were on the escape of the Moslems in
their third and great emigration in 622 A.D., would naturally have
taken every strong and hostile measure to persecute the fugitives.[3]

It was in the second year from the general expulsion of the Moslems from
Mecca that the Koreish, with a large army of one thousand strong,
marched upon the Moslems at Medina. Medina being 250 miles or 12 stages
from Mecca, the aggressive army, after marching 8 stages, arrived at
Badr, which is 3 or 4 stages from Medina. Mahommad--with only 300
Moslems, more being from among the people of Medina than the
refugees--came out of Medina in self-defence to encounter the Koreish,
and the famous battle of Badr was fought only at thirty miles from
Medina. There could be no doubt that the affair was purely and
admittedly a defensive one.

Sura XXII, verses 39-42, copied at page 17 of this book, was first
published in the matter of taking up arms in self-defence after the
battle of Badr.

[Footnote 3: The idea of forbearance on the part of the Koreish, as
entertained by Sir W. Muir, is not borne out by their former conduct of
persecuting the believers and pursuing the fugitives among them. He
says: "Mahomet and Abu Bakr trusted their respective clans to protect
their families from insult. But no insult or annoyance of any kind was
offered by the Coreish. Nor was the slightest attempt made to detain
them; although it was not unreasonable that they should have been
detained as hostages against any hostile incursion from Medina"[A]. They
were contemplating a grand pursuit and attack on the Moslems, and had no
reason to detain the families of Mahomet and Abu Bakr as hostages whilst
they could not think that the Moslems will take the initiative, as they
were too glad to escape and live unmolested.]

[Footnote A: Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol II, page 265.]


[Sidenote: The three battles waged by the Koreish against Mohammad.]

7. The Koreish carried on three aggressive battles against the Moslems
at Medina. The first, called the Battle of Badr, took place at thirty
miles from Medina, the Koreish having come down 250 miles from Mecca.
The second, called the Battle of Ohad, was fought at a distance of one
mile from Medina, the enemy having advanced 250 miles from Mecca. The
third was the battle of confederates, in which they had mustered an army
of ten thousand strong. The city was besieged for several days, and the
Moslems defended themselves within the walls of Medina which they had
entrenched. These were the only battles between the Koreish and
Mohammad, in each the latter always acted on the defensive. Neither he
attacked the Koreish offensively to take revenge, nor to compel them by
force of arms to accept his religion.

[Sidenote: These wars were purely in defence, not to redress their
wrongs or to establish their rights.]

Even these three battles were not waged by Mohammad to redress wrong or
establish imperilled rights. They were only to repel force by right of
self-defence. Had Mohammad and his Moslems invaded Mecca and fought
battles against the Koreish there, he would have been justified for
waging war to redress the injuries of person and property inflicted by
the Meccans on the Moslems whom they were tormenting for their religion
and had expelled them from their homes, and had even barred their
yearly visitation to the shrine of Kaaba. A war which is undertaken for
just causes, to repel or avert wrongful force, or to establish a right,
is sanctioned by every law, religious, moral or political.


[Sidenote: The battle of Badr was defensive.]

8. Sir W. Muir, the great advocate for the aggressive Koreish, holds
that the war of Badr was "brought on by Mahomet himself,"[4] and that he
intended to surprise the caravan of the Koreish returning from Syria
under the charge of Abu Sofian, and had come out to Medina to waylay it.
Abu Sofian sent for an army of the Koreish for his aid, and thus
commenced the battle of Badr. I have given my reasons at pages 74-76 of
the book to show that this is a false account. I will point out from
contemporary records, _i.e._, the Koran, that Mohammad neither meant,
nor had he come out of Medina, to attack the caravan.

[Sidenote: Reasons for the same.]

I. The verses 5 and 6 of Sura VIII[5] show that a part of the believers
were quite averse to Mohammad's coming out of Medina on the occasion of
the battle of Badr. Had their mission been one of plundering rich
caravans, as it is generally alleged, there could be no reason for that
aversion of a party of believers who are accused so often of a hostile
attitude towards the Koreish, and possessed of that great love of booty
and adventure so prominent among the Arabs. The fact is, a party of
believers had disputed with Mohammad the necessity of the combat and its
probable result outside Medina. They preferred to defend themselves
within its walls. This argument is against the allegation that Mohammad
with his followers had started to waylay the caravan, and the Koreish
had come only to rescue it.

II. The 43rd[6] verse of the same Sura shows that it was by a mere
accident or coincidence that all the three parties of the Moslems, the
Koreshite army and the caravan had arrived, and encamped close to Badr
in front of each other. This is an argument against those who say that
Mohammad had intentionally come to Badr to waylay the caravan there.[7]
There was, in fact, no predetermination on the part of Mohammad either
to waylay the caravan, or encounter the Koreish army at Badr. Mohammad
with his followers had come out only to check the advancing enemy in his
self-defence.

III. The seventh[8] verse of the same Sura shows that while the parties
had so accidentally encamped close to each other, the Moslems had
desired then and there only to attack the caravan, as a reprisal or by
way of retaliation, instead of combating with the Koreish army. This is
an argument in support of my contention that there was no previous
arrangement to attack the caravan.

IV. The same verse also shows that Mohammad had no intention of
attacking the caravan either before his coming out of Medina, as it is
alleged by ignorant people, or after coming at Badr in front of the
enemy's army.

V. Sura VIII, verse 72,[9] which treats of the prisoners of the war
taken at Badr, expressly notes the treachery of the Meccans before their
being taken prisoner, and refers obviously to their aggressively setting
out of Mecca to attack the Moslems at Medina.

VI. Sura IX, verse 13,[10] at a subsequent event of the violation of
the truce of Hodeibia by the Koreish, very distinctly charges them with
attacking first and waging offensive war and being aggressive. As there
was no war or attack from the Koreish on the Moslems before Badr, I
conclude that in the war of Badr the Koreish were aggressive.

[Footnote 4: The Life of Mahomet, Vol. III, page 255, _foot-note_. This
note has been expunged in the New Edition of "The Life": _Vide_ page
317.]

[Footnote 5: 5. "_Remember_ how thy Lord caused thee to go forth from
thy home on _a mission_ of truth, and verily a part of the believers
were quite averse to it."

6. "They disputed with thee about the truth after it had been made
clear, as if they were being led forth to death and saw it before them."
Sura VIII.]

[Footnote 6: 43. "When ye were encamped on the near side of the valley,
and they were on the further side, and the caravan was below you, if ye
have made an engagement to _attack_, ye would assuredly have failed the
engagement; but _ye were led into action notwithstanding_, that God
might accomplish the thing _destined_ to be done." Sura VIII.]

[Footnote 7: Muir's Life of Mahomet. New Edition, page 226.]

[Footnote 8: "And _remember_ when God promised you that one of the two
troops should fall to you, and ye desired that they who had no arms
should fall to you: but God purposed to prove true the truth of his
words, and to cut off the uttermost part of the infidels."]

[Footnote 9: "But if they seek to deal treacherously with thee--they
have already dealt treacherously with God before! Therefore hath He
given you power over them."]

[Footnote 10: "Will ye not do battle with a people who have broken their
covenant and aimed to expel your Apostle and attacked you first? Will
you dread them?"]


[Sidenote: Mohammad, owing to the attacks, inroads and threatening
gatherings from the Koreish and other Arab tribes, had hardly time to
think of offensive measures.]

9. But Mohammad, harassed and attacked every year by the Koreish and
other hostile Arab tribes, had hardly any time to wage an aggressive war
against his Koreshite foes, to establish his imperilled rights, or to
redress the injuries of the Moslems or his own wrong; much less of
taking up arms to compel them to renounce idolatry and believe in his
Divine mission. During the first year after their expulsion from Mecca,
the Moslems were in constant danger from the ferocity of the Koreish,
and when Mohammad was contracting treaties of neutrality with the
neighbouring tribes, Kurz-bin-Jabir, a Koreish of the desert, committed
a raid upon Medina. In the course of the second year the Koreish fought
the battle of Badr, followed by a petty inroad of theirs upon Medina at
the end of the year. The Bani Nazeer treasoned against Medina by giving
intelligence to, and entertaining, the enemy. In the beginning of the
third year, the nomad tribes of Suleim and Ghatafan, inhabitants of the
plains of Najd, and descendants of a stock common with the Koreish,
twice projected a plundering attack upon Medina. At the same time the
Moslems were defeated at the battle of Ohad, near Medina, by the
Koreish, which circumstance greatly affected the prestige of the
Prophet, who was threatened with a similar fate the next year by his
victorious enemies. With the opening of the fourth year, the inimical
spirit of many of the Bedouins, as well as that of the Jews of Bani
Nazeer, was perceptible, and in various quarters large masses were
organized to act against Mohammad and to take advantage of the defeat at
Medina. The tribes of Bani Asad and Bani Lahyan were brought together to
follow the victory of the Koreish at Ohad. And last, not least, the
Moslem missionaries were cut to pieces at Raji and Bir Mauna. At the
close of the year, the people of Medina were alarmed by an exaggerated
account of the preparations at Mecca to attack Medina as promised last
year (Sura III, v. 176). During the fifth year certain tribes of
Ghatafan were assembling with suspicious purposes at Zat-al-Rikaa and
the marauding bands near Dumatal Jandal threatened a raid upon Medina.
The Bani Mustalik, a branch of Khozaa, hitherto friendly to Mohammad's
cause, took up arms with a view of joining the Koreish in the intended
attack upon Medina. At the end of the year, the Koreish, joined by an
immense force of the Bedouin tribes,[11] marched against Medina, and
laid siege to it for many days. The Bani Koreiza, having defected from
Mohammad, joined the Koreish army when Medina was besieged.

In the beginning of the sixth year Uyeina, the chief of the Bani
Fezara, had committed an inroad upon Medina.[12] A Medinite caravan,
under the charge of Zeid-bin-Haris, was seized and plundered by the Bani
Fezara.[13] In the month of Zul-Kada, (the eleventh month of the Arab
lunar year), when war was unlawful throughout Arabia, but much more so
within the sacred precincts of Mecca, Mohammad and his followers,
longing to visit the house of their Lord and the sacred places around
it, and to join the yearly pilgrimage which they had grown from their
childhood to regard as an essential part of their social and religious
life, not to mention their intense desire of seeing their houses and
families from which they were unjustly expelled, started from Medina for
performing the lesser pilgrimage. They were under the impression that,
in the peaceful habits of pilgrims, the Koreish would be morally bound
by every pledge of national faith to leave them unmolested, and Mohammad
had promised them a peaceful entry. But the Koreish armed themselves and
opposed the progress of the Moslems towards Mecca, notwithstanding the
pious object and unwarlike attitude of the pilgrims. At length a treaty,
in terms unfavourable to the Moslems, but in fact a victory won by
Islam, was concluded by Mohammad and the Koreish at Hodeibia. By this
peace war was suspended for ten years.

From my brief sketch of Mohammad's first six years' sojourn in Medina,
it is evident that during this time Medina was constantly in a sort of
military defence. The Moslems were every moment in the danger of an
invasion, attack, or inroad from without, and treachery, conspiracy and
treason from within. They either had to encounter superior numbers or to
disperse hostile gathering or to chastise sometimes marauding tribes. So
Mohammad could scarcely breathe freely at Medina, but much less could he
find time and opportunity to mature a scheme of attacking the Koreish at
Mecca in order to revenge himself and his refugees for the persecutions
which the Koreish had inflicted on the Moslems, to redress their wrongs,
and to re-establish their rights of civil and religious liberty, or to
make converts of them or any other tribes at the point of sword.

[Footnote 11: Bani Ashja, Murra Fezara, Suleim, Sad, Asad, and several
clans of Ghatafan, the Jews of Wady-al-Koraa and Khyber.]

[Footnote 12: A party of Moslems at Zil Kassa was slain, and Dihya, sent
by Mohammad to the Roman Emperor, on his return, was robbed of every
thing by the Bani Juzam beyond Wady-al-Kora.]

[Footnote 13: The Jews at Khyber were enticing the Bani Fezara and Bani
Sad-bin-Bakr and other Bedouin tribes to make depredations upon Medina.]


[Sidenote: Armed opposition of the Koreish to the Moslem pilgrims in the
vicinity of Mecca.]

[Sidenote: Mohammad proclaimed war against the opposing Koreish to
obtain the right of civil and religious liberty at Mecca.]

10. It was only when the Moslems, unarmed as they were in pilgrim's
garb, were opposed by the armed Koreish, who had encamped at Zu Towa,
clothed in panther's skin, or, in other words, with a firm resolution to
fight to the last, and when Osman, the Moslem envoy to Mecca, was
actually placed in confinement,[14] of whom the rumour was constantly
rife that he was murdered at Mecca, and when a party of the Koreish had
actually attacked the camp of Mohammad,[15] that excitement, alarm and
anxiety prevailed in the Moslem camp, and Mohammad took a solemn oath
from the Faithful to stand by their cause even unto death. (Sura
XLVIII.[16]) In the meantime appeals were received from the Moslems
detained in confinement at Mecca, and otherwise oppressed for
deliverance. _Vide_ Sura IV, verses 77, 99, 100; Sura VIII, verses 72,
73. He, on this occasion, proclaimed a war with the Koreish in the event
of their attacking first, and enjoining the believers to redress their
earlier and later wrongs, to establish their civil and religious
liberty, to have free access to their native city, to have the free
exercise of their religion, and to make away with the oppressions of
Koreish once for all.

The following verses were published on the occasion:--Sura II, verses
186-190, 212-215. The Sura XLVIII afterwards had reference to the
occasion, specially verses 10, 22-27. They are quoted in pp. 17-19.

[Sidenote: The war thus proclaimed did not take place.]

But happily a truce was agreed upon, and not a drop of blood was shed on
either side. Thus the injunctions contained in the verses referred to
above were never carried out. Mohammad, in proclaiming this war, had all
the laws and justice on his side. Even this war, had it been waged,
would have been defensive, undertaken for the purpose of establishing
the civil rights of the Moslems and their religious liberty, hitherto
unjustly denied them.

[Footnote 14: Ibn Hisham, p. 746.]

[Footnote 15: _Ibid._ 745, see Sura XLVIII.]

[Footnote 16: Mohammad had gained over some of the Bedouin tribes in the
direction of Mecca, and were on friendly terms with him. At this time
they were summoned by Mohammad to join him if there be a war. They did
not join him except a very few.]


[Sidenote: The Koreish again commit hostilities and violate their
pledges.]

[Sidenote: War declared against those who had violated the truce.]

11. This truce did not last long. The last act of hostility on the part
of the aggressive Koreish was the violation of the truce within two
years of its being concluded. This resulted in the submission of Mecca.
The tribe of Bani Khozaa,[17] who were now converts to Islam since the
truce, and who had entered into an open alliance with Mohammad at the
treaty, were attacked by the Koreish and their allies, the Bani
Bakr.[18] The aggressed Moslems appealed for aid to Mohammad through a
deputation, that displayed their wrongs to Mohammad and his followers in
very touching terms, urging in a plaintive tone to avenge them upon the
treacherous murderers. War was declared by Mohammad against the
aggressors, who had violated the truce, and attacked the Bani Khozaa, to
redress their wrongs. A proclamation was issued declaring immunity from
God and his Apostle to those who had broken the league and aided the
Bani Bakr against the Khozaa. Four months' time was allowed them to make
terms, in default of which they were to be warred against, seized, and
besieged, in short, to suffer all the hardships of war. Sura IX, verses
1-15, was published declaring the war. It has been copied at pages 22-25
of the book.

[Sidenote: War not carried out.]

But the threatened war did not actually take place, and Mecca
surrendered by a compromise. Thus Mohammad obtained his object of civil
and religious liberty of the Moslems at Mecca and Medina, and averted
the (_fitnah_) persecutions and oppressions of the Koreish without
actual war or bloodshed, and also secured peace for his followers in
exchange of the constant fear and agitation impending over them. This
was promised some years ago in Sura XXIV, verse 54, which runs as
follows:--

     "God hath promised to those of you who believe and do the things
     that are right, that He will cause them to succeed other in the
     land, as He gave succession to those who went before them, and that
     He will establish for them their religion in which they delight,
     and that after their fears He will give them security in exchange.
     They shall worship Me: nought shall they join with Me: And whoso
     after this believe not, they will be the impious."

[Footnote 17: The Bani Khozaa are also taken notice of in Sura VIII,
verses 73-74.]

[Footnote 18: The Bani Bakr, son of Abd Monat, were a branch of Kinana
of the Moaddite stock.]


[Sidenote: War with foes other than the Koreish.]

12. Now I shall dispense with the Koreish and refer to the wars of other
enemies of the early Moslems. There is only one war of the Arab tribes
other than the Koreish noticed in the Koran, and that is the battle of
Honain. In this war the Sakifites were the aggressors. The battle of
Muraisia is not noticed in the Koran, but it is stated by biographers
that information of a new project against him after the defeat at Ohad
in the direction of Mecca, and the Bani Mustalik's raising fresh forces
with a view of joining the Koreish in the threatened attack of Medina
having reached Mohammad, he resolved by a bold attempt to prevent their
design. I have shown in the book that the expedition of Mohammad against
