
"'Sagara said, "O my boy! sore am I at heart for having abandoned thy
father, on account of the death of my sons, and also on being
unsuccessful in getting back the horse. Therefore, O grandson! harassed
with grief and confounded with the obstruction to my religious rites as
I am, thou must bring back the horse and deliver me from hell." Thus
addressed by the magnanimous Sagara, Ansuman went with sorrow to that
spot where the earth had been excavated. And by that very passage he
entered into the sea, and beheld that illustrious Kapila and that same
horse. And having beheld that ancient saint, most righteous of his
order, looking like a mass of light, he bowed with his head to the
ground, and informed him of the reason of his visit. Then, O great king,
Kapila was pleased with Ansuman, and that saint of a virtuous soul told
him to ask for a favour from him. And he in the first place prayed for
the horse, for the purpose of using it in the sacrifice; in the second
place he prayed for the purification of his fathers. Then the mighty
chief of saints, Kapila spake to him, saying, "I shall grant thee
everything that thou desirest, O stainless (prince). May good luck be
thine! In thee are fixed (the virtues of) forbearance, and truth, and
righteousness. By thee hath Sagara had all his desires fulfilled. Thou
are (really) a son to thy father. And by thy ability the sons of Sagara
will go to heaven (i.e., will be delivered from the consequences of
their unhallowed death). And the son of thy son, with a view to
purifying the sons of Sagara, will obtain the favour of the great god
Siva, (by means of practising great austerities), and will (thus) bring
(to this world) the river that floweth in three (separate) streams,
Ganga, O chief of men! May good luck be thine! Take thou with thee the
sacrificial horse. Finish, my lad! the sacrificial rites of the
magnanimous Sagara." Thus addressed by the illustrious Kapila, Ansuman
took the horse with him, and came back to the sacrificial yard of the
mighty-minded Sagara. Then he fell prostrate at the feet of the
high-souled Sagara, who smelt him on the head and narrated all the
events to him, all that had been seen and heard by him, and likewise the
destruction of Sagara's sons. He also announced that the horse had been
brought back to the sacrificial yard. And when king Sagara heard of
this, he no more grieved on account of his sons. And he praised and
honoured Ansuman, and finished those same sacrificial rites. His
sacrifice finished, Sagara was greeted honourably by all the gods; and
he converted the sea, Varuna's dwelling place, into a son of himself.
And the lotus-eyed (King Sagara) having ruled his kingdom for a period
of exceeding length, placed his grandson on the throne, (full of)
responsibilities and then ascended to heaven. And Ansuman likewise, O
great king! virtuous in soul, ruled over the world as far as the edge of
the sea, following the foot-prints of his father's father. His son was
named Dilipa, versed in virtue. Upon him placing the duties of his
sovereign post, Ansuman likewise departed this life. And then when
Dilipa heard what an awful fate had overtaken his forefathers, he was
sorely grieved and thought of the means of raising them. And the ruler
of men made every great effort towards the descent of Ganga (to the
mortal world). But although trying to the utmost of his power, he could
not bring about what he so much wished. And a son was born to him, known
by the name of Bhagiratha, beauteous, and devoted to a virtuous life,
and truthful, and free from feelings of malice. And Dilipa appointed him
as king, and betook himself to the forest life. And, O best of all the
scions of Bharata's race! that same king (Dilipa), devoted himself to a
successful course of austerities, and at the end of (sufficient) period,
from the forest departed to heaven.'"


SECTION CVIII

"Lomasa said, 'That same king, of a powerful bow, standing at the head
of the surrounding, (i.e., the occupant of an imperial throne) of a
powerful car, (i.e., possessing every great fighting power) became the
delight of the eyes and the soul of all the world. And he of the
powerful arm came to learn how his forefathers had met an awful end from
Kapila of mighty soul, and how they had been unable to attain the region
of gods. And he with a sorrowful heart made over his kingly duties to
his minister, and, O lord of men! for practising austerities, went to
the side of the snowy Mountain (the Himalayas). And, O most praiseworthy
of men, desirous of extinguishing his sins by leading an austere life,
and (thereby) obtaining the favour of the (goddess) Ganga, he visited
that foremost of mountains--Himalaya. And he beheld it adorned with
peaks of diverse forms full of mineral earth; besprinkled on all sides
with drops from clouds which were resting themselves upon the breeze;
beautiful with rivers and groves and rocky spurs, looking like (so many)
palaces (in a city); attended upon by lions and tigers that had
concealed themselves in its caves and pits; and also inhabited by birds
of checkered forms, which were uttering diverse sounds, such as the
Bhringarajas, and ganders, and Datyuhas, and water-cocks, and peacocks
and birds with a hundred feathers, and Jivanjivakas, and black birds,
and Chakoras of eyes furnished with black corners, and the birds that
love their young. And he saw the mountain abounding in lotus plants
growing in delightful reservoirs of water. And the cranes rendered it
charming with their sounds; and the Kinnaras and the celestial nymphs
were seated on its stony slabs. And the elephants occupying the cardinal
points had everywhere robbed its trees with the end of their tusks; and
the demi-gods of the Vidyadhara class frequented the hill. And it was
full of various gems, and was also infested by snakes bearing terrible
poison and of glowing tongues. And the mountain at places looked like
(massive) gold, and elsewhere it resembled a silvery (pile), and at some
places it was like a (sable) heap of collyrium. Such was the snowy hill
where the king now found himself. And that most praiseworthy of men at
that spot betook himself to an awful austere course of life. And for one
thousand years his subsistence was nothing but water, fruit and roots.
When, however, a thousand years according to the calculation of gods had
elapsed, then the great river Ganga having assumed a material form,
manifested to him her (divine) self.

"'Ganga said. "O great king! what dost thou desire of me? And what must
I bestow on thee? Tell me the same, O most praiseworthy of men! I shall
do as thou mayst ask me." Thus addressed, the king then made his reply
to Ganga, the daughter of the snowy Hill, saying, "O grantress of boons!
O great river! my father's fathers, while searching for the horse, were
sent by Kapila to the abode of the god of death. And those same sixty
thousand sons of Sagara of mighty soul, having met with the majestic
Kapila, perished, (to a soul) in an instant of time. Having thus
perished, there hath been no place for them in the region of heaven. O
great river! So long as thou dost not besprinkle those same bodies with
thy water, there is no salvation for these same Sagara's sons. O blessed
goddess! carry thou my forefathers, Sagara's sons, to the region of
heaven. O great river! on their account am I beseeching thee
forsooth."'

"Lomasa said, 'Ganga, the goddess saluted by the world, having heard
these words of the king, was well pleased, and spake to Bhagiratha the
following words: "O great king! I am prepared to do what thou dost ask
me; there is no doubt therein. But when I shall descend from the sky to
the earth, the force of my fall will be difficult to sustain, O
protector of men! In the three worlds there exists none who is able to
sustain the same, excepting Siva, the most praiseworthy of gods, the
great Lord with the throat of sable blue. O (prince) of a powerful arm!
Obtain the favour, by practising austerities, of that same Siva--giver
of boons. That same god will sustain my descent upon his head. Thy
desire he will fulfill, the desire, namely, to be of service to thy
fathers, O king!" Then the great king Bhagiratha having heard the same,
went to the Kailasa hill, and betaking himself to a severe course of
penances, at the expiration of a certain length of time obtained the
favour of that worker of blessings (Siva). And, O protector of men! that
same best of men, in order that his forefathers might have a place in
heaven secured to them, received from that very Siva the fulfilment of
his wish, namely the wish that the descending Ganga might be
sustained.'"


SECTION CIX

"Lomasa said, 'The blessed God having heard what Bhagiratha had said,
and with a view to doing what was agreeable to the residents of heaven,
replied to the king, saying, "So let it be. O most righteous of the
protectors of men, O (prince) of a powerful arm! For thy sake I shall
sustain the river of the gods, when she will take her descent from the
sky, she who is pure and blessed and divine, O (king) of a mighty arm!"
Saying this, he came to the snowy mountain, surrounded by his
attendants, of awful mien, and with uplifted weapons of diverse forms.
And standing there, he said to Bhagiratha, the most praiseworthy of men,
"O (prince) of a powerful arm! do thou pray to the river, the daughter
of the king of mountains. I shall sustain that most praiseworthy of
rivers when she falls down from the third region of the world (heaven)."
Having heard these words uttered by Siva, the king became devout (in
heart), made obesiance and directed his thoughts towards Ganga. Then the
delightful (river), of pure water in being so thought of by the king,
and seeing that the great lord (Siva) was standing (to receive her
fall), came down all of a sudden from the sky. And seeing that she had
taken her leap from the sky, the gods, together with the mighty saints,
the Gandharvas, the snakes, and the Yakshas, assembled there as
spectators. Then came down from the sky Ganga, the daughter of the snowy
mountain. And her whirlpools were raging, and she was teeming with
fishes and sharks. O king! she directing her course towards the sea,
separated herself, into three streams; and her water was bestrewn with
piles of froth, which looked like so many rows of (white) ganders. And
crooked and tortuous in the movement of her body, at places; and at
others stumbling as it were; and covered with foam as with a robe: she
went forward like a woman drunk. And elsewhere, by virtue of the roar of
her waters, she uttered loud sounds. Thus assuming very many different
aspects, when she fell from the sky, and reached the surface of the
earth, she said to Bhagiratha, "O great king! show me the path that I
shall have to take. O lord of the earth! for thy sake have I descended
to the earth." Having heard these words, king Bhagiratha directed his
course towards the spot where lay those bodies of mighty Sagara's sons,
in order that, O most praiseworthy of men, the holy water might flood
(the same). Having achieved the task of sustaining Ganga, Siva, saluted
by men, went to Kailasa the most praiseworthy of mountains, accompanied
by the celestials. And the protector of men (Bhagiratha) accompanied by
Ganga reached the sea; and the sea, the abode of Varuna, was quickly
filled. And the king adopted Ganga as a daughter of himself, and at that
spot offered libations of water to the names of his forefathers; thus
was his heart's wish fulfilled. Thus asked by thee, I have narrated the
whole story how Ganga running in three streams, was brought down to the
earth for filling the sea; how the mighty saint had drunk up the sea for
a particular reason, and how, O lord! Vatapi, the slayer of Brahmanas,
was destroyed by Agastya.'"


SECTION CX

Vaisampayana said, "O chief of the Bharata race! then the son of Kunti
went at a slow pace to the two rivers Nanda and Aparananda, which had
the virtue of destroying the dread of sin. And the protector of men
having reached the healthy hill Hemakuta, beheld there very many strange
and inconceivable sights. There the very utterance of words caused the
gathering of clouds, and a thousand volleys of stones. And people at its
sight were struck sad, and were unable to ascend the hill. There the
winds blew for aye, and the heavens always poured down rains; and
likewise the sounds of the recitation of the sacred writ were heard, yet
nobody was seen. In the evening and in the morning would be seen the
blessed fire that carries offerings to the gods and there flies would
bite and interrupt the practice of austerities. And there a sadness
would overtake the soul, and people would become sick. The son of Pandu,
having observed very many strange circumstances of this character again
addressed his questions to Lomasa with reference to these wonderful
things.

"Lomasa said, 'O slayer of foes! O king! I am going to tell thee as we
heard it before; do thou attend to the same with intent mind. In this
peak of Rishava, there was once a saint known by that name. And his life
had lasted for many hundred years. And he was devoted to penances and
was greatly wrathful. And he, forsooth, for having been spoken to by
others, from wrath addressed the hill thus, "Whoever should utter any
words here, thou must throw stones at him, and thou must call up the
winds to prevent him from making any noise." This was what the saint
said. And so at this place, as soon as a man utters any words, he is
forbidden by a roaring cloud. O king! thus these deeds were performed by
that great saint, and from wrath he also forbade other acts. O king!
tradition says that when the gods of yore had come to the Nanda,
suddenly came over (there) a number of men to look at the celestials.
Those same gods at whose head stood Indra did not, however, like to be
seen; and so they rendered this spot inaccessible, by raising
obstructions in the form of hills. And from that day forward, O Kunti's
son! men could not cast their eyes at any time on what looked like a
hill, far less could they ascend the same. This big mountain is
incapable of being seen by one who hath not led an austere life, nor can
such a one ascend it. Therefore, O son of Kunti! keep thou thy tongue
under control. Here at that time all those gods performed the best
sacrificial rites. O Bharata's son! Even up to this day these marks
thereof may be seen. This grass here hath the form of the sacred _kusa_
grass: the ground here seemeth to be overspread with the sacred grass;
and, O lord of men! many of these trees here look like the spots for
tying the sacrificial beasts. O Bharata's son! still the Gods and saints
have residence here; and their sacred fire is observed in the morning
and in the evening. Here if one bathes, his sin is forthwith destroyed,
O Kunti's son! O most praiseworthy of the race of Kuru! do thou,
therefore, perform thy ablutions, together with thy younger brothers.
Then after having washed thyself in the Nanda, thou wilt repair to the
river Kausiki, the spot where the most excellent and severest form of
penances was practised by Viswamitra.' Then the king with his
attendants, having washed his body there, proceeded to the river
Kausiki, which was pure and delightful and pleasant with cool water.

"Lomasa said, 'This is the pure divine river by name Kausiki. O chief of
Bharata's race! and this is the delightful hermitage of Viswamitra,
conspicuous here. And this is a hermitage, with a holy name, belonging
to Kasyapa of mighty soul; whose son was Rishyasringa, devoted to
penances, and of passions under control. He by force of his penances
caused Indra to rain; and that god, the slayer of the demons Vala and
Vritra, dreading him, poured down rain during a drought. That powerful
and mighty son of Kasyapa was born of a hind. He worked a great marvel
in the territory of Lomapada. And when the crops had been restored, king
Lomapada gave his daughter Santa in marriage to him, as the sun gave in
marriage his daughter Savitri.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'How was the son of Kasyapa, Rishyasringa, born of a
hind? And how was he endowed with holiness, being the issue of a
reprehensible sexual connexion? And for what reason was Indra, the
slayer of the demons Vala and Vritra, afraid of that same sagacious boy,
and poured down rain during a period of drought? And how beautiful was
that princess Santa, pure in life, she who allured the heart of him when
he had turned himself into a stag? And since the royal saint Lomapada is
said to have been of a virtuous disposition, why was it that in his
territory, Indra, the chastiser of the demon Paka, had withheld rain? O
holy saint! all this in detail, exactly as it happened, thou wilt be
pleased to narrate to me, for I am desirous of hearing the deeds of
Rishyasringa's life.'

"Lomasa said, 'Hear how Rishyasringa, of dreaded name, was born as a son
to Vibhandaka, who was a saint of the Brahmana caste, who had cultured
his soul by means of religious austerities, whose seed never failed in
causing generation, and who was learned and bright like the Lord of
beings. And the father was highly honoured, and the son was possessed of
a mighty spirit, and, though a boy, was respected by aged men. And that
son of Kasyapa, Vibhandaka, having proceeded to a big lake, devoted
himself to the practice of penances. And that same saint, comparable to
a god, laboured for a long period. And once while he was washing his
mouth in the waters, he beheld the celestial nymph Urvasi--whereupon
came out his seminal fluid. And, O king! a hind at that time lapped it
up along with the water that she was drinking, being athirst; and from
this cause she became with child. That same hind had really been a
daughter of the gods, and had been told of yore by the holy Brahma, the
creator of the worlds, "Thou shall be a hind; and when in that form,
thou shall give birth to a saint; thou shalt then be freed." As Destiny
would have it, and as the word of the creator would not be untrue, in
that same hind was born his (Vibhandaka's) son a mighty saint. And
Rishyasringa, devoted to penances, always passed his days in the forest.
O king! there was a horn on the head of that magnanimous saint and for
this reason did he come to be known at the time by the name of
Rishyasringa. And barring his father, not a man had ever before been
seen by him; therefore his mind, O protector of men! was entirely
devoted to the duties of a continent life. At this very period there was
a ruler of the land of Anga known by the name of Lomapada who was a
friend of Dasaratha. We have heard that he from love of pleasure had
been guilty of a falsehood towards a Brahmana. And that same ruler of
the world had at that time been shunned by all persons of the priestly
class. And he was without a ministering priest (to assist him in his
religious rites). And the god of a thousand eyes (Indra) suddenly
abstained from giving rain in his territory; so that his people began to
suffer and O lord of the earth! he questioned a number of Brahmanas,
devoted to penances, of cultivated minds, and possessed of capabilities
with reference to the matter of rain being granted by the lord of gods,
saying, "How may the heavens grant us the rain? Think of an expedient
(for this purpose)." And those same cultured men, being thus questioned,
gave expression to their respective views. And one among them--the best
of saints--spake to that same king, saying, "O lord of kings! the
Brahmanas are angry with thee. Do some act (therefore) for appeasing
them. O ruler of the earth! send for Rishyasringa, the son of a saint,
resident of the forest knowing nothing of the female sex, and always
taking delight in simplicity. O king! if he, great in the practice of
penances, should show himself in thy territory, forthwith rain would be
granted by the heavens, herein I have no doubt at all." And, O king!
having heard these words Lomapada made atonement for his sins. And he
went away; and when the Brahmanas had been appeased, he returned again,
and seeing the king returned, the people were again glad at heart. Then
the king of Anga convened a meeting of his ministers, proficient in
giving counsel. And he took great pains in order to settle some plan for
securing a visit from Rishyasringa. And, O unswerving (prince)! with
those ministers, who were versed in all branches of knowledge, and
exceedingly proficient in worldly matters, and had a thorough training
in practical affairs, he at last settled a plan (for gaining his
object). And then he sent for a number of courtesans, women of the town,
clever in everything. And when they came, that same ruler of the earth
spake to them, saying, "Ye lovely women! Ye must find some means to
allure, and obtain the confidence of the son of the saint--Rishyasringa,
whom ye must bring over to my territory." And those same women, on the
one hand afraid of the anger of the king and on the other, dreading a
curse from the saint, became sad and confounded, and declared the
business to be beyond their power. One, however, among them--a hoary
woman, thus spake to the king, "O great king! him whose wealth solely
consists in penances, I shall try to bring over here. Thou wilt,
however, have to procure for me certain things, in connection with the
plan. In that case, I may be able to bring over the son of the
saint--Rishyasringa." Thereupon the king gave an order that all that she
might ask for should be procured. And he also gave a good deal of wealth
and jewels of various kinds. And then, O Lord of the earth, she took
with herself a number of women endowed with beauty and youth, and went
to the forest without delay.'"


SECTION CXI

"Lomasa said, 'O descendant of Bharata! she in order to compass the
object of the king, prepared a floating hermitage, both because the king
had ordered so, and also because it exactly accorded with her plan. And
the floating hermitage, containing artificial trees adorned with various
flowers and fruits, and surrounded by diverse shrubs and creeping plants
and capable of furnishing choice and delicious fruits, was exceedingly
delightful, and nice, and pleasing, and looked as if it had been created
by magic. Then she moored the vessel at no great distance from the
hermitage of Kasyapa's son, and sent emissaries to survey the place
where that same saint habitually went about. And then she saw an
opportunity; and having conceived a plan in her mind, sent forward her
daughter, a courtesan by trade and of smart sense. And that clever woman
went to the vicinity of the religious man and arriving at the hermitage
beheld the son of the saint.

"'The courtesan said, "I hope, O saint! that is all well with the
religious devotees. And I hope that thou hast a plentiful store of
fruits and roots and that thou takest delight in this hermitage. Verily
I come here now to pay thee a visit. I hope the practice of austerities
among the saints is on the increase. I hope that thy father's spirit
hath not slackened and that he is well pleased with thee. O Rishyasringa
of the priestly caste! I hope thou prosecutest the studies proper for
thee."

"'Rishyasringa said, "Thou art shining with lustre, as if thou wert a
(mass) of light. And I deem thee worthy of obeisance. Verily I shall
give thee water for washing thy feet and such fruits and roots also as
may be liked by thee, for this is what my religion hath prescribed to
me. Be thou pleased to take at thy pleasure thy seat on a mat made of
the sacred grass, covered over with a black deer-skin and made pleasant
and comfortable to sit upon. And where is thy hermitage? O Brahmana!
thou resemblest a god in thy mien. What is the name of this particular
religious vow, which thou seemest to be observing now?"

"'The courtesan said, "O son of Kasyapa! on the other side of yonder
hill, which covers the space of three Yojanas, is my hermitage--a
delightful place. There, not to receive obeisance is the rule of my
faith nor do I touch water for washing my feet. I am not worthy of
obeisance from persons like thee; but I must make obeisance to thee. O
Brahmana! This is the religious observance to be practised by me,
namely, that thou must be clasped in my arms."

"'Rishyasringa said, "Let me give thee ripe fruits, such as gallnuts,
myrobalans, _Karushas, Ingudas_ from sandy tracts and Indian fig. May it
please thee to take a delight in them!"'

"Lomasa said, 'She, however, threw aside all those edible things and
then gave him unsuitable things for food. And these were exceedingly
nice and beautiful to see and were very much acceptable to Rishyasringa.
And she gave him garlands of an exceedingly fragrant scent and beautiful
and shining garments to wear and first-rate drinks; and then played and
laughed and enjoyed herself. And she at his sight played with a ball and
while thus employed, looked like a creeping plant broken in two. And she
touched his body with her own and repeatedly clasped Rishyasringa in her
arms. Then she bent and broke the flowery twigs from trees, such as the
Sala, the Asoka and the Tilaka. And overpowered with intoxication,
assuming a bashful look, she went on tempting the great saint's son. And
when she saw that the heart of Rishyasringa had been touched, she
repeatedly pressed his body with her own and casting glances, slowly
went away under the pretext that she was going to make offerings on the
fire. On her departure, Rishyasringa became over-powered with love and
lost his sense. His mind turned constantly to her and felt itself
vacant. And he began to sigh and seemed to be in great distress. At that
moment appeared Vibhandaka, Kasyapa's son, he whose eyes were tawny like
those of a lion, whose body was covered with hair down to the tip of the
nails, who was devoted to studies proper for his caste, and whose life
was pure and was passed in religious meditation. He came up and saw that
his son was seated alone, pensive and sad, his mind upset and sighing
again and again with upturned eyes. And Vibhandaka spake to his
distressed son, saying, "My boy! why is it that thou art not hewing the
logs for fuel. I hope thou hast performed the ceremony of burnt offering
today. I hope thou hast polished the sacrificial ladles and spoons and
brought the calf to the milch cow whose milk furnisheth materials for
making offerings on the fire. Verily thou art not in thy wonted state, O
son! Thou seemest to be pensive, and to have lost thy sense. Why art
thou so sad today? Let me ask thee, who hath been to this place
today?"'"


SECTION CXII

"'Rishyasringa said, "Here came to-day a religious student with a mass
of hair on his head. And he was neither short nor tall. And he was of a
spirited look and a golden complexion, and endued with eye large as
lotuses; and he was shining and graceful as a god. And rich was his
beauty blazing like the Sun; and he was exceedingly fair with eyes
graceful and black. And his twisted hair was blue-black and neat and
long and of a fragrant scent and tied up with strings of gold. A
beautiful ornament was shining on his neck which looked like lightning
in the sky. And under the throat he had two balls of flesh without a
single hair upon them and of an exceedingly beautiful form. And his
waist was slender to a degree and his navel neat; and smooth also was
the region about his ribs. Then again there shone a golden string from
under his cloth, just like this waist-string of mine. And there was
something on his feet of a wonderful shape which give forth a jingling
sound. Upon his wrists likewise was tied a pair of ornaments that made a
similar sound and looked just like this rosary here. And when he walked,
his ornaments uttered a jingling sound like those uttered by delighted
ganders upon a sheet of water. And he had on his person garments of a
wonderful make; these clothes of mine are by no means beautiful like
those. And his face was wonderful to behold; and his voice was
calculated to gladden the heart; and his speech was pleasant like the
song of the male blackbird. And while listening to the same I felt
touched to my inmost soul. And as a forest in the midst of the vernal
season, assumes a grace only when it is swept over by the breeze, so, O
father! he of an excellent and pure smell looks beautiful when fanned by
the air. And his mass of hair is neatly tied up and remains adhering to
the head and forehead evenly sundered in two. And his two eyes seemed to
be covered with wonderful Chakravaka birds of an exceedingly beautiful
form. And he carried upon his right palm a wonderful globur fruit, which
reaches the ground and again and again leaps up to the sky in a strange
way. And he beats it and turns himself round and whirls like a tree
moved by the breeze. And when I looked at him, O father! he seemed to be
a son of the celestials, and my joy was extreme, and my pleasure
unbounded. And he clasped my body, took hold of my matted hair, and bent
down my mouth, and, mingling his mouth with my own, uttered a sound that
was exceedingly pleasant. And he doth not care for water for washing his
feet, nor for those fruits offered by me; and he told me that such was
the religious observance practised by him. And he gave unto me a number
of fruits. Those fruits were tasteful unto me: these here are not equal
to them in taste. They have not got any rind nor any stone within them,
like these. And he of a noble form gave me to drink water of an
exceedingly fine flavour; and having drunk it, I experienced great
pleasure; and the ground seemed to be moving under my feet. And these
are the garlands beautiful and fragrant and twined with silken threads
that belong to him. And he, bright with fervent piety, having scattered
these garlands here, went back to his own hermitage. His departure hath
saddened my heart; and my frame seems to be in a burning sensation! And
my desire is to go to him as soon as I can, and to have him every day
walk about here. O father, let me this very moment go to him. Pray, what
is that religious observance which is being practised by him. As he of a
noble piety is practising penances, so I am desirous to live the same
