One of these is God; Man himself is the other.


a. Two Kinds of Worship.

Worship means 'worthiness,' and thence 'regarding anyone as worthy.'
For this reason a magistrate is called 'his worship'; and a guild or
company is called 'worshipful.'  In the Marriage Service the man says
to his wife "I thee worship" because he sets her before all else.  In
Wyclif's Bible (S. Matth. xix. 19) we find "Worschipe thi fadir and thi
moder."  In old days _any act of mind or body acknowledging the
worthiness of another was an Act of Worship_.  In later days the word
'Worship' has been limited.

_Limitation_ 1.  Since God alone is perfectly worthy, worship is now
ascribed usually to God alone: _any act of mind or body acknowledging
the worthiness of God may still be called an Act of Worship_.  For
instance, in Col. iii. 17-iv. 1, the duties of mankind in daily life
are set forth as a constant acknowledgment of the presence of God.  The
repetition of the word (_kurios_) meaning 'Lord' and 'master'--10 times
in 10 verses--falls on the ear like a peal of bells, calling us to make
daily life an unbroken Worship of God.

_Limitation_ 2.  We ought not to forget that life is all one piece; and
that the word Worship should describe what we do and say outside our
prayers, as well as what we say and think in prayer and praise.  The
word is, however, more commonly limited to words and thoughts.  These
two limitations lead us {14} to a second definition of worship as
_words and thoughts which acknowledge the worthiness of God_.  We have
nearly abandoned the word as describing the honour paid by one creature
to another, and but rarely use it of acts of the body.

God is always the object of Worship: but the subject of worship is
two-fold--we may speak of ourselves or we may speak of our God.  When
we chiefly think of God in worship we call it Praise: when we chiefly
think of ourselves we call it Prayer.

These are then the two kinds of Worship--Praise and Prayer.  It is
evident that the Lord's Prayer teaches us to put Praise in the higher
place.


b. Praise and Prayer.

Praise.  There are two ways in which respect is paid to a man, viz. (1)
Outspoken praise, (2) Deference to his words.  In like manner we praise
God (1) by dwelling with joy and gladness on His perfections; and (2)
by listening with reverence to His Word.

Prayer, on the other hand, is that kind of worship which acknowledges
God as the Source of all our help.  Our needs are necessarily in our
minds when we pray.  We think of them in order to ask Him to help us;
and we think of them again when we thank Him for the help which we have
already had.

Thanksgiving might be coupled with Praise because its aim is to glorify
God: but as its motive is the thought of human wants which have been
already supplied, Thanksgiving is placed with the Prayers, which also
relate to human wants.

{15}

We must therefore expect to find in Worship;

   I. Praise.  (1) Declaration of God's excellence.
               (2) Attention to His Word.

  II. Prayer   (3) Petitions for grace and help.
               (4) Thanksgivings for grace and help.


c. Intention and Setting.

The same words may serve for Praise and for Prayer.  The plainest
meaning of "Hallowed be Thy Name" is Praise to God.  But it may be also
a Prayer to Him to cause His Name to be hallowed.  If we have no reason
to the contrary, we shall use the Lord's Prayer as an act of Praise and
Prayer--Praise in its first three petitions, Prayer in its last four.
If, however, we want to ask Him to cause His Name to be hallowed and
His Kingdom to come and His Will to be done, we can turn it all into a
prayer.

This direction of our minds into a certain channel is called
'Intention'.

We have already said that Unity of Intention is the essence of
congregational worship.  Hence the Intention must be the same in all
the worshippers if they use words suitable for both Praise and Prayer.
If one is saying "Hallowed be Thy Name" and thinking chiefly of God's
holiness, his Intention will be different from that of a neighbour who
is thinking chiefly of the wickedness of sin.  We need some agreement,
that our intention may be the same.

This agreement might have been left to the knowledge of those who take
part in the Service.  They might have been expected to learn what the
intention is, at each place when the Lord's Prayer is said.  Or it
might {16} have been stated in a Rubric, or direction, at the head of
the Prayer.  Neither of these methods is adopted in the Book of Common
Prayer.  Instead of them, the Prayer itself is so arranged as to
proclaim the Intention.

When it is to be used for Praise, the words "_for thine is the kingdom,
the power, and the glory, for ever and ever_" are placed at the end:
when it is to be used for Prayer, the Lesser Litany "_Lord have mercy
upon us, Christ have mercy upon us, Lord have mercy upon us_" is placed
at the beginning.

It is convenient to call this the 'setting'.

When the Lord's Prayer is 'set' for Praise, every petition in it is to
be said with that _intention_.  We shall then unite in praising God for
the glory of His holy Name, the majesty of His Kingdom, the power of
His Will, and also as the Giver, the Forgiver, the Leader and
Deliverer.  The thought of our weaknesses will be as much as possible
left out, that we may rejoice in the perfections of God.

In like manner, when the Lord's Prayer is 'set' for Prayer, the thought
of human wants will be present in every petition.  We have great need
to pray that God will cause His Name to be hallowed, His Kingdom to
come, and His Will to be done, on earth as in heaven, as well as to ask
Him for the necessaries of life, the forgiveness of sins, guidance, and
deliverance from evil.


d. The key-note of Prayer and Praise.

"When ye pray, say, Our Father, &c."  S. Luke xi. 2.


We can now understand why the Lord's Prayer is used twice in the same
Service.  The Praises begin with it and the Prayers begin with it.  The
setting of {17} the Lord's Prayer will always proclaim what kind of
Service is beginning[1].  Thus the Lord's Prayer is made to strike the
key-note of the Service, or part of a Service, to which it is prefixed.


e. Forms of Worship.

We have seen that Unity of Intention is necessary to congregational
worship.  When a few people, animated by the same sentiments, are drawn
together by one motive, and incur the same dangers, it matters little
whether they use a form of worship or not.  Whatever words are used in
their name, their unity of intention is secured by the fact that they
have no diversity of desires.

If the small body becomes a large one and times grow peaceful,
diversity of desires will destroy unity of worship unless they adopt a
form.

Forms of worship should, if possible, unite the most diverse features
of character, occupation, danger, trial, suffering, joy, &c. in the
expressions of Praise or Prayer which are common to them all.  Local
colouring and personal references are admissible only when they arouse
a common emotion.  The Lord's Prayer {18} is in this, as in other
respects, an ideal Form of Worship.

Christian Worship began amongst people who were already accustomed to
Forms.  The Jews had Psalms for Worship (1 Chron. xvi. 4-43), and two
Lessons in their Synagogue Service (Acts xv. 21, First Lesson: Acts
xiii. 27, Second Lesson).  The two Lessons were followed by the
Exhorter (Acts xiii. 15; St Luke iv. 16, 17).

The word _Amen_, being Hebrew, gives further evidence of the derivation
of the first Christian forms from the Synagogue Services, with, of
course, a Christian character infused into them (1 Cor. xiv. 15, 16;
cf. Deut. xxvii. 15-26).

Amen, as a Hebrew adjective, means _firm, faithful_; and, as an adverb,
_verily_, or, as the Catechism explains it, _so be it_.  "Its proper
place is where one person confirms the words of another, and adds his
wish for success to the other's vows and predictions" (Gesenius).  Each
of the first four Books of the Psalms ends with it--see Psalms xli.,
lxxii., lxxxix., cvi.

For some time the first Christians were able to resort to the Temple
and Synagogues, and both worship and teach there (Acts ii. 46, iii. 1,
3, 8, 11, v. 12, 21, 25, 42: xiii. 5, 14, xiv. 1, xvii. 1, 2, xix. 8).
They were joined by a number of the Priests (Acts vi. 7) whose help in
arranging the services would bring a considerable influence in the same
direction.  At Ephesus (Acts xix. 9) a division arose in the Synagogue,
causing S. Paul and the Christian disciples to remove into a school.
At Corinth, for a similar {19} reason, they set up the Christian
worship in the next house to the Synagogue, and the Ruler of the
Synagogue went with them (Acts xviii. 7, 8).  It is not very surprising
that under these circumstances they derived some of their forms of
Worship from the Synagogue.

Forms assist the mind to take its due part in the worship which we
offer to the Almighty.  Worship is offered with body, mind and spirit.
If one of these encroaches on the others, their share is in danger.  If
the tongue and the knees and the hands are too much engaged in it, the
mind grows weary or idle.  If the mind is too busily employed, the
spirit has a diminished share, or the body is indolent.  It is
necessary to provide occupation for the mind, but not to occupy it in
following great mental efforts for which it is unprepared.  If the mind
is unprepared, it no sooner reaches one point than it has to follow the
speaker to another; and thereby the spirit loses its power of speeding
the utterance to the throne of God.


f. Worship-Forms.

(See Table, p. 21.  Cf. Chap. I, p. 3.)

We find that, in the Services, shares are distributed to the
worshippers in five different ways, which may be called Worship-forms.
The Table on p. 21 should be carefully studied.  Hooker's description
of them (E. P. v. xxxix. 1) is a little difficult to make out; but it
will be found to verify our table.  (See Appendix A, pp. 22, 23.)

{20}

Walter Travers was Reader at the Temple Church in London, when (1585)
Richard Hooker was appointed to be Master of the Temple.  Travers had
been a friend and favourite of Thomas Cartwright, a severe critic of
the Order and Discipline of the Church of England.  Travers took up the
criticisms, and so attacked Hooker that the latter in self-defence
wrote his Books on _The Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity_ (1592), wherein
he replies to Cartwright's and Travers' criticisms.

The Worship-forms have been in use for so long that it is scarcely
possible to discuss their origin.  The traces of them in the Bible are
interesting:

1.  Amen.  1 Cor. xiv. 16; Rev. xxii. 20.

2.  Responsorial or Interjectional.  S. Luke ii. 13, 14.

3.  Anthem.  Exodus xv. 21; Isaiah vi. 3.

4.  Litany.

5.  Preceded.  Exodus xxiv. 7, xix. 7, 8, xx. 18-21.

The Prayer Book furnishes examples of Praise and Prayer in each Form,
excepting the Litany Form, which is used only for Prayer.  But there is
no reason why that also should not be used for Praise: the 136th Psalm
will show how this might be done.

{21}

THE FIVE KINDS OF WORSHIP FORMS

(See Hooker, _Eccl. Pol._ v. xxxix. 1.)

                                      Examples--       Examples--
                                       Prayer           Praise

  1. The Minister       AMEN form     The Collects     Prayer of
     offers and the                                    Consecration
     People endorse                                    in Holy
     it                                                Communion (see
                                                       1 Cor. xiv. 16)

  2. Minister and       Responsorial,   Hymn at         Sursum Corda
     People pursue      or              Ordination of   in Holy
     different lines    INTERJECTIONAL  Priests         Communion
     interrupting       form            Preces before   Versicles
     one another                        Collects        before
                                                        Psalms

  3. The Congregation   Antiphonal,     "From our       The Psalms
     form two           or ANTHEM       enemies, &c."   in Mattins
     companies which    form            --8 verses in   and
     reply to one                       the Litany      Evensong
     another

  4. The Minister       LITANY          The main body
     names the subject  form            of the Litany
     and the People
     offer the prayer
     (or praise)

  5. A portion of       PRECEDED        The             Lesson and
     Holy Scripture     prayer or       Commandments    Canticle
     is read and the    praise          in Holy
     prayer or praise                   Communion
     completes it as
     an Act of Worship


{22}

APPENDIX A.

Cartwright, attacking the Prayer Book, 1572 or later, wrote--

"For the singing of Psalms by course and side after side, although it
be very ancient yet it is not commendable, and so much the more to be
suspected for that the Devil hath gone about to get it so great
authority, partly by deriving it from Ignatius' time, and partly in
making the world believe that this came from heaven, and that the
Angels were heard to sing after this sort," &c.

To this Hooker (_Eccl. Polity_, v. xxxix. 1) replies--

"And if the prophet David did think that the very meeting of men
together and their accompanying one another to the House of God should
make the bond of their love insoluble, and tie them in a league of
inviolable amity (Ps. lv. 14); how much more may we judge it reasonable
to hope that the like effects may grow _in each of the people towards
other_, in them [Sidenote: Anthem] all towards their pastor, and in
their pastor towards every of them, between whom there daily and
interchangeably pass, in the hearing of God Himself, and in the
presence of His holy Angels, so many heavenly acclamations,
exultations, provocations, petitions, songs of {23} comfort, psalms of
praise and thanksgiving: in all which [Sidenote: Amen] particulars, as
when _the pastor maketh their suits and they with one voice testify a
general assent thereunto; or when he joyfully beginneth, and they with
like alacrity follow_, dividing [Sidenote: Interjection] between them
the sentences wherewith they strive which shall most show his own and
stir up others' zeal, to the glory of that God whose name they magnify;
[Sidenote: Litany] or _when he proposeth unto God their necessities,
and they their own requests for relief in every of them; or when he
lifteth up his voice like a trumpet_ to proclaim unto them the laws
[Sidenote: Preceded] of God, _they adjoining_, though not as Israel did
by way of generality, a cheerful promise, 'All that the Lord hath
commanded we will do,' yet that which God doth no less approve, that
which savoureth more of meekness, that which testifieth rather a
feeling knowledge of our common imbecility, _unto the several branches
thereof several lowly and humble requests_ for grace at the merciful
hands of God to perform the thing which is commanded; or when they wish
reciprocally each other's ghostly happiness, or when he by exhortation
raiseth them up, and they by protestation of their readiness declare he
speaketh not in vain unto them; these interlocutory forms of speech,
what are they else, but most effectual, partly testifications, and
partly inflammations, of all piety?"



[1] There are two or three apparent exceptions which on examination
prove the rule.  At the beginning of the Communion Service the
intention is so plain and the _Lord have mercy_ is repeated so often
with the Commandments, that it is left out before the Lord's Prayer.
At Baptism and Confirmation there is no setting, probably because the
Thanksgiving close of those services has the character of both Praise
