unseen.

The reason for the warning goes on two principles: one that
righteousness is to be rewarded, over and above its own inherent
blessedness; another, that the prospect of the reward is a legitimate
stimulus, over and above the prime reason for righteousness, namely,
that it is righteous. The New Testament morality is not good enough for
some very superfine people, who are pleased to call it selfish because
it lets a martyr brace himself in the fire by the vision of the crown
athwart the smoke. Somehow or other, however, that selfish morality gets
itself put in practice, and turns out more unselfish people than its
assailants manage to produce. Perhaps the motive which they attack may
be part of the reason.

The mingling of regard for man's approbation with apparently righteous
acts absolutely disqualifies them for receiving God's reward, for it
changes their whole character, and they are no longer what they seem.
Charity given from that motive is not charity, nor prayer offered from
it devotion.

I. The general warning is applied to three cases, of which we have to
deal with two. Our Lord speaks first of ostentatious almsgiving. Note
that we are not to take 'blowing the trumpets' as actual fact. Nobody
would do that in a synagogue. The meaning of all attempts, however
concealed, to draw attention to one's beneficence, is just what the
ear-splitting blast would be; and the incongruity of startling the
worshippers with the harsh notes is like the incongruity of doing good
and trying to attract notice. I think Christ's ear catches the screech
of the brazen abomination in a good many of the ways of raising and
giving money, which find favour in the Church to-day. This is an
advertising age, and flowers that used to blush unseen are forced now
under glass for exhibition. No one needs to blow his own trumpet
nowadays. We have improved on the ruder methods of the Pharisees, and
newspapers and collectors will blow lustily and loud for us, and defend
the noise on the ground that a good example stimulates others. Perhaps
so, though it may be a question what it stimulates to, and whether B's
gift, drawn from him in imitation or emulation of A's, is any liker
Christ's idea of gifts than was A's, given that B might hear of it. To
a very large extent, the money getting and giving arrangements of the
modern Church are neither more nor less than the attempt to draw
Christ's chariot with the devil's traces. Christ condemned ostentation.
His followers too often try to make use of it. 'They have their reward.'
Observe that _have_ means _have received in full_, and note the emphasis
of that _their_. It is all the reward that they will ever get, and all
that they are capable of. The pure and lasting crown, which is a fuller
possession of God Himself, has no charms for them, and could not be
given. And what a poor thing it is which they seek--the praise of men, a
breath, as unsubstantial and short-lived as the blast of the trumpet
which they blew before their selfish benevolence. Their charity was no
charity, for what they did was not to give, but to buy. Their gift was a
speculation. They invested in charity, and looked for a profit of
praise. How can they get God's reward? True benevolence will even hide
the giving right hand from the idle left, and, as far as may be, will
dismiss the deed from the doer's consciousness. Such alms, given wholly
out of pity and desire to be like the all-giving Father, can be
rewarded, and will be, with that richer acquaintance with Him and more
complete victory over self, which is the heaven of heaven and the
foretaste of it now.

In its coarsest forms, this ostentation is out and out hypocrisy, which
consciously assumes a virtue which it has not. But far more common and
dangerous is the subtle, unconscious mingling of it with real
charity--the eye wandering from the poor, whom the hand is helping, to
the bystanders--and it is this mingling which we have therefore to take
most heed to avoid. One drop of this sour stuff will curdle whole
gallons of the milk of human kindness. The hypocrisy which hoodwinks
ourselves is more common and perilous than that which blinds others.

II. We need not dwell at length on the second application of the general
warning--to prayer; as the words are almost, and the thoughts entirely,
identical with those of the former verses. If there be any action of the
spirit which requires the complete exclusion of thoughts of men, it is
prayer, which is the communion of the soul alone with God. It is as
impossible to pray, and at the same time to think of men, as to look up
and down at once. If we think of prayer, as formalists in all times have
done, as so many words, then it will not seem incongruous to choose the
places where men are thickest for 'saying our prayers,' and we shall do
it with all the more spirit if we have spectators. That accounts for a
great deal of the 'devotion' in Mohammedan and Roman Catholic countries
which travellers with no love for Protestant Christianity are so fond of
praising. But if we think of prayer as Christ did, as being the yearning
of the soul to God, we shall feel that the inmost chamber and the closed
door are its fitting accompaniments. Of course, our Lord is not
forbidding united prayer; for each of the assembled worshippers may be
holding communion with God, which is none the less solitary though
shared by others, and none the less united though in it each is alone
with God.

III. Our Lord passes for a time from the more immediate subject of
ostentation to add other teaching about prayer, which still farther
unfolds its true conception. Another corruption arising from the error
of thinking that prayer is an outward act, is 'vain repetition,'
characteristic of all heathen religion, and resting upon a profound
disbelief in the loving willingness of God to help. Of course, earnest,
reiterated prayer is not vain repetition. Jesus is not here condemning
His own agony in Gethsemane when He thrice 'said the same words.' The
persistence in prayer, which is the child of faith, is no relation to
the parrot-like repetition which is the child of disbelief, nor does the
condemnation of the one touch the other. The frenzied priests who
yelled, 'O Baal, hear us!' all the long day; the Buddhists who repeat
the sacred invocation till they are stupefied; the poor devotee who
thinks merit is proportioned to the number of Paternosters and Aves, are
all instances of this gross mechanical conception of prayer. Are there
no similar superstitions nearer home? Are there no ministers or
congregations that we ever heard of, who have a regulation length for
their prayers, and would scarcely think they had prayed at all if their
devotions were as short as most of the prayers in the Bible? Are we in
no danger of believing what Christ here tells us is pure
heathenism--that many words may move God?

The only real remedy against such degradation of the very idea of prayer
lies in the deeper conceptions of God and of it which Christ here gives.
He knows our needs before we ask. Then what is prayer for? Not to inform
Him, nor to move Him, unwilling, to have mercy, as if, like some proud
prince, He required a certain amount of recognition of His greatness as
the price of His favours, but to fit our own hearts by conscious need
and true desire and dependence, to receive the gifts which He is ever
willing to give, but we are not always fit to receive. As St. Augustine
has it, the empty vessel is by prayer carried to the full fountain.


SOLITARY PRAYER

     'Enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to
     thy Father which is in secret,'--MATT. vi. 6.

An old heathen who had come to a certain extent under the influence of
Christ, called prayer 'the flight of the solitary to the Solitary.'
There is a deep truth in that, though not all the truth.

Prayer is not only the most intensely individual act that a man can
perform, but it is also the highest social act. Christ came not to carry
solitary souls by a solitary pathway to heaven, but to set the solitary
in families and to rear up a church. Of that church the highest function
is united worship.

No one is likely to fall into the mistake of supposing that this passage
before us condemns praying in the synagogues, or even, if need were, at
the street corners. It does not, of course, interdict social public
prayer, though it enjoins solitary secret communion with the solitary,
secret God.

I. What is the practice here enjoined?

Since 'that they may be seen of men' constitutes the evil, we may fairly
say that Christ is not here prescribing the place where, but the spirit
in which, we ought to pray; that what He condemns is not the fact of
praying where we can be seen, but of picking out the place in order that
we may be seen; that, in a word, the contrast here is between
ostentation and sincerity. A man that has sidelong looks at the
passers-by in his devotions has not much devotion.

But then, as a material help to this, we need solitude and secrecy; they
are not indispensable, but almost so. And in that solitude what is to be
our occupation? One word answers the question--Communion. We are to be
alone that we may more fully and thrillingly feel that we are with God.
That communion will have an intellectual element in which we try to rise
to perception of the high truths as to God, or in meditation gaze on
Him, and a petitionary element in which we ask for the communication of
His grace according to our needs.

II. What is the special worth of such a habit?

1. The truths that we profess to believe are in their nature such as can
only be vividly realised by such an exercise. They are all matters of
faith, not of sense. God is a spirit, and is felt near by none but still
and waiting spirits. Our religion has to do with the Unseen, the Solemn,
the Profound, the Remote. These are not to be fully felt hastily. They
are like mountains that grow on us as we gaze, like a fair scene that we
must be alone in, rightly to feel. They must be allowed to saturate the
soul. The eye must be slowly accustomed to the light.

2. The pressure of the world can only be resisted by such an exercise.

Our business as Christians is to keep ourselves free from it.

3. The tone and balance of our own minds can only be preserved and
restored thus. Solitude is the mother-country of the strong. 'I was left
alone, and I saw this great vision.' We get hot and fevered, interested
and absorbed, and we need solitude as a counterpoise.

4. What is the connection of this with other kinds of worship and with
our life's work? It has a function of its own.

These cannot be substituted for it--public worship, reading Christian
books, bring a different class of feelings altogether into play.

They are not to be excluded by it. They find their true foundation in
it. A tree's branches stretch to the same circumference as its roots.

5. What is the special need of this precept for this age?

It is neglected in our modern life. The evils of our modern
Christianity, the low tone of religion, the small grasp of Christian
truth, the irreligious cast of religious work.

The thought of being alone with God will be a joy--or a terror.


THE STRUCTURE OF THE LORD'S PRAYER

     'After this manner therefore pray ye.'--MATT. vi. 9.

'After this manner' may or may not imply that Christ meant this prayer
to be a form, but He certainly meant it for a model. And they who drink
in its spirit, and pray, seeking God's glory before their own
satisfaction, and, while trustfully asking from His hand their daily
bread, rise quickly to implore the supply of their spiritual hunger, do
pray after this manner,' whether they use these words or no.

All begins with the recognition of the Fatherhood of God. The clear and
fixed contemplation of God is the beginning of all true prayer, and that
contemplation does not fasten on His remote and partially intelligible
attributes, nor strive to climb to behold Him as in Himself, but grasps
Him as related to us. The Fatherhood of God implies His communication of
life, His tenderness, and our kindred. This is the prayer of the
children of the kingdom, and can only be truly offered by those who, by
faith in the Son, have received the adoption of sons. It gathers all
such into a family, so delivering their prayer from selfish absorption
in their own joys or needs. As our Father 'in Heaven,' He is lifted
clear above earth's limitations, changes, and imperfections. So
childlike familiarity is sublimed into reverence, our hearts are drawn
upward, and freed from the oppressive and narrowing attachment to earth
and sense.

The perfect sevenfold petitions of the prayer fall into two halves,
corresponding roughly to the first and second tables of the decalogue.
The first half consists of three petitions, which refer to God and His
kingdom. They are three, in accordance with the symbolism of numbers
which, in the Old Testament, always regards three as the sacred number
of completeness and of divinity. The second half consists of four
petitions, which refer to ourselves. They are four--the number which
symbolises the creature. The lessons taught by the order in which these
two halves occur do not need to be dwelt upon. God first and man second,
His glory before our wants--that is the true order. For how few of us is
it the spontaneous order! Do we first rise to God, and only secondly
descend to ourselves?

Note, too, the sequence in each of these halves. In the first we may say
that we begin from above and come down, or from within and come
outwards. In the second, the process is the opposite. We begin on the
lowest level with our external needs, and go upwards and inwards to
removal of sin, exemption from temptation, and complete deliverance from
evil. The first half gives us the beginning, middle, and end of God's
purposes for the world. The recognition of His name is the basis of His
kingdom, and His kingdom is the sphere in which alone His will is done.
The second half, in like manner, gives us the beginning, middle, and end
of His dealings with the individual, the common mercies of daily bread,
forgiveness, guidance, protection in conflict, and final deliverance.

The 'name' of God is His revealed character. He hallows it when He so
acts as to make His holiness manifest. We hallow it when we regard it as
the holy thing which it is. That petition is first, because the
knowledge of God as He is self-revealed is the deepest want of men, and
the spread of that knowledge and reverence is the way by which His
kingdom comes.

God's kingdom is His rule over men's hearts. Christ began His ministry
by proclaiming its near approach, and in effect brought it to earth. But
it spreads slowly in the individual heart, and in the world. Therefore,
this second petition is ever in place, until the consummation. God's
rule is established through the hallowing of His name; for it is a rule
which works on men through their understandings, and seeks no ignorant
submission.

The sum of this first half is, 'Thy will be done, as in Heaven, so on
earth.' Obedience to that will is the end of God's self-revelation. It
makes all the difference whether we begin with the thought of the name
or of the will. In the latter case, religion will be slavish and
submission sullen. There is no more horrible and paralysing conception
of God than that of mere sovereign will. But if we think of Him as
desiring that we should know His name, and as gathering all its
syllables into the one perfect 'Word of God'; then we are sure that His
will must be intelligible and good. Obedience becomes delight, and the
surrender of our wills to His the glad expression of love. He who begins
with 'Thy will be done' is a slave, and never really does the will at
all; he who begins with 'Our Father, hallowed be Thy name,' is a son,
and his will, gladly yielding, is free in surrender, strong in
self-abnegation, and restful in putting the reins into God's hands.

The two halves make a whole. The second, which deals with our needs,
starts with the cry for bread, and climbs up slowly through the ills of
life, from bodily hunger to trespasses and human unkindness and personal
weakness, and a world of temptation, and the double evil of sin and of
sorrow, and so regains at last the starting-point of the first half,
Heaven and God. The probable meaning of the difficult word rendered
'daily' seems to be 'sufficient for our need.' The lessons of the
petition are that God's children have a claim for the supply of their
wants, since He is bound, as a faithful Creator, not to send mouths
without sending meat to fill them, but that our desires should be
limited to our actual necessities, and our cravings, as well as our
efforts for the bread that perishes, made into prayers. Such a prayer
rightly used would put an end to much wicked luxury among Christians,
and to many questionable ways of getting wealth. 'Bless my cheating, my
sharp practice, my half lies!' If we dare not pray this prayer over what
we do in 'earning our living,' we had better ask ourselves whether we
are not rather earning our death.

Sin is debt Incurred to God. So Christ taught in the previous chapter by
His parable of agreeing with the adversary; and in the other parables
of the two debtors (Luke vii. 41) and of the unmerciful servant (Matt.
xviii. 23). As universal as the need for bread is the need for pardon.
It is the first want of the spiritual nature, but it is a constantly
recurring want, as this petition teaches us. Forgiveness is the
cancelling of a debt; but we must not forget that it is a Father's
forgiveness, and therefore does not merely, or even chiefly, imply the
removal of penalty, but much rather the unimpeded flow of the Father's
love, and consequently the removal of the miserable consciousness of
separation from Him. The appended comparison 'as we have forgiven' does
not mean that our forgiveness is the reason for God's forgiveness of us.
The ground of our pardon is Christ's work, the condition of it our
faith; but, as we saw in considering the Beatitudes, the condition on
which the children of the kingdom can retain the blessing of the divine
pardon is their imitation of it.

The next petition is the expression of conscious weakness. The forgiven
man, though in his deepest soul hating sin, is still surrounded with
sparks which may fire the combustibles in his heart. If we ask not to be
led into temptation, because we want a smooth and easy road, we are
wrong. If we do so from self-distrust and fear lest we fall, then it is
allowable. But perhaps we may draw a distinction between being tempted
and being led into temptation. The former may mean the presentation of
an inducement to do evil which we cannot hope to escape, and which it is
not well that we should escape. The latter may mean the further step of
embracing or being entangled in it by consenting to it. We do not need
to dread the entrance into the Valley of the Shadow of Death, for if the
Lord be with us we shall pass through it. Our prayer may mean, lead us,
not into, but through, the trial. It is the plaint of conscious
weakness, the recognition of God as ordering our path, the cry of a
heart which desires holiness most of all, and which trusts in God's
upholding hand in the hour of trial.

'Deliver us from evil' is a petition which, in its width, fits the close
of the prayer better than does the translation of the Revised Version.
There seems an echo of the words in Paul's noble confidence while the
headsman's axe was so near, 'The Lord will deliver me from every evil
work.' Entire exemption from evil of every sort, whether sin or sorrow,
is the true end of our prayers, as it is the crown of God's purpose.
Nothing less can satisfy our yearnings; nothing less can fulfil the
divine desire for us. Nothing less should be the goal of our faith and
hope. To the height of meek assurance, and the reaching out of our souls
in desire which is the pledge of its own fulfilment, Christ would have
us attain on the wings of prayer. _They_ can have no narrower bonds
to the horizon of their hopes, nor any lesser blessing for the
satisfaction of their longings, whose prayer begins with 'Our Father
which art in heaven'; for where the Father is, the child must wish to
be, and some day will be, to go out no more.


'OUR FATHER'

     'Our Father which art in heaven.'--Matt. vi. 9.

The words of Christ, like the works of God, are inexhaustible. Their
depth is concealed beneath an apparent simplicity which the child and
the savage can understand. But as we gaze upon them and try to fathom
all their meaning, they open as the skies above us do when we look
steadily into their blue chambers, or as the sea at our feet does when
we bend over to pierce its clear obscure. The poorest and weakest learns
from them the lesson of divine love and a mighty helper; the reverent,
loving contemplation of the profoundest souls, and the experience of all
the ages discern ever new depths in them and feel that much remains
unlearned. 'They did all eat and were filled, men, women, and
children--and they took up of fragments that were left five baskets
full.'

This is especially true about the Lord's Prayer. We teach it to our
children, and its divine simplicity becomes their lisping tongues and
little folded hands. But the more we ponder it, and try to make it the
model of our prayers, the more wonderful does its fulness of meaning
appear, the more hard does it become to pray 'after this manner.' There
is everything in it: the loftiest revelation of God in His relations to
us and in His purposes with the world; the setting forth of all our
relations to Him, to His purposes, and to one another; the grandest
vision of the future for mankind; the care for the smallest wants of
each day.

As a theology, it smites into fragments all false, unworthy human
thoughts of God. As an exposition of religion, the man who has drunk in
its spirit has ceased from self-will and sin. As a foundation of social
morals it lays deep the only basis for true human brotherhood, and he
who lives in its atmosphere will live in charity and helpfulness with
all mankind. As a guide for personal life, it gives us authoritatively
the order and relative worth of all human desires, and with these the
order and subordination of our pursuits and life's aims. As a prayer it
is all comprehensive and intended to be so, holding within the perfect
seven of its petitions, all for which we should come to God, and resting
them all on His divine name, and closing them all with a chorus of
thanksgiving. As a prophecy it opens the loftiest vision, beyond which
none is possible, of the final transformation of this world into the
kingdom in which God's will shall be perfectly done, and of the final
deliverance from, all evil of the struggling, sinning, sorrowing souls
of His children.

I desire to try in a series of sermons to set forth what little I can
see of the depth and comprehensiveness of this model of all prayer, and
of its ever fresh applicability to the wants and difficulties of our
days as of all days. But before dealing with that great invocation of
the divine name on which all rests, a word or two must be said touching
the introductory clause.

'After this manner pray ye.' The question which is usually made
prominent in thinking of these words is really a very subordinate one.
Did Christ intend to establish a form, or only to give an example?
Churchmen say, a form; Dissenters generally say, an example. But it
would be better for both Churchmen and Dissenters to try to realise for
themselves what 'this manner' is.

Unquestionably, whether our Lord is giving us a form or not, His chief
object was not to prescribe words. To pray is not to repeat petitions,
and His commandment has for its chief meaning a much deeper one than
that He was giving us either a form which we are to incorporate verbally
with our prayers, or an outline according to which our spoken
supplications are to be shaped. Whether in addition to this we are to
regard the very words as to be used by us, will be determined by each
man and church according as he regards the use of set forms in prayer as
being the true and noblest manner of prayer. Such use is certainly not
inconsistent with the utmost spirituality, but the habitual use of
forms, especially their exclusive use, seems to many of us to be
dangerous, regard being had to the tendency of human nature to rest in
them. And it is not without significance that this very prayer of our
Lord's, which was given as the corrective of vain repetitions and idle,
heathenish chattering of forms of prayer, has itself come to be the
saddest instance in all Christendom of these very faults, while the
beads slip through the fingers of the mechanical repeater of muttered
Paternosters. Instead of wrangling about this subordinate question, let
us try to pray after this manner. We shall find it hard, but blessed. Be
sure that every prayer not after this manner is after a wrong manner.

This prayer helps to reverse our foolish desire to make earth foremost.
The true end of prayer is to get our wills harmonised with His, not to
bend His to ours. Surely if self-denial and submission be the very heart
of Christianity, that should be most expressed in prayer which is the
very sanctuary of religion. The prayers that are to be offered after
this manner will not be passionate, petulant pleadings or prescriptions
to God to do this or that, but in them God and His glory will be first,
I second, and through Him and as He wills.

Ah, brethren! this is an awful requirement of Christ's. Who dare take
such holy words into his lips? It is a hard matter to pray as Christ
taught us. The prayer seems to move in a height of unapproachable
elevation, and the air there is too thin and pure for our gross lungs.
For be it remembered, we are not praying after this manner unless our
lives in some sort repeat and confirm our prayers. Do our hearts seek
first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness? Are our energies given
to this, as their noblest aim, to hallow God's name; or does the very
blood in our hearts throb hot, passionate desires for worldly things,
and God's name and kingdom and will seem dreamy and far-off objects
which kindle no desire in our souls and rule no effort of our lives,
like suns far away which shed little light upon the earth and sway not
its rolling tides, that are obedient to the nearer but borrowed light of
the changeful moon? If so, no matter whether we use this form or not, we
are not praying after this manner.

Look, now, at this first clause, which is the basis of all.

I. The divine Name which is the ground and object of all our prayers. It
is not merely a formula of address, like the superscription on a letter,
but the reality of His character as revealed before us. There is
inseparable from all prayer the effort to conceive worthily of Him to
whom we speak; to raise our souls to that height.

How much of our prayer, even while truest, fails here! We may be
distinctly conscious of our wants; our wishes may be right, and our
confidence may be firm that God will give us what we ask; yet how often
there is no vivid thought of Him filling the mind! How often our prayers
are offered to a mere name! How seldom through the cloud-wrack beneath
His feet do we see His face!

This absorbed contemplation is the necessary preliminary of all real
prayer, and there is a truth in the thought that such losing of self in
gazing on God is the highest form of prayer. We should feel as some
peasant come to court who stands on the threshold of the
presence-chamber, and forgetting his grievances and his embassy, gazes
entranced on the splendour and benignity of his sovereign.

Look, then, at this Name: what it expresses. It is not new. The Jews
dimly had it, and even Greek and other paganisms knew of a 'father of
Gods and men.' The name of Father carries with it primarily the idea of
the Source of life ('we also are His offspring'), and also, secondarily,
that of loving care.

How wonderful, how beautiful, that that earthly relation should find its
deepest reality in God! God be thanked that, 'like as a father pitieth
his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear Him.'

But the true Christian idea of God's fatherhood is more than all this.
This is a prayer for disciples, for those who alone can really pray. All
men are God's children because all draw their life from Him, were made
in His image, and are objects of His love. But there is a fatherhood and
a sonship which are not universal, and for which another birth is
necessary. Its conditions are plainly laid down by the Evangelist: 'To
as many as received Him, to them gave He power to become sons of God,'
and by the Apostle, 'Ye are the children of God through faith in Christ
Jesus.'

We are made sons through Jesus. We are made sons by faith.

And now, how should this Fatherhood affect our prayers? We shall come
with hope and familiar confidence, for 'your heavenly Father knoweth
what things ye have need of.' Does a father love to have his children
about him? Does a child shrink from telling its wishes to a father? Also
we must bend our wills to His--to a Father.

Contrast that conception with the ideas of God which we are all tempted
to cherish, the slavish one which dwells upon the gulf between God and
man, with the cold deity of 'natural religion,' with the Epicurean
notion of Him which divorces Him from all living interest in His
creation.

Contrast it with the ghastly image which our consciences and our fears
frame, the heathen notion of an avenger and cruel. We do not need to
seek to avert His anger. This mighty word shatters all cowering terror
and abject prostration.

And it is a vow as well as an Invocation, binding us to supreme love to
Him, to obedience to Him, to moral conformity with Him. Be ye perfect as
your Father which is in heaven is perfect. The noblest prayer is 'Abba,
Father.'

II. The loftiness and perfectness of that divine Name.

'In heaven.' Not fact, but symbol, to express His exaltation above the
earth, and so suggesting all ideas of remoteness from creatures, from
earth's limitations and conditions, changes and imperfection, and
showing the gulf between man and God.

1. The thought that He is in heaven deepens our reverence, love casting
out fear, but making us more lowly. It leads to familiar yet
awe-stricken approach.

2. It exalts the preciousness of the Fatherhood, as being free from all
weakness and all change. It reveals a better Father than we can know
here; one not narrow of view, infirm of purpose, weak in tenderness,
bounded in power. As the heavens stretch calm and serene above us, far
from all our trouble and noise, unvexed, pitying, and dropping rain and
dew on earth, so is He.

3. It draws our hearts and hopes to our Father's home.

4. It delivers us from worship of the visible and from worship by means
of the visible. So the Name guards against placing stress on externals
and secondary forms, places, times of worship.

III. The Community of Brotherhood of the Worshippers.

_Our_ Father.

1. All true enjoyment of blessings depends on our being willing to share
them. To keep for ourselves is to lose. We enter by faith into a great
community.

2. The effect of this on our prayers: to destroy their selfishness. We
bow to Him of whom the whole family is named.

3. Effect on our lives.

Dare we rise from our knees to plan and plot for ourselves? How we are
tempted to forget our brotherhood in personal animosities, vanity, and
self-interest, competing with others! Our differences of ideas arising
from differences of race, training, occupation, country, fling us apart.
Our differences of wealth and position alienate us. Our differences of
conception of Christianity often separate and embitter us. But do these
not crumble when we say '_Our_ Father'?

Think of the generations who have gone to the grave saying this prayer.
What a prophecy of the heaven, where all shall be gathered and each feel
his sense of Fatherhood increased by his brethren!

And this is the only possible basis for true fraternity among men.

Opinion? Men are not thinking machines.

Interest? Men are not ruled by calculations, and such union is the
destruction of true unity.

Common aims?--shallow.

Nation or race?--artificial and not capable of universality.

There is no brotherhood but that which rests on God's Fatherhood,
Christ's Sonship. For the world Christ has come, therefore we are no
more 'strangers and foreigners.'

Therefore, listening to His voice, and trusting in Him who has made us
heirs together with Him, let us lift up our voices, 'Our Father,' and
therein proclaim that God who loves every soul of man, who knows each
man's wants, who bends over him in pitying tenderness, who can neither
die nor change, and who will gather into His eternal home all His
prodigal children and keep them blessed by His side for evermore.


'HALLOWED BE THY NAME'

     'Hallowed be Thy name.'--Matt. vi. 9.

Name is character so far as revealed.

I. What is meaning of Petition?

Hallowed means to make holy; or to show as holy; or to regard as holy.
The second of these is God's hallowing of His Name. The third is men's.

The prayer asks that God would so act as to show the holiness of His
character, and that men, one and all, may see the holiness of His
character.

i.e. Hallowed by divine self-revelation.

Hallowed by human recognition.

Hallowed by human adoration and appropriate sentiments.

Hallowed by human action.

II. On what it rests:

On the Fatherhood of God.

On the confidence that God wills that His Name should be known. In
other words, the petition rests on the assurance of God's fatherly love,
which cannot but will that His children should know their Father as He
is.

On the fact that men need the knowledge of the Name.

On the conviction that men cannot attain it for themselves.

That Christ is the great means of His hallowing His Name.

His finished work does not render this prayer unnecessary.

'I have declared Thy name, and will declare it.'

That this is to be issue of all. A grand prophecy.

III. Why put first.

Singular, that so remote a petition should stand at beginning. We should
begin not with ourselves, but with God; not with temporal wants, not
even with our own spiritual ones.

We begin not with men, but with God.

It is God's glory even more than men's knowledge of Him that the
petition contemplates. And though the two things coincide, which of them
is foremost in our minds makes an infinite difference.

Then in regard to God, we first ask not that His law may be kept, but
that His nature may be known.

The place of this petition in the prayer is explained by considerations
which suggest very important thoughts for ourselves and all men.

That true knowledge of God is the deepest and fundamental necessity for
all men.

That the knowledge will affect their whole scheme of thought and life.

That the most important of all questions is, How does a man think of
God?

That the Inward comes before the Outward.

That knowledge is the guide of emotions and of practical life, as set
forth here in the order of petitions.

This sequence of petitions corrects many errors into which we are apt to
fall.

(a) That religion is chiefly to give us forgiveness.

(b) That accurate knowledge of God and His will matters comparatively
little if we have devout emotions and experiences.

(c) That plans for the reformation of men should begin with the
exterior, leaving theological subtleties to themselves.

But this is not a theological subtlety.

'Seek ye first the kingdom of God,' is a maxim for social reformation as
well as for individual life.

IV. To what practical life this prayer binds us.

Following in our estimates, aims, and practice the sequence which it
prescribes. Desiring for world most of all that it may hallow the Name.

Seeking for ourselves to hallow it.

Seeking for ourselves that we may be the means of others doing so.

The ever-present remembrance, that the name of God is blasphemed or
hallowed, that God is glorified or disgraced, by us.

That to be like His name is true way to commend it. Do you know this
name?


'THY KINGDOM COME'

     'Thy kingdom come.--MATT. vi. 10.

'The Lord reigneth, let the earth be glad'; 'The Lord reigneth, let the
people tremble,' was the burden of Jewish psalmist and prophet from the
first to the last. They have no doubt of His present dominion. Neither
man's forgetfulness and man's rebellion, nor all the dark crosses and
woes of the world, can disturb their conviction that He is then and for
ever the sole Lord.

The kingdom is come, then. Yet John the Baptist broke the slumbers of
that degenerate people with the trumpet-call, 'Repent, for the kingdom
is at hand.' It is not come, then--but coming. And the Master said, 'If
I by the finger of God cast out devils, no doubt the kingdom of God is
come nigh unto you.' It is come, then, in Him. This prayer throws it
forward again into the future, and far down on the stream of prophecy;
we hear borne up to us through the darkness the shouts that shall hail a
future day when here on earth the kingdoms of this world shall become
the kingdom of our Lord and of His Christ. It is a kingdom, then, that
has ever been, and yet has stages of progress, a kingdom that was
established in Jesus; a kingdom that has a past, a present, and a future
on earth. It is after this world that the words are said, 'Come, ye
blessed, enter into the kingdom.' It is a kingdom, then, manifested on
earth, and yet a kingdom into which death, who keeps the keys of all
secrets, admits us.

Once more--the kingdom of God is within you. 'The kingdom of God is
righteousness, and peace, and joy.' But there is beyond earth to be a
manifestation of the kingdom in a more perfect form. It is 'the kingdom
of heaven,' not only because the King is 'Our Father which art in
heaven,' but because we cannot completely come into it, or it into us,
till we pass out of earth by death, and enter through that gate into the
city. He has translated us into the kingdom of His dear Son.

It is a dominion, then, over heart and soul, having its realm within,
standing not so much in outward institutions as in inner experiences;
and yet a kingdom which, though like leaven hid, shall like leaven be
seen in its effects; though like a seed buried deep, shall like a seed
blossom into a mighty tree; though it cometh not with observation, yet
is like to the lightning that flashes with a kind of omnipresence in its
rapid course from end to end, everywhere at once; which though it be
within, yet clearly is meant to rule over all outward acts, and one day
to have all kings bowing down before it.

These are the varieties with which the one thought of the kingdom of
God, or of heaven, is presented in Scripture. It is eternal yet revealed
in time, ever here but ever coming, ever coming but never come on earth,
but entered when we go yonder, ruling us man by man, inward, spiritual,
unseen, and yet moulding nations and institutions, outward and visible,
compelling sight and filling all the earth.

But these varieties are not contradictions, still less are they the
effects of a vague and imperfect notion which means anything or
everything according to the fancy of the writer. The conception is clear
and well defined. The kingdom of God is an organised community which is
subject to the will of the personal God. The elements of subordination
and society are both there. On the one hand there is the Ruler, on the
other there is the mass of subjects. The whole of the varieties in the
use of the term can be all reconciled in the one simple central notion,
but we cannot afford to lose sight of any of them if we would understand
what is meant by this prayer.

Let us take these thoughts which I have suggested, as expressing the
Scriptural meaning of this phrase, and by their help try to ascertain
what this prayer suggests.

I. God reigns, yet we pray for the coming of His kingdom.

That is to acknowledge that the world has departed from Him. It is at
once to separate ourselves from those who see in it no signs of
departure and rebellion. It is to confess that, Lord as He is whether
men believe it or no, whether men will it or no, yet that the relation
of common subordination as to a supreme Lord which we hold with all
creatures is not all that we are fit for, not all that we should be.
That dominion which the psalmist saw making the sea and the fulness
thereof rejoice, which is at once the control and the upholding, the
sustaining and the commanding, of all orders of being, is not the whole
of the dominion which can be exercised over man. The rule, which we
share with the trees of the field and the tribes of life, is not all;
and the unwilling control which the thought of an overruling Providence
demands that we shall believe that God exercises over all the workings
of men--that is not enough. And the terrible bending of men into
unconscious instruments, by which He that sitteth in the heavens laughs
at princes' and rulers' counsel, speaking to the tyrant as the rod of
His anger, using men as the axe with which He hews, and the staff in His
