punishment.

S: And if We make him taste mercy from Us after distress that has
touched him, he would most certainly say: This is of me, and I do not
think the hour will come to pass, and if I am sent back to my Lord, I
shall have with Him sure good; but We will most certainly inform those
who disbelieved of what they did, and We will most certainly make them
taste of hard chastisement.

041.051
Y: When We bestow favours on man, he turns away, and gets himself remote
on his side (instead of coming to Us); and when evil seizes him, (he
comes) full of prolonged prayer!

P: When We show favour unto man, he withdraweth and turneth aside, but
when ill toucheth him then he aboundeth in prayer.

S: And when We show favor to man, he turns aside and withdraws himself;
and when evil touches him, he makes lengthy supplications.

041.052
Y: Say: "See ye if the (Revelation) is (really) from Allah, and yet do
ye reject it? Who is more astray than one who is in a schism far (from
any purpose)?"

P: Bethink you: If it is from Allah and ye reject it - Who is further
astray than one who is at open feud (with Allah)?

S: Say: Tell me if it is from Allah; then you disbelieve in it, who is
in greater error than he who is in a prolonged opposition?

041.053
Y: Soon will We show them our Signs in the (furthest) regions (of the
earth), and in their own souls, until it becomes manifest to them that
this is the Truth. Is it not enough that thy Lord doth witness all
things?

P: We shall show them Our portents on the horizons and within themselves
until it will be manifest unto them that it is the Truth. Doth not thy
Lord suffice, since He is Witness over all things?

S: We will soon show them Our signs in the Universe and in their own
souls, until it will become quite clear to them that it is the truth.
Is it not sufficient as regards your Lord that He is a witness over all
things?

041.054
Y: Ah indeed! Are they in doubt concerning the Meeting with their Lord?
Ah indeed! It is He that doth encompass all things!

P: How! Are they still in doubt about the meeting with their Lord? Lo!
Is not He surrounding all things?

S: Now surely they are in doubt as to the meeting of their Lord; now
surely He encompasses all things.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 42:

                     ASH-SHURA (COUNCIL, CONSULTATION)
 Total Verses: 53 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

042.001
Y: Ha-Mim.

P: Ha. Mim.

S: Ha Mim.

042.002
Y: 'Ain. Sin. Qaf.

P: A'in. Sin. Qaf.

S: Ain Sin Qaf.

042.003
Y: Thus doth (He) send inspiration to thee as (He did) to those before
thee,- Allah, Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom.

P: Thus Allah the Mighty, the Knower inspireth thee (Muhammad) as (He
inspired) those before thee.

S: Thus does Allah, the Mighty, the Wise, reveal to you, and (thus He
revealed) to those before you.

042.004
Y: To Him belongs all that is in the heavens and on earth: and He is
Most High, Most Great.

P: Unto Him belongeth all that is in the heavens and all that is in the
earth, and He is the Sublime, the Tremendous.

S: His is what is in the heavens and what is in the earth, and He is the
High, the Great.

042.005
Y: The heavens are almost rent asunder from above them (by Him Glory):
and the angels celebrate the Praises of their Lord, and pray for
forgiveness for (all) beings on earth: Behold! Verily Allah is He, the
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: Almost might the heavens above be rent asunder while the angels hymn
the praise of their Lord and ask forgiveness for those on the earth.
Lo! Allah, He is the Forgiver, the Merciful.

S: The heavens may almost rend asunder from above them and the angels
sing the praise of their Lord and ask forgiveness for those on earth;
now surely Allah is the Forgiving, the Merciful.

042.006
Y: And those who take as protectors others besides Him,- Allah doth
watch over them; and thou art not the disposer of their affairs.

P: And as for those who choose protecting friends beside Him, Allah is
Warden over them, and thou art in no wise a guardian over them.

S: And (as for) those who take guardians besides Him, Allah watches over
them, and you have not charge over them.

042.007
Y: Thus have We sent by inspiration to thee an Arabic Qur'an: that thou
mayest warn the Mother of Cities and all around her,- and warn (them)
of the Day of Assembly, of which there is no doubt: (when) some will be
in the Garden, and some in the Blazing Fire.

P: And thus We have inspired in thee a Lecture in Arabic, that thou
mayst warn the mother-town and those around it, and mayst warn of a day
of assembling whereof there is no doubt. A host will be in the Garden,
and a host of them in the Flame.

S: And thus have We revealed to you an Arabic Quran, that you may warn
the mother city and those around it, and that you may give warning of
the day of gathering together wherein is no doubt; a party shall be in
the garden and (another) party in the burning fire.

042.008
Y: If Allah had so willed, He could have made them a single people; but
He admits whom He will to His Mercy; and the wrongdoers will have no
protector nor helper.

P: Had Allah willed, He could have made them one community, but Allah
bringeth whom He will into His mercy. And the wrong-doers have no
friend nor helper.

S: And if Allah had pleased He would surely have made them a single
community, but He makes whom He pleases enter into His mercy, and the
unjust it is that shall have no guardian or helper.

042.009
Y: What! Have they taken (for worship) protectors besides Him? But it is
Allah,- He is the Protector, and it is He Who gives life to the dead:
It is He Who has power over all things,

P: Or have they chosen protecting friends besides Him? But Allah, He
(alone) is the Protecting Friend. He quickeneth the dead, and He is
Able to do all things.

S: Or have they taken guardians besides Him? But Allah is the Guardian,
and He gives life to the dead, and He has power over all things.

042.010
Y: Whatever it be wherein ye differ, the decision thereof is with Allah:
such is Allah my Lord: In Him I trust, and to Him I turn.

P: And in whatsoever ye differ, the verdict therein belongeth to Allah.
Such is my Lord, in Whom I put my trust, and unto Whom I turn.

S: And in whatever thing you disagree, the judgment thereof is (in)
Allah's (hand); that is Allah, my Lord, on Him do I rely and to Him do
I turn time after time.

042.011
Y: (He is) the Creator of the heavens and the earth: He has made for you
pairs from among yourselves, and pairs among cattle: by this means does
He multiply you: there is nothing whatever like unto Him, and He is the
One that hears and sees (all things).

P: The Creator of the heavens and the earth. He hath made for you pairs
of yourselves, and of the cattle also pairs, whereby He multiplieth
you. Naught is as His likeness; and He is the Hearer, the Seer.

S: The Originator of the heavens and the earth; He made mates for you
from among yourselves, and mates of the cattle too, multiplying you
thereby; nothing like a likeness of Him; and He is the Hearing, the
Seeing.

042.012
Y: To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth: He enlarges and
restricts. The Sustenance to whom He will: for He knows full well all
things.

P: His are the keys of the heavens and the earth. He enlargeth
providence for whom He will and straiteneth (it for whom He will). Lo!
He is Knower of all things.

S: His are the treasures of the heavens and the earth; He makes ample
and straitens the means of subsistence for whom He pleases; surely He
is Cognizant of all things.

042.013
Y: The same religion has He established for you as that which He
enjoined on Noah - the which We have sent by inspiration to thee - and
that which We enjoined on Abraham, Moses, and Jesus: Namely, that ye
should remain steadfast in religion, and make no divisions therein: to
those who worship other things than Allah, hard is the (way) to which
thou callest them. Allah chooses to Himself those whom He pleases, and
guides to Himself those who turn (to Him).

P: He hath ordained for you that religion which He commended unto Noah,
and that which We inspire in thee (Muhammad), and that which We
commended unto Abraham and Moses and Jesus, saying: Establish the
religion, and be not divided therein. Dreadful for the idolaters is
that unto which thou callest them. Allah chooseth for Himself whom He
will, and guideth unto Himself him who turneth (toward Him).

S: He has made plain to you of the religion what He enjoined upon Nuh
and that which We have revealed to you and that which We enjoined upon
Ibrahim and Musa and Isa that keep to obedience and be not divided
therein; hard to the unbelievers is that which you call them to; Allah
chooses for Himself whom He pleases, and guides to Himself him who
turns (to Him), frequently.

042.014
Y: And they became divided only after Knowledge reached them,- through
selfish envy as between themselves. Had it not been for a Word that
went forth before from thy Lord, (tending) to a Term appointed, the
matter would have been settled between them: But truly those who have
inherited the Book after them are in suspicious (disquieting) doubt
concerning it.

P: And they were not divided until after the knowledge came unto them,
through rivalry among themselves; and had it not been for a Word that
had already gone forth from thy Lord for an appointed term, it surely
had been judged between them. And those who were made to inherit the
Scripture after them are verily in hopeless doubt concerning it.

S: And they did not become divided until after knowledge had come to
them out of envy among themselves; and had not a word gone forth from
your Lord till an appointed term, certainly judgment would have been
given between them; and those who were made to inherit the Book after
them are most surely in disquieting doubt concerning it.

042.015
Y: Now then, for that (reason), call (them to the Faith), and stand
steadfast as thou art commanded, nor follow thou their vain desires;
but say: "I believe in the Book which Allah has sent down; and I am
commanded to judge justly between you. Allah is our Lord and your Lord:
for us (is the responsibility for) our deeds, and for you for your
deeds. There is no contention between us and you. Allah will bring us
together, and to Him is (our) Final Goal."

P: Unto this, then, summon (O Muhammad). And be thou upright as thou art
commanded, and follow not their lusts, but say: I believe in whatever
scripture Allah hath sent down, and I am commanded to be just among
you. Allah is our Lord and your Lord. Unto us our works and unto you
your works; no argument between us and you. Allah will bring us
together, and unto Him is the journeying.

S: To this then go on inviting, and go on steadfastly on the right way
as you are commanded, and do not follow their low desires, and say: I
believe in what Allah has revealed of the Book, and I am commanded to
do justice between you: Allah is our Lord and your Lord; we shall have
our deeds and you shall have your deeds; no plea need there be (now)
between us and you: Allah will gather us together, and to Him is the
return.

042.016
Y: But those who dispute concerning Allah after He has been accepted,-
futile is their dispute in the Sight of their Lord: on them will be a
Penalty terrible.

P: And those who argue concerning Allah after He hath been acknowledged,
their argument hath no weight with their Lord, and wrath is upon them
and theirs will be an awful doom.

S: And (as for) those who dispute about Allah after that obedience has
been rendered to Him, their plea is null with their Lord, and upon them
is wrath, and for them is severe punishment.

042.017
Y: It is Allah Who has sent down the Book in Truth, and the Balance (by
which to weigh conduct). And what will make thee realise that perhaps
the Hour is close at hand?

P: Allah it is Who hath revealed the Scripture with truth, and the
Balance. How canst thou know? It may be that the Hour is nigh.

S: Allah it is Who revealed the Book with truth, and the balance, and
what shall make you know that haply the hour be nigh?

042.018
Y: Only those wish to hasten it who believe not in it: those who believe
hold it in awe, and know that it is the Truth. Behold, verily those
that dispute concerning the Hour are far astray.

P: Those who believe not therein seek to hasten it, while those who
believe are fearful of it and know that it is the Truth. Are not they
who dispute, in doubt concerning the Hour, far astray?

S: Those who do not believe in it would hasten it on, and those who
believe are in fear from it, and they know that it is the truth. Now
most surely those who dispute obstinately concerning the hour are in a
great error.

042.019
Y: Gracious is Allah to His servants: He gives Sustenance to whom He
pleases: and He has power and can carry out His Will.

P: Allah is gracious unto His slaves. He provideth for whom He will. And
He is the Strong, the Mighty.

S: Allah is Benignant to His servants; He gives sustenance to whom He
pleases, and He is the Strong, the Mighty.

042.020
Y: To any that desires the tilth of the Hereafter, We give increase in
his tilth, and to any that desires the tilth of this world, We grant
somewhat thereof, but he has no share or lot in the Hereafter.

P: Whoso desireth the harvest of the Hereafter, We give him increase in
its harvest. And whoso desireth the harvest of the world, We give him
thereof, and he hath no portion in the Hereafter.

S: Whoever desires the gain of the hereafter, We will give him more of
that again; and whoever desires-- the gain of this world, We give him
of it, and in the hereafter he has no portion.

042.021
Y: What! have they partners (in godhead), who have established for them
some religion without the permission of Allah? Had it not been for the
Decree of Judgment, the matter would have been decided between them (at
once). But verily the wrongdoers will have a grievous Penalty.

P: Or have they partners (of Allah) who have made lawful for them in
religion that which Allah allowed not? And but for a decisive word
(gone forth already), it would have been judged between them. Lo! for
wrong-doers is a painful doom.

S: Or have they associates who have prescribed for them any religion
that Allah does not sanction? And were it not for the word of judgment,
decision would have certainly been given between them; and surely the
unjust shall have a painful punishment.

042.022
Y: Thou wilt see the Wrong-doers in fear on account of what they have
earned, and (the burden of) that must (necessarily) fall on them. But
those who believe and work righteous deeds will be in the luxuriant
meads of the Gardens: they shall have, before their Lord, all that they
wish for. That will indeed be the magnificent Bounty (of Allah).

P: Thou seest the wrong-doers fearful of that which they have earned,
and it will surely befall them, while those who believe and do good
works (will be) in flowering meadows of the Gardens, having what they
wish from their Lord. This is the great preferment.

S: You will see the unjust fearing on account of what they have earned,
and it must befall them; and those who believe and do good shall be in
the meadows of the gardens; they shall have what they please with their
Lord: that is the great grace.

042.023
Y: That is (the Bounty) whereof Allah gives Glad Tidings to His Servants
who believe and do righteous deeds. Say: "No reward do I ask of you for
this except the love of those near of kin." And if any one earns any
good, We shall give him an increase of good in respect thereof: for
Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Ready to appreciate (service).

P: This it is which Allah announceth unto His bondmen who believe and do
good works. Say (O Muhammad, unto mankind): I ask of you no fee
therefor, save loving kindness among kinsfolk. And whoso scoreth a good
deed We add unto its good for him. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Responsive.

S: That is of which Allah gives the good news to His servants, (to)
those who believe and do good deeds. Say: I do not ask of you any
reward for it but love for my near relatives; and whoever earns good,
We give him more of good therein; surely Allah is Forgiving, Grateful.

042.024
Y: What! Do they say, "He has forged a falsehood against Allah"? But if
Allah willed, He could seal up thy heart. And Allah blots out Vanity,
and proves the Truth by His Words. For He knows well the secrets of all
hearts.

P: Or say they: He hath invented a lie concerning Allah? If Allah
willed, He could have sealed thy heart (against them). And Allah will
wipe out the lie and will vindicate the truth by His words. Lo! He is
Aware of what is hidden in the breasts (of men).

S: Or do they say: He has forged a lie against Allah? But if Allah
pleased, He would seal your heart; and Allah will blot out the
falsehood and confirm the truth with His words; surely He is Cognizant
of what is in the breasts.

042.025
Y: He is the One that accepts repentance from His Servants and forgives
sins: and He knows all that ye do.

P: And He it is Who accepteth repentance from His bondmen, and pardoneth
the evil deeds, and knoweth what ye do,

S: And He it is Who accepts repentance from His servants and pardons the
evil deeds and He knows what you do;

042.026
Y: And He listens to those who believe and do deeds of righteousness,
and gives them increase of His Bounty: but for the Unbelievers their is
a terrible Penalty.

P: And accepteth those who do good works, and giveth increase unto them
of His bounty. And as for disbelievers, theirs will be an awful doom.

S: And He answers those who believe and do good deeds, and gives them
more out of His grace; and (as for) the unbelievers, they shall have a
severe punishment.

042.027
Y: If Allah were to enlarge the provision for His Servants, they would
indeed transgress beyond all bounds through the earth; but he sends
(it) down in due measure as He pleases. For He is with His Servants
Well acquainted, Watchful.

P: And if Allah were to enlarge the provision for His slaves they would
surely rebel in the earth, but He sendeth down by measure as He
willeth. Lo! He is Informed, a Seer of His bondmen.

S: And if Allah should amplify the provision for His servants they would
certainly revolt in the earth; but He sends it down according to a
measure as He pleases; surely He is Aware of, Seeing, His servants.

042.028
Y: He is the One that sends down rain (even) after (men) have given up
all hope, and scatters His Mercy (far and wide). And He is the
Protector, Worthy of all Praise.

P: And He it is Who sendeth down the saving rain after they have
despaired, and spreadeth out His mercy. He is the Protecting Friend,
the Praiseworthy.

S: And He it is Who sends down the rain after they have despaired, and
He unfolds His mercy; and He is the Guardian, the Praised One.

042.029
Y: And among His Signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and
the living creatures that He has scattered through them: and He has
power to gather them together when He wills.

P: And of His portents is the creation of the heaven and the earth, and
of whatever beasts He hath dispersed therein. And He is Able to gather
them when He will.

S: And one of His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth and
what He has spread forth in both of them of living beings; and when He
pleases He is all-powerful to gather them together.

042.030
Y: Whatever misfortune happens to you, is because on the things your
hands have wrought, and for many (of them) He grants forgiveness.

P: Whatever of misfortune striketh you, it is what your right hands have
earned. And He forgiveth much.

S: And whatever affliction befalls you, it is on account of what your
hands have wrought, and (yet) He pardons most (of your faults).

042.031
Y: Nor can ye frustrate (aught), (fleeing) through the earth; nor have
ye, besides Allah, any one to protect or to help.

P: Ye cannot escape in the earth, for beside Allah ye have no protecting
friend nor any helper.

S: And you cannot escape in the earth, and you shall not have a guardian
or a helper besides Allah.

042.032
Y: And among His Signs are the ships, smooth-running through the ocean,
(tall) as mountains.

P: And of His portents are the ships, like banners on the sea;

S: And among His signs are the ships in the sea like mountains.

042.033
Y: If it be His Will He can still the Wind: then would they become
motionless on the back of the (ocean). Verily in this are Signs for
everyone who patiently perseveres and is grateful.

P: If He will He calmeth the wind so that they keep still upon its
surface - Lo! herein verily are signs for every steadfast grateful
(heart)-

S: If He pleases, He causes the wind to become still so that they lie
motionless on its back; most surely there are signs in this for every
patient, grateful one,

042.034
Y: Or He can cause them to perish because of the (evil) which (the men)
have earned; but much doth He forgive.

P: Or He causeth them to perish on account of that which they have
earned - And He forgiveth much -

S: Or He may make them founder for what they have earned, and (even
then) pardon most;

042.035
Y: But let those know, who dispute about Our Signs, that there is for
them no way of escape.

P: And that those who argue concerning Our revelations may know they
have no refuge.

S: And (that) those who dispute about Our communications may know; there
is no place of refuge for them.

042.036
Y: Whatever ye are given (here) is (but) a convenience of this life: but
that which is with Allah is better and more lasting: (it is) for those
who believe and put their trust in their Lord:

P: Now whatever ye have been given is but a passing comfort for the life
of the world, and that which Allah hath is better and more lasting for
those who believe and put their trust in their Lord,

S: So whatever thing you are given, that is only a provision of this
world's life, and what is with Allah is better and more lasting for
those who believe and rely on their Lord.

042.037
Y: Those who avoid the greater crimes and shameful deeds, and, when they
are angry even then forgive;

P: And those who shun the worst of sins and indecencies and, when they
are wroth, forgive,

S: And those who shun the great sins and indecencies, and whenever they
are angry they forgive.

042.038
Y: Those who hearken to their Lord, and establish regular Prayer; who
(conduct) their affairs by mutual Consultation; who spend out of what
We bestow on them for Sustenance;

P: And those who answer the call of their Lord and establish worship,
and whose affairs are a matter of counsel, and who spend of what We
have bestowed on them,

S: And those who respond to their Lord and keep up prayer, and their
rule is to take counsel among themselves, and who spend out of what We
have given them.

042.039
Y: And those who, when an oppressive wrong is inflicted on them, (are
not cowed but) help and defend themselves.

P: And those who, when great wrong is done to them, defend themselves,

S: And those who, when great wrong afflicts them, defend themselves.

042.040
Y: The recompense for an injury is an injury equal thereto (in degree):
but if a person forgives and makes reconciliation, his reward is due
from Allah: for (Allah) loveth not those who do wrong.

P: The guerdon of an ill-deed is an ill the like thereof. But whosoever
pardoneth and amendeth, his wage is the affair of Allah. Lo! He loveth
not wrong-doers.

S: And the recompense of evil is punishment like it, but whoever
forgives and amends, he shall have his reward from Allah; surely He
does not love the unjust.

042.041
Y: But indeed if any do help and defend themselves after a wrong (done)
to them, against such there is no cause of blame.

P: And whoso defendeth himself after he hath suffered wrong - for such,
there is no way (of blame) against them.

S: And whoever defends himself after his being oppressed, these it is
against whom there is no way (to blame).

042.042
Y: The blame is only against those who oppress men and wrong-doing and
insolently transgress beyond bounds through the land, defying right and
justice: for such there will be a penalty grievous.

P: The way (of blame) is only against those who oppress mankind, and
wrongfully rebel in the earth. For such there is a painful doom.

S: The way (to blame) is only against those who oppress men and revolt
in the earth unjustly; these shall have a painful punishment.

042.043
Y: But indeed if any show patience and forgive, that would truly be an
exercise of courageous will and resolution in the conduct of affairs.

P: And verily whoso is patient and forgiveth - lo! that, verily, is (of)
the steadfast heart of things.

S: And whoever is patient and forgiving, these most surely are actions
due to courage.

042.044
Y: For any whom Allah leaves astray, there is no protector thereafter.
And thou wilt see the Wrong-doers, when in sight of the Penalty, Say:
"Is there any way (to effect) a return?"

P: He whom Allah sendeth astray, for him there is no protecting friend
after Him. And thou (Muhammad) wilt see the evil-doers when they see
the doom, (how) they say: Is there any way of return?

S: And whomsoever Allah makes err, he has no guardian after Him; and you
shall see the unjust, when they see the punishment, saying: Is there
any way to return?

042.045
Y: And thou wilt see them brought forward to the (Penalty), in a humble
frame of mind because of (their) disgrace, (and) looking with a
stealthy glance. And the Believers will say: "Those are indeed in loss,
who have given to perdition their own selves and those belonging to
them on the Day of Judgment. Behold! Truly the Wrong-doers are in a
lasting Penalty!"

P: And thou wilt see them exposed to (the Fire), made humble by
disgrace, and looking with veiled eyes. And those who believe will say:
Lo! the (eternal) losers are they who lose themselves and their
housefolk on the Day of Resurrection. Lo! are not the wrong-doers in
perpetual torment?

S: And you shall see them brought before it humbling themselves because
of the abasements, looking with a faint glance. And those who believe
shall say: Surely the losers are they who have lost themselves and
their followers on the resurrection day. Now surely the iniquitous
shall remain in lasting chastisement.

042.046
Y: And no protectors have they to help them, other than Allah. And for
any whom Allah leaves to stray, there is no way (to the Goal).

P: And they will have no protecting friends to help them instead of
Allah. He whom Allah sendeth astray, for him there is no road.

S: And they shall have no friends to help them besides Allah; and--
whomsoever Allah makes err, he shall have no way.

042.047
Y: Hearken ye to your Lord, before there come a Day which there will be
no putting back, because of (the Ordainment of) Allah! that Day there
will be for you no place of refuge nor will there be for you any room
for denial (of your sins)!

P: Answer the call of your Lord before there cometh unto you from Allah
a Day which there is no averting. Ye have no refuge on that Day, nor
have ye any (power of) refusal.

S: Hearken to your Lord before there comes the day from Allah for which
there shall be no averting; you shall have no refuge on that day, nor
shall it be yours to make a denial.

042.048
Y: If then they run away, We have not sent thee as a guard over them.
Thy duty is but to convey (the Message). And truly, when We give man a
taste of a Mercy from Ourselves, he doth exult thereat, but when some
ill happens to him, on account of the deeds which his hands have sent
forth, truly then is man ungrateful!

P: But if they are averse, We have not sent thee as a warder over them.
Thine is only to convey (the message). And lo! when We cause man to
taste of mercy from Us he exulteth therefor. And if some evil striketh
them because of that which their own hands have sent before, then lo!
man is an ingrate.

S: But if they turn aside, We have not sent you as a watcher over them;
on you is only to deliver (the message); and surely when We make man
taste mercy from Us, he rejoices thereat; and if an evil afflicts them
on account of what their hands have already done, then-surely man is
ungrateful.

042.049
Y: To Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth. He
creates what He wills (and plans). He bestows (children) male or female
according to His Will (and Plan),

P: Unto Allah belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. He
createth what He will. He bestoweth female (offspring) upon whom He
will, and bestoweth male (offspring) upon whom He will;

S: Allah's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He creates what
He pleases; He grants to whom He pleases daughters and grants to whom
He pleases sons.

042.050
Y: Or He bestows both males and females, and He leaves barren whom He
will: for He is full of Knowledge and Power.

P: Or He mingleth them, males and females, and He maketh barren whom He
will. Lo! He is Knower, Powerful.

S: Or He makes them of both sorts, male and female; and He makes whom He
pleases barren; surely He is the Knowing, the Powerful.

042.051
Y: It is not fitting for a man that Allah should speak to him except by
inspiration, or from behind a veil, or by the sending of a messenger to
reveal, with Allah's permission, what Allah wills: for He is Most High,
Most Wise.

P: And it was not (vouchsafed) to any mortal that Allah should speak to
him unless (it be) by revelation or from behind a veil, or (that) He
sendeth a messenger to reveal what He will by His leave. Lo! He is
Exalted, Wise.

S: And it is not for any mortal that Allah should speak to them, they
could not bear to hear and they did not see.

042.052
Y: And thus have We, by Our Command, sent inspiration to thee: thou
knewest not (before) what was Revelation, and what was Faith; but We
have made the (Qur'an) a Light, wherewith We guide such of Our servants
as We will; and verily thou dost guide (men) to the Straight Way,-

P: And thus have We inspired in thee (Muhammad) a Spirit of Our command.
Thou knewest not what the Scripture was, nor what the Faith. But We
have made it a light whereby We guide whom We will of Our bondmen. And
lo! thou verily dost guide unto a right path,

S: And thus did We reveal to you an inspired book by Our command. You
did not know what the Book was, nor (what) the faith (was), but We made
it a light, guiding thereby whom We please of Our servants; and most
surely you show the way to the right path:

042.053
Y: The Way of Allah, to Whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and
whatever is on earth. Behold (how) all affairs tend towards Allah!

P: The path of Allah, unto Whom belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens
and whatsoever is in the earth. Do not all things reach Allah at last?

S: The path of Allah, Whose is whatsoever is in the heavens and
whatsoever is in the earth; now surely to Allah do all affairs
eventually come.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 43:

                   AZ-ZUKHRUF (ORNAMENTS OF GOLD, LUXURY)
 Total Verses: 89 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

043.001
Y: Ha-Mim.

P: Ha. Mim.

S: Ha Mim.

043.002
Y: By the Book that makes things clear,-

P: By the Scripture which maketh plain,

S: I swear by the Book that makes things clear:

043.003
Y: We have made it a Qur'an in Arabic, that ye may be able to understand
(and learn wisdom).

P: Lo! We have appointed it a Lecture, in Arabic that haply ye may
understand.

S: Surely We have made it an Arabic Quran that you may understand.

043.004
Y: And verily, it is in the Mother of the Book, in Our Presence, high
(in dignity), full of wisdom.

P: And Lo! in the Source of Decrees, which We possess, it is indeed
sublime, decisive.

S: And surely it is in the original of the Book with Us, truly elevated,
full of wisdom.

043.005
Y: Shall We then take away the Message from you and repel (you), for
that ye are a people transgressing beyond bounds?

P: Shall We utterly ignore you because ye are a wanton folk?

S: What! shall We then turn away the reminder from you altogether
because you are an extravagant people?

043.006
Y: But how many were the prophets We sent amongst the peoples of old?

P: How many a prophet did We send among the men of old!

S: And how many a prophet have We sent among the ancients.

043.007
Y: And never came there a prophet to them but they mocked him.

P: And never came there unto them a prophet but they used to mock him.

S: And there came not to them a prophet but they mocked at him.

043.008
Y: So We destroyed (them)- stronger in power than these;- and (thus) has
passed on the Parable of the peoples of old.

P: Then We destroyed men mightier than these in prowess; and the example
of the men of old hath gone (before them).

S: Then We destroyed those who were stronger than these in prowess, and
the case of the ancients has gone before,

043.009
Y: If thou wert to question them, 'Who created the heavens and the
earth?' They would be sure to reply, 'they were created by (Him), the
Exalted in Power, Full of Knowledge';-

P: And if thou (Muhammad) ask them: Who created the heavens and the
earth, they will surely answer: The Mighty, the Knower created them;

S: And if you should ask them, Who created the heavens and the earth?
they would most certainly say: The Mighty, the Knowing One, has created
them;

043.010
Y: (Yea, the same that) has made for you the earth (like a carpet)
spread out, and has made for you roads (and channels) therein, in order
that ye may find guidance (on the way);

P: Who made the earth a resting-place for you, and placed roads for you
therein, that haply ye may find your way;

S: He Who made the earth a resting-place for you, and made in it ways
for you that you may go aright;

043.011
Y: That sends down (from time to time) rain from the sky in due
measure;- and We raise to life therewith a land that is dead; even so
will ye be raised (from the dead);-

P: And Who sendeth down water from the sky in (due) measure, and We
revive a dead land therewith. Even so will ye be brought forth;

S: And He Who sends down water from the cloud according to a measure,
then We raise to life thereby a dead country, even thus shall you be
brought forth;

043.012
Y: That has created pairs in all things, and has made for you ships and
cattle on which ye ride,

P: He Who created all the pairs, and appointed for you ships and cattle
whereupon ye ride.

S: And He Who created pairs of all things, and made for you of the ships
and the cattle what you ride on,

043.013
Y: In order that ye may sit firm and square on their backs, and when so
seated, ye may celebrate the (kind) favour of your Lord, and say,
"Glory to Him Who has subjected these to our (use), for we could never
have accomplished this (by ourselves),"

P: That ye may mount upon their backs, and may remember your Lord's
favour when ye mount thereon, and may say: Glorified be He Who hath
subdued these unto us, and we were not capable (of subduing them);

S: That you may firmly sit on their backs, then remember the favor of
your Lord when you are firmly seated thereon, and say: Glory be to Him
Who made this subservient to us and we were not able to do it,

043.014
Y: "And to our Lord, surely, must we turn back!"

P: And lo! unto our Lord we surely are returning.

S: And surely to our Lord we must return.

043.015
Y: Yet they attribute to some of His servants a share with Him (in his
godhead)! truly is man a blasphemous ingrate avowed!

P: And they allot to Him a portion of His bondmen! Lo! man is verily a
mere ingrate.

S: And they assign to Him a part of His servants; man, to be sure, is
clearly ungrateful.

043.016
Y: What! has He taken daughters out of what He himself creates, and
granted to you sons for choice?

P: Or chooseth He daughters of all that He hath created, and honoureth
He you with sons?

S: What! has He taken daughters to Himself of what He Himself creates
and chosen you to have sons?

043.017
Y: When news is brought to one of them of (the birth of) what he sets up
as a likeness to (Allah) Most Gracious, his face darkens, and he is
filled with inward grief!

P: And if one of them hath tidings of that which he likeneth to the
Beneficent One, his countenance becometh black and he is full of inward
rage.

S: And when one of them is given news of that of which he sets up as a
likeness for the Beneficent Allah, his face becomes black and he is
full of rage.

043.018
Y: Is then one brought up among trinkets, and unable to give a clear
account in a dispute (to be associated with Allah)?

P: (Liken they then to Allah) that which is bred up in outward show, and
in dispute cannot make itself plain?

S: What! that which is made in ornaments and which in contention is
unable to make plain speech!

043.019
Y: And they make into females angels who themselves serve Allah. Did
they witness their creation? Their evidence will be recorded, and they
will be called to account!

P: And they make the angels, who are the slaves of the Beneficent,
females. Did they witness their creation? Their testimony will be
recorded and they will be questioned.

S: And they make the angels-- them who are the servants of the
Beneficent Allah-- female (divinities). What! did they witness their
creation? Their evidence shall be written down and they shall be
questioned.

043.020
Y: ("Ah!") they say, "If it had been the will of (Allah) Most Gracious,
we should not have worshipped such (deities)!" Of that they have no
knowledge! they do nothing but lie!

P: And they say: If the Beneficent One had (so) willed, we should not
have worshipped them. They have no knowledge whatsoever of that. They
do but guess.

S: And they say: If the Beneficent Allah had pleased, we should never
have worshipped them. They have no knowledge of this; they only lie.

043.021
Y: What! have We given them a Book before this, to which they are
holding fast?

P: Or have We given them any scripture before (this Qur'an) so that they
are holding fast thereto?

S: Or have We given them a book before it so that they hold fast to it?

043.022
Y: Nay! they say: "We found our fathers following a certain religion,
and we do guide ourselves by their footsteps."

P: Nay, for they say only: Lo! we found our fathers following a
religion, and we are guided by their footprints.

S: Nay! they say: We found our fathers on a course, and surely we are
guided by their footsteps.

043.023
Y: Just in the same way, whenever We sent a Warner before thee to any
people, the wealthy ones among them said: "We found our fathers
following a certain religion, and we will certainly follow in their
footsteps."

P: And even so We sent not a warner before thee (Muhammad) into any
township but its luxurious ones said: Lo! we found our fathers
following a religion, and we are following their footprints.

S: And thus, We did not send before you any warner in a town, but those
who led easy lives in it said: Surely we found our fathers on a course,
and surely we are followers of their footsteps.

043.024
Y: He said: "What! Even if I brought you better guidance than that which
ye found your fathers following?" They said: "For us, we deny that ye
(prophets) are sent (on a mission at all)."

P: (And the warner) said: What! Even though I bring you better guidance
than that ye found your fathers following? They answered: Lo! in what
ye bring we are disbelievers.

S: (The warner) said: What! even if I bring to you a better guide than
that on which you found your fathers? They said: Surely we are
unbelievers in that with which you are sent.

043.025
Y: So We exacted retribution from them: now see what was the end of
those who rejected (Truth)!

P: So We requited them. Then see the nature of the consequence for the
rejecters!

S: So We inflicted retribution on them, then see how was the end of the
rejecters.

043.026
Y: Behold! Abraham said to his father and his people: "I do indeed clear
myself of what ye worship:"

P: And when Abraham said unto his father and his folk: Lo! I am innocent
of what ye worship

S: And when Ibrahim said to his father and his people: Surely I am clear
of what you worship,

043.027
Y: "(I worship) only Him Who made me, and He will certainly guide me."

P: Save Him Who did create me, for He will surely guide me.

S: Save Him Who created me, for surely He will guide me.

043.028
Y: And he left it as a Word to endure among those who came after him,
that they may turn back (to Allah).

P: And he made it a word enduring among his seed, that haply they might
return.

S: And he made it a word to continue in his posterity that they may
return.

043.029
Y: Yea, I have given the good things of this life to these (men) and
their fathers, until the Truth has come to them, and a messenger making
things clear.

P: Nay, but I let these and their fathers enjoy life (only) till there
should come unto them the Truth and a messenger making plain.

S: Nay! I gave them and their fathers to enjoy until there came to them
the truth and a Messenger making manifest (the truth).

043.030
Y: But when the Truth came to them, they said: "This is sorcery, and we
do reject it."

P: And now that the Truth hath come unto them they say: This is mere
magic, and lo! we are disbelievers therein.

S: And when there came to them the truth they said: This is magic, and
surely we are disbelievers in it.

043.031
Y: Also, they say: "Why is not this Qur'an sent down to some leading man
in either of the two (chief) cities?"

P: And they say: If only this Qur'an had been revealed to some great man
of the two towns?

S: And they say: Why was not this Quran revealed to a man of importance
in the two towns?

043.032
Y: Is it they who would portion out the Mercy of thy Lord? It is We Who
portion out between them their livelihood in the life of this world:
and We raise some of them above others in ranks, so that some may
command work from others. But the Mercy of thy Lord is better than the
(wealth) which they amass.

P: Is it they who apportion thy Lord's mercy? We have apportioned among
them their livelihood in the life of the world, and raised some of them
above others in rank that some of them may take labour from others; and
the mercy of thy Lord is better than (the wealth) that they amass.

S: Will they distribute the mercy of your Lord? We distribute among them
their livelihood in the life of this world, and We have exalted some
of them above others in degrees, that some of them may take others in
subjection; and the mercy of your Lord is better than what they amass.

043.033
Y: And were it not that (all) men might become of one (evil) way of
life, We would provide, for everyone that blasphemes against (Allah)
Most Gracious, silver roofs for their houses and (silver) stair-ways on
which to go up,

P: And were it not that mankind would have become one community, We
might well have appointed, for those who disbelieve in the Beneficent,
roofs of silver for their houses and stairs (of silver) whereby to
mount,

S: And were it not that all people had been a single nation, We would
certainly have assigned to those who disbelieve in the Beneficent Allah
(to make) of silver the roofs of their houses and the stairs by which
they ascend.

043.034
Y: And (silver) doors to their houses, and thrones (of silver) on which
they could recline,

P: And for their houses doors (of silver) and couches of silver whereon
to recline,

S: And the doors of their houses and the couches on which they recline,

043.035
Y: And also adornments of gold. But all this were nothing but
conveniences of the present life: The Hereafter, in the sight of thy
Lord is for the Righteous.

P: And ornaments of gold. Yet all that would have been but a provision
of the life of the world. And the Hereafter with your Lord would have
been for those who keep from evil.

S: And (other) embellishments of gold; and all this is naught but
provision of this world's life, and the hereafter is with your Lord
only for those who guard (against evil).

043.036
Y: If anyone withdraws himself from remembrance of (Allah) Most
Gracious, We appoint for him an evil one, to be an intimate companion
to him.

P: And he whose sight is dim to the remembrance of the Beneficent, We
assign unto him a devil who becometh his comrade;

S: And whoever turns himself away from the remembrance of the Beneficent
Allah, We appoint for him a Shaitan, so he becomes his associate.

043.037
Y: Such (evil ones) really hinder them from the Path, but they think
that they are being guided aright!

P: And lo! they surely turn them from the way of Allah, and yet they
deem that they are rightly guided;

S: And most surely they turn them away from the path, and they think
that they are guided aright:

043.038
Y: At length, when (such a one) comes to Us, he says (to his evil
companion): "Would that between me and thee were the distance of East
and West!" Ah! evil is the companion (indeed)!

P: Till, when he cometh unto Us, he saith (unto his comrade): Ah, would
that between me and thee there were the distance of the two horizons -
an evil comrade!

S: Until when he comes to Us, he says: O would that between me and you
there were the distance of the East and the West; so evil is the
associate!

043.039
Y: When ye have done wrong, it will avail you nothing, that Day, that ye
shall be partners in Punishment!

P: And it profiteth you not this day, because ye did wrong, that ye will
be sharers in the doom.

S: And since you were unjust, it will not profit you this day that you
are sharers in the chastisement.

043.040
Y: Canst thou then make the deaf to hear, or give direction to the blind
or to such as (wander) in manifest error?

P: Canst thou (Muhammad) make the deaf to hear, or canst thou guide the
blind or him who is in error manifest?

S: What! can you then make the deaf to hear or guide the blind and him
who is in clear error?

043.041
Y: Even if We take thee away, We shall be sure to exact retribution from
them,

P: And if We take thee away, We surely shall take vengeance on them,

S: But if We should take you away, still We shall inflict retribution on
them;

043.042
Y: Or We shall show thee that (accomplished) which We have promised
them: for verily We shall prevail over them.

P: Or (if) We show thee that wherewith We threaten them; for lo! We have
complete command of them.

S: Rather We will certainly show you that which We have promised them;
for surely We are the possessors of full power over them.

043.043
Y: So hold thou fast to the Revelation sent down to thee; verily thou
art on a Straight Way.

P: So hold thou fast to that which is inspired in thee. Lo! thou art on
a right path.

S: Therefore hold fast to that which has been revealed to you; surely
you are on the right path.

043.044
Y: The (Qur'an) is indeed the message, for thee and for thy people; and
soon shall ye (all) be brought to account.

P: And lo! it is in truth a Reminder for thee and for thy folk; and ye
will be questioned.

S: And most surely it is a reminder for you and your people, and you
shall soon be questioned.

043.045
Y: And question thou our messengers whom We sent before thee; did We
appoint any deities other than (Allah) Most Gracious, to be worshipped?

P: And ask those of Our messengers whom We sent before thee: Did We ever
appoint gods to be worshipped beside the Beneficent?

S: And ask those of Our messengers whom We sent before you: Did We ever
appoint gods to be worshipped besides the Beneficent Allah?

043.046
Y: We did send Moses aforetime, with Our Signs, to Pharaoh and his
Chiefs: He said, "I am a messenger of the Lord of the Worlds."

P: And verily We sent Moses with Our revelations unto Pharaoh and his
chiefs, and he said: I am a messenger of the Lord of the Worlds.

S: And certainly We sent Musa with Our communications to Firon and his
chiefs, so he said: Surely I am the messenger of the Lord of the
worlds.

043.047
Y: But when he came to them with Our Signs, behold they ridiculed them.

P: But when he brought them Our tokens, behold! they laughed at them.

S: But when he came to them with Our signs, lo! they laughed at them.

043.048
Y: We showed them Sign after Sign, each greater than its fellow, and We
seized them with Punishment, in order that they might turn (to Us).

P: And every token that We showed them was greater than its sister
(token), and We grasped them with the torment, that haply they might
turn again.

S: And We did not show them a sign but it was greater than its like, and
We overtook them with chastisement that they may turn.

043.049
Y: And they said, "O thou sorcerer! Invoke thy Lord for us according to
His covenant with thee; for we shall truly accept guidance."

P: And they said: O wizard! Entreat thy Lord for us by the pact that He
hath made with thee. Lo! we verily will walk aright.

S: And they said: O magician! call on your Lord for our sake, as He has
made the covenant with you; we shall surely be the followers of the
right way.

043.050
Y: But when We removed the Penalty from them, behold, they broke their
word.

P: But when We eased them of the torment, behold! they broke their word.

S: But when We removed from them the chastisement, lo! they broke the
pledge.

043.051
Y: And Pharaoh proclaimed among his people, saying: "O my people! Does
not the dominion of Egypt belong to me, (witness) these streams flowing
underneath my (palace)? What! see ye not then?"

P: And Pharaoh caused a proclamation to be made among his people saying:
O my people! Is not mine the sovereignty of Egypt and these rivers
flowing under me? Can ye not then discern?

S: And Firon proclaimed amongst his people: O my people! is not the
kingdom of Egypt mine? And these rivers flow beneath me; do you not
then see?

043.052
Y: "Am I not better than this (Moses), who is a contemptible wretch and
can scarcely express himself clearly?"

P: I am surely better than this fellow, who is despicable and can hardly
make (his meaning) plain!

S: Nay! I am better than this fellow, who is contemptible, and who can
hardly speak distinctly:

043.053
Y: "Then why are not gold bracelets bestowed on him, or (why) come (not)
with him angels accompanying him in procession?"

P: Why, then, have armlets of gold not been set upon him, or angels sent
along with him?

S: But why have not bracelets of gold been put upon him, or why have
there not come with him angels as companions?

043.054
Y: Thus did he make fools of his people, and they obeyed him: truly were
they a people rebellious (against Allah).

P: Thus he persuaded his people to make light (of Moses), and they
obeyed him. Lo! they were a wanton folk.

S: So he incited his people to levity and they obeyed him: surely they
were a transgressing people.

043.055
Y: When at length they provoked Us, We exacted retribution from them,
and We drowned them all.

P: So, when they angered Us, We punished them and drowned them every
one.

S: Then when they displeased Us, We inflicted a retribution on them, so
We drowned them all together,

043.056
Y: And We made them (a people) of the Past and an Example to later ages.

P: And We made them a thing past, and an example for those after (them).

S: And We made them a precedent and example to the later generations.

043.057
Y: When (Jesus) the son of Mary is held up as an example, behold, thy
people raise a clamour thereat (in ridicule)!

P: And when the son of Mary is quoted as an example, behold! the folk
laugh out,

S: And when a description of the son of Marium is given, lo! your people
raise a clamor thereat.

043.058
Y: And they say, "Are our gods best, or he?" This they set forth to
thee, only by way of disputation: yea, they are a contentious people.

P: And say: Are our gods better, or is he? They raise not the objection
save for argument. Nay! but they are a contentious folk.

S: And they say: Are our gods better, or is he? They do not set it forth
to you save by way of disputation; nay, they are a contentious people.

043.059
Y: He was no more than a servant: We granted Our favour to him, and We
made him an example to the Children of Israel.

P: He is nothing but a slave on whom We bestowed favour, and We made him
a pattern for the Children of Israel.

S: He was naught but a servant on whom We bestowed favor, and We made
him an example for the children of Israel.

043.060
Y: And if it were Our Will, We could make angels from amongst you,
succeeding each other on the earth.

P: And had We willed We could have set among you angels to be viceroys
in the earth.

S: And if We please, We could make among you angels to be successors in
the land.

043.061
Y: And (Jesus) shall be a Sign (for the coming of) the Hour (of
Judgment): therefore have no doubt about the (Hour), but follow ye Me:
this is a Straight Way.

P: And lo! verily there is knowledge of the Hour. So doubt ye not
concerning it, but follow Me. This is the right path.

S: And most surely it is a knowledge of the hour, therefore have no
doubt about it and follow me: this is the right path.

043.062
Y: Let not the Evil One hinder you: for he is to you an enemy avowed.

P: And let not Satan turn you aside. Lo! he is an open enemy for you.

S: And let not the Shaitan prevent you; surely he is your open enemy.

043.063
Y: When Jesus came with Clear Signs, he said: "Now have I come to you
with Wisdom, and in order to make clear to you some of the (points) on
which ye dispute: therefore fear Allah and obey me."

P: When Jesus came with clear proofs (of Allah's Sovereignty), he said:
I have come unto you with wisdom, and to make plain some of that
concerning which ye differ. So keep your duty to Allah, and obey me.

S: And when Isa came with clear arguments he said: I have come to you
indeed with wisdom, and that I may make clear to you part of what you
differ in; so be careful of (your duty to) Allah and obey me:

043.064
Y: "For Allah, He is my Lord and your Lord: so worship ye Him: this is a
Straight Way."

P: Lo! Allah, He is my Lord and your Lord. So worship Him. This is a
right path.

S: Surely Allah is my Lord and your Lord, therefore serve Him; this is
the right path:

043.065
Y: But sects from among themselves fell into disagreement: then woe to
the wrong-doers, from the Penalty of a Grievous Day!

P: But the factions among them differed. Then woe unto those who do
wrong from the doom of a painful day.

S: But parties from among them differed, so woe to those who were unjust
because of the chastisement of a painful day.

043.066
Y: Do they only wait for the Hour - that it should come on them all of a
sudden, while they perceive not?

P: Await they aught save the Hour, that it shall come upon them
suddenly, when they know not?

S: Do they wait for aught but the hour, that it should come upon them
all of a sudden while they do not perceive?

043.067
Y: Friends on that day will be foes, one to another,- except the
Righteous.

P: Friends on that day will be foes one to another, save those who kept
their duty (to Allah).

S: The friends shall on that day be enemies one to another, except those
who guard (against evil).

043.068
Y: My devotees! no fear shall be on you that Day, nor shall ye grieve,-

P: O My slaves! For you there is no fear this day, nor is it ye who
grieve;

S: O My servants! there is no fear for you this day, nor shall you
grieve.

043.069
Y: (Being) those who have believed in Our Signs and bowed (their wills
to Ours) in Islam.

P: (Ye) who believed Our revelations and were self-surrendered,

S: Those who believed in Our communications and were submissive:

043.070
Y: Enter ye the Garden, ye and your wives, in (beauty and) rejoicing.

P: Enter the Garden, ye and your wives, to be made glad.

S: Enter the garden, you and your wives; you shall be made happy.

043.071
Y: To them will be passed round, dishes and goblets of gold: there will
be there all that the souls could desire, all that their ayes could
delight in: and ye shall abide therein (for eye).

P: Therein are brought round for them trays of gold and goblets, and
therein is all that souls desire and eyes find sweet. And ye are
immortal therein.

S: There shall be sent round to them golden bowls and drinking-cups and
therein shall be what their souls yearn after and (wherein) the eyes
shall delight, and you shall abide therein.

043.072
Y: Such will be the Garden of which ye are made heirs for your (good)
deeds (in life).

P: This is the Garden which ye are made to inherit because of what ye
used to do.

S: And this is the garden which you are given as an inheritance on
account of what you did.

043.073
Y: Ye shall have therein abundance of fruit, from which ye shall have
satisfaction.

P: Therein for you is fruit in plenty whence to eat.

S: For you therein are many fruits of which you shall eat.

043.074
Y: The sinners will be in the Punishment of Hell, to dwell therein (for
aye):

P: Lo! the guilty are immortal in hell's torment.

S: Surely the guilty shall abide in the chastisement of hell.

043.075
Y: Nowise will the (Punishment) be lightened for them, and in despair
will they be there overwhelmed.

P: It is not relaxed for them, and they despair therein.

S: It shall not be abated from them and they shall therein be
despairing.

043.076
Y: Nowise shall We be unjust to them: but it is they who have been
unjust themselves.

P: We wronged them not, but they it was who did the wrong.

S: And We are not unjust to them, but they themselves were unjust.

043.077
Y: They will cry: "O Malik! would that thy Lord put an end to us!" He
will say, "Nay, but ye shall abide!"

P: And they cry: O master! Let thy Lord make an end of us. He saith: Lo!
here ye must remain.

S: And they shall call out: O Malik! let your Lord make an end of us. He
shall say: Surely you shall tarry.

043.078
Y: Verily We have brought the Truth to you: but most of you have a
hatred for Truth.

P: We verily brought the Truth unto you, but ye were, most of you,
averse to the Truth.

S: Certainly We have brought you the truth, but most of you are averse
to the truth.

043.079
Y: What! have they settled some plan (among themselves)? But it is We
Who settle things.

P: Or do they determine any thing (against the Prophet)? Lo! We (also)
are determining.

S: Or have they settled an affair? Then surely We are the settlers.

043.080
Y: Or do they think that We hear not their secrets and their private
counsels? Indeed (We do), and Our messengers are by them, to record.

P: Or deem they that We cannot hear their secret thoughts and private
confidences? Nay, but Our envoys, present with them, do record.

S: Or do they think that We do not hear what they conceal and their
secret discourses? Aye! and Our messengers with them write down.

043.081
Y: Say: "If (Allah) Most Gracious had a son, I would be the first to
worship."

P: Say (O Muhammad): If the Beneficent One hath a son, then, I shall be
first among the worshippers. (But there is no son).

S: Say: If the Beneficent Allah has a son, I am the foremost of those
who serve.

043.082
Y: Glory to the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the
Throne (of Authority)! (He is free) from the things they attribute (to
him)!

P: Glorified be the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the
Throne, from that which they ascribe (unto Him)!

S: Glory to the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of Power,
from what they describe.

043.083
Y: So leave them to babble and play (with vanities) until they meet that
Day of theirs, which they have been promised.

P: So let them flounder (in their talk) and play until they meet the Day
which they are promised.

S: So leave them plunging into false discourses and sporting until they
meet their day which they are threatened with.

043.084
Y: It is He Who is Allah in heaven and Allah on earth; and He is full of
Wisdom and Knowledge.

P: And He it is Who in the heaven is Allah, and in the earth Allah. He
is the Wise, the Knower.

S: And He it is Who is Allah in the heavens and Allah in the earth; and
He is the Wise, the Knowing.

043.085
Y: And blessed is He to Whom belongs the dominion of the heavens and the
earth, and all between them: with Him is the Knowledge of the Hour (of
Judgment): and to Him shall ye be brought back.

P: And blessed be He unto Whom belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens
and the earth and all that is between them, and with Whom is knowledge
of the Hour, and unto Whom ye will be returned.

S: And blessed is He Whose is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth
and what is between them, and with Him is the knowledge of the hour,
and to Him shall you be brought back.

043.086
Y: And those whom they invoke besides Allah have no power of
intercession;- only he who bears witness to the Truth, and they know
(him).

P: And those unto whom they cry instead of Him possess no power of
intercession, saving him who beareth witness unto the Truth knowingly.

S: And those whom they call upon besides Him have no authority for
intercession, but he who bears witness of the truth and they know
(him).

043.087
Y: If thou ask them, who created them, they will certainly say, Allah:
How then are they deluded away (from the Truth)?

P: And if thou ask them who created them, they will surely say: Allah.
How then are they turned away?

S: And if you should ask them who created them, they would certainly
say: Allah. Whence are they then turned back?

043.088
Y: (Allah has knowledge) of the (Prophet's) cry, "O my Lord! Truly these
are people who will not believe!"

P: And he saith: O my Lord! Lo! these are a folk who believe not.

S: Consider his cry: O my Lord! surely they are a people who do not
believe.

043.089
Y: But turn away from them, and say "Peace!" But soon shall they know!

P: Then bear with them (O Muhammad) and say: Peace. But they will come
to know.

S: So turn away from them and say, Peace, for they shall soon come to
know.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 44:

                             AD-DUKHAN (SMOKE)
 Total Verses: 59 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

044.001
Y: Ha-Mim.

P: Ha. Mim.

S: Ha Mim!

044.002
Y: By the Book that makes things clear;-

P: By the Scripture that maketh plain

S: I swear by the Book that makes manifest (the truth).

044.003
Y: We sent it down during a Blessed Night: for We (ever) wish to warn
(against Evil).

P: Lo! We revealed it on a blessed night - Lo! We are ever warning -

S: Surely We revealed it on a blessed night surely We are ever warning--

044.004
Y: In the (Night) is made distinct every affair of wisdom,

P: Whereon every wise command is made clear

S: Therein every wise affair is made distinct,

044.005
Y: By command, from Our Presence. For We (ever) send (revelations),

P: As a command from Our presence - Lo! We are ever sending -

S: A command from Us; surely We are the senders (of messengers),

044.006
Y: As Mercy from thy Lord: for He hears and knows (all things);

P: A mercy from thy Lord. Lo! He, even He is the Hearer, the Knower,

S: A mercy from your Lord, surely He is the Hearing, the Knowing,

044.007
Y: The Lord of the heavens and the earth and all between them, if ye
(but) have an assured faith.

P: Lord of the heavens and the earth and all that is between them, if ye
would be sure.

S: The Lord of the heavens and the earth and what is between them, if
you would be sure.

044.008
Y: There is no god but He: It is He Who gives life and gives death,- The
Lord and Cherisher to you and your earliest ancestors.

P: There is no God save Him. He quickeneth and giveth death; your Lord
and Lord of your forefathers.

S: There is no god but He; He gives life and causes death, your Lord and
the Lord of your fathers of yore.

044.009
Y: Yet they play about in doubt.

P: Nay, but they play in doubt.

S: Nay, they are in doubt, they sport.

044.010
Y: Then watch thou for the Day that the sky will bring forth a kind of
smoke (or mist) plainly visible,

P: But watch thou (O Muhammad) for the day when the sky will produce
visible smoke

S: Therefore keep waiting for the day when the heaven shall bring an
evident smoke,

044.011
Y: Enveloping the people: this will be a Penalty Grievous.

P: That will envelop the people. This will be a painful torment.

S: That shall overtake men; this is a painful punishment.

044.012
Y: (They will say:) "Our Lord! remove the Penalty from us, for we do
really believe!"

P: (Then they will say): Our Lord relieve us of the torment. Lo! we are
believers.

S: Our Lord! remove from us the punishment; surely we are believers.

044.013
Y: How shall the message be (effectual) for them, seeing that an
Messenger explaining things clearly has (already) come to them,-

P: How can there be remembrance for them, when a messenger making plain
(the Truth) had already come unto them,

S: How shall they be reminded, and there came to them a Messenger
making clear (the truth),

044.014
Y: Yet they turn away from him and say: "Tutored (by others), a man
possessed!"

P: And they had turned away from him and said: One taught (by others), a
madman?

S: Yet they turned their backs on him and said: One taught (by others),
a madman.

044.015
Y: We shall indeed remove the Penalty for a while, (but) truly ye will
revert (to your ways).

P: Lo! We withdraw the torment a little. Lo! ye return (to disbelief).

S: Surely We will remove the punishment a little, (but) you will surely
return (to evil).

044.016
Y: One day We shall seize you with a mighty onslaught: We will indeed
(then) exact Retribution!

P: On the day when We shall seize them with the greater seizure, (then)
in truth We shall punish.

S: On the day when We will seize (them) with the most violent seizing;
surely We will inflict retribution.

044.017
Y: We did, before them, try the people of Pharaoh: there came to them a
messenger most honourable,

P: And verily We tried before them Pharaoh's folk, when there came unto
them a noble messenger,

S: And certainly We tried before them the people of Firon, and there
came to them a noble messenger,

044.018
Y: Saying: "Restore to me the Servants of Allah: I am to you a
messenger worthy of all trust;"

P: Saying: Give up to me the slaves of Allah. Lo! I am a faithful
messenger unto you.

S: Saying: Deliver to me the servants of Allah, surely I am a faithful
messenger to you,

044.019
Y: "And be not arrogant as against Allah: for I come to you with
authority manifest."

P: And saying: Be not proud against Allah. Lo! I bring you a clear
warrant.

S: And that do not exalt yourselves against Allah, surely I will bring
to you a clear authority:

044.020
Y: "For me, I have sought safety with my Lord and your Lord, against
your injuring me."

P: And lo! I have sought refuge in my Lord and your Lord lest ye stone
me to death.

S: And surely I take refuge with my Lord and your Lord that you should
stone me to death:

044.021
Y: "If ye believe me not, at least keep yourselves away from me."

P: And if ye put no faith in me, then let me go.

S: And if you do not believe in me, then leave me alone.

044.022
Y: (But they were aggressive:) then he cried to his Lord: "These are
indeed a people given to sin."

P: And he cried unto his Lord, (saying): These are guilty folk.

S: Then he called upon his Lord: These are a guilty people.

044.023
Y: (The reply came:) "March forth with My Servants by night: for ye are
sure to be pursued."

P: Then (his Lord commanded): Take away My slaves by night. Lo! ye will
be followed,

S: So go forth with My servants by night; surely you will be pursued:

044.024
Y: "And leave the sea as a furrow (divided): for they are a host
(destined) to be drowned."

P: And leave the sea behind at rest, for lo! they are a drowned host.

S: And leave the sea intervening; surely they are a host that shall be
drowned.

044.025
Y: How many were the gardens and springs they left behind,

P: How many were the gardens and the watersprings that they left behind,

S: How many of the gardens and fountains have they left!

044.026
Y: And corn-fields and noble buildings,

P: And the cornlands and the goodly sites

S: And cornfields and noble places!

044.027
Y: And wealth (and conveniences of life), wherein they had taken such
delight!

P: And pleasant things wherein they took delight!

S: And goodly things wherein they rejoiced;

044.028
Y: Thus (was their end)! And We made other people inherit (those
things)!

P: Even so (it was), and We made it an inheritance for other folk;

S: Thus (it was), and We gave them as a heritage to another people.

044.029
Y: And neither heaven nor earth shed a tear over them: nor were they
given a respite (again).

P: And the heaven and the earth wept not for them, nor were they
reprieved.

S: So the heaven and the earth did not weep for them, nor were they
respited.

044.030
Y: We did deliver aforetime the Children of Israel from humiliating
Punishment,

P: And We delivered the Children of Israel from the shameful doom;

S: And certainly We delivered the children of Israel from the abasing
chastisement,

044.031
Y: Inflicted by Pharaoh, for he was arrogant (even) among inordinate
transgressors.

P: (We delivered them) from Pharaoh. Lo! he was a tyrant of the wanton
ones.

S: From Firon; surely he was haughty, (and) one of the extravagant.

044.032
Y: And We chose them aforetime above the nations, knowingly,

P: And We chose them, purposely, above (all) creatures.

S: And certainly We chose them, having knowledge, above the nations.

044.033
Y: And granted them Signs in which there was a manifest trial.

P: And We gave them portents wherein was a clear trial.

S: And We gave them of the communications wherein was clear blessing.

044.034
Y: As to these (Quraish), they say forsooth:

P: Lo! these, forsooth, are saying:

S: Most surely these do say:

044.035
Y: "There is nothing beyond our first death, and we shall not be raised
again."

P: There is naught but our first death, and we shall not be raised
again.

S: There is naught but our first death and we shall not be raised again.

044.036
Y: "Then bring (back) our forefathers, if what ye say is true!"

P: Bring back our fathers, if ye speak the truth!

S: So bring our fathers (back), if you are truthful.

044.037
Y: What! Are they better than the people of Tubba and those who were
before them? We destroyed them because they were guilty of sin.

P: Are they better, or the folk of Tubb'a and those before them? We
destroyed them, for surely they were guilty.

S: Are they better or the people of Tubba and those before them? We
destroyed them, for surely they were guilty.

044.038
Y: We created not the heavens, the earth, and all between them, merely
in (idle) sport:

P: And We created not the heavens and the earth, and all that is between
them, in play.

S: And We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between
them in sport.

044.039
Y: We created them not except for just ends: but most of them do not
understand.

P: We created them not save with truth; but most of them know not.

S: We did not create them both but with the truth, but most of them do
not know.

044.040
Y: Verily the Day of sorting out is the time appointed for all of them,-

P: Assuredly the Day of Decision is the term for all of them,

S: Surely the day of separation is their appointed term, of all of them

044.041
Y: The Day when no protector can avail his client in aught, and no help
can they receive,

P: A day when friend can in naught avail friend, nor can they be helped,

S: The day on which a friend shall not avail (his) friend aught, nor
shall they be helped,

044.042
Y: Except such as receive Allah's Mercy: for He is Exalted in Might,
Most Merciful.

P: Save him on whom Allah hath mercy. Lo! He is the Mighty, the
Merciful.

S: Save those on whom Allah shall have mercy; surely He is the Mighty
the Merciful.

044.043
Y: Verily the tree of Zaqqum

P: Lo! the tree of Zaqqum,

S: Surely the tree of the Zaqqum,

044.044
Y: Will be the food of the Sinful,-

P: The food of the sinner!

S: Is the food of the sinful

044.045
Y: Like molten brass; it will boil in their insides.

P: Like molten brass, it seetheth in their bellies

S: Like dregs of oil; it shall boil in (their) bellies,

044.046
Y: Like the boiling of scalding water.

P: As the seething of boiling water.

S: Like the boiling of hot water.

044.047
Y: (A voice will cry:) "Seize ye him and drag him into the midst of the
Blazing Fire!"

P: (And it will be said): Take him and drag him to the midst of hell,

S: Seize him, then drag him down into the middle of the hell;

044.048
Y: "Then pour over his head the Penalty of Boiling Water,"

P: Then pour upon his head the torment of boiling water.

S: Then pour above his head of the torment of the boiling water:

044.049
Y: "Taste thou (this)! Truly wast thou mighty, full of honour!"

P: (Saying): Taste! Lo! thou wast forsooth the mighty, the noble!

S: Taste; you forsooth are the mighty, the honorable:

044.050
Y: "Truly this is what ye used to doubt!"

P: Lo! this is that whereof ye used to doubt.

S: Surely this is what you disputed about.

044.051
Y: As to the Righteous (they will be) in a position of Security,

P: Lo! those who kept their duty will be in a place secured.

S: Surely those who guard (against evil) are in a secure place,

044.052
Y: Among Gardens and Springs;

P: Amid gardens and watersprings,

S: In gardens and springs;

044.053
Y: Dressed in fine silk and in rich brocade, they will face each other;

P: Attired in silk and silk embroidery, facing one another.

S: They shall wear of fine and thick silk, (sitting) face to face;

044.054
Y: So; and We shall join them to fair women with beautiful, big, and
lustrous eyes.

P: Even so (it will be). And We shall wed them unto fair ones with wide,
lovely eyes.

S: Thus (shall it be), and We will wed them with Houris pure, beautiful
ones.

044.055
Y: There can they call for every kind of fruit in peace and security;

P: They call therein for every fruit in safety.

S: They shall call therein for every fruit in security;

044.056
Y: Nor will they there taste Death, except the first death; and He will
preserve them from the Penalty of the Blazing Fire,-

P: They taste not death therein, save the first death. And He hath saved
them from the doom of hell,

S: They shall not taste therein death except the first death, and He
will save them from the punishment of the hell,

044.057
Y: As a Bounty from thy Lord! that will be the supreme achievement!

P: A bounty from thy Lord. That is the supreme triumph.

S: A grace from your Lord; this is the great achievement.

044.058
Y: Verily, We have made this (Qur'an) easy, in thy tongue, in order that
they may give heed.

P: And We have made (this Scripture) easy in thy language only that they
may heed.

S: So have We made it easy in your tongue that they may be mindful.

044.059
Y: So wait thou and watch; for they (too) are waiting.

P: Wait then (O Muhammad). Lo! they (too) are waiting.

S: Therefore wait; surely they are waiting.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 45:

                           AL-JATHIYA (CROUCHING)
 Total Verses: 37 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

045.001
Y: Ha-Mim.

P: Ha. Mim.

S: Ha Mim.

045.002
Y: The revelation of the Book is from Allah the Exalted in Power, Full
of Wisdom.

P: The revelation of the Scripture is from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise.

S: The revelation of the Book is from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise.

045.003
Y: Verily in the heavens and the earth, are Signs for those who believe.

P: Lo! in the heavens and the earth are portents for believers.

S: Most surely in the heavens and the earth there are signs for the
believers.

045.004
Y: And in the creation of yourselves and the fact that animals are
scattered (through the earth), are Signs for those of assured Faith.

P: And in your creation, and all the beasts that He scattereth in the
earth, are portents for a folk whose faith is sure.

S: And in your (own) creation and in what He spreads abroad of animals
there are signs for a people that are sure;

045.005
Y: And in the alternation of Night and Day, and the fact that Allah
sends down Sustenance from the sky, and revives therewith the earth
after its death, and in the change of the winds,- are Signs for those
that are wise.

P: And the difference of night and day and the provision that Allah
sendeth down from the sky and thereby quickeneth the earth after her
death, and the ordering of the winds, are portents for a people who
have sense.

S: And (in) the variation of the night and the day, and (in) what Allah
sends down of sustenance from the cloud, then gives life thereby to the
earth after its death, and (in) the changing of the winds, there are
signs for a people who understand.

045.006
Y: Such are the Signs of Allah, which We rehearse to thee in Truth; then
in what exposition will they believe after (rejecting) Allah and His
Signs?

P: These are the portents of Allah which We recite unto thee (Muhammad)
with truth. Then in what fact, after Allah and His portents, will they
believe?

S: These are the communications of Allah which We recite to you with
truth; then in what announcement would they believe after Allah and His
communications?

045.007
Y: Woe to each sinful dealer in Falsehoods:

P: Woe unto each sinful liar,

S: Woe to every sinful liar,

045.008
Y: He hears the Signs of Allah rehearsed to him, yet is obstinate and
lofty, as if he had not heard them: then announce to him a Penalty
Grievous!

P: Who heareth the revelations of Allah recited unto him, and then
continueth in pride as though he heard them not. Give him tidings of a
painful doom.

S: Who hears the communications of Allah recited to him, then persists
proudly as though he had not heard them; so announce to him a painful
punishment.

045.009
Y: And when he learns something of Our Signs, he takes them in jest: for
such there will be a humiliating Penalty.

P: And when he knoweth aught of Our revelations he maketh it a jest. For
such there is a shameful doom.

S: And when he comes to know of any of Our communications, he takes it
for a jest; these it is that shall have abasing chastisement.

045.010
Y: In front of them is Hell: and of no profit to them is anything they
may have earned, nor any protectors they may have taken to themselves
besides Allah: for them is a tremendous Penalty.

P: Beyond them there is hell, and that which they have earned will
naught avail them, nor those whom they have chosen for protecting
friends beside Allah. Theirs will be an awful doom.

S: Before them is hell, and there shall not avail them aught of what
they earned, nor those whom they took for guardians besides Allah, and
they shall have a grievous punishment.

045.011
Y: This is (true) Guidance and for those who reject the Signs of their
Lord, is a grievous Penalty of abomination.

P: This is guidance. And those who disbelieve the revelations of their
Lord, for them there is a painful doom of wrath.

S: This is guidance; and (as for) those who disbelieve in the
communications of their Lord, they shall have a painful punishment on
account of uncleanness.

045.012
Y: It is Allah Who has subjected the sea to you, that ships may sail
through it by His command, that ye may seek of his Bounty, and that ye
may be grateful.

P: Allah it is Who hath made the sea of service unto you that the ships
may run thereon by His command, and that ye may seek of His bounty, and
that haply ye may be thankful;

S: Allah is He Who made subservient to you the sea that the ships may
run therein by His command, and that you may seek of His grace, and
that you may give thanks.

045.013
Y: And He has subjected to you, as from Him, all that is in the heavens
and on earth: Behold, in that are Signs indeed for those who reflect.

P: And hath made of service unto you whatsoever is in the heavens and
whatsoever is in the earth; it is all from Him. Lo! herein verily are
portents for a people who reflect.

S: And He has made subservient to you whatsoever is in the heavens and
whatsoever is in the earth, all, from Himself; most surely there are
signs in this for a people who reflect.

045.014
Y: Tell those who believe, to forgive those who do not look forward to
the Days of Allah: It is for Him to recompense (for good or ill) each
People according to what they have earned.

P: Tell those who believe to forgive those who hope not for the days of
Allah; in order that He may requite folk what they used to earn.

S: Say to those who believe (that) they forgive those who do not fear
the days of Allah that He may reward a people for what they earn.

045.015
Y: If any one does a righteous deed, it ensures to the benefit of his
own soul; if he does evil, it works against (his own soul). In the end
will ye (all) be brought back to your Lord.

P: Whoso doeth right, it is for his soul, and whoso doeth wrong, it is
against it. And afterward unto your Lord ye will be brought back.

S: Whoever does good, it is for his own soul, and whoever does evil, it
is against himself; then you shall be brought back to your-- Lord.

045.016
Y: We did aforetime grant to the Children of Israel the Book, the Power
of Command, and Prophethood; We gave them, for Sustenance, things good
and pure; and We favoured them above the nations.

P: And verily we gave the Children of Israel the Scripture and the
Command and the Prophethood, and provided them with good things and
favoured them above (all) peoples;

S: And certainly We gave the Book and the wisdom and the prophecy to the
children of Israel, and We gave them of the goodly things, and We made
them excel the nations.

045.017
Y: And We granted them Clear Signs in affairs (of Religion): it was only
after knowledge had been granted to them that they fell into schisms,
through insolent envy among themselves. Verily thy Lord will judge
between them on the Day of Judgment as to those matters in which they
set up differences.

P: And gave them plain commandments. And they differed not until after
the knowledge came unto them, through rivalry among themselves. Lo! thy
Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection concerning that
wherein they used to differ.

S: And We gave them clear arguments in the affair, but they did not
differ until after knowledge had come to them out of envy among
themselves; surely your Lord will judge between them on the day of
resurrection concerning that wherein they differed.

045.018
Y: Then We put thee on the (right) Way of Religion: so follow thou that
(Way), and follow not the desires of those who know not.

P: And now have We set thee (O Muhammad) on a clear road of (Our)
commandment; so follow it, and follow not the whims of those who know
not.

S: Then We have made you follow a course in the affair, therefore follow
it, and do not follow the low desires of those who do not know.

045.019
Y: They will be of no use to thee in the sight of Allah: it is only
wrong-doers (that stand as) protectors, one to another: but Allah is
the Protector of the Righteous.

P: Lo! they can avail thee naught against Allah. And lo! as for the
wrong-doers, some of them are friends of others; and Allah is the
Friend of those who ward off (evil).

S: Surely they shall not avail you in the least against Allah; and
surely the unjust are friends of each other, and Allah is the guardian
of those who guard (against evil).

045.020
Y: These are clear evidences to men and a Guidance and Mercy to those of
assured Faith.

P: This is clear indication for mankind, and a guidance and a mercy for
a folk whose faith is sure.

S: These are clear proofs for men, and a guidance and a mercy for a
people who are sure.

045.021
Y: What! Do those who seek after evil ways think that We shall hold them
equal with those who believe and do righteous deeds,- that equal will
be their life and their death? Ill is the judgment that they make.

P: Or do those who commit ill-deeds suppose that We shall make them as
those who believe and do good works, the same in life and death? Bad is
their judgment!

S: Nay! do those who have wrought evil deeds think that We will make
them like those who believe and do good-- that their life and their
death shall be equal? Evil it is that they judge.

045.022
Y: Allah created the heavens and the earth for just ends, and in order
that each soul may find the recompense of what it has earned, and none
