who addressed himself to all classes and not merely to the Brahman
aristocracy, selected as the divine name Rama. It was more human than
Narayana, less sensuous than Krishna. Every Hindu was familiar with
the poetry which sings of Rama as a chivalrous and godlike hero. But
he was not, like Krishna, the lover of the soul, and when Ramaism
was divested of mythology by successive reformers it became a
monotheism in which Hindu and Moslim elements could blend. Ramanand
had twelve disciples, among whom were Kabir, a Raja called Pipa, Rai
Das, a leather-seller (and therefore an outcast according to Hindu
ideas) as well as Brahmans. The Ramats, as his followers were called,
are a numerous and respectable body in north India, using the same
sectarian mark as the Vadagalais from whom they do not differ
materially, although a Hindu might consider that their small regard
for caste is a vital distinction. They often call themselves
Avadhutas, that is, those who have shaken off worldly restrictions,
and the more devout among them belong to an order divided into four
classes of which only the highest is reserved to Brahmans and the
others are open to all castes. They own numerous and wealthy maths,
but it is said that in some of these celibacy is not required and that
monks and nuns live openly as man and wife.[607]

An important aspect of the Ramat movement is its effect on the popular
literature of Hindustan which in the fifteenth and even more in the
sixteenth century blossoms into flowers of religious poetry. Many of
these writings possess real merit and are still a moral and spiritual
force. European scholars are only beginning to pay sufficient
attention to this mighty flood of hymns which gushed forth in nearly
all the vernaculars of India[608] and appealed directly to the people.
The phenomenon was not really new. The psalms of the Buddhists and
even the hymns of the Rig Veda were vernacular literature in their
day, and in the south the songs of the Devaram and Nalayiram are of
some antiquity. But in the north, though some Prakrit literature has
been preserved, Sanskrit was long considered the only proper language
for religion. We can hardly doubt that vernacular hymns existed, but
they did not receive the imprimatur of any teacher, and have not
survived. But about 1400 all this changes. Though Ramanand was not
much of a writer he gave his authority to the use of the vernacular:
he did not, like Ramanuja, either employ or enjoin Sanskrit and the
meagre details which we have of his circle lead us to imagine him
surrounded by men of homely speech.

One current in this sea of poetry was Krishnaite and as such not
directly connected with Ramanand. Vidyapati[609] sang of the loves of
Krishna and Radha in the Maithili dialect and also in a form of
Bengali. In the early fifteenth century (c. 1420) we have the poetess
Mira Bai, wife of the Raja of Chitore who gained celebrity and
domestic unhappiness by her passionate devotion to the form of
Krishna known as Ranchor. According to one legend the image came to
life in answer to her fervent prayers, and throwing his arms round her
allowed her to meet a rapturous death in his embrace. This is
precisely the sentiment which we find later in the teaching of
Vallabhacarya and Caitanya. The hymns of the Bengali poets have been
collected in the _Padakalpataru_, one of the chief sacred books of the
Bengali Vaishnavas. From Vallabhacarya spring the group of poets who
adorned Braj or the Muttra district. Pre-eminent among them is the
blind Sur Das who flourished about 1550 and wrote such sweet lyrics
that Krishna himself came down and acted as his amanuensis. A
somewhat later member of the same group is Nabha Das, the author of
the Bhakta Mala or Legends of the Saints, which is still one of the
most popular religious works of northern India.[610] Almost
contemporary with Sur Das was the great Tulsi Das and Grierson[611]
enumerated thirteen subsequent writers who composed Ramayanas in some
dialect of Hindi. A little later came the Mahratta poet Tukaram (born
about 1600) who gave utterance to Krishnaism in another language.

Tulsi Das is too important to be merely mentioned as one in a list of
poets. He is a great figure in Indian religion, and the saying that
his Ramayana is more popular and more honoured in the North-western
Provinces than the Bible in England is no exaggeration.[612] He came
into the world in 1532 but was exposed by his parents as born under an
unlucky star and was adopted by a wandering Sadhu. He married but his
son died and after this loss he himself became a Sadhu. He began to
write his Ramayana in Oudh at the age of forty-three, but moved to
Benares where he completed it and died in 1623. On the Tulsi Ghat,
near the river Asi, may still be seen the rooms which he occupied.
They are at the top of a lofty building and command a beautiful view
over the river[4].

His Ramayana which is an original composition and not a translation of
Valmiki's work is one of the great religious poems of the world and
not unworthy to be set beside _Paradise Lost_. The sustained majesty
of diction and exuberance of ornament are accompanied by a spontaneity
and vigour rare in any literature, especially in Asia. The poet is not
embellishing a laboured theme: he goes on and on because his emotion
bursts forth again and again, diversifying the same topic with an
inexhaustible variety of style and metaphor. As in some forest a
stream flows among flowers and trees, but pours forth a flood of pure
water uncoloured by the plants on its bank, so in the heart of Tulsi
Das the love of God welled up in a mighty fountain ornamented by the
mythology and legends with which he bedecked it, yet unaffected by
them. He founded no sect, which is one reason of his popularity, for
nearly all sects can read him with edification, and he is primarily a
poet not a theologian. But though he allows himself a poet's licence
to state great truths in various ways, he still enunciates a definite
belief. This is theism, connected with the name Rama. Since in the
north he is the author most esteemed by the Vishnuites, it would be a
paradox to refuse him that designation, but his teaching is not so
much that Vishnu is the Supreme Being who becomes incarnate in Rama,
as that Rama, and more rarely Hari and Vasudeva, are names of the
All-God who manifests himself in human form. Vishnu is mentioned as a
celestial being in the company of Brahma,[613] and so far as any god
other than Rama receives attention it is Siva, not indeed as Rama's
equal, but as a being at once very powerful and very devout, who acts
as a mediator or guide. "Without prayer to Siva no one can attain to
the faith which I require."[614] "Rama is God, the totality of good,
imperishable, invisible, uncreated, incomparable, void of all change,
indivisible, whom the Veda declares that it cannot define."[615] And
yet, "He whom scripture and philosophy have sung and whom the saints
love to contemplate, even the Lord God, he is the son of Dasarath,
King of Kosala."[616] By the power of Rama exist Brahma, Vishnu and
Siva, as also Maya, the illusion which brings about the world. His
"delusive power is a vast fig-tree, its clustering fruit the countless
multitude of worlds, while all things animate and inanimate are like
the insects that dwell inside and think their own particular fig the
only one in existence."[617] God has made all things: pain and
pleasure, sin and merit, saints and sinners, Brahmans and butchers,
passion and asceticism. It is the Veda that distinguishes good and
evil among them.[618] The love of God and faith are the only road to
happiness. "The worship of Hari is real and all the world is a
dream."[619] Tulsi Das often uses the language of the Advaita
philosophy and even calls God the annihilator of duality, but though
he admits the possibility of absorption and identification with the
deity, he holds that the double relation of a loving God and a loving
soul constitutes greater bliss. "The saint was not absorbed into the
divinity for this reason that he had already received the gift of
faith."[620] And in a similar spirit he says, "Let those preach in
their wisdom who contemplate Thee as the supreme spirit, the uncreate,
inseparable from the universe, recognizable only by inference and
beyond the understanding; but we, O Lord, will ever hymn the glories
of thy incarnation." Like most Hindus he is little disposed to enquire
what is the purpose of creation, but he comes very near to saying that
God has evolved the world by the power of Maya because the bliss which
God and his beloved feel is greater than the bliss of impersonal
undifferentiated divinity. It will be seen that Tulsi Das is
thoroughly Hindu: neither his fundamental ideas nor his mythological
embellishments owe anything to Islam or Christianity. He accepts
unreservedly such principles as Maya, transmigration, Karma and
release. But his sentiments, more than those of any other Indian
writer, bear a striking resemblance to the New Testament. Though he
holds that the whole world is of God, he none the less bids men shun
evil and choose the good, and the singular purity of his thoughts and
style contrasts strongly with other Vishnuite works. He does not
conceive of the love which may exist between the soul and God as a
form of sexual passion.


2


The beginning of the sixteenth century was a time of religious
upheaval in India for it witnessed the careers not only of
Vallabhacarya and Caitanya, but also of Nanak, the founder of the
Sikhs. In the west it was the epoch of Luther and as in Europe so in
India no great religious movement has taken place since that time. The
sects then founded have swollen into extravagance and been reformed:
other sects have arisen from a mixture of Hinduism with Moslem and
Christian elements, but no new and original current of thought or
devotion has been started.

Though the two great sects associated with the names of Caitanya and
Vallabhacarya have different geographical spheres and also present
some differences in doctrinal details, both are emotional and even
erotic and both adore Krishna as a child or young man. Their almost
simultaneous appearance in eastern and western India and their rapid
growth show that they represent an unusually potent current of ideas
and sentiments. But the worship of Krishna was, as we have seen,
nothing new in northern India. Even that relatively late phase in
which the sports of the divine herdsman are made to typify the love of
God for human souls is at least as early as the Gita-govinda written
about 1170. In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, the history of
Krishna worship is not clear,[621] but it persisted and about 1400
found speech in Bengal and in Rajputana.

According to Vaishnava theologians the followers of
Vallabhacarya[622] are a section of the Rudra-sampradaya founded in
the early part of the fifteenth century by Vishnusvami, an emigrant
from southern India, who preached chiefly in Gujarat. The doctrines of
the sect are supposed to have been delivered by the Almighty to Siva
from whom Vishnusvami was fifteenth in spiritual descent, and are
known by the name of _Suddhadvaita_ or pure non-duality. They teach
that God has three attributes--_sac-cid-ananda_--existence,
consciousness and bliss. In the human or animal soul bliss is
suppressed and in matter consciousness is suppressed too. But when the
soul attains release it recovers bliss and becomes identical in nature
with God. For practical purposes the Vallabhacaris may be regarded as
a sect founded by Vallabha, said to have been born in 1470. He was the
son of a Telinga Brahman, who had migrated with Vishnusvami to the
north.

Such was the pious precocity of Vallabha that at the age of twelve he
had already discovered a new religion and started on a pilgrimage to
preach it. He was well received at the Court of Vijayanagar, and was
so successful in disputation that he was recognized as chief doctor of
the Vaishnava school. He subsequently spent nine years in travelling
twice round India and at Brindaban received a visit from Krishna in
person, who bade him promulgate his worship in the form of the divine
child known as Bala Gopala. Vallabha settled in Benares and is said to
have composed a number of works which are still extant.[623] He gained
further victories as a successful disputant and also married and
became the father of two sons. At the age of fifty-two he took to the
life of a Sannyasi, but died forty-two days afterwards.

Though Vallabha died as an ascetic, his doctrines are currently known
as the Pushti Marga, the road of well-being or comfort. His
philosophy was more decidedly monistic than is usual among Vishnuites,
and Indian monism has generally taught that, as the soul and God are
one in essence, the soul should realize this identity and renounce the
pleasures of the senses. But with Vallabhacarya it may be said that
the vision which is generally directed godwards and forgets the flesh,
turned earthwards and forgot God, for his teaching is that since the
individual and the deity are one, the body should be reverenced and
indulged. Pushti[624] or well-being is the special grace of God and
the elect are called Pushti-jiva. They depend entirely on God's grace
and are contrasted with Maryada-jivas, or those who submit to moral
discipline. The highest felicity is not _mukti_ or liberation but the
eternal service of Krishna and eternal participation in his sports.

These doctrines have led to deplorable results, but so strong is the
Indian instinct towards self-denial and asceticism that it is the
priests rather than the worshippers who profit by this permission to
indulge the body, and the chief feature of the sect is the extravagant
respect paid to the descendants of Vallabhacarya. They are known as
Maharajas or Great Kings and their followers, especially women,
dedicate to them _tan_, _dhan_, _man_: body, purse and spirit, for it
is a condition of the road of well-being that before the devotee
enjoys anything himself he must dedicate it to the deity and the
Maharaj represents the deity. The daily prayer of the sect is "Om.
Krishna is my refuge. I who suffer the infinite pain and torment of
enduring for a thousand years separation from Krishna, consecrate to
Krishna my body, senses, life, heart and faculties, my wife, house,
family, property and my own self. I am thy slave, O Krishna."[625]
This formula is recited to the Maharaj with peculiar solemnity by each
male as he comes of age and is admitted as a full member of the sect.
The words in which this dedication of self and family is made are not
in themselves open to criticism and a parallel may be found in
Christian hymns. But the literature of the Vallabhis unequivocally
states that the Guru is the same as the deity[626] and there can be
little doubt that even now the Maharajas are adored by their
followers, especially by the women, as representatives of Krishna in
his character of the lover of the Gopis and that the worship is often
licentious.[627] Many Hindus denounce the sect and in 1862 one of the
Maharajas brought an action for libel in the supreme court of Bombay
on account of the serious charges of immorality brought against him in
the native press. The trial became a _cause celebre_. Judgment was
delivered against the Maharaj, the Judge declaring the charges to be
fully substantiated. Yet in spite of these proceedings the sect still
flourishes, apparently unchanged in doctrine and practice, and has a
large following among the mercantile castes of western India. The
Radha-Vallabhis, an analogous sect founded by Harivamsa in the
sixteenth century, give the pre-eminence to Radha, the wife of
Krishna, and in their secret ceremonies are said to dress as women.
The worship of Radha is a late phase of Vishnuism and is not known
even to the Bhagavata Purana.[628]

Vallabhism owes much of its success to the family of the founder. They
had evidently a strong dynastic sentiment as well as a love of
missionary conquest--a powerful combination. Vallabhacarya left behind
him eighty-four principal disciples whose lives are recorded in the
work called the _Stories of the Eighty-four Vaishnavas_, and his
authority descended to his son Vithalnath. Like his father, Vithalnath
was active as a proselytizer and pilgrim and propagated his doctrines
extensively in many parts of western India such as Cutch, Malwa, and
Bijapur. His converts came chiefly from the mercantile classes but
also included some Brahmans and Mussulmans. He is said to have
abolished caste distinctions but the sect has not preserved this
feature. In his later years he resided at Muttra or the neighbouring
town of Gokul, whence he is known as Gokul Gosainji. This title of
Gosain, which is still borne by his male descendants, is derived from
Krishna's name Gosvamin, the lord of cattle.[629] He had seven sons,
in each of whom Krishna is said to have been incarnate for five
years. They exercised spiritual authority in separate districts--as we
might say in different dioceses--but the fourth son, Gokulnathji and
his descendants claimed and still claim a special pre-eminence. The
family is at present represented by about a hundred males who are
accepted as incarnations and receive the title of Maharaja. About
twenty reside at Gokul[630] or near Muttra: there are a few in Bombay
and in all the great cities of western India, but the Maharaj of Nath
Dwara in Rajputana is esteemed the chief. This place is not an ancient
seat of Krishna worship, but during the persecution of Aurungzeb a
peculiarly holy image was brought thither from Muttra and placed in
the shrine where it still remains.

A protest against the immorality of the Vallabhi sect was made by
Swaminarayana, a Brahman who was born in the district of Lucknow
about 1780.[631] He settled in Ahmedabad and gained so large a
following that the authorities became alarmed and imprisoned him. But
his popularity only increased: he became the centre of a great
religious movement: hymns descriptive of his virtues and sufferings
were sung by his followers and when he was released he found himself
at the head of a band which was almost an army. He erected a temple in
the village of Wartal in Baroda, which he made the centre of his sect,
and recruited followers by means of periodical tours throughout
Gujarat. His doctrines are embodied in an anthology called the
Sikshapatri consisting of 212 precepts, some borrowed from accepted
Hindu scriptures and some original and in a catechism called
Vacanamritam. His teaching was summed up in the phrase "Devotion to
Krishna with observance of duty and purity of life" and in practice
took the form of a laudable polemic against the licentiousness of the
Vallabhis. As in most of the purer sects of Vishnuism, Krishna is
regarded merely as a name of the Supreme Deity. Thus the Sikshapatri
says "Narayana and Siva should be equally recognized as parts of one
and the same supreme spirit, since both have been declared in the
Vedas to be forms of Brahma. On no account let it be thought that
difference in form or name makes any difference in the identity of the
deity." The followers of Swaminarayana still number about 200,000 in
western India and are divided into the laity and a body of celibate
clergy. I have visited their religious establishments in Ahmedabad. It
consists of a temple with a large and well-kept monastery in which are
housed about 300 monks who wear costumes of reddish grey. Except in
Assam I have not seen in India any parallel to this monastery either
in size or discipline. It is provided with a library and hospital. In
the temple are images of Nara and Narayana (explained as Krishna
and Arjuna), Krishna and Radha, Ganesa and Hanuman.[632]


3


The sect founded by Caitanya is connected with eastern India as the
Vallabhis are with the west. Bengal is perhaps the native land of the
worship of Krishna as the god of love. It was there that Jayadeva
flourished in the last days of the Sena dynasty and the lyrical poet
Chandidas at the end of the fourteenth century. About the same time
the still greater poet Vidyapati was singing in Durbhanga. For these
writers, as for Caitanya, religion is the bond of love which unites
the soul and God, as typified by the passion[633] that drew together
Radha and Krishna. The idea that God loves and seeks out human souls
is familiar to Christianity and receives very emotional expression in
well-known hymns, but the bold humanity of these Indian lyrics seems
to Europeans unsuitable. I will let a distinguished Indian apologize
for it in his own words:

"The paradox that has to be understood is that Krishna means God.
Yet he is represented as a youth, standing at a gate, trying to waylay
the beloved maiden, attempting to entrap the soul, as it were, into a
clandestine meeting. This, which is so inconceivable to a purely
modern mind, presents no difficulty at all to the Vaishnava devotee.
To him God is the lover himself: the sweet flowers, the fresh grass,
the gay sound heard in the woods are direct messages and tokens of
love to his soul, bringing to his mind at every instant that loving
God whom he pictures as ever anxious to win the human heart."[634]

Caitanya[635] was born at Nadia in 1485 and came under the influence
of the Madhva sect. In youth he was a prodigy of learning,[636] but at
the age of about seventeen while on a pilgrimage to Gaya began to
display that emotional and even hysterical religious feeling which
marked all his teaching. He swooned at the mention of Krishna's name
and passed his time in dancing and singing hymns. At twenty-five he
became a Sannyasi, and at the request of his mother, who did not wish
him to wander too far, settled in Puri near the temple of Jagannath.
Here he spent the rest of his life in preaching, worship and ecstatic
meditation, but found time to make a tour in southern India and
another to Brindaban and Benares. He appears to have left the
management of his sect largely to his disciples, Advaita, Nityananda
and Haridas, and to have written nothing himself. But he evidently
possessed a gift of religious magnetism and exercised an extraordinary
influence on those who heard him preach or sing. He died or
disappeared before the age of fifty but apparently none of the stories
about his end merit credence.

Although the teaching of Caitanya is not so objectionable morally as
the doctrines of the Vallabhis, it follows the same line of making
religion easy and emotional and it is not difficult to understand how
his preaching, set forth with the eloquence which he possessed, won
converts from the lower classes by thousands. He laid no stress on
asceticism, approved of marriage and rejected all difficult rites and
ceremonies. The form of worship which he specially enjoined was the
singing of Kirtans or hymns consisting chiefly in a repetition of the
divine names accompanied by music and dancing. Swaying the body and
repetition of the same formula or hymn are features of emotional
religion found in the most diverse regions, for instance among the
Rufais or Howling Dervishes, at Welsh revival meetings and in negro
churches in the Southern States. It is therefore unnecessary to seek
any special explanation in India but perhaps there is some connection
between the religious ecstasies of Vaishnavas and Dervishes. Within
Caitanya's sect, caste was not observed. He is said to have admitted
many Moslims to membership and to have regarded all worshippers of
Krishna as equal. Though caste has grown up again, yet the old
regulation is still in force inside the temple of Jagannath at Puri.
Within the sacred enclosure all are treated as of one caste and eat
the same sacred food. In Caitanya's words "the mercy of God regards
neither tribe nor family."

His theology[637] shows little originality. The deity is called
Bhagavan or more frequently Hari. His majesty and omnipotence are
personified as Narayana, his beauty and ecstasy as Krishna. The
material world is defined as _bhedabhedaprakasa_, a manifestation of
the deity as separate and yet not separate from him, and the soul is
_vibhinnamsa_ or a detached portion of him. Some souls are in
bondage to Prakriti or Maya, others through faith and love attain
deliverance. Reason is useless in religious matters, but _ruci_ or
spiritual feeling has a quick intuition of the divine.

Salvation is obtained by Bhakti, faith or devotion, which embraces and
supersedes all other duties. This devotion means absolute
self-surrender to the deity and love for him which asks for no return
but is its own reward. "He who expects remuneration for his love acts
as a trader." In this devotion there are five degrees: (_a_) santi,
calm meditation, (_b_) dasya, servitude, (_c_) sakhya, friendship,
(_d_) vatsalya, love like that of a child for its parent, (_e_)
madhurya, love like that of a woman for a lover. All these sentiments
are found in God and this combined ecstasy is an eternal principle
identified with Hari himself, just as in the language of the Gospels,
God is love. Though Caitanya makes love the crown and culmination of
religion, the worship of his followers is not licentious, and it is
held that the right frame of mind is best attained by the recitation
of Krishna's names especially Hari.

The earlier centre of Caitanya's sect was his birthplace, Nadia, but
both during his life and afterwards his disciples frequented Brindaban
and sought out the old sacred sites which were at that time neglected.
At the beginning of the nineteenth century Lala Baba, a wealthy
Bengali merchant, became a mendicant and visited Muttra. Though he had
renounced the world, he still retained his business instincts and
bought up the villages which contained the most celebrated shrines and
were most frequented by pilgrims. The result was a most profitable
speculation and the establishment of Caitanya's Church in the district
of Braj, which thus became the holy land of both the great Krishnaite
sects. The followers of Caitanya at the present day are said to be
divided into Gosains, or ecclesiastics, who are the descendants of the
founder's original disciples, the Vrikats or celibates, and the laity.
Besides the celibates there are several semi-monastic orders who adopt
the dress of monks but marry. They have numerous maths at Nadia and
elsewhere. Like the Vallabhis, this sect deifies its leaders.
Caitanya, Nityananda and Advaita are called the three masters (Prabhu)
and believed to be a joint incarnation of Krishna, though according
to some only the first two shared the divine essence. Six of
Caitanya's disciples known as the six Gosains are also greatly
venerated and even ordinary religious teachers still receive an almost
idolatrous respect.

Though Caitanya was not a writer himself he exercised a great
influence on the literature of Bengal. In the opinion of so competent
a judge as Dinesh Chandra Sen, Bengali was raised to the status of a
literary language by the Vishnuite hymn-writers just as Pali was by
the Buddhists. Such hymns were written before the time of Caitanya but
after him they became extremely numerous[638] and their tone and style
are said to change. The ecstasies and visions of which they tell are
those described in his biographies and this emotional poetry has
profoundly influenced all classes in Bengal. But there was and still
is a considerable hostility between the Saktas and Vishnuites.


4


A form of Vishnuism, possessing a special local flavour, is connected
with the Maratha country and with the names of Namdev, Tukaram[639]
and Ramdas, the spiritual preceptor of Sivaji. The centre of this
worship is the town of Pandharpur and I have not found it described as
a branch of any of the four Vishnuite Churches: but the facts that
Namdev wrote in Hindi as well as in Marathi, that many of his hymns
are included in the Granth, and that his sentiments show affinities to
the teaching of Nanak, suggest that he belonged to the school of
Ramanand. There is however a difficulty about his date. Native
tradition gives 1270 as the year of his birth but the language of his
poems both in Marathi and Hindi is said to be too modern for this
period and to indicate that he lived about 1400,[640] when he might
easily have felt the influence of Ramanand, for he travelled in the
north.

Most of his poetry however has for its centre the temple of Pandharpur
where was worshipped a deity called Vitthala, Vittoba or
Pandurang. It is said that the first two names are dialectic
variations of Vishnu, but that Pandurang is an epithet of
Siva.[641] There is no doubt that the deity of Pandharpur has for many
centuries been identified with Krishna, who, as in Bengal, is god
the lover of the soul. But the hymns of the Marathas are less sensuous
and Krishna is coupled not with his mistress Radha, but with his
wife Rukmini. In fact Rukminipati or husband of Rukmini is one of
his commonest titles. Namdev's opinions varied at different times and
perhaps in different moods: like most religious poets he cannot be
judged by logic or theology. Sometimes he inveighs against
idolatry--understood as an attempt to limit God to an image--but in
other verses he sings the praises of Pandurang, the local deity, as
the lord and creator of all. His great message is that God--by
whatever name he is called--is everywhere and accessible to all,
accessible without ceremonial or philosophy. "Vows, fasts and
austerities are not needful, nor need you go on pilgrimage. Be
watchful in your heart and always sing the name of Hari. Yoga,
sacrifices and renunciation are not needful. Love the feet of Hari.
