 oppresses very childhood--the overpowering thought of space. A child
 can put his head upon his hands, and think and think till it reaches
 in imagination some far distant barrier of the universe, and still the
 difficulty presents itself to his young mind, "And what is beyond that
 barrier?" and the only answer is "The high and lofty place." And this
 brethren, is the inward seal with which God has stamped Himself upon
 man's heart. If every other trace of Deity has been expunged by the
 fall, these two at least defy destruction--the thought of Eternal
 Time, and the thought of Immeasurable Space.

 The third measure which is given us of God respects His character.
 His name is Holy. The chief idea which this would convey to us is
 separation from evil. Brethren, there is perhaps a time drawing near
 when those of us who shall stand at His right hand, purified from all
 evil taint, shall be able to comprehend absolutely what is meant by
 the Holiness of God. At present, with hearts cleaving down to earth,
 and tossed by a thousand gusts of unholy passion, we can only form a
 dim conception _relatively_ of that which it implies. None but the
 pure can understand purity. The chief knowledge which we have of God's
 holiness comes from our acquaintance with unholiness. We know what
 impurity is--God is _not_ that. We know what injustice is--God is
 _not_ that. We know what restlessness, and guilt, and passion are, and
 deceitfulness, and pride, and waywardness--all these we know. God is
 none of these. And this is our chief acquaintance with His character.
 We know what God is _not_. We scarcely can be rightly said to know,
 that is to feel, what God _is_. And therefore, this is implied in the
 very name of holiness. Holiness in the Jewish sense means simply
 separateness. From all that is wrong, and mean, and base, our God is
 for ever separate.

 There is another way in which God gives to us a conception of what
 this holiness implies. Tell us of His justice, His truth, His
 loving-kindness. All these are cold abstractions. They convey no
 distinct idea of themselves to our hearts. What we wanted was, that
 these should be exhibited to us in tangible reality. And it is just
 this which God has done. He has exhibited all these attributes, not in
 the light of _speculation_, but in the light of _facts_. He has given
 us His own character in all its delicacy of colouring in the history
 of Christ. Love, Mercy, Tenderness, Purity--these are no mere names
 when we see them brought out in the human actions of our Master.
 Holiness is only a shadow to our minds, till it receives shape and
 substance in the life of Christ. All this character of holiness is
 intelligible to us in Christ. "No man hath seen God at any time, the
 only begotten of the Father He hath declared Him."

 There is a third light in which God's holiness is shown to us, and
 that is in the sternness with which He recoils from guilt. When Christ
 died for man, I know what God's love means; and when Jesus wept human
 tears over Jerusalem, I know what God's compassion means; and when the
 stern denunciations of Jesus rung in the Pharisees' ears, I can
 comprehend what God's indignation is; and when Jesus stood calm before
 His murderers, I have a conception of what serenity is. Brethren,
 revelation opens to us a scene beyond the grave, when this shall be
 exhibited in full operation. There will be an everlasting banishment
 from God's presence of that impurity on which the last efforts have
 been tried in vain. It will be a carrying out of this sentence by a
 law that cannot be reversed--"Depart from me, ye cursed." But it is
 quite a mistake to suppose that this is only a matter of revelation.
 Traces of it we have now on this side the sepulchre. Human life is
 full of God's recoil from sin. In the writhings of a heart which has
 been made to possess its own iniquities--in the dark spot which guilt
 leaves upon the conscience, rising up at times in a man's gayest
 moments, as if it will not come out--in the restlessness and the
 feverishness which follow the efforts of the man who has indulged
 habits of sin too long,--in all these there is a law repelling
 wickedness from the presence of the Most High,--which proclaims that
 God is holy.

 Brethren, it is in these that the greatness of God consists--Eternal
 in Time--Unlimited in Space--Unchangeable--Pure in character--His
 serenity and His vastness arise from His own perfections.


 We are to consider, in the second place, the greatness of man.

   1. The nature of that greatness.
   2. The persons who are great.

 Now, this is brought before us in the text in this one fact, that man
 has been made a habitation of the Deity--"I dwell with him that is of
 a contrite and humble spirit." There is in the very outset this
 distinction between what is great in God and what is great in man. To
 be independent of everything in the universe is God's glory, and to be
 independent is man's shame. All that God has, He has from Himself--all
 that man has, He has from God. And the moment man cuts himself off
 from God, that moment he cuts himself off from all true grandeur.

 There are two things implied in Scripture, when it is said that God
 dwells with man. The first is that peculiar presence which He has
 conferred upon the members of His church. Brethren, we presume not to
 define what that Presence is, and how it dwells within us--we are
 content to leave it as a mystery. But this we know, that something of
 a very peculiar and supernatural character takes place in the heart of
 every man upon whom the gospel has been brought to bear with power.
 "Know ye not," says the Apostle, "that your bodies are the temples of
 the Holy Ghost." And again in the Epistle to the Ephesians--"In Christ
 ye are builded for an habitation of God through the Spirit." There is
 something in these expressions which refuses to be explained away.
 They leave us but one conclusion, and that is--that in all those who
 have become Christ's by faith, God personally and locally has taken up
 His dwelling-place.

 There is a second meaning attached in Scripture to the expression God
 dwells in man. According to the first meaning, we understand it in the
 most plain and literal sense the words are capable of conveying.
 According to the second, we understand His dwelling in a figurative
 sense, implying this--that He gives an acquaintance with Himself to
 man. So, for instance, when Judas asked, "Lord, how is it, that Thou
 wilt manifest Thyself to us and not to the world?" Our Redeemer's
 reply was this--"If a man love me, he will keep my words, and my
 Father will love him, and We will come unto him and make Our abode
 with him." In the question it was asked _how_ God would manifest
 Himself to His servants. In the answer it was shown _how_ He would
 make His abode with them. And if the answer be any reply to the
 question at all, what follows is this--that God making His abode or
 dwelling in the heart is the same thing exactly as God's manifesting
 himself to the heart.

 Brethren, in these two things the greatness of man consists. One is to
 have God so dwelling in us as to impart His character to us; and the
 other is to have God so dwelling in us that we recognise His presence,
 and know that we are His and He is ours. They are two things perfectly
 distinct To _have_ God in us, this is salvation; to _know_ that God is
 in us, this is assurance.

 Lastly, we inquire as to the persons who are truly great. And these
 the Holy Scripture has divided into two classes--those who are humble
 and those who are contrite in heart. Or rather, it will be observed
 that it is the same class of character under different circumstances.
 Humbleness is the frame of mind of those who are in a state of
 innocence, contrition of those who are in a state of repentant guilt.
 Brethren, let not the expression innocence be misunderstood. Innocence
 in its true and highest sense never existed but once upon this earth.
 Innocence cannot be the religion of man now. But yet there are those
 who have walked with God from youth, not quenching the spirit which He
 gave them, and who are therefore _comparatively_ innocent beings. All
 they have to do is to go on, whereas the guilty man has to stop and
 turn back before he can go on. Repentance with them is the gentle work
 of every day, not the work of one distinct and miserable part of life.
 They are those whom the Lord calls just men which need no repentance,
 and of whom He says, "He that is clean needeth not save to wash his
 feet."

 Now they are described here as the humble in heart. Two things are
 required for this state of mind. One is that a man should have a true
 estimate of God, and the other is that he should have a true estimate
 of himself.

 Vain, blind man, places himself on a little corner of this planet, a
 speck upon a speck of the universe, and begins to form conclusions
 from the small fraction of God's government which he can see from
 thence. The astronomer looks at the laws of motion and forgets that
 there must have been a First Cause to commence that motion. The
 surgeon looks at the materialism of his own frame and forgets that
 matter cannot organise itself into exquisite beauty. The metaphysician
 buries himself in the laws of mind and forgets that there may be
 spiritual influences producing all those laws. And this brethren, is
 the unhumbled spirit of philosophy--intellectual pride. Men look at
 Nature, but they do not look through it up to Nature's God. There is
 awful ignorance of God, arising from indulged sin, which produces an
 unhumbled heart. God may be shut out from the soul by pride of
 intellect, or by pride of heart.

 Pharaoh is placed before us in Scripture almost as a type of pride.
 His pride arose from ignorance of God. "Who is the Lord that I should
 obey His voice? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go."
 And this was not intellectual pride; it was pride in a matter of duty.
 Pharaoh had been immersing his whole heart in the narrow politics of
 Egypt. The great problem of his day was to aggrandise his own people
 and prevent an insurrection of the Israelites; and that small kingdom
 of Egypt had been his universe. He shut his heart to the voice of
 justice and the voice of humanity; in other words, great in the pride
 of human majesty, small in the sight of the High and Lofty One, he
 shut himself out from the knowledge of God.

 The next ingredient of humbleness is, that a man must have a right
 estimate of himself. There is a vast amount of self-deception on this
 point. We say of ourselves that which we could not bear others to say
 of us. A man truly humbled would take it only as his due when others
 treated him in the way that he says that he deserves. But my brethren,
 we kneel in our closets in shame for what we are, and we tell our God
 that the lowest place is too good for us; and then we go into the
 world, and if we meet with slight or disrespect, or if our opinion be
 not attended to, or if another be preferred before us, there is all
 the anguish of a galled and jealous spirit, and half the bitterness of
 our lives comes from this, that we are smarting from what we call the
 wrongs and the neglect of men. My beloved brethren, if we saw
 ourselves as God sees us, we should be willing to be anywhere, to be
 silent when others speak, to be passed by in the world's crowd, and
 thrust aside to make way for others. We should be willing to put
 others in the way of doing that which we might have got reputation for
 by doing ourselves. This was the temper of our Master--this is the
 meek and the quiet spirit, and this is the temper of the humble with
 whom the High and Lofty One dwells.

 The other class of those who are truly great are the contrite in
 spirit. At first sight it might be supposed that there must ever be a
 vast distinction between the innocent and the penitent. It was so that
 the elder son in the parable thought when he saw his brother restored
 to his father's favour. He was surprised and hurt. He had served his
 father these many years--his brother had wasted his substance in
 riotous living. But in this passage God makes no distinction. He
 places the humble consistent follower and the broken-hearted sinner on
 a level. He dwells with both, with Him that is contrite, _and_ with
 him that is humble. He sheds around them both the grandeur of His own
 presence, and the annals of Church history are full of
 exemplifications of this marvel of God's grace. By the transforming
 grace of Christ men, who have done the very work of Satan, have become
 as conspicuous in the service of heaven, as they were once conspicuous
 in the career of guilt.

 So indisputably has this been so, that men have drawn from such
 instances the perverted conclusion, that if a man is ever to be a
 great saint, he must first be a great sinner. God forbid brethren,
 that we should ever make such an inference. But this we infer for our
 own encouragement, that past sin does not necessarily preclude from
 high attainments. We must "forget the things that are behind." We
 must not mourn over past years of folly as if they made saintliness
 impossible. Deep as we may have been once in earthliness, so deep we
 may also be in penitence, and so high we may become in spirituality.

 We have so many years the fewer to do our work in. Well brethren, let
 us try to do it so much the faster. Christ can crowd the work of years
 into hours. He did it with the dying thief. If the man who has set out
 early may take his time, it certainly cannot be so with _us_ who have
 lost our time. If we have lost God's bright and happy presence by our
 wilfulness, what then? Unrelieved sadness? Nay, brethren, calmness,
 purity, may have gone from our heart; but _all_ is not gone yet. Just
 as sweetness comes from the bark of the cinnamon when it is bruised,
 so can the spirit of the Cross of Christ bring beauty and holiness and
 peace out of the bruised and broken heart. God dwells with the
 contrite as much as with the humble.

 And now brethren, to conclude, the first inference we collect from
 this subject, is the danger of coming into collision with such a God
 as our God. Day by day we commit sins of thought and word of which the
 dull eye of man takes no cognisance. He whose name is Holy cannot pass
 them by. We may elude the vigilance of a human enemy and place
 ourselves beyond his reach. God fills all space--there is not a spot
 in which His piercing eye is not on us, and His uplifted hand cannot
 find us out. Man must strike soon if he would strike at all; for
 opportunities pass away from him, and his victim may escape his
 vengeance by death. There is no passing of opportunity with God, and
 it is this which makes His long suffering a solemn thing. God can
 wait, for He has a whole eternity before Him in which He may strike.
 "All things are open, and naked to Him with whom we have to do."

 In the next place we are taught the heavenly character of
 condescension. It is not from the insignificance of man that God's
 dwelling with him is so strange. It is as much the glory of God to
 bend His attention on an atom as to uphold the universe. But the
 marvel is that the habitation which He has chosen for Himself is an
 impure one. And when He came down from His magnificence to make this
 world His home, still the same character of condescension was shown
 through all the life of Christ. Our God selected the society of the
 outcasts of earth, those whom none else would speak to.

 Brethren, if we would be Godlike, we must follow in the same steps.
 Our temptation is to do exactly the reverse. We are for ever wishing
 to obtain the friendship and the intimacy of those above us in the
 world. To win over men of influence to truth--to associate with men of
 talent and station, and title. This is the world-chase, and this,
 brethren, is too much the religious man's chase. But if you look
 simply to the question of resemblance to God, then the man who makes
 it a habit to select that one in life to do good to, and that one in
 a room to speak with, whom others pass by because there is nothing
 either of intellect, or power, or name, to recommend him, but only
 humbleness, _that_ man has stamped upon his heart more of heavenly
 similitude by condescension, than the man who has made it his business
 to win this world's great ones, even for the sake of truth.

 Lastly, we learn the guilt of two things of which this world is
 full--vanity and pride. There is a distinction between these two. But
 the distinction consists in this, that the vain man looks for the
 admiration of others--the proud man requires nothing but his own. Now,
 it is this distinction which makes vanity despicable to us all. We can
 easily find out the vain man--we soon discover what it is he wants to
 be observed, whether it be a gift of person, or a gift of mind, or a
 gift of character. If he be vain of his person, his attitudes will
 tell the tale. If he be vain of his judgment, or his memory, or his
 honesty, he cannot help an unnecessary parade. The world finds him
 out, and this is why vanity is ever looked on with contempt. So soon
 as we let men see that we are suppliants for their admiration, we are
 at their mercy. We have given them the privilege of feeling that they
 are above us. We have invited them to spurn us. And therefore vanity
 is but a thing for scorn. But it is very different with pride. No man
 can look down on him that is proud, for he has asked no man for
 anything. They are forced to feel respect for pride, because it is
 thoroughly independent of them. It wraps itself up in the consequence
 of its own excellences, and scorns to care whether others take note
 of them or not.

 It is just here that the danger lies. We have exalted a sin into a
 virtue. No man will acknowledge that he is vain, but almost any man
 will acknowledge that he is proud. But tried by the balance of the
 sanctuary, there is little to choose between the two. If a man look
 for greatness out of God, it matters little whether he seek it in his
 own applause, or in the applause of others. The _proud_ Pharisee, who
 trusted in himself that he was righteous, was condemned by Christ as
 severely, and even more, than the _vain_ Jews who "could not believe
 because they sought honour from one another, and not that honour which
 cometh from God only." It may be a more dazzling, and a more splendid
 sin to be proud. It is not less hateful in God's sight. Let us speak
 God's word to our own unquiet, swelling, burning hearts. Pride may
 disguise itself as it will in its own majesty, but in the presence of
 the High and Lofty One, it is but littleness after all.




 XIX.

 _Preached June 27, 1852._

 THE LAWFUL AND UNLAWFUL USE OF LAW.

 (A FRAGMENT.)


   "But we know that the law is good, if a man use it lawfully."--1
    Tim. i. 8.
