when offered as inspiring ideals; and to assume them to be of common
attainment or experience is to degrade them from their supreme sanctity.
But in thus ruling them unfit for general singing one must distinguish
large miscellaneous congregations from small united bodies, in which a
more intimate emotion may be natural: and as there is no exact line of
distinction here, so there is no objection to the occasional and partial
intrusion of some of these more intimate subjects into congregational
hymns.

To this first question then, as to what emotions are fit to be expressed
by congregational music, the answer appears to be that the more general
the singing, the more general and simple should be the emotion and that
the universally fitting themes are those of simple praise, prayer, or
faith: and we might inquire whether one fault of our modern hymn-books
may not be their attempt to supply congregational music to unfitting
themes.

To the next question, _Whose emotion_ is this congregational music to
excite or heighten? the answer is plain: It is the average man, or one
rather below the average, the uneducated, as St. Augustin says the
weaker, mind and that in England is, at least artistically, a narrow mind
and a vulgar being. And it may of course be alleged that the music in our
hymn-books which is intolerable to the more sensitive minds was not put
there for them, but would justify itself in its supposed fitness for the
lower classes. 'What use,' the pastor would say to one who, on the ground
of tradition advocated the employment of the old plain-song and the
Ambrosian melodies, 'What use to seek to attract such people as those in
my cure with the ancient outlandish and stiff melodies that pleased folk
a thousand years ago, and which I cannot pretend to like myself?' Or if
his friend is a modern musician, who is urging him to have nothing in his
church but what would satisfy the highest artistic sense of the day, his
answer is the same: he will tell you that it would be casting pearls
before swine; and that unless the music is 'tuney' and 'catchy' the
people will not take to it. And we cannot hastily dismiss these practical
objections. The very Ambrosian music which is now so strange to modern
ears was doubtless, when St. Ambrose introduced it, much akin to the
secular music of the day, if it was not directly borrowed from it: and
the history of hymn-music is a history of the adaptations of profane
successes in the art to the uses of the Church. Nor do I see that it can
ever be otherwise, for the highest music demands a supernatural material;
so that it would seem an equal folly for musicians to neglect the unique
opportunity which religion offers them, and for religion to refuse the
best productions of human art. And we must also remember that the art of
the time, whether it be bad or good, has a much more living relation to
the generation which is producing it, and exerts a more powerful
influence upon it, than the art of any time that is past and gone. It is
the same in all aspects of life: it is the book of the day, the hero or
statesman of the hour, the newest hope, the latest flash of scientific
light, which attracts the people. And it must be, on the face of it, true
that any artist who becomes widely popular must have hit off, 'I know not
by what secret familiarity,' the exact fashion or caprice of the current
taste of his own generation.

And this is so true that it must be admitted that it is not always the
uneducated man only whose taste is hit off. In the obituary notices of
such men as Gladstone and Tennyson the gossip will inform us, rightly or
wrongly, that their 'favourite hymn[7]' was, not one of the great
masterpieces of the world,--which, alas, it is only too likely that in
their long lives they never heard,--but some tune of the day: as if in
the minds of men whose lives appealed strongly to their age there must be
something delicately responsive to the exact ripple of the common taste
and fashion of their generation.

All this makes a strong case: and it would seem, since our hymn-music is
to stir the emotions of the vulgar, that it must itself be both vulgar
and modern; and that, in the interest of the weaker mind, we must
renounce all ancient tradition and the maxims of art, in order to be in
touch with the music-halls.

This is impossibly absurd; and unless there is some flaw in our argument,
the fault must lie in the premisses; we have omitted some necessary
qualification.

The qualification which we neglected is this, that _the music must be
dignified_, and suitable to the meaning; and we should only have wasted
words in ignoring what we knew all along, if we had not, by so doing,
brought this qualification into its vital prominence, and at the same
time exposed the position of those who neglect it, and the real reason of
the mean condition of our church music.

The use of undignified music for sacred purposes may perhaps be justified
in exceptional cases, which must be left to the judgement of those who
consider all things lawful that they may save some. But if from the
mission service this licence should creep into the special service, and
then invade every act of public worship, it must be met with an edict of
unscrupulous exclusion. Not that it can be truly described as thus having
crept in in our time. It is always creeping, it has flourished in special
habitats for four or five hundred years, and before then there is the
history of Palestrina's great reform of like abuses. If in our time in
England we differ in any respect for the worse, it is rather in the
universal prevalence of a mild form of the degradation, which is perhaps
more degrading than the occasional exceptional abuses of a more flagrant
kind, which cannot hide their scandal but bring their own condemnation.

There is indeed no extreme from which this abuse has shrunk; perhaps the
worst form of it is the setting of sacred hymns to popular airs, which
are associated in the minds of the singers with secular, or even comic
and amatory words[8]: of which it is impossible to give examples, because
the extreme instances are blasphemies unfit to be quoted; and it is only
these which could convey an adequate idea of the licence[9] The essence
of the practice appears to be the production of a familiar excitement,
with the intention of diverting it into a religious channel.

But, even in the absence of secular or profane association,
congregational singing, when provoked by undignified music, such as may
be found in plenty in our modern hymn-books, may be maintained without
the presence of religious feeling, out of mere high spirits, or as we
say, 'in fun,' and may easily give rise to mockery. I have witnessed
examples enough in proof of this, but if I gave them it might be thought
that I wished to amuse profane readers[10]. And though such extreme
disasters may be exceptional outbursts, yet they are always but just
beneath the surface, and are the inevitable outcome of the use of
unworthy means. The cause of such a choice of means must be either an
artistic incapacity to distinguish, or a want of faith in the power of
religious emotion when unaided by profane adjuncts. What would St.
Augustin have ruled here, or thought of the confusion of ideas, which,
being satisfied with any expression, mistakes one emotion for another?

The practical question now arises. We know the need; how is it to be
supplied? We require music which will reach the emotions of uneducated
people, and in which they will delight to join, and in which it shall be
easy to join: and it must be dignified and not secular. If we condemn and
reject the music which the professional church-musicians have supplied
with some popular success to meet the need, what is there to take its
place? Of what music is our hymn-book to be constructed, which shall be
at once dignified, sacred, and popular?

The answer is very simple: it is this, _Dignified Melody_. Good melody is
never out of fashion; and as it is by all confession the seal of high
musical genius, so it is that form of music which is universally
intelligible and in the best sense popular; and we have a rich legacy of
it. What we want is that our hymn-books should contain a collection of
the best ecclesiastical and sacred hymn-melodies, and _nothing but
these_, instead of having but a modicum of these, for the most part
mauled and illset, among a crowd of contributions of an altogether
inferior kind; the whole collection being often such that if an
ill-natured critic were to assert that the compilers had degraded and
limited the old music in order to set off their own, it would be
difficult to meet him with a logical refutation.

The shortest and most practical way of treating this subject will be to
give some account of the sources from which the music of such a hymn-book
as I propose would be drawn. I will take these in their chronological
order. First in order of time are the Plain-song melodies.

I have already stated the ordinary objection to these tunes, that they
are stiff and out of date. Now it may be likely enough that they will
never be so universally popular in our country as the fine melodies
invented on the modern harmonic system, yet the idea that they are not
popular in character, and that modern people will not sing them, is a
mistake; there is plenty of evidence on this point. Nor must we judge
them by the incompetent, and I confess somewhat revolting aspect in which
they were offered to us by the Anglo-gregorianists of thirty years ago, a
presentment which has gone far to ruin their reputation; they are better
understood now, and may be heard here and there sung as they should be.
They are of great artistic merit and beauty; and instead of considering
them _a priori_ as uncongenial on the ground of antiquity, we should
rather be thinking of them that they were invented at a time when unison
singing was cultivated in the highest perfection, so much so that a large
number of these tunes are, on account of their elaborate and advanced
rhythm, not only far above the most intelligent taste of the minds with
which we have to deal, but are also so difficult of execution that there
are few trained choirs in the country that could render them well. To the
simpler tunes, however, these objections do not apply: in fact there are
only two objections that can be urged against them, and both of these
will be found on examination to be advantages.

The first objection is that they are not in the modern scale. Now as this
objection is only felt by persons who have cramped their musical
intelligence by an insufficient technical education, and cannot believe
that music is music unless they are modulating in and out of some key by
means of a sharp seventh;--and as the nature of the ecclesiastical modes
is too long a subject, and too abstruse for a paper of this sort, even if
I were competent to discuss it;--I shall therefore content myself by
