to associate. He commanded the respect of foreign ambassadors and
travellers, of dignitaries in the Oriental Churches, bankers, and
the highest in society, as well as the common people. Even enemies
were constrained to honor him. Few possess in so high a degree the
admirable faculty of doing good without offense, and of recommending
personal religion to the world."[1]

[1] See _Missionary Herald_ for 1867, pp. 129-133: also 1865,
p. 350.

Mr. Herman N. Barnum's account of a tour to Diarbekir, Mardin, Sert,
Bitlis, and Moosh, in 1867, brings the Eastern field vividly before
us. His new associate, Mr. Henry S. Barnum, together with the
pastors connected with the Evangelical Union, and nine recent
graduates of the Seminary, accompanied him as far as Diarbekir,
where they arrived on Saturday. There was a union service of the two
congregations, on the next day, in the yard of one of the chapels,
at which as many as eight hundred were present. The church in
Diarbekir, though its pastor had been absent for two and a half
years, and there was only one native preacher for the two
congregations, yet had maintained the ordinances, and secured
frequent accessions to the community. They supported their preacher,
and also several schools, sent money to their absent pastor, and
supported two students at the Theological Seminary, whom they had
sent thither to be educated for the mission in Koordistan. They
chose several of their more intelligent members to assist the
preacher in keeping up the services of the two congregations; thus
proving their ability to care for themselves under very unfavorable
circumstances.

The Union was in session four days, and its meetings were well
attended. The evangelizing of Koordistan received a good deal of
attention. The five young men who were preparing for it, had
locations assigned them, their salaries fixed, and thus the native
pastors were acquiring experience in missionary superintendence.
Seven young men, just graduated from the Seminary, were carefully
examined for licensure, especially in their religious experience and
their motives for entering the ministry.

The last day of the session was the most interesting, when one of
the pastors read an essay upon the "means of promoting an awakening
among the unconverted;" which was followed by remarks from nearly
all the pastors present. The interest was greatest when some gave
expression to their deep feeling of responsibility, and to the
conviction that their own want of earnestness and spirituality was
the reason of so much indifference among the unconverted.

From Diarbekir the missionaries and six of the pastors went to
Mardin, whence, after ordaining one pastor, they went a journey of
five days to Sert. There they took part in another ordination, and
the formation of a church. Elias, the new pastor, had labored long
and faithfully in this place, and refused a most pressing call from
Mardin, though in worldly things it was much more desirable. He
believed he could be more useful where the poor and oppressed looked
to him as their spiritual father. Out of seven persons who offered
themselves as candidates for church-membership, six were organized
into a church. The congregation was small and poor, but a long
series of persecutions had wonderfully purged them of selfishness.
They had paid largely for their house of worship, had provided the
pastor elect with a new suit of clothes for the ordination, and,
considering their deep poverty, had made extraordinary subscriptions
towards the required half of his salary. They now adopted the system
of tithes cheerfully, which had been so successfully advocated by
John Concordance.

From Sert Mr. Williams proceeded to Mosul, and the rest to Bitlis.
There the congregation had long desired for their pastor Baron
Simon, who received ordination as an evangelist years before at
Constantinople. He has been repeatedly mentioned as Pastor Simon,
and was a man of experience and sterling worth. There were no
missionaries then at Bitlis. From hence they passed on to Moosh. The
plain on which the town is situated, is sixty miles long and ten or
twelve wide, and contains about seventy nominally Christian
villages. The travellers were exposed to a snow-storm while crossing
the plain. "It was genuine winter weather," writes Mr. Barnum, "yet
I think I never saw anywhere else, not even in the warm sunshine of
Egypt, so much nakedness, total or partial. Adults of course had the
semblance of clothing, though it was often a mass of rags, sewed or
tied together; but the poor children! It makes my heart ache to
think of them. Some had a tolerably whole shirt and drawers, some
had no drawers, and what was once a shirt was now a few shreds,
hanging from the shoulders. Many had merely a rag, as a sort of
jacket, with holes to put the arms through, and others had not a
thread upon their bodies. The people seem to be almost bedless.
Wherever we went, we found that the beds were a piece of carpet, or
felt, or only a little straw, with a piece of carpet as a covering.
In the six or seven villages visited by us, we did not notice a
woman, or a child, who had either stockings or shoes. They walked
about in the snow, and over the frozen ground, with bare feet. The
soil is fertile, and the people own the land themselves,--not
the Turkish Aghas, as is the case in many other parts of the
country,--so that it must be mere thriftlessness, rather than any
stern necessity, which makes them so destitute. They have not
learned to raise cotton, and consequently do not have on hand the
material for making clothes, except some kinds of woolen garments;
and as they do not like to pay money for cotton cloth, they live in
this truly barbarous state. Our pastors had never seen any
destitution like this among their Christian brethren, and it made a
deep impression upon them."

Mr. Barnum adds: "The spiritual condition of the people is as bad as
the physical. In the three or four monasteries surrounding the
plain, there are said to be fifty vartabeds--men of more or less
education. What a work they might do in these seventy villages, in
improving the condition of the people, if they only had the heart
for it. They are in a great measure responsible for this state of
things. They come down periodically from their haunts of
dissipation, and gather up and carry off whatever the people can
spare; and this has helped to discourage enterprise. The great want
now is the pure Gospel. This will not only save their souls, it will
give them true civilization and refinement. To us it seemed that the
people were ripe for the reception of the truth, for they are
growing tired of their present condition. The pastors turned away
from Moosh plain with the determination to induce the Evangelical
Union, if consistent with the work undertaken in Koordistan, to do
something for these people."

This journey of five hundred and fifty miles occupied thirty-eight
days, and was too much for the new missionary, who reached home
"jaded and worn," and had a serious illness. Before his recovery,
and probably in consequence of her care of her husband, Mrs. Barnum
was prostrated by typhus fever, which proved fatal on the 31st of
December, 1867, a little more than three months after her arrival at
Harpoot. But even in so short a time she had greatly endeared
herself to her associates.[1]

[1] _Missionary Herald_ for 1868, p. 136.

North of the territory traversed by Mr. Barnum, is the Erzroom
district. Of the sixty thousand inhabitants of the city of Erzroom
in 1868, fifteen thousand were Armenians. The hundred villages
scattered over its plain are smaller and more scattered than those
on the plain of Harpoot. But then the territory connected with
Erzroom is nearly as large as New England west of Maine, and has a
population of half a million, two thirds of whom are Armenians.
Touring in this territory is easy, as compared with the Harpoot
district; since the roads, almost everywhere, admit of the use of
wheels, and on the public thoroughfares the khans are comparatively
good. A wagon road was then in a sluggish process of construction
from Trebizond across the mountains.

The church in Diarbekir continued to grow, even during the three or
four years' absence of the pastor. They were active in communicating
the truth to their neighbors, and were especially interested in
securing the introduction of the Gospel into the surrounding
villages, and into Koordistan. But since then, the energy bestowed
upon these outside enterprises has been turned toward the building
of a large church, by means of funds collected by the pastor chiefly
in England, and to strictly home affairs.

The young men sent on the mission to Koordistan addressed themselves
chiefly to the Armenians and Jacobites, without neglecting the
Moslems, Koords, and Yezidees. These sects, in their social
intercourse, used only the Koordish language; but in their prayers,
the Armenians used the ancient Armenian, the Jacobites the ancient
Syriac, and the Koords the Arabic, all wholly unintelligible to
them. And it was a new thought to them, that God could be addressed
in the Koordish language.

A company of native missionaries was sent from Harpoot, in the
summer of 1868, to the benighted region of Moosh. This was a result
of the tour just described, and was a self-denying enterprise, but
the sacrifice was cheerfully made.

The two Seminaries at Harpoot were now full. Including the students
brought thither for a time from Mardin, and the Koordish students,
there were fifty in each Seminary; and these, with their children,
made a colony of one hundred and fifty.

It became manifest, soon after the Crimean war, that the Papal
ecclesiastics in Turkey, emboldened by the increased prospect of
French protection, grew relentlessly cruel where they had power, in
their persecutions of the Protestants. A painful illustration of
this occurred at Mardin in the summer of 1868, upon the arrival of a
new Papal Patriarch. He and the Papal Armenian bishop resolved to
make a determined effort to crush out Protestantism. The charges
upon which the proceedings were based, were pretended arrearages in
the payment of taxes, whereas none of the taxes were due.

On July 25th, six Protestants were arrested, and taken, not to
prison, but to the cavalry camp, to bring water for the horses,
sprinkle the ground, build mangers, clear privies, etc. Suleeba, the
Protestant preacher from Diarbekir who was laboring there at the
time, went to the Muteserif or governor of the city, and represented
the injustice of the proceeding. As a result, he was ordered to
prison himself, but was soon released. After various other efforts
with the Muteserif and the Pasha to secure justice (in which he was
opposed by the Papal Syrian Patriarch, and by priests and leaders of
the other sects at Mardin), and after presenting receipts which had
been given the Protestants for their taxes, Suleeba was delivered to
the soldiers, with the rest. He writes:--

"A gendarme took me to the camp. On seeing me the soldier said,
'This is their priest; bring some _large_ jars (water jars) for
him.' They fastened two jars to my neck, one before and one behind,
and gave two into my hands.[1] A soldier was assigned to each one of
us, and each one carried a long stick of wood, an inch in thickness,
and with these they freely beat us. In filling the jars which were
fastened to us, the soldiers would pour nearly as much into our
necks as into the jars, so that we were thoroughly drenched all the
time. Once I was so much fatigued that I begged permission to set
down the jars and rest, but the soldiers would not allow me. I
dropped one of them, as I could not hold it any longer, for the road
was long and my hands grew weak. In trying to recover it I fell to
the ground, and the soldier beat me severely with his stick."

[1] The four jars, when full of water, weighed more than one hundred
and fifty pounds.

It was on Monday that Suleeba was sent to the camp, and things
remained thus till Friday. "A little after sunrise on that day, a
gendarme came and said, 'The Protestants are wanted at the palace.'
We were taken to the Muteserif, and he began to curse us in the
vilest manner for not giving the money. I said, 'Examine our
accounts, and if you find that we owe anything we will pay it.' He
then ordered a stick to be brought,--it was a strong one, thicker
than my thumb,--and telling a soldier to take me by the head and
bend me forward, he gave the stick to a centurion, who gave me ten
or twelve blows. I still feel the soreness, though he was not
violent in his beating."

"About nine o'clock they called us to the Mejlis, or city council.
After a careful examination of the documents, in which the Pasha's
scribe, Fettah Effendi, took a prominent part, the Mejlis said with
one voice, to those on the other side, 'You have no claim whatever
on the Protestants.'" This decision was not accepted by the enemies
of the Protestants. In the afternoon of the same day, Suleeba
writes: "The Patriarch and the Papal Armenian Bishop called on the
Pasha. They stayed about half an hour. Before they left, a
lieutenant came from the Pasha, accompanied by two priests, and said
to the Muteserif, 'The Pasha orders that you instantly deliver each
one of the Protestants to two gensdarmes, and collect the money from
each one _at once_, according to this paper.' The Muteserif replied,
'There is no claim upon these men. What shall we collect?' He
replied, 'This is the Pasha's order.' The Muteserif said, 'We have
just examined these men's accounts, and have found that the
Protestants do not owe a para. Tell the Pasha so.' The Lieutenant
replied, 'The Patriarch and Bishop were with the Pasha just now, and
he told them that this money should be collected.' The Muteserif
then turned to Fettah Effendi, of Diarbekir, and urged him to go and
explain to the Pasha, but he did not wish to go. He then called out,
much excited, 'Come, gensdarmes, take these men and kill them.' I
then said, 'How much money do you want? Tell us, and we will give
it.' The Muteserif said, 'I don't know.' I said, 'You are delivering
us over to these soldiers. Tell us how much you want and we will
give it, and save ourselves from them.' The Muteserif then asked
Fettah Effendi, who had looked over our documents, and who had said
that the Protestants owed nothing, 'How much are these men to pay?'
He said, 'I don't know.' He then turned to the members of the other
sects and said, 'How much do you want of these men?' They said, 'Let
them come to the market [where the chief of police was receiving
taxes], and we will see.' So we were hurried off there. This was
less than an hour before sunset. We were taken to the shop occupied
by Daoud Agha, the chief of the police. A great crowd gathered as we
went along, and afterwards, which completely filled all the streets
in that vicinity. As we entered, Daoud Agha, who is an old enemy of
the Protestants, said to his men, 'Bring me two bottles of raki and
three or four candles, and I will collect this money before
morning."

The reader will remember the interesting account Mr. Williams gave
of the conversion of an influential merchant at Mardin named
Meekha.[1] This is the old man, Muksi Meekha, whom the chief of the
police delivered over to the gensdarmes, with the charge to collect
six thousand piasters from him. Mr. Barnum thus describes the
treatment he received: "They took him out into the street and began
to beat him with their gun-stocks. This is done by taking the gun in
both hands and striking with it endwise. He promised to give
security for the payment of the money in the morning, and begged to
be allowed till morning to raise the money, as the shops were all
shut; but they said, 'We must have the money now.' He wandered
through the market in the vain hope of finding somebody who would
advance the money, the guard all the time beating him, and so
severely that he several times fell down, and his outer garment was
torn into shreds; and he has since that time, now more than a week,
kept his bed most of the time. At last he met a member of the Mejlis
(a Turkish member), who told the guard that if it was money they
wished they must take _kefil_ from him, and wait till morning, as it
was now evening, and nobody could raise money at that time; 'but,'
he said, 'if your object is to kill him, take him back to the chief
of police and butcher him there.' They then took him back to the
crowd, and he found a man who gave a part of the money and a note
for the payment of the rest in the morning, and he was released. He
thinks that he would have been killed but for the intervention of
the Turk.

[1] See Chapter xxvii.

"Each one of the prisoners was then passed over to two gensdarmes.
Some of these were at once delivered, by their friends advancing the
money; but four of them, besides Muksi Meekha, were treated just as
he was, and all of them have kept their beds most of the time since.

"The police were at the same time sent to the houses of all the
other Protestants, and they were brought, and the money which the
sects demanded collected from them, by their paying the money or
getting security for its payment in the morning. In this way, in the
space of a few hours, and that evening, nineteen thousand piasters
were collected."

Only a very small portion of this money was ever refunded.

Mention was made, in connection with Dr. Goodell's visit to the
central mission in 1862, of the progress of the evangelical
reformation at Oorfa. Two years later, Mr. Nutting, the resident
missionary, announced an interesting revival of religion among his
people. Both church and congregation were aroused, and the
missionary had never seen more thorough conviction of sin, than was
apparent in many. They had been studying the Westminster Assembly's
Catechism for two years, and recently had attended lectures on the
Epistle to the Romans; "and the fundamental truths thus lodged in
their minds," writes Mr. Nutting, "had been greatly blessed." They
met entirely the expense of their own religious and educational
institutions. In February, 1865, the church numbered forty-two, and
as many more were known to be inquirers.

About this time there arose considerable uneasiness in the mission
from an apprehension of doctrinal errors in a candidate for the
pastorate of this church. To what extent such errors actually
existed, was never determined with certainty, but there was a spirit
of alienation and division, which was regarded with concern. The
churches in Oorfa and its four out-stations contained a total, in
1870, of one hundred and sixty-one members, of whom twenty-five had
been received in the previous year. The Report of the Board for 1871
declares the difficulties of former years to have happily passed
away; except that unsound doctrinal views continued to disturb the
harmony of the church at Severek, and that this place was noted, in
early times, for the prevalence of similar errors.

Mr. Wheeler returned from his visit to the United States in October,
1868, accompanied by Mrs. Wheeler, and the Misses Parmelee and
Baker; and they were met, six hours or nearly twenty miles out, by
the Harpoot and village pastors, and quite a delegation from the
city. The last day was a constant succession of welcomes. As they
drew near the city, they saw a large crowd on the hill, with a white
flag. It was the theological students drawn up in a line; and next,
the women and girls of the school; and then men, women, and children
crowded to greet them. It was the spontaneous expression of love to
those who had told them of Christ and his salvation.

The return of Dr. David H. Nutting from the United States to the
Central mission, in the autumn of 1868, led him to speak of the
progress of civilization at Aleppo. "All the stations of this
mission are now connected with this city by telegraph, while it is
connected with Constantinople. A line from here to Killis, Aintab,
and Marash, has just been constructed. We have French and Russian,
as well as Turkish, posts. A semi-weekly paper called the "Frat"
(Euphrates), is printed here, in three languages--Arabic,
Armeno-Turkish, and Arabo-Turkish. The streets are being repaved and
widened in some places, and street-lamps are put up. A carriage-road
from here to Alexandretta, the sea-port, is to be built
immediately."

John Concordance, the blind preacher at Havadoric, died at that
place in March, 1869, greatly beloved and lamented, and not by his
own people alone. The Armenians vied with the Protestants in
attending to the burial services, and especially in seeing that
Hohannes' particular requests were carried out to the letter, and
both classes were genuine mourners at his grave. His influence in
the matter of consecrating one tenth of one's income has been
extensively felt; and he practiced what he preached. His salary was
only eight dollars a month, and although he had a wife and child to
support from this, he never failed of giving one tenth into the
"store-house;" thus leaving but little more than seven dollars for
the monthly support of himself and family.

In the year 1868, Dr. Schneider, after a residence at Aintab of a
score of years, returned again to Broosa. It was natural for him to
review the progress of the good work at Aintab during his connection
with it, and his statement will interest the reader.

"I preached my first sermon in Aintab to a company of twenty-five or
thirty in the year 1848. Now, the average audience is near one
thousand, and often rises to twelve or fifteen hundred. Then, there
was a church of only eight members; now, there are two churches,
containing three hundred and seventy-three members. Then, the entire
community of Protestants numbered only forty souls, while at present
there are nineteen hundred, small and great. The number has become
so large, that a division into two separate congregations became a
necessity; and while there was then hardly any native laborer, now
two able native pastors are settled over these two churches. In the
beginning, next to nothing was done in the way of self-support and
general benevolence; while now, these communities pay the salaries
of their pastors and school-teachers, and all their other expenses.
Besides this, nearly five hundred dollars in gold were given for
general benevolence, and more than nine hundred towards a second
church edifice. All this in a community where a day-laborer receives
thirteen and a half cents per day, and a mason or carpenter
thirty-two cents. In view of their poverty, and the exactions of the
government, this is extraordinary liberality. More than one half of
the male members of these churches give a tithe of their income to
benevolent objects.

"In the beginning, we worshipped in a private house; but for many
years a large church edifice has been filled, and a second one, for
the benefit of the second church, will be completed in a few months.
At first, there was no school through the week, or on the Sabbath;
now, there are seven common schools, with nearly four hundred
pupils, and a Sabbath-school averaging a thousand, which has been as
high as sixteen hundred. More than a score of pastors and preachers
have been trained at Aintab, most of whom are still in the service,
and a large number have been sent forth as teachers and colporters
into the surrounding regions. Finally, when the Gospel was first
preached in Aintab, the Protestants were despised and persecuted;
while now, they are not only recognized as a regular community, with
rights and privileges, but they have acquired for themselves a name,
respect, and influence."






CHAPTER XLIII.

THE ARMENIANS.

1869-1872.


The year 1870 commenced at Marash with another revival. A thousand
persons were present at the prayer-meeting on the 3d of January,
which was admirably conducted by Pastor Murad. The missionaries,
though present, did not deem it necessary to assist him. Fifty-three
new members were received into the two churches, and a much larger
number offered themselves for admission. Successful efforts were
made to reach the women, who were visited in their own homes by the
wives of students in the theological school, and by the older
scholars in the girls' school. The number of houses thus visited
during six weeks, was three hundred and eight, and there were
fifty-five prayer-meetings.

A revival was also in progress at Bitlis. For many weeks there had
been a sunrise prayer-meeting every day; and it was fully attended
for eight months; its location being changed occasionally to
accommodate different parts of the city. The meeting on the 18th of
February was the most interesting and profitable. Nearly ninety
persons were seated on the floor of a room thirteen feet by twenty.
Pastor Simon had charge of the meeting, and so ready were the
people, that it continued two hours and three quarters before he
could bring it to a close. As many as seventeen spoke, and about as
many prayed. During the meeting, a prominent church-member called
the attention of the weeping congregation to the importance of
making a covenant with God _now_; and after reading a beautiful and
appropriate hymn, he requested all who were ready to make such a
covenant to rise. Nearly all rose, and while they were standing, he
offered an earnest prayer for the aid of the Holy Spirit in keeping
that covenant. It was an impressive scene. Forty were added to the
church as the result of this revival. The people paid the debt on
their chapel and parsonage, and enlarged the former. They also gave
a site for the building to be erected by the two Misses Ely for the
girls' boarding-school, in which were twenty pupils, for the most
part wives of native helpers.

Some time in the month of April, the good people of Bitlis observed
a day of fasting and prayer for the village of Havadoric, where the
blind preacher, John Concordance, had labored, and where he died.
After a few weeks, Mr. Knapp visited the place, with Pastor Simon,
and they found delightful evidence of the presence of the Holy
Spirit. It was in contemplation to organize a church in that place,
and the church in Bitlis had sent three delegates, who walked
forty-five miles over the muddy roads. Ten hours were spent, the day
after their arrival, in examining more than a score of persons for
the new church, and eleven were approved, including two women. After
the church had been organized, Avedis, a graduate of the Harpoot
Seminary, was ordained as pastor. Fifty were present at the Lord's
supper from Bitlis, Moosh, and Khanus.
