been strayed sheep who have been mercifully brought back to the fold,
if so, amend your ways, and grow in holiness and in spiritual health;
or in the Last Day you will be thrust forth as incurable, and the
Children of God will be sanctified, whilst you are buried in the valley
of Achor.




XLI.

_RASH DECISIONS._

4th Sunday after Trinity.

S. Luke vi. 37.

"Judge not--condemn not--forgive."


INTRODUCTION.--Our Lord here condemns all rash judgments.  We know not
the motives of other men's actions, and therefore have no right to pass
a sweeping condemnation upon them.  From our ignorance, we ought to be
cautious and merciful in our judgments, and from our own weakness, we
should be forgiving to those who have trespassed against us.

Rash judgments arise from pride.  It is because we are puffed up with a
high opinion of our own selves, our own goodness, the soundness of our
judgment, the sharpness of our perception, that we are so prompt to
pass judgment on others.

SUBJECT.--This same Pride urges us to something else, Persistency in
maintaining that on which we have determined, even after we know it is
unwise.  It is of this which I am going to speak to-day.  This fault is
so closely akin to rash judgment of others, that I may well address you
on the subject upon a Sunday when our Lord warns against the other.

I.  Many a man, out of pride, sticks to what he says after he knows
that it is wrong.  He will not admit that he is wrong, or he is moved
by a false sense of what is due to himself to hold to his word, or to
his opinion, when his conscience tells him that he is in error.  You
must have met with those stubborn persons who are not to be moved by
any argument, not to be convinced by any proof, that they are wrong.
They have made up their minds once for all, and are no longer open to
reverse their decision.

Let us look to Scripture, and see if we have any examples of such.  I
find two; and one of these is in a man of whom we might have hoped
better things--King David.

I.  When David came to the kingdom, he was very anxious to show
kindness to any son of Jonathan whom he might find; and he heard of
Mephibosheth, who was lame in both his feet, and at once made over to
him all the landed property that had belonged to King Saul, his
grandfather.  After seven years, Absalom, David's son, conspired
against his father, and David was obliged to fly from Jerusalem, with a
few friends.  As David was escaping, there came to him Ziba, a servant
of Mephibosheth, with a couple of asses saddled, and upon them two
hundred loaves of bread, and a hundred bunches of raisins, and an
hundred of summer fruits, and a skin of wine.  Then David asked Ziba
what these were for, and Ziba answered that he had brought them to the
king as a present, thinking he might need them in his flight.  And the
king asked after Mephibosheth; then Ziba said, "O! he is at home in
Jerusalem, he said in my hearing, A good time is coming to me.  To-day
shall the house of Israel restore me the kingdom of my father."  Now
all this was a wicked lie.  Mephibosheth had sent the present, and Ziba
had promised to tell David why his master could not come with him,
because he was crippled in both his feet, and could not get about.  As
for any idea of recovering the throne of Saul, it had not once entered
his head.  Now when David heard the slander of Ziba, he was very angry
with Mephibosheth, and at once he judged him, and condemned him,
without waiting to hear more, and said to Ziba, "Behold, I will give
thee all that belonged to Mephibosheth, if ever I get back to Jerusalem
and recover my power."

Not long after there was a great battle, and Absalom was slain, and the
enemies of David put to flight.  Then David returned over Jordan from
the wilderness where he had taken refuge, and Mephibosheth met him.
This good man, full of love for David, "had neither dressed his feet,
nor trimmed his beard, nor washed his clothes," all the time of David's
absence, to shew his great grief.  David at once reproached him for his
disloyalty, and then only he heard how great a lie Ziba had told.  Then
David answered, "Why speakest thou any more of thy matters?  I have
said, Thou and Ziba divide the land."  Mark the wicked injustice.  The
lying, slanderous servant is rewarded with half the property of poor
Mephibosheth,--why?--because David had promised him the whole when
misinformed.  David knows that Ziba has acted falsely, yet, because he
had said to him that he should be given the land of his master, he
keeps his word to him, though he knows he is doing an injustice to
Mephibosheth.

There you have a pretty example of an obstinate man sticking to what he
has said, after he is convinced that he has been misled, and doing a
great wrong rather than acknowledge that he had judged rashly, and
condemned on no good grounds.

II.  I can give you another example.  King Herod was pleased with the
dancing of the daughter of Herodias one evening at a supper, and he
swore to her, when he was half tipsy, that he would give her what she
liked in reward for her display.  Then she asked him to cut off the
head of S. John the Baptist, and give it her in a dish.  Now, as soon
as she asked this, the king was sorry, for he knew that S. John was a
good man, and he knew also that he had no right to have a man murdered
in prison to please the whim of a wicked woman; however, because he had
passed his word, he was too proud and cowardly to go back from it, and
refuse her what she had no right to ask.  Then he sent an executioner,
and he cut off the head of the saint, and put it in a dish, and it was
brought thus to the girl, and she carried it to her mother.

III.  A man is right to stick to his word, if his word be right.  He is
right to stick to his promise, if he have promised that over which he
has a just right.  He is right to stick to his opinion if his opinion
be founded on good grounds, and if he have heard nothing that ought to
cause him to alter it.

But--no man has any right to stick to his opinion simply because it is
his opinion.  He has no right to hold a promise which he had no right
to make.  He has no right to adhere to a harsh judgment simply because
he has formed that judgment.

When our Lord bids us not judge, He bids us be very cautious in forming
a decided opinion, and in sticking to it through thick and thin.  We
know so little here, and so imperfectly, that our opinions must be
formed on uncertain grounds, and therefore we have no right to be
tenacious about them.  Yet many persons are as touchy about their
opinions as though it were a sacrilege to dispute them.  Some of the
greatest injustices have been done through obstinacy, in clinging to
opinions that have become untenable.

CONCLUSION.--Remember then the lessons taught you by our Lord in this
day's Gospel, and also by the conduct of David.  Be very cautious of
forming a judgment, and when you have formed one, do not allow Pride to
stand in the way of confessing your fault, and changing your opinion,
when you are given reasonable grounds for so doing.




XLII.

_THE SECRET OF SUCCESS._

5th Sunday after Trinity

S. Luke v. 5.

"We have taken nothing; nevertheless at Thy word, I will let down the
net."


INTRODUCTION.--S. Peter and the other Apostles had been fishing all
night, and had met with no success at all, then Jesus entered into the
boat of Simon, and bade him launch out and let down his net.  S. Peter
did not hesitate.  He had met with no success when fishing in the
night, nevertheless now, at the word of Christ, he fishes again, and
this time the net encloses a great multitude, so that the net breaks.
No doubt our Lord desired to show those who were to become fishers of
men that there were two ways of doing a thing, and that one way would
be successful and the other would not.

If they were going to become fishers of men, they must try to catch
them by carrying Christ, _i.e._ a Christlike spirit, with them, and the
spirit of Christ is love and gentleness.  If they were to be successful
in winning souls, they must have a loving zeal, and that would gain
more than hard work without love.

SUBJECT.--We are all of us, in our several callings, fishers of souls.
Of course, especially are the clergy fishers, but not they only, every
man who loves God must seek to win souls for God, every man who is in
the net of the Church must seek to draw others into the same net.  If
the fisher is to be successful, he must fish in the spirit of Christ,
that is, actuated by love, and must deal gently with the souls he
desires to gain.

I.  I say, we are all fishers.  Those of us who are parents desire to
draw to Christ the souls of our children, those who are masters, the
souls of their servants.  The husband seeks to win the wife, and the
believing wife the husband.  "What knowest thou, O wife," says S. Paul,
"whether thou shalt save thy husband? or how knowest thou, O man,
whether thou shalt save thy wife?"

The servant seeks to win the fellow-servant, the labourer in the field
has the welfare of his fellow-labourer at heart, and seeks to draw him
to God.  It was Cain who said, "Am I my brother's keeper?"  And the
same isolating, selfish spirit is in those who take no interest in
those they associate with, and do not seek their good.

I was much struck last spring with something a gentleman said to me,
who had been a good deal in America; he was much surprised and struck
with the interest felt in England by the rich for the poor, by the
master and mistress for their servants, by the landowner for his
tenants, and he said to me, "This seems to me the most marvellous thing
I have seen in England.  With us a master cares not one snap of the
fingers what becomes of the man he employs, he no more thinks of what
becomes of him than he does of a dollar that passes through his hands.
He sees that he does his work, and if the man dies, the master gets
another in his place to-morrow, and asks nothing about the man who has
disappeared."

Well!  I thank God we are not come to that yet, however advanced we may
be in our independent ways; and it is not right and Christian that we
should.

II.  Now we come to the way in which we are to try to draw other souls
to Christ, the souls of our children, of our servants, of our
companions, of our fellow-workers.  The first principle of success is
gentleness.

In the 4th chapter of the 2nd book of Kings we have this story.  There
was a Shunammite woman who had an only son.  She was a good
kind-hearted woman, who had shown much hospitality to the prophet
Elijah [Transcriber's note: Elisha?].  One day the little boy ran out
into the harvest field, when the sun was hot, and he had a sunstroke,
and was very ill.  "He said unto his father, My head, my head.  And he
said to a lad, Carry him to his mother.  And when he had taken him and
brought him to his mother, he sat on her knees till noon, and then he
died.  And she went up, and laid him on the bed of the man of God, and
shut the door upon him, and went out."  Then she ordered one of the
servants to saddle an ass, and drive her to the prophet; and when she
found him, she told him the piteous story, and how the poor little
fellow whom she loved so dearly, and who was such a darling of his
father, and such a pet of the old Elisha when he paid them his visits,
was lying white and dead upstairs on the bed.

Then Elisha was sorely troubled, and he gave his staff to his servant,
Gehazi, and made him run as fast as he could to the house of the
Shunammite.  "Gird up thy loins, and take my staff in thine hand, and
go thy way: if thou meet any man, salute him not; and if any salute
thee, answer him not again; and lay my staff upon the face of the
child."  Gehazi obeyed, but it was of no use.  "He laid the staff upon
the face of the child: but there was neither voice, nor hearing."  Then
Elisha came himself, and he shut the door, and laid himself beside the
little body, and put his lips to the lips of the child, and his warm
loving heart against the little dead heart, and took the chill hands in
his.  Then the spirit of the child came back into him again, and he sat
up, and Elisha delivered him alive to his mother.

Now this story contains some lesson for us.  And this is the short
comment on the miracle by an old writer, "Him whom the rod of terror
will not rouse, _love_ will."  Or in other words, we may learn by this
that gentleness will succeed where harshness will fail.

In the time when all the north of England was heathen, there was an
assembly held at Iona to decide who should preach the gospel to the
English of Northumbria.  Then one missionary was sent, and after having
laboured for some years, he came back to give an account of his
mission.  And a council was held, and he said, "Those Northumbrians are
a stiff-necked, hard-hearted people.  I threatened them with God's
wrath, I spoke to them of Hell-fire, I warned them of the terrors of
judgment, I denounced the vengeance of God on them, and they would not
be converted."  Then one sitting in a bark seat said, "My brother, it
seems to me that you went the wrong way to work.  You should have gone
in love, and not in wrath.  You should have tried to win, and not to
drive."  All eyes were turned en the speaker, and it was decided with
one voice that he should be sent, and he went.  His name was Aidan--and
he was the Apostle of all Northumberland, Durham, and Yorkshire.  He
had the joy to see the whole people bow their necks to receive the yoke
of Christ.

What says S. Paul?  "What will ye? shall I come unto you with a rod, or
in love, and in the spirit of meekness?"  If he had come with the rod,
he would have gone back disappointed.

CONCLUSION.--Let us then, dear brethren, in dealing with the souls of
others, approach them, not with the rod, or we shall fail to awake them
to a new and better life, but in love, and in the spirit of gentleness,
and then we shall meet, I doubt not, with good success.




XLIII.

_PERSISTENCY IN WRONG DOING._

6th Sunday after Trinity.

S. Matt. v. 25.

"Agree with thine adversary quickly, while thou art in the way with
him."


INTRODUCTION.--I spoke to you the Sunday before last about the
obstinacy of persisting in an opinion after you have good cause to
believe that this opinion is unjust, or unreasonable.  I am going to
speak to you to-day of another form of obstinacy.

SUBJECT.--My subject is Persistency in doing wrong, because you have
begun wrong.  This is only another form of the same fault.  The other
is thinking wrong persistently, this is perseverance in doing wrong.
And the source of both is the same, Pride.  Pride stands in the way of
altering an erroneous opinion, and in the way of altering a wrongful
course of action.

I.  In the tenth chapter of the second book of Samuel we have a
striking story of the way in which a man having once done a wrong,
persists in it, and it brings about his ruin.

King David, when firmly established on his throne, began to look about
him to see who had been kind to him in his day of adversity, and to
reward, or thank them.  He showed his gratitude to the memory of his
friend Jonathan by investing his son Mephibosheth with his
grandfather's property.  Then he remembered that Nahash the King of
Ammon had shown him hospitality, and he heard also that he was just
dead.  So David said, "I will show kindness unto Hanun the son of
Nahash, as his father showed kindness unto me."  And David sent to
comfort him by the hand of his servants for his father.

The message was kindly intended.  David wished to show that he was not
forgetful of past favours, that he was ready to make a lasting
friendship with Hanun, and he desired to exhibit his sympathy with the
son for the loss of his father.  These were the three motives actuating
David, all good.  Now, how did Hanun act?  One would naturally suppose
that he would appreciate these motives, and that he would be glad, when
scarce settled on his throne, to secure the powerful friendship of King
David.  No!--he was young, insolent, inconsiderate, and fond of
practical joking,--a vulgar-minded fellow, puffed up with conceit at
his elevation to power.  Hanun took the servants, the ambassadors of
David, and shaved off half their beards, and cut off the lower half of
all their clothes, and sent them back to David.  And when it was told
unto David that his messengers had been thus ignominiously treated, "he
sent to meet them, because the men were greatly ashamed, and said,
Tarry at Jericho, until your beards be grown, and then return."  As
soon as Hanun and his Ammonites had done this, what was their next
step?--As perhaps you are aware, by the laws of civilized and
uncivilized people, the persons of ambassadors are held to be sacred.
Therefore Hanun had not only done an insolent, and utterly blackguard
trick, but he had gone against one of the first laws of nations.  What
he ought to have done, was at once to send to David a most humble
apology, with an acknowledgment that he had acted wrongly.  But he was
too proud for this.  He would not admit that he had erred.  He at once
sent and hired the Syrians of Beth-rehob, and the Syrians of Zoba,
twenty thousand foot soldiers, and of King Maacah a thousand men, and
of Ish-tob twelve thousand men, so that this malicious trick began to
shew that it was an expensive one.  Then David's army drew up in array
against this army of Ammon and their hired allies, and at once, all the
mercenaries ran away.  So then there was nothing for it but for the
Ammonites to return as quickly as possible within the walls of their
city.  Now, what should Hanun have done?  It was clear that David was
not eager to punish him, for he had not even sent his army against
Ammon till Hanun had collected the great host against him, and as soon
as the Ammonites, deserted by their auxiliaries, had retired within
their walls, the army of David had not pressed them, but gone quietly
back to Jerusalem.  What then ought Hanun to have done?  Of course, he
should now have sent his apology, and said how wrongly he had acted,
how ashamed of himself he was, and how desirous he was to have the past
forgotten.  But no, having done wrong once, his pride would not let him
acknowledge it, and he went on.  He now engaged Hadarezar, King of the
Syrians, and this time there was a great battle, and David slew of the
Syrians seven hundred chariots, and forty thousand horsemen, and smote
the captain of their host, so that he was left dead on the field, and
all the Syrians who could escape ran away for their lives.  Then
Hadarezer had had quite enough of fighting against Israel, and he made
peace with David, and "So the Syrians feared to help the children of
Ammon any more."  Now the Ammonites were left completely without
auxiliaries.  What chance was there for them?  Still David did not
press them.  A whole year passed, and he made no move.  He was waiting
for an apology.  But no.  That headstrong Hanun was still too proud to
make it.  He would die with all his people rather than say he had done
wrong.  So, at the end of a year, David sent his army against the
Ammonites, and destroyed them utterly.  He killed Hanun, and took away
his crown, and plundered his capital town, and ruined all his cities.
That was the end of one practical joke unapologised for.

II.  In the Gospel for to-day, our Lord warns against the same
hard-headedness in persisting in refusing an apology, and to make up
friendship that has been broken.  "Agree with thine adversary quickly,
while thou art in the way with him; lest at any time the adversary
deliver thee to the judge, and the judge deliver thee to the officer,
and thou be cast into prison.  Verily I say unto thee, Thou shalt by no
means come out thence, till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing."  He
urges Christians when they have done an injury to any, frankly to
confess it, to put their pride in their pocket, and to ask forgiveness.
It is not an easy thing to do, to acknowledge that you have done wrong,
but there is more true courage in doing so, than in persevering in
spite of the consequences, in wrong doing.  Many a lasting and
miserable quarrel has arisen because at the outset one little word has
not been said, which would have made all things smooth.  Two families
become estranged and bitterly hostile, because some one has reported to
the mother in one, that the mother in the other had made a disparaging
remark about her.  A little word, and all would be explained, and set
to rights.  "Let not the sun go down on your wrath," says the Apostle,
and an excellent piece of advice this is:--Make up all quarrels the
same day that they break out.

There was a good old bishop of Alexandria called John the Almsgiver,
and he and the Governor of the city were great friends.  Something
occurred which made a breach between them.  If I remember aright, it
was this.  The bishop was very charitable, and was always urging the
rich people to give to the poor, and they were constantly sending him
money to distribute among the sick and needy.  Now at this time the
Governor had experienced some difficulty in raising the taxes, and this
ruffled his temper.  He was on a visit to the Bishop, when he saw on
the stairs a number of servants of a rich lady bringing up, as a
present to the bishop some pots, labelled "Virgin Honey."  The Governor
said he did not believe they were pots of honey, but pots of gold, and
when the bishop offered to open them and let him see for himself, he
dashed out of the door in a rage, and said, "No wonder I can't get
money in taxes when you swindle it out of the people, to feed the
beggars on honey."  When the Governor was gone, the old Bishop was very
troubled, and he sat in his room all the rest of the day, waiting for
the Governor to come and make it up with him.  But no! the Governor was
fuming with anger and would do no such thing.  That evening the
Governor had a party, and as he was sitting at table with the guests, a
little scrap of paper was put on his plate, a servant of the Bishop had
brought it.  The Governor took it up and saw, "Dear old Friend--THE SUN
IS SETTING."  Then his heart relented, he excused himself to his
guests, and ran to the house of the Bishop, and they fell into one
another's arms and made friends again.

CONCLUSION.--Now remember this story.  Whenever you have a quarrel with
another, let not the sun go down on your wrath.  Make it up before set
of sun.




XLIV.

THE MEASURE OF SIN.

7th Sunday after Trinity.

S. Mark viii. 2.

"I have compassion on the multitude."


INTRODUCTION.--In to-day's Gospel we see the tender compassion of our
Lord for those who came into the wilderness to hear Him.  This is only
one example out of many of His great love and mercy: and indeed "His
mercy is over all His works."  "Thou, O Lord," says David, "art full of
compassion and mercy, long-suffering and truth."  This is a verity of
which we are so convinced that it is quite possible we may overlook the
other truth, that His mercy, though unlimited in extent, is limited in
its application.  His mercy is extended for a definite purpose, and
when it ceases to avail for this purpose, then it ceases to flow.  What
that purpose is, S. Paul tells us.  "Knowest thou not," he says, "that
the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance."  That is, God is
merciful that we may amend, not in order that we may continue in sin.
Now, if men thought that when they had fallen into grievous sin there
was no more a hope of recovery, then they would sink into despair, and
become hard and impenitent.  But that this may not be the case, God
assures us of His mercy, but he assures us of His mercy only to insure
our amendment.

SUBJECT.--It seems plain from Holy Scripture that to each man there is
a fixed measure of sin, and that if he fills that measure, after that
there is no place for repentance, and no more pardon.  This is a very
terrible truth,--but a truth it is, as I shall show you.

I.  There was a nation of Canaan called the Amorites, and God promised
to Abraham that He would give their land to his descendants, but that
He could not give it yet without injustice.  The land was in the
possession of the Amorites, a people on their trial, and till the day
of their probation was expired, their kingdom could not be taken from
them.  "In the fourth generation," God said, "thy seed shall come
hither, for the iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full."  Now
actually it was not till four hundred and seventy years later that the
destruction of the Amorites was accomplished.  Four generations after
Abraham, that is some two hundred and forty years after, the measure of
their iniquities was full, and yet they existed on till Joshua crossed
Jordan with the Israelites, and then they were all put to the sword.
