           on that island that was simply black lava; _hiwa_, black, was
           a sacred color. The term _uli_ has reference to its
           verdancy.]

           [Footnote 427: _Ipu_. Wai-uli, the foster father of the dog,
           while fishing in a mountain brook, brought up a pebble on his
           hook; his wife, who was childless and yearned for offspring,
           kept it in a calabash wrapped in choice tapa. In a year or
           two it had developed into the wonderful dog, Puapua-lenalena.
           The calabash was the _ipu_ here mentioned, the same as the
           _hano wai_ (verse 13), a water-container.]

           [Footnote 428: _Kilioe_. A sorceress who lived at Haena, Kauai,
           on the steep cliffs that were inaccessible to human foot.]

           [Footnote 429: _Ena-ena, na ahi o Kilauea_. "Hot are the fires
           of Kilauea." The duplicated word _ena-ena_, taken in
           connection with _Ha-ena_ in the previous verse, is a capital
           instance of a form of assonance, or nonterminal rhyme, much
           favored and occasionally used by Hawaiian poets of the middle
           period. From the fact that its use here introduces a break in
           the logical relation which it is hard to reconcile with unity
           one may think that the poet was seduced from the straight and
           narrow way by this opportunity for an indulgence that
           sacrifices reason to rhyme.]

           [Footnote 430: _Kamoho-alii_. The brother of Pele; his person
           was so sacred that the flames and smoke of Kilauea dared not
           invade the bank on which he reposed. The connection of
           thought between this and the main line of argument is not
           clear.]

           [Footnote 431: _Hoouna ka elele_. According to one story Liloa
           dispatched a messenger to bring Puapua-lenalena and his
           master to Waipi'o to aid him in regaining possession of
           Kiha-pu.]

           [Footnote 432: _A ao aku oe, aoa_ ... This indicated the
           dog's assent. Puapua-lenalena understood what was said to
           him, but could make no reply in human speech. When a question
           was put to him, if he wished to make a negative answer, he
           would keep silent; but if he wished to express assent to a
           proposition, he barked and frisked about.]

           [Footnote 433: _Hana e o Kaua-hoa_ ... No one has been found
           who can give a satisfactory explanation of the logical
           connection existing between the passage here cited and the
           rest of the poem. It treats of an armed conflict between
           Kauahoa and his cousin Kawelo, a hero from Oahu, which took
           place on Kauai. Kauahoa was a retainer and soldier of
           Ai-kanaka, a king of Kauai. The period was in the reign of
           King Kakuhihewa, of Oahu. Kawelo invaded Kauai with an armed
           force and made a proposition to Kauahoa which involved
           treachery to Kauahoa's liege-lord Ai-kanaka. Kauahoa's answer
           to this proposition is given in verse 28; _Hu'e a kaua, moe i
           ke awakea!_--"Strike home, then sleep at midday!" The sleep
           at midday was the sleep of death.]

           [Footnote 434: _Kapae ke kaua o ka hoahanau!_ This was the
           reply of Kawelo, urging Kauahoa to set the demands of kinship
           above those of honor and loyalty to his liege-lord. In the
           battle that ensued Kauahoa came to his death. The story of
           Kawelo is full of romance.]

           [Footnote 435: _Kaio'e_. Said to be a choice and beautiful
           flower found on Kauai. It is not described by Hillebrand.]

           [Footnote 436: _Ka nioi o Paka'a-lana_. The doorsill of the
           temple, _heiau_, of Paka'a-lana was made of the exceedingly
           hard wood _nioi_. It was to this temple that Puapua-lenalena
           brought the conch Kiha-pu when he had stolen (recovered) it
           from god Kane.]

           [Footnote 437: _Qumukahi_. See note _c_ on p. 197.]

           [Footnote 438: _Awa kau-laau o Puna_. It is said that in Puna
           the birds sometimes planted the awa in the stumps or in the
           crotches of the trees, and this awa was of the finest
           quality.]

           The author of this mele, apparently under the sanction of his
           poetic license, uses toward the great god Ku a plainness of
           speech which to us seems satirical; he speaks of him as
           _makole_, red-eyed, the result, no doubt, of his notorious
           addiction to awa, in which he was not alone among the gods.
           But it is not at all certain that the Hawaiians looked upon
           this ophthalmic redness as repulsive or disgraceful.
           Everything connected with awa had for them a cherished value.
           In the mele given on p. 130 the cry was, "Kane is drunken
           with awa!" The two gods Kane and Ku were companions in their
           revels as well as in nobler adventures. Such a poem as this
           flashes a strong light into the workings of the Hawaiian mind
           on the creations of their own imagination, the beings who
           stood to them as gods; not robbing them of their power, not
           deposing them from the throne of the universe, perhaps not
           even penetrating the veil of enchantment and mystery with
           which the popular regard covered them, at the most perhaps
           giving them a hold on the affections of the people.

                          [Translation]

                              _Song_

                Look forth, god Ku, look forth!
                Huh! Ku is blear-eyed!
                Aye, weave now the wreath--
                A wreath for the dog Pua-lena;
            5   A hala plume for Kahili,
                Choice garlands from Niho-ku.
[Page 226]      There was a scurry of clouds, earth, groaned;
                The sound of your baying reached
                Hawaii the verdant, the pet of the gods;
           10   A portent was seen in the heavens.
                You were kept in a cradle of gourd,
                Water-gourd of the witch Kilioe,
                Who haunted the cliffs of Haena--
                The fiery blasts of the crater
           15   Touch not Kamoho-alii's cliff.
                Your travel reaches Waipi'o,
                The sacred cliff of god Kane.
                Sleep fled the bed of the king
                At the din of the conch Kiha-pu.
           20   The king was tormented, depressed;
                His messenger sped on his way;
                Found help from Kanai of Mano--
                The marvelous foster child,
                By Waiuli, Kahuli, upreared;
           25   Your answer, a-o-a, a-o-a!--
                'Twas thus Kauahoa made ready betimes,
                That hero of old Hanalei--
                "Strike home! then sleep at midday!"
                "God fend a war between kindred!"
           30   One flower all other surpasses;
                Twine with it a wreath of kai-o'e,
                A chaplet to crown Pua-lena.
                My labor now has its reward,
                The doorsill of Pa-ka'a-lana.
           35   My heart leaps up in great cheer;
                The bay of the dog greets my ear,
                It reaches East Cape by the sea,
                Where Puna gave refuge to thee,
                Till came the king's herald, hot-foot,
           40   And quaffed the awa's tree-grown root.
                A-o-a, a-o-a, he, he, hene!

           The problem to be solved by the translator of this peculiar
           mele is a difficult one. It involves a constant readjustment
           of the mental standpoint to meet the poet's vagrant fancy,
           which to us seems to occupy no consistent point of view. If
           this difficulty arises from the author's own lack of insight,
           he can at least absolve himself from the charge of negligence
           and lack of effort to discover the standpoint that shall give
           unity to the whole composition; and can console himself with
           the reflection that no native Hawaiian scholar with whom he
           has conferred has been able to give a key to the solution of
           this problem. In truth, the native Hawaiian scholars of
           to-day do not appreciate as we do the necessity of holding
           fast to one viewpoint. They seem to be willing to accept with
           gusto any production of their old-time singers, though they
           may not be able to explain them, and though to us, in whose
           hearts the songs of the masters ever make music, they may
           seem empty riddles.
[Page 227]
           The solution of this problem here furnished is based on
           careful study of the text and of the allusions to tradition
           and myth that therein abound. Its expression in the
           translation has rendered necessary occasional slight
           departures from absolute literalness, and has involved the
           supplying of certain conjunctive and explanatory words and
           phrases of which the original, it is true, gives no hint, but
           without which the text would be meaningless.

           One learned Hawaiian with whom the author has enjoyed much
           conference persists in taking a most discouraging and
           pessimistic view of this mele. It is gratifying to be able to
           differ from him in this matter and to be able to sustain
           one's position by the consenting opinion of other Hawaiians
           equally accomplished as the learned friend just referred to.

           The incidents in the story of Puapua-lenalena alluded to in
           the mele do not exactly chime with any version of the legend
           met with. That is not strange. Hawaiian legends of necessity
           had many variants, especially where, as in this case, the
           adventures of the hero occurred in part on one and in part on
           another island. The author's knowledge of this story is
           derived from various independent sources, mainly from a
           version given to his brother, Joseph S. Emerson, who took it
           down from the words of an intelligent Hawaiian youth of
           Kohala.

           English literature, so far as known to the author, does not
           furnish any example that is exactly comparable to or that
           will serve as an illustration of this nonterminal rhyme,
           which abounds in Hawaiian poetry. Perhaps the following will
           serve the purpose of illustration:

                'Twas the swine of Gadara, fattened on _mast_.
                The _mast_-head watch of a ship was the last
                To see the wild herd careering past,

           Or such a combination as this:

                He was a mere _flat_,
                Yet _flat_tered the girls.

           Such artificial productions as these give us but a momentary
           intellectual entertainment. While the intellectual element in
           them was not lacking with the Hawaiians, the predominant
           feeling, no doubt, was a sensuous delight coming from the
           repetition of a full-throated vowel-combination.
[Page 228]




                            XXXIII.--THE HULA PUA'A


           The hula _pua'a_ rounds out the number of animal-dances that
           have survived the wreck of time, or the memory of which has
           come down to us. It was a dance in which only the olapa took
           part without the aid of instrumental accompaniment. Women as
           well as men were eligible as actors in its performance. The
           actors put much spirit into the action, beating the chest,
           flinging their arms in a strenuous fashion, throwing the body
           into strained attitudes, at times bending so far back as
           almost to touch the floor. This energy seems to have invaded
           the song, and the cantillation of the mele is said to have
           been done in that energetic manner called _ai-ha'a_.

           The hula pua'a seems to have been native to Kauai. The author
           has not been able to learn of its performance within historic
           times on any other island.

           The student of Hawaiian mythology naturally asks whether the
           hula pua'a concerned itself with the doings of the
           mythological hog-deity Kama-pua'a whose amour with Pele was
           the scandal of Hawaiian mythology. It takes but a superficial
           reading of the mele to answer this question in the
           affirmative.

           The following mele, or oli more properly, which was used in
           connection with the hula pua'a, is said to have been the
           joint production of two women, the daughters of a famous bard
           named Kana, who was the reputed brother of Limaloa
           (long-armed), a wonder-working hero who piled up the clouds
           in imitation of houses and mountains and who produced the
           mirage:

                            _Oli_

                Ko'i maka nui,[439]
                Ike ia na pae moku,
                Na moku o Mala-la-walu,[440]
                Ka noho a Ka-maulu-a-niho,
            5   Kupuna o Kama-pua'a.
[Page 229]      Ike ia ka hono a Pii-lani;[441]
                Ku ka paoa i na mokupuni.
                Ua puni au ia Pele,
                Ka u'i noho mau i Kilauea,
           10   Anau hewa i ke a o Puna.
                Keiki kolohe a Ku ame Hina--[442]
                Hina ka opua, kau i ke olewa,
                Ke ao pua'a[443] maalo i Haupu.
                Haku'i ku'u manao e hoi[444] i Kahiki;
           15   Pau ole ka'u hoohihi ia Hale-ma'u-ma'u,[445]
                I ka pali kapu a Ka-moho-alii.[446]
                Kela kuahiwi a mau a ke ahi.
                He manao no ko'u e noho pu;
                Pale 'a mai e ka hilahila,
           20   I ka hakukole ia mai e ke Akua wahine
                Pale oe, pale au, iloko o ka hilahila;
                A hilahila wale ia iho no e oe;
                Nau no ia hale i noho.[447]
                Ka hana ia a ke Ko'i maka nui,
           25   Ike ia na pae moku.
                He hiapo[448] au na Olopana,
                He hi'i-alo na Ku-ula,
                Ka mea nana na haka moa;
[Page 230]      Noho i ka uka o Ka-liu-wa'a;[449]
           30   Ku'u wa'a ia ho'i i Kahiki.
                Pau ia ike ana ia Hawaii,
                Ka aina a ke Akua i hiki mai ai,
                I noho malihini ai i na moku o Hawaii.
                Malihini oe, malihini au,
           35   Ko'i maka nui, ike ia na-pae opuaa.
                A pepelu, a pepelu, a pepelu
                Ko ia la huelo! pili i ka lemu!
                Hu! hu! hu! hu!
                Ka-haku-ma'a-lani[450] kou inoa!
           40   A e o mai oe, e Kane-hoa-lani.
                Ua noa.

           [Footnote 439: _Ko'i maka nui_ The word _maka_, which from the
           connection here must mean the edge of an ax, is the word
           generally used to mean an eye. Insistence on their
           peculiarity leads one to think that there must have been
           something remarkable about the eyes of Kama-pua'a. One
           account describes Kama-pua'a as having eight eyes and as many
           feet. It is said that on one occasion as Kama-pua'a was lying
           in wait for Pele in a volcanic bubble in the plains of Puna
           Pele's sisters recognized his presence by the gleam of his
           eyes. They immediately walled up the only door of exit.]

           [Footnote 440: _Mala-la-walu_. A celebrated king of Maui, said
           to have been a just ruler, who was slain in battle on Hawaii
           while making war against Lono-i-ka-makahiki, the rightful
           ruler of the island. It may be asked if the name is not
           introduced here because of the word _walu_ (eight) as a
           reference to Kama-pua'a's eight eyes.]

           [Footnote 441: _Pi'i-lani_. A king of Maui, father-in-law to
           Umi, the son of Liloa.]

           [Footnote 442: _Hina_. There were several Hinas in Hawaiian
           mythology and tradition. Olopana, the son of Kamaulu-a-niho
           (Fornander gives this name as Ka-maunu-a-niho), on his
           arrival from Kahiki, settled in Koolau and married a woman
           named Hina. Kama-pua'a is said to be the natural son of Hina
           by Kahiki-ula, the brother of Olopana. To this Olopana was
           attributed the heiau of Kawaewae at Kaneohe.]

           [Footnote 443: _A o pu-a'a_. The cloud-cap that often rested on
           the summit of Haupu, a mountain on Kauai, near Koloa, is said
           to have resembled the shape of a pig. It was a common saying,
           "The pig is resting on Haupu."]

           [Footnote 444: _Ho'i_. To return. This argues that, if
           Kama-pua'a was not originally from Kahiki, he had at least
           visited there.]

           [Footnote 445: _Hale-ma'u-ma'u_. This was an ancient lava-cone
           which until within a few years continued to be the most
           famous fire-lake in the caldera of Kilauea. It was so called,
           probably, because the roughness of its walls gave it a
           resemblance to one of those little shelters made from rough
           _ama'u_ fern such as visitors put up for temporary
           convenience. The word has not the same pronunciation and is
           not to be confounded with that other word _mau_, meaning
           everlasting.]

           [Footnote 446: _Kamoho-ali'i_. The brother of Pele; in one
           metamorphosis he took the form of a shark. A high point in
           the northwest quarter of the wall of Kilauea was considered
           his special residence and regarded as so sacred that no smoke
           or flame from the volcano ever touched it. He made his abode
           chiefly In the earth's underground caverns, through which the
           sun made its nightly transit from West back to the East. He
           often retained the orb of the day to warm and illumine his
           abode. On one such occasion the hero Mawi descended into this
           region and stole away the sun that his mother Hina might have
           the benefit of its heat in drying her tapas.]

           [Footnote 447: _Hale i noho_. The word _hale_, meaning house,
           is frequently used metaphorically for the human body,
           especially that of a woman. Pele thus acknowledges her amour
           with Kama-pua'a.]

           [Footnote 448: _Hiapo_. A firstborn child. Legends are at
           variance with one another as to the parentage of Kama-pua'a.
           According to the legend referred to previously, Kama-pua'a
           was the son of Olopana's wife Hina, his true father being
           Kahiki-ula, the brother of Olopana. Olopana seems to have
           treated him as his own son. After Kama-pua'a's robbery of his
           mother's henroosts, Olopana chased the thief into the
           mountains and captured him. Kama eventually turned the tables
           against his benefactor and caused the death of Olopana
           through the treachery of a priest in a heiau; he was offered
           up on the altar as a sacrifice.]

           [Footnote 449: _Ka-liu-wa'a_. The bilge of the canoe. This is
           the name of a deep and narrow valley at Hauula, Koolau, Oahu,
           and is well worth a visit. Kama-pua'a, hard pressed by the
           host of his enemies, broke through the multitude that
           encompassed him on the land side and with his followers
           escaped up this narrow gorge. When the valley came to an
           abrupt end before him, and he could retreat no farther, he
           reared up on his hind legs and scaled the mountain wall; his
           feet, as he sprang up, scored the precipice with immense
           hollowed-out grooves or flutings. The Hawaiians call these
           _wa'a_ from their resemblance to the hollow of a Hawaiian
           canoe. This feat of the hog-god compelled recognition of
           Kama-pua'a as a deity; and from that time no one entered
           Ka-liu-wa'a valley without making an offering to Kama-pua'a.]

           [Footnote 450: _Ka-haku-ma'a-lani._ A name evidently applied to
           Kama-pua'a.]

                        [Translation]

                            _Song_

                Ax of broadest edge I'm hight;
                The island groups I've visited,
                Islands of Mala-la-walu,
                Seat of Ka-maulu-a-niho,
            5   Grandam of Kama, the swine-god.
                I have seen Pi'i-lani's glory,
                Whose fame spreads over the islands.
                Enamored was I of Pele;
                Her beauty holds court at the fire-pit,
           10   Given to ravage the plains of Puna.
                Mischievous son of Ku, and of Hina,
                Whose cloud-bloom hangs in ether,
                The pig-shaped cloud that shadows Haupu.
                An impulse comes to return to Kahiki--
           15   The chains of the pit still gall me,
                The tabu cliff of Ka-moho-alii,
                The mount that is ever ablaze.
                I thought to have domiciled with her;
                Was driven away by mere shame--
           20   The shameful abuse of the goddess!
                Go thou, go I--a truce to the shame.
                It was your manners that shamed me.
                Free to you was the house we lived in.
                These were the deeds of Broad-edged-Ax,
           25   Who has seen the whole group of islands.
                Olopana's firstborn am I,
                Nursed in the arms of Ku-ula;
[Page 231]      Hers were the roosts for the gamecocks.
                The wilds of Ka-liu-wa'a my home,
           30   That too my craft back to Kahiki;
                This my farewell to Hawaii,
                Land of the God's immigration.
                Strangers we came to Hawaii;
                A stranger thou, a stranger I,
           35   Called Broad-edged-Ax:
                I've read the cloud-omens in heaven.
                It curls, it curls! his tail--it curls!
                Look, it clings to his buttocks!
                Faugh, faugh, faugh, faugh, uff!
           40   What! Ka-haku-ma'a-lani your name!
                Answer from heaven, oh Kane!
                My song it is done!

           If one can trust, the statement of the Hawaiian who
           communicated the above mele, it represents only a portion of
           the whole composition, the first canto--if we may so term
           it--having dropped into the limbo of forgetfulness. The
           author's study of the mele lends no countenance to such a
           view. Like all Hawaiian poetry, this mele wastes no time with
           introductory flourishes; it plunges at once in medias res.

           Hawaiian mythology figured Pele, the goddess of the volcano,
           as a creature of passion, capable of many metamorphoses; now
           a wrinkled hag, asleep in a cave on a rough lava bed, with
           banked fires and only an occasional blue flame playing about
           her as symbols of her power; now a creature of terror, riding
           on a chariot of flame and carrying destruction; and now as a
           young woman of seductive beauty, as when she sought
           passionate relations with the handsome prince, Lohiau; but in
           disposition always jealous, fickle, vengeful.

           Kama-pua'a was a demigod of anomalous birth, character, and
           make-up, sharing the nature and form of a man and of a hog,
           and assuming either form as suited the occasion. He was said
           to be the nephew of Olopana, a king of Oahu, whose kindness
           in acting as his foster father he repaid by the robbery of
           his henroosts and other unfilial conduct. He lived the
           lawless life of a marauder and freebooter, not confining his
           operations to one island, but swimming from one to another as
           the fit took him. On one occasion, when, the farmers of
           Waipi'o, whom he had robbed, assembled with arms to bar his
           retreat and to deal vengeance upon him, he charged upon the
           multitude, overthrew them with great slaughter, and escaped
           with his plunder.

           Toward Pele Kama-pua'a assumed the attitude of a lover, whose
           approaches she at one time permitted to her peril. The
           incident took place in one of the water caves--volcanic
           bubbles--in Puna, and at the level of the ocean; but when he
           had the audacity to invade her privacy and call to her as she
           reposed in her home at Kilauea she repelled his advances and
           answered his persistence with a fiery onset, from which he
[Page 232] fled in terror and discomfiture, not halting until he had put
           the width of many islands and ocean channels between himself
           and her.

           In seeking an explanation of this myth of Pele, the volcano
           god and Kama-pua'a, who, on occasion, was a sea-monster,
           there is no necessity to hark back to the old polemics of
           Asia. Why not account for this remarkable myth as the
           statement in terms of passion familiar to all Hawaiians of
           those impressive natural phenomena that were daily going on
           before them? The spectacle of the smoking mountain pouring
           out its fiery streams, overwhelming river and forest, halting
           not until they had invaded the ocean; the awful turmoil as
           fire and water came in contact; the quick reprisal as the
           angry waves overswept the land; then the subsiding and
           retreat of the ocean to its own limits and the restoration of
           peace and calm, the fiery mount still unmoved, an apparent
           victory for the volcanic forces. Was it not this spectacular
           tournament of the elements that the Hawaiian sought to embody
           and idealize in his myth of Pele and Kama-pua'a?[451]

           [Footnote 451: "The Hawaiian tradition of _Pele_, the dread
           goddess of the volcanic fires," says Mr. Fornander,
           "analogous to the Samoan _Fe'e_, is probably a local
           adaptation in aftertimes of an elder myth, half forgotten and
           much distorted. The contest related in the legend between
           Pele and _Kamapua'a_, the eight-eyed monster demigod,
           indicates, however, a confused knowledge of some ancient
           strife between religious sects, of which the former
           represented the worshipers of fire and the latter those with
           whom water was the principal element worthy of adoration."
           (Abraham Fornander, The Polynesian Race, pp. 51, 52, Trubner
           & Co., London.)]

           The likeness to be found between the amphibious Kama-pua'a
           and the hog appeals picturesquely to one's imagination in
           many ways. The very grossness of the hog enables him
           becomingly to fill the role of the Beast as a foil to Pele,
           the Beauty. The hog's rooting snout, that ravages the
           cultivated fields; his panicky retreat when suddenly
           disturbed; his valiant charge and stout resistance if
           cornered; his lowered snout in charge or retreat; his curling
           tail--how graphically all these features appeal to the
           imagination in support of the comparison which likens him to
           a tidal wave.
[Page 233]




                               XXXIV.--THE HULA OHELO


           The hula _ohelo_ was a very peculiar ancient dance, in which
           the actors, of both sexes, took a position almost that of
           reclining, the body supported horizontally by means of the
           hand and extended leg of one side, in such a manner that
           flank and buttock did not rest upon the floor, while the free
           leg and arm of the opposite side swung in wide gestures, now
           as if describing the arch of heaven, or sweeping the circle
           of the horizon, now held straight, now curved like a hook. At
           times the company, acting in concert, would shift their base
           of support from the right hand to the left hand, or vice
           versa. The whole action, though fantastical, was conducted
           with modesty. There was no instrumental accompaniment; but
           while performing the gymnastics above described the actors
           chanted the words of a mele to some Old World tune, the
           melody and rhythm of which are lost.

           A peculiar feature of the training to which pupils were
           subjected in preparation for this dance was to range them in
           a circle about a large fire, their feet pointing to the
           hearth. The theory of this practice was that the heat of the
           fire suppled the limbs and imparted vivacity to the motions,
           on the same principle apparently as fire enables one to bend
           into shape a crooked stick. The word _kapuahi_, fireplace, in
           the fourth line of the mele, is undoubtedly an allusion to
           this practice.

           The fact that the climate of the islands, except in the
           mountains and uplands, is rarely so cold as to make it
           necessary to gather about a fire seems to argue that the
           custom of practising this dance about a fireplace must have
           originated in some land of climate more austere than Hawaii.

           It is safe to say that very few kumu-hulas have seen and many
           have not even heard of the hula ohelo. The author has an
           authentic account of its production at Ewa in the year 1856,
           its last performance, so far as he can learn, on the public
           stage.

                                _Mele_

                                   1

                Ku, oe ko'u wahi ohelo nei la, auwe, auwe!
                Maka'u au i kau mea nui wali-wali, wali-wali!
                Ke hoolewa nei, a lewa la, a lewa nei!
                Minomino, enaena ka ia la kapuani, kapuahi!
            5   Nenea i ka la'i o Kona, o Kona, a o Kona!
                Ponu malino i ke kai hawana-wana, hawana-wana!
                He makau na ka lawaia nui, a nui e, a nui la!
                Ke o-e nei ke aho o ka ipu-holoholona, holoholona!
[Page 234]      Nana, i ka opua makai e, makai la!
