of their number. The emissary selected was Loki, who lost no time in
setting off to the waterfall where the dwarf Andvari dwelt, in order
that he might secure the treasure there amassed.


    "There is a desert of dread in the uttermost part of the world,
    Where over a wall of mountains is a mighty water hurled,
    Whose hidden head none knoweth, nor where it meeteth the sea;
    And that force is the Force of Andvari, and an Elf of the Dark
    is he.
    In the cloud and the desert he dwelleth amid that land alone;
    And his work is the storing of treasure within his house of stone."


In spite of diligent search, however, Loki could not find the dwarf,
until, perceiving a salmon sporting in the foaming waters, it occurred
to him that the dwarf might have assumed this shape. Borrowing Ran's
net he soon caught the fish, and learned, as he had suspected, that it
was Andvari. Finding that there was nothing else for it, the dwarf now
reluctantly brought forth his mighty treasure and surrendered it all,
including the Helmet of Dread and a hauberk of gold, reserving only a
ring which was gifted with miraculous powers, and which, like a magnet,
attracted the precious ore. But the greedy Loki, catching sight of it,
wrenched it from off the dwarf's finger and departed laughing, while
his victim hurled angry curses after him, declaring that the ring would
ever prove its possessor's bane and would cause the death of many.


    "That gold
    Which the dwarf possessed
    Shall to two brothers
    Be cause of death,
    And to eight princes,
    Of dissension.
    From my wealth no one
    Shall good derive."

            Saemund's Edda (Thorpe's tr.).


On arriving at Hreidmar's house, Loki found the mighty treasure none
too great, for the skin became larger with every object placed upon it,
and he was forced to throw in the ring Andvaranaut (Andvari's loom),
which he had intended to retain, in order to secure the release of
himself and his companions. Andvari's curse of the gold soon began
to operate. Fafnir and Regin both coveted a share, while Hriedmar
gloated over his treasure night and day, and would not part with an
item of it. Fafnir the invincible, seeing at last that he could not
otherwise gratify his lust, slew his father, and seized the whole
of the treasure, then, when Regin came to claim a share he drove him
scornfully away and bade him earn his own living.

Thus exiled, Regin took refuge among men, to whom he taught the arts
of sowing and reaping. He showed them how to work metals, sail the
seas, tame horses, yoke beasts of burden, build houses, spin, weave,
and sew--in short, all the industries of civilised life, which had
hitherto been unknown. Years elapsed, and Regin patiently bided
his time, hoping that some day he would find a hero strong enough
to avenge his wrongs upon Fafnir, whom years of gloating over his
treasure had changed into a horrible dragon, the terror of Gnitaheid
(Glittering Heath), where he had taken up his abode.

His story finished, Regin turned suddenly to the attentive Sigurd,
saying he knew that the young man could slay the dragon if he wished,
and inquiring whether he were ready to aid him to avenge his wrongs.


    "And he spake: 'Hast thou hearkened, Sigurd? Wilt thou help a
    man that is old
    To avenge him for his father? Wilt thou win that treasure of Gold
    And be more than the Kings of the earth? Wilt thou rid the earth
    of a wrong
    And heal the woe and the sorrow my heart hath endured o'er long?'"



Sigurd's Sword

Sigurd immediately assented, on the condition, however, that the curse
should be assumed by Regin, who, also, in order to fitly equip the
young man for the coming fight, should forge him a sword, which no
blow could break. Twice Regin fashioned a marvellous weapon, but twice
Sigurd broke it to pieces on the anvil. Then Sigurd bethought him of
the broken fragments of Sigmund's weapon which were treasured by his
mother, and going to Hiordis he begged these from her; and either
he or Regin forged from them a blade so strong that it divided the
great anvil in two without being dinted, and whose temper was such
that it neatly severed some wool floating gently upon the stream.

Sigurd now went upon a farewell visit to Gripir, who, knowing the
future, foretold every event in his coming career; after which he
took leave of his mother, and accompanied by Regin set sail for the
land of his fathers, vowing to slay the dragon when he had fulfilled
his first duty, which was to avenge the death of Sigmund.


    "'First wilt thou, prince,
    Avenge thy father,
    And for the wrongs of Eglymi
    Wilt retaliate.
    Thou wilt the cruel,
    The sons of Hunding,
    Boldly lay low:
    Thou wilt have victory.'"

            Lay of Sigurd Fafnicide (Thorpe's tr.).


On his way to the land of the Volsungs a most marvellous sight was
seen, for there came a man walking on the waters. Sigurd straightway
took him on board his dragon ship, and the stranger, who gave his name
as Feng or Fioellnir, promised favourable winds. Also he taught Sigurd
how to distinguish auspicious omens. In reality the old man was Odin
or Hnikar, the wave-stiller, but Sigurd did not suspect his identity.



The Fight with the Dragon

Sigurd was entirely successful in his descent upon Lygni, whom he
slew, together with many of his followers. He then departed from his
reconquered kingdom and returned with Regin to slay Fafnir. Together
they rode through the mountains, which ever rose higher and higher
before them, until they came to a great tract of desert which Regin
said was the haunt of Fafnir. Sigurd now rode on alone until he met
a one-eyed stranger, who bade him dig trenches in the middle of the
track along which the dragon daily dragged his slimy length to the
river to quench his thirst, and to lie in wait in one of these until
the monster passed over him, when he could thrust his sword straight
into its heart.

Sigurd gratefully followed this counsel, and was rewarded with complete
success, for as the monster's loathsome folds rolled overhead, he
thrust his sword upward into its left breast, and as he sprang out
of the trench the dragon lay gasping in the throes of death.


    "Then all sank into silence, and the son of Sigmund stood
    On the torn and furrowed desert by the pool of Fafnir's blood,
    And the Serpent lay before him, dead, chilly, dull, and grey;
    And over the Glittering Heath fair shone the sun and the day,
    And a light wind followed the sun and breathed o'er the fateful
    place,
    As fresh as it furrows the sea-plain, or bows the acres' face."


Regin had prudently remained at a distance until all danger was past,
but seeing that his foe was slain, he now came up. He was fearful
lest the young hero should claim a reward, so he began to accuse him
of having murdered his kin, but, with feigned magnanimity, he declared
that instead of requiring life for life, in accordance with the custom
of the North, he would consider it sufficient atonement if Sigurd
would cut out the monster's heart and roast it for him on a spit.


    "Then Regin spake to Sigurd: 'Of this slaying wilt thou be free?
    Then gather thou fire together and roast the heart for me,
    That I may eat it and live, and be thy master and more;
    For therein was might and wisdom, and the grudged and hoarded lore:
    --Or, else depart on thy ways afraid from the Glittering Heath.'"


Sigurd was aware that a true warrior never refused satisfaction of
some kind to the kindred of the slain, so he agreed to the seemingly
small proposal, and immediately prepared to act as cook, while Regin
dozed until the meat was ready. After an interval Sigurd touched the
roast to ascertain whether it were tender, but burning his fingers
severely, he instinctively thrust them into his mouth to allay the
smart. No sooner had Fafnir's blood thus touched his lips than he
discovered, to his utter surprise, that he could understand the
songs of the birds, many of which were already gathering round the
carrion. Listening attentively, he found that they were telling how
Regin meditated mischief against him, and how he ought to slay the
old man and take the gold, which was his by right of conquest, after
which he ought to partake of the heart and blood of the dragon. As
this coincided with his own wishes, he slew the evil old man with a
thrust of his sword and proceeded to eat and drink as the birds had
suggested, reserving a small portion of Fafnir's heart for future
consumption. He then wandered off in search of the mighty hoard,
and, after donning the Helmet of Dread, the hauberk of gold, and the
ring Andvaranaut, and loading Greyfell with as much gold as he could
carry, he sprang to the saddle and sat listening eagerly to the birds'
songs to know what his future course should be.



The Sleeping Warrior Maiden

Soon he heard of a warrior maiden fast asleep on a mountain and
surrounded by a glittering barrier of flames, through which only the
bravest of men could pass to arouse her.


    "On the fell I know
    A warrior maid to sleep;
    Over her waves
    The linden's bane:
    Ygg whilom stuck
    A sleep-thorn in the robe
    Of the maid who
    Would heroes choose."

            Lay of Fafnir (Thorpe's tr.).


This adventure was the very thing for Sigurd, and he set off at
once. The way lay through trackless regions, and the journey was long
and cheerless, but at length he came to the Hindarfiall in Frankland,
a tall mountain whose cloud-wreathed summit seemed circled by fiery
flames.


    "Long Sigurd rideth the waste, when, lo, on a morning of day,
    From out of the tangled crag-walls, amidst the cloudland grey,
    Comes up a mighty mountain, and it is as though there burns
    A torch amidst of its cloud-wreath; so thither Sigurd turns,
    For he deems indeed from its topmost to look on the best of
    the earth;
    And Greyfell neigheth beneath him, and his heart is full of mirth."


Sigurd rode up the mountain side, and the light grew more and more
vivid as he proceeded, until when he had neared the summit a barrier
of lurid flames stood before him. The fire burned with a roar which
would have daunted the heart of any other, but Sigurd remembered
the words of the birds, and without a moment's hesitation he plunged
bravely into its very midst.


    "Now Sigurd turns in his saddle, and the hilt of the Wrath
    he shifts,
    And draws a girth the tighter; then the gathered reins he lifts,
    And crieth aloud to Greyfell, and rides at the wildfire's heart;
    But the white wall wavers before him and the flame-flood rusheth
    apart,
    And high o'er his head it riseth, and wide and wild its roar
    As it beareth the mighty tidings to the very heavenly floor:
    But he rideth through its roaring as the warrior rides the rye,
    When it bows with the wind of the summer and the hid spears
    draw anigh;
    The white flame licks his raiment and sweeps through Greyfell's
    mane,
    And bathes both hands of Sigurd and the hilt of Fafnir's bane,
    And winds about his war-helm and mingles with his hair,
But nought his raiment dusketh or dims his glittering gear;
    Then it fails and fades and darkens till all seems left behind,
    And dawn and the blaze is swallowed in mid-mirk stark and blind."


The threatening flames having now died away, Sigurd pursued his
journey over a broad tract of white ashes, directing his course to
a great castle, with shield-hung walls. The great gates stood wide
open, and Sigurd rode through them unchallenged by warders or men at
arms. Proceeding cautiously, for he feared some snare, he at last came
to the centre of the courtyard, where he saw a recumbent form cased
in armour. Sigurd dismounted from his steed and eagerly removed the
helmet, when he started with surprise to behold, instead of a warrior,
the face of a most beautiful maiden.

All his efforts to awaken the sleeper were vain, however, until he
had removed her armour, and she lay before him in pure-white linen
garments, her long hair falling in golden waves around her. Then as the
last fastening of her armour gave way, she opened wide her beautiful
eyes, which met the rising sun, and first greeting with rapture the
glorious spectacle, she turned to her deliverer, and the young hero
and the maiden loved each other at first sight.


    "Then she turned and gazed on Sigurd, and her eyes met the
    Volsung's eyes.
    And mighty and measureless now did the tide of his love arise,
    For their longing had met and mingled, and he knew of her heart
    that she loved,
    And she spake unto nothing but him and her lips with the
    speech-flood moved."


The maiden now proceeded to tell Sigurd her story. Her name was
Brunhild, and according to some authorities she was the daughter of
an earthly king whom Odin had raised to the rank of a Valkyr. She
had served him faithfully for a long while, but once had ventured to
set her own wishes above his, giving to a younger and therefore more
attractive opponent the victory which Odin had commanded for another.

In punishment for this act of disobedience, she had been deprived
of her office and banished to earth, where Allfather decreed she
should wed like any other member of her sex. This sentence filled
Brunhild's heart with dismay, for she greatly feared lest it might be
her fate to mate with a coward, whom she would despise. To quiet these
apprehensions, Odin took her to Hindarfiall or Hindfell, and touching
her with the Thorn of Sleep, that she might await in unchanged youth
and beauty the coming of her destined husband, he surrounded her with
a barrier of flame which none but a hero would venture through.

From the top of Hindarfiall, Brunhild now pointed out to Sigurd her
former home, at Lymdale or Hunaland, telling him he would find her
there whenever he chose to come and claim her as his wife; and then,
while they stood on the lonely mountain top together, Sigurd placed
the ring Andvaranaut upon her finger, in token of betrothal, swearing
to love her alone as long as life endured.


    "From his hand then draweth Sigurd Andvari's ancient Gold;
    There is nought but the sky above them as the ring together
    they hold,
    The shapen ancient token, that hath no change nor end,
    No change, and no beginning, no flaw for God to mend:
    Then Sigurd cried: 'O Brynhild, now hearken while I swear,
    That the sun shall die in the heavens and the day no more be fair,
    If I seek not love in Lymdale and the house that fostered thee,
    And the land where thou awakedst 'twixt the woodland and the sea!'
    And she cried: 'O Sigurd, Sigurd, now hearken while I swear
    That the day shall die for ever and the sun to blackness wear,
    Ere I forget thee, Sigurd, as I lie 'twixt wood and sea
    In the little land of Lymdale and the house that fostered me!'"



The Fostering of Aslaug

According to some authorities, the lovers parted after thus plighting
their troth; but others say that Sigurd soon sought out and wedded
Brunhild, with whom he lived for a while in perfect happiness until
forced to leave her and his infant daughter Aslaug. This child, left
orphaned at three years of age, was fostered by Brunhild's father, who,
driven away from home, concealed her in a cunningly fashioned harp,
until reaching a distant land he was murdered by a peasant couple for
the sake of the gold they supposed it to contain. Their surprise and
disappointment were great indeed when, on breaking the instrument open,
they found a beautiful little girl, whom they deemed mute, as she would
not speak a word. Time passed, and the child, whom they had trained
as a drudge, grew to be a beautiful maiden, and she won the affection
of a passing viking, Ragnar Lodbrog, King of the Danes, to whom she
told her tale. The viking sailed away to other lands to fulfil the
purposes of his voyage, but when a year had passed, during which time
he won much glory, he came back and carried away Aslaug as his bride.


    "She heard a voice she deemed well known,
    Long waited through dull hours bygone
    And round her mighty arms were cast:
    But when her trembling red lips passed
    From out the heaven of that dear kiss,
    And eyes met eyes, she saw in his
    Fresh pride, fresh hope, fresh love, and saw
    The long sweet days still onward draw,
    Themselves still going hand in hand,
    As now they went adown the strand."

            The Fostering of Aslaug (William Morris).


In continuation of the story of Sigurd and Brunhild, however, we are
told that the young man went to seek adventures in the great world,
where he had vowed, as a true hero, to right the wrong and defend
the fatherless and oppressed.



The Niblungs

In the course of his wanderings, Sigurd came to the land of the
Niblungs, the land of continual mist, where Giuki and Grimhild were
king and queen. The latter was specially to be feared, as she was well
versed in magic lore, and could weave spells and concoct marvellous
potions which had power to steep the drinker in temporary forgetfulness
and compel him to yield to her will.

The king and queen had three sons, Gunnar, Hoegni, and Guttorm,
who were brave young men, and one daughter, Gudrun, the gentlest
as well as the most beautiful of maidens. All welcomed Sigurd most
warmly, and Giuki invited him to tarry awhile. The invitation was
very agreeable after his long wanderings, and Sigurd was glad to
stay and share the pleasures and occupations of the Niblungs. He
accompanied them to war, and so distinguished himself by his valour,
that he won the admiration of Grimhild and she resolved to secure him
as her daughter's husband. One day, therefore, she brewed one of her
magic potions, and when he had partaken of it at the hand of Gudrun,
he utterly forgot Brunhild and his plighted troth, and all his love
was diverted unto the queen's daughter.


    "But the heart was changed in Sigurd; as though it ne'er had been
    His love of Brynhild perished as he gazed on the Niblung Queen:
    Brynhild's beloved body was e'en as a wasted hearth,
    No more for bale or blessing, for plenty or for dearth."


Although there was not wanting a vague fear that he had forgotten
some event in the past which should rule his conduct, Sigurd asked for
and obtained Gudrun's hand, and their wedding was celebrated amid the
rejoicings of the people, who loved the young hero very dearly. Sigurd
gave his bride some of Fafnir's heart to eat, and the moment she
had tasted it her nature was changed, and she began to grow cold and
silent to all except him. To further cement his alliance with the two
eldest Giukings (as the sons of Giuki were called) Sigurd entered the
"doom ring" with them, and the three young men cut a sod which was
placed upon a shield, beneath which they stood while they bared and
slightly cut their right arms, allowing their blood to mingle in the
fresh earth. Then, when they had sworn eternal friendship, the sod
was replaced.

But although Sigurd loved his wife and felt a true fraternal affection
for her brothers, he could not lose his haunting sense of oppression,
and was seldom seen to smile as radiantly as of old. Giuki had now
died, and his eldest son, Gunnar, ruled in his stead. As the young
king was unwedded, Grimhild, his mother, besought him to take a wife,
suggesting that none seemed more worthy to become Queen of the Niblungs
than Brunhild, who, it was reported, sat in a golden hall surrounded
by flames, whence she had declared she would issue only to marry the
warrior who would dare brave the fire for her sake.



Gunnar's Stratagem

Gunnar immediately prepared to seek this maiden, and strengthened
by one of his mother's magic potions, and encouraged by Sigurd, who
accompanied him, he felt confident of success. But when on reaching
the summit of the mountain he would have ridden into the fire, his
steed drew back affrighted and he could not induce him to advance a
step. Seeing that his companion's steed did not show signs of fear,
he asked him of Sigurd; but although Greyfell allowed Gunnar to mount,
he would not stir because his master was not on his back.

Now as Sigurd carried the Helmet of Dread, and Grimhild had given
Gunnar a magic potion in case it should be needed, it was possible
for the companions to exchange their forms and features, and seeing
that Gunnar could not penetrate the flaming wall Sigurd proposed to
assume the appearance of Gunnar and woo the bride for him. The king
was greatly disappointed, but as no alternative offered he dismounted,
and the necessary exchange was soon effected. Then Sigurd mounted
Greyfell in the semblance of his companion, and this time the steed
showed not the least hesitation, but leaped into the flames at the
first touch on his bridle, and soon brought his rider to the castle,
where, in the great hall, sat Brunhild. Neither recognised the other:
Sigurd because of the magic spell cast over him by Grimhild; Brunhild
because of the altered appearance of her lover.

The maiden shrank in disappointment from the dark-haired intruder,
for she had deemed it impossible for any but Sigurd to ride through
the flaming circle. But she advanced reluctantly to meet her visitor,
and when he declared that he had come to woo her, she permitted him
to take a husband's place at her side, for she was bound by solemn
injunction to accept as her spouse him who should thus seek her
through the flames.

Three days did Sigurd remain with Brunhild, and his bright sword lay
bared between him and his bride. This singular behaviour aroused the
curiosity of the maiden, wherefore Sigurd told her that the gods had
bidden him celebrate his wedding thus.


    "There they went in one bed together; but the foster-brother laid
    'Twixt him and the body of Brynhild his bright blue battle-blade;
    And she looked and heeded it nothing; but, e'en as the dead
    folk lie,
    With folded hands she lay there, and let the night go by:
    And as still lay that Image of Gunnar as the dead of life forlorn,
    And hand on hand he folded as he waited for the morn.
    So oft in the moonlit minster your fathers may ye see
    By the side of the ancient mothers await the day to be."

