     And how unsearchable are His judgments!
     God gives birth to the people,
     But their natures are not constant;
     All have the same beginning,
     But few have the same end.

God, however, is not held responsible for the sufferings of mankind.
King Wen, in an address to the last tyrant of the House of Shang, says
plainly,

     It is not God who has caused this evil time,
     But it is you who have strayed from the old paths.

The Associate of God.--Worshipped on certain occasions as the Associate
of God, and often summoned to aid in hours of distress or danger, was a
personage known as Hou Chi, said to have been the original ancestor
of the House of Chou. His story, sufficiently told in the _Odes_, is
curious for several reasons, and especially for an instance in Chinese
literature, which, in the absence of any known husband, comes near
suggesting the much-vexed question of parthenogenesis:--

     She who first gave birth to our people
     Was the lady Chiang Yuan.
     How did she give birth to them?
     She offered up a sacrifice
     That she might not be childless;
     Then she trod in a footprint of God's, and conceived,
     The great and blessed one,
     Pregnant with a new birth to be,
     And brought forth and nourished
     Him who was Hou Chi.

     When she had fulfilled her months,
     Her firstborn came forth like a lamb.
     There was no bursting, no rending,
     No injury, no hurt,
     In order to emphasise his divinity.
     Did not God give her comfort?
     Had He not accepted her sacrifice,
     So that thus easily she brought forth her son?

     He was exposed in a narrow lane,
     But sheep and oxen protected and suckled him;
     He was exposed in a wide forest,
     But woodcutters found him;
     He was exposed on cold ice,
     But birds covered him with their wings.

Apotheosis of Hou Chi.--And so he grew to man's estate, and taught
the people husbandry, with a success that has never been rivalled.
Consequently, he was deified, and during several centuries of the Chou
dynasty was united in worship with God:--

     O wise Hou Chi,
     Fit Associate of our God,
     Founder of our race,
     There is none greater than thou!
     Thou gavest us wheat and barley,
     Which God appointed for our nourishment,
     And without distinction of territory,
     Didst inculcate the virtues over our vast dominions.

Other Deities.--During the long period covered by the Chou dynasty,
various other deities, of more or less importance, were called into
existence.

The patriarchal Emperor Shen Nung, B.C. 2838-2698, who had taught his
people to till the ground and eat of the fruits of their labour, was
deified as the tutelary genius of agriculture:--

     That my fields are in such good condition
     Is matter of joy to my husbandmen.
     With lutes, and with drums beating,
     We will invoke the Father of Husbandry,
     And pray for sweet rain,
     To increase the produce of our millet fields,
     And to bless my men and their wives.

There were also sacrifices to the Father of War, whoever he may have
been; to the Spirits of Wind, Rain, and Fire; and even to a deity who
watched over the welfare of silkworms. Since those days, the number of
spiritual beings who receive worship from the Chinese, some in one part
of the empire, some in another, has increased enormously. A single
work, published in 1640, gives notices of no fewer than eight hundred
divinities.

Superstitions.--During the period under consideration, all kinds of
superstition prevailed; among others, that of referring to the rainbow.
The rainbow was believed by the vulgar to be an emanation from an
enormous oyster away in the great ocean which surrounded the world, i.e.
China. Philosophers held it to be the result of undue proportions in the
mixture of the two cosmogonical principles which when properly blended
produce the harmony of nature. By both parties it was considered to be
an inauspicious manifestation, and merely to point at it would produce a
sore on the hand.

Supernatural Manifestations.--Several events of a supernatural character
are recorded as having taken place under the Chou dynasty. In B.C. 756,
one of the feudal Dukes saw a vision of a yellow serpent which descended
from heaven and laid its head on the slope of a mountain. The Duke spoke
of this to his astrologer, who said, "It is a manifestation of God;
sacrifice to it."

In B.C. 747, another Duke found on a mountain a being in the semblance
of a stone. Sacrifices were at once offered, and the stone was deified,
and received regular worship from that time forward.

In B.C. 659, a third Duke was in a trance for five days, when he saw
a vision of God, and received from Him instructions as to matters then
pressing. For many generations afterwards the story ran that the Duke
had been up to Heaven. This became a favourite theme for romancers. It
is stated in the biography of a certain Feng Po that "one night he saw
the gate of heaven open, and beheld exceeding glory within, which shone
into his courtyard."

The following story is told by Huai-nan Tzu (d. B.C. 122):--"Once when
the Duke of Lu-yang was at war with the Han State, and sunset drew near
while a battle was still fiercely raging, the Duke held up his spear and
shook it at the sun, which forthwith went back three zodiacal signs."

Only the Emperor worships God and Earth.--From the records of this
period we can also see how jealously the worship of God and Earth was
reserved for the Emperor alone.

In B.C. 651, Duke Huan of the Ch'i State, one of the feudal nobles to
be mentioned later on, wished to signalise his accession to the post of
doyen or leader of the vassal States by offering the great sacrifices
to God and to Earth. He was, however, dissuaded from this by a wise
Minister, who pointed out that only those could perform these ceremonies
who had personally received the Imperial mandate from God.

This same Minister is said to be responsible for the following
utterance:--

"Duke Huan asked Kuan Chang, saying, To what should a prince attach the
highest importance? To God, replied the Minister; at which Duke Huan
gazed upwards to the sky. The God I mean, continued Kuan Chung, is not
the illimitable blue above. A true prince makes the people his God."

Sacrifices.--Much has been recorded by the Chinese on the subject
of sacrifice,--more indeed than can be easily condensed into a small
compass. First of all, there were the great sacrifices to God and to
Earth, at the winter and summer solstices respectively, which were
reserved for the Son of Heaven alone. Besides what may be called private
sacrifices, the Emperor sacrificed also to the four quarters, and to the
mountains and rivers of the empire; while the feudal nobles sacrificed
each to his own quarter, and to the mountains and rivers of his own
domain. The victim offered by the Emperor on a blazing pile of wood was
an ox of one colour, always a young animal; a feudal noble would use any
fatted ox; and a petty official a sheep or a pig. When sacrificing to
the spirits of the land and of grain, the Son of Heaven used a bull, a
ram, and a boar; the feudal nobles only a ram and a boar; and the common
people, scallions and eggs in spring, wheat and fish in summer, millet
and a sucking-pig in autumn, and unhulled rice and a goose in winter.
If there was anything infelicitous about the victim intended for God, it
was used for Hou Chi. The victim intended for God required to be kept in
a clean stall for three months; that for Hou Chi simply required to
be perfect in its parts. This was the way in which they distinguished
between heavenly and earthly spirits.

In primeval times, we are told, sacrifices consisted of meat and drink,
the latter being the "mysterious liquid," water, for which wine was
substituted later on. The ancients roasted millet and pieces of pork;
they made a hole in the ground and scooped the water from it with their
two hands, beating upon an earthen drum with a clay drumstick. Thus they
expressed their reverence for spiritual beings.

"Sacrifices," according to the _Book of Rites_ (Legge's translation),
"should not be frequently repeated. Such frequency is an indication of
importunateness; and importunateness is inconsistent with reverence. Nor
should they be at distant intervals. Such infrequency is indicative
of indifference; and indifference leads to forgetting them altogether.
Therefore the superior man, in harmony with the course of Nature, offers
the sacrifices of spring and autumn. When he treads on the dew which
has descended as hoar-frost he cannot help a feeling of sadness, which
arises in his mind, and which cannot be ascribed to the cold. In spring,
when he treads on the ground, wet with the rains and dews that have
fallen heavily, he cannot avoid being moved by a feeling as if he were
seeing his departed friends. We meet the approach of our friends with
music, and escort them away with sadness, and hence at the sacrifice in
spring we use music, but not at the sacrifice in autumn."

"Sacrifice is not a thing coming to a man from without; it issues from
within him, and has its birth in his heart. When the heart is deeply
moved, expression is given to it by ceremonies; and hence, only men
of ability and virtue can give complete exhibition to the idea of
sacrifice." It was in this sense that Confucius warned his followers not
to sacrifice to spirits which did not belong to them, i.e. to other than
those of their own immediate ancestors. To do otherwise would raise a
suspicion of ulterior motives.
