    of his father David: 33 and he shall reign over the house of Jacob
    for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end. 34 And Mary
    said unto the angel, How shall this be, seeing I know not a man?
    35 And the angel answered and said unto her, The Holy Spirit shall
    come upon thee, and the power of the Most High shall overshadow
    thee: wherefore also the holy thing which is begotten shall be
    called the Son of God. 36 And behold, Elisabeth thy kinswoman, she
    also hath conceived a son in her old age; and this is the sixth
    month with her that was called barren. 37 For no word from God
    shall be void of power. 38 And Mary said, Behold, the handmaid of
    the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word. And the angel
    departed from her.


The prediction to Mary of the birth of Jesus is recorded by Luke with
marked dignity, delicacy, and reserve. It is an important record. This
prediction is the crown of all prophecy and it reveals the supreme mystery
of the Christian faith, namely, the nature of our Lord, at once human and
divine.

The same angelic being who had spoken to Zacharias speaks again, not now
to an aged and distinguished priest amidst the splendors of the Temple in
Jerusalem, but to a humble maiden betrothed to a carpenter in an obscure
village of Galilee. The angelic salutation, "Hail, thou that art highly
favored," has been translated less accurately, "Hail, thou that art full
of grace," and it has been misinterpreted to encourage the practice of
praying to the virgin as divine. It does not mean, however, that Mary was
to be a source but rather a recipient of grace; upon her God was bestowing
peculiar favor. She may rightly be regarded as the most blessed among
women; but only a woman still.

Mary had been startled by so strange an appearance and greeting; now she
was further amazed by the announcement, "Thou shalt ... bring forth a son,
and shalt call his name Jesus." Before her marriage she was to become a
mother, and she was to call her child by that significant name which
signifies "Saviour" or "God is Saviour." "He shall be great," continued
the angel, both in his person, as "the Son of the Most High," and in his
royal power, for "the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his
father David." This throne of David does not refer to the Christian Church
or to merely heavenly or spiritual influence. It is a rule on earth which
here is promised, yet it is not to be limited to one nation nor is it to
be confined to one age. It is the Kingdom of the Messiah, which is to
bring joy to "the house of Jacob for ever" and also to all the nations of
the world--"and of his kingdom there shall be no end."

The exclamation of Mary expressed astonishment but not unbelief: "How
shall this be?" Then came the answer which is unsurpassed as a clear and
sublime statement of the incarnation, "The Holy Spirit shall come upon
thee, and the power of the Most High shall overshadow thee;" the creative
power of God was to rest upon Mary as the cloud of glory had rested upon
the tabernacle of Israel and as a result the child who would be born
should be in reality, and should be called, "the Son of God." Of the truth
of his promise the angel added a sign and proof in the surprising fact
that Elisabeth, the aged kinswoman of Mary, was soon to be blessed with a
son. This was in fulfillment of a promise made by the same angel
messenger, and the marvel in the case of Elisabeth would assure Mary of
the certain accomplishment of the gracious and more surprising promise to
her. The reply of Mary is probably unequaled in all history as an
expression of perfect faith, "Behold the handmaid of the Lord; be it unto
me according to thy word." Thus she revealed belief in the word of God and
submission to the will of God. There was no doubt in her mind as to the
truth of the divine promise with all that it suggested of miracle and of
mystery; and there was no shrinking on her part from all that the
fulfillment of this promise possibly might involve of suspicion and shame
and reproach and suffering and even death. Those who believe most firmly
in the promises of God, submit most patiently to his providences; they see
the glory which surely will succeed the gloom. Mary was to become the
mother of the Messiah, of the Son of Man, of the Saviour of the world.




C. The "Magnificat." Ch. 1:39-56


    39 And Mary arose in these days and went into the hill country
    with haste, into a city of Judah; 40 and entered into the house of
    Zacharias and saluted Elisabeth. 41 And it came to pass, when
    Elisabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe leaped in her
    womb; and Elisabeth was filled with the Holy Spirit; 42 and she
    lifted up her voice with a loud cry, and said, Blessed _art_ thou
    among women, and blessed is the fruit of thy womb. 43 And whence
    is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come unto me?


    44 For behold, when the voice of thy salutation came into mine
    ears, the babe leaped in my womb for joy. 45 And blessed is she
    that believeth; for there shall be a fulfilment of the things
    which have been spoken to her from the Lord. 46 And Mary said,

    My soul doth magnify the Lord,
    47 And my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour.
    48 For he hath looked upon the low estate of his handmaid:
      For behold, from henceforth all generations shall call me
                  blessed.
    49 For he that is mighty hath done to me great things;
      And holy is his name.
    50 And his mercy is unto generations and generations
      On them that fear him.
    51 He hath showed strength with his arm;
      He hath scattered the proud in the imagination of their heart.
    52 He hath put down princes from _their_ thrones,
      And hath exalted them of low degree.
    53 The hungry he hath filled with good things;
      And the rich he hath sent empty away.
    54 He hath given help to Israel his servant,
      That he might remember mercy
    55 (As he spake unto our fathers)
      Toward Abraham and his seed for ever.


    56 And Mary abode with her about three months, and returned unto
    her house.


The Magnificat, the lovely lyric which comes from the lips of Mary, has
been sung during many centuries as one of the chief canticles of the
Christian Church. Its occasion was a visit paid to her kinswoman,
Elisabeth, by Mary shortly after she had received the promise of the birth
of a son. Elisabeth on hearing the salutation of Mary addressed her in
high spiritual ecstasy, declaring her supremely blessed among women
because of the Son to be born, and wondering at her own honor in being
thus visited by the mother of her Lord, by which phrase she means the
mother of the Messiah; it is to be noted that the Bible does not contain
the phrase "Mother of God." Elisabeth congratulated Mary upon her faith
and assured her that the promise upon which Mary relied was certain to be
fulfilled.

The name of the song which Mary then sang, the Magnificat, has come from
the first line in its Latin form, _Magnificat anima mea Dominum_. The
model is that of the ancient hymn sung by Hannah when her heart, like that
of Mary, was rejoicing in the promised gift of a son. The verses form a
perfect mosaic of Old Testament quotations. The hymn was not addressed to
Elisabeth or to the Lord; it is rather a meditation upon the mercy and
grace of God.

According to the common division the song is composed of four stanzas of
four lines each, except the third stanza which contains six lines. The
general movement of thought seems to be from the goodness of God to Mary
as an individual, to his consequent kindness to Israel as a nation.

The first stanza, or strophe, vs. 46-48, illustrates, as do those which
follow, one of the chief features of Hebrew poetry, namely, the
expression, in successive lines, of thoughts which are parallel or closely
related. In her "soul" or "spirit" or innermost being, Mary praises or
magnifies the Lord and rejoices in him as her Saviour. This salvation is
not only for her people, but particularly for herself; it is not only
political but also spiritual. It is to be wrought out by the gift God is
granting to Mary. He has chosen her, an obscure village maiden betrothed
to a poor carpenter, and has bestowed upon her such honor that all future
generations will call her "blessed." While realizing the honor she dwells
most upon her unworthiness while recognizing what it may cost her, she
declares her submission as a true "bondmaid" or slave of the Lord.
Humility and faith could hardly be more sublime.

The second stanza, vs. 49, 50, centers the thought upon the character of
God as revealed in his gracious gift. His power, his holiness, his mercy
are praised. In his goodness to Mary he had shown his divine power, yet in
accordance with the moral perfection of his revealed nature and in order
to bring blessings to countless generations who would trust and reverence
him.

In the third stanza, vs. 51-53, is an illustration of another feature of
Hebrew poetry; not only is there striking parallelism, but here past
tenses are used to describe future events; the results of the coming of
the Messiah are stated as though already achieved. In contrast with the
blessedness of those that fear the Lord, "the proud," the rebellious, and
unbelieving are pictured as "scattered" like the hosts of a defeated army;
the oppressed are exalted while tyrants are dethroned; the hungry are
filled and the rich are sent away "empty." These results are to be
regarded as spiritual as well as physical. Such reversals are certain to
occur where Christ is accepted and those who receive blessings from him
are the humble who are conscious of their need.

The last strophe, vs. 54, 55, emphasizes the faithfulness of God to his
ancient promises which Mary sees fulfilled in the birth of her Son. In
this saving help given to Israel, God is showing that he has not forgotten
the mercy "toward Abraham and his seed" promised to the "fathers" of old.
Only in Christ Jesus can be realized all the promises to Israel, all the
hopes of the ages.




D. The Birth of John, and the "Benedictus." Ch. 1:57-80


    57 Now Elisabeth's time was fulfilled that she should be
    delivered; and she brought forth a son. 58 And her neighbors and
    her kinsfolk heard that the Lord had magnified his mercy towards
    her; and they rejoiced with her. 59 And it came to pass on the
    eighth day, that they came to circumcise the child; and they would
    have called him Zacharias, after the name of his father. 60 And
    his mother answered and said, Not so; but he shall be called John.
    61 And they said unto her, There is none of thy kindred that is
    called by this name. 62 And they made signs to his father, what he
    would have him called. 63 And he asked for a writing tablet, and
    wrote, saying, His name is John. And they marvelled all. 64 And
    his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue _loosed_, and he
    spake, blessing God. 65 And fear came on all that dwelt round
    about them: and all these sayings were noised abroad throughout
    all the hill country of Judaea. 66 And all that heard them laid
    them up in their heart, saying, What then shall this child be? For
    the hand of the Lord was with him.


    67 And his father Zacharias was filled with the Holy Spirit, and
    prophesied, saying,

    68 Blessed _be_ the Lord, the God of Israel;
      For he hath visited and wrought redemption for his people,
    69 And hath raised up a horn of salvation for us
      In the house of his servant David
    70 (As he spake by the mouth of his holy prophets that have been
                from of old),
    71 Salvation from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate
                us;
    72 To show mercy towards our fathers,
      And to remember his holy covenant;
    73 The oath which he sware unto Abraham our father,
    74 To grant unto us that we being delivered out of the hand of our
                enemies
      Should serve him without fear,
    75 In holiness and righteousness before him all our days.
    76 Yea and thou, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Most
                High:
      For thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to make ready his
                  ways;
    77 To give knowledge of salvation unto his people
      In the remission of their sins,
    78 Because of the tender mercy of our God,
      Whereby the dayspring from on high shall visit us,
    79 To shine upon them that sit in darkness and the shadow of
                death;
      To guide our feet into the way of peace.


    80 And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was in the
    deserts till the day of his showing unto Israel.


When the aged priest, Zacharias, had received from an angel the promise
that he was to be given a son who would be called John and who would be
the herald of Christ, and when he had asked for a sign to attest the truth
of the prediction, he was smitten with dumbness as a rebuke for his
unbelief and as a stimulus for his faith. Even when at last the promise
was fulfilled, the sign was not removed and he was not able to speak until
he had given a written expression of his confidence in God. This
interesting incident occurred on the eighth day after the birth of John,
when in the presence of their rejoicing friends the parents were about to
name the child. Many supposed that the name of the father would be
selected. The mother, however, intimated that the name might be "John."
When Zacharias, the father, was consulted, "he asked for a writing tablet,
and wrote, ... His name is John." There was no hesitation, no uncertainty,
no question in his mind, for this name had been predicted by the angel,
and Zacharias showed by his decision and firmness that he believed
absolutely in the fulfillment of all that the angel had promised
concerning the career of the son who was to be regarded by his fellow men
as a gift of divine grace and a prophet of divine appointment. It usually
happens that a public confession of faith results in new joy and in wider
testimony. It was surely so in the case of Zacharias: "His mouth was
opened immediately, ... and he spake, blessing God." His thanksgiving was
voiced in a hymn which, for hundreds of years, has been sung daily in
Christian worship. It is indeed a Christian hymn and a hymn of the
nativity; for while its occasion was the birth of John, only one stanza
refers to that event; the whole burden of the thanksgiving refers to the
approaching birth of Jesus and to the salvation which he is to bring.

This hymn is named the Benedictus from the first word in the Latin
version. It is an ecstatic expression of gratitude to God for his
boundless goodness. The poem possibly may be divided into five stanzas of
four lines each; but there is a definite pause after the third of these
stanzas when the thought turns from the work of Christ to the specific
mission of John.

The first strophe, vs. 68, 69, speaks of the redemption of Israel as
already accomplished in the gift of the Christ who is about to be born and
who is described as "a horn of salvation," that is, a manifestation of
saving power. He is to appear as a son and heir of David the king.

The second stanza, or strophe, vs. 70-72, indicates that the salvation
from all enemies is in fulfillment of the promises made through the
prophets and cherished by the ancient fathers and embodied in the holy
covenant made with Israel of old.

The third stanza, vs. 73-75, describes the nature of this salvation which
was assured by the oath to Abraham; it is to be such a deliverance from
political oppression as to make possible for Israel a true, priestly
service of God, as a nation holy and righteous before him.

In the fourth stanza, vs. 76, 77, the singer turns to address his own son
whose birth has given occasion to the song. He declares that John is to be
recognized as a prophet of God whose divine mission will be to announce
and to define the promised salvation as in its essence not a political but
a spiritual redemption consisting in the remission of sin. John was not to
be a revolutionist but a reformer. He was to call a nation to repentance
that those who obeyed his message might be ready to receive the salvation
of Christ.

This mission of John is linked with that of Christ as the description of
the latter reaches its climax in the closing strophe. Vs. 78, 79. The
source of all the blessings Christ will bring is found in "the tender
mercy of our God;" the essence is a visitation of "the dayspring from on
high," when the Sun of righteousness arises upon the helpless, terrified
wanderers of the night who are seated "in darkness and the shadow of
death;" the result will be "to guide our feet into the way of peace."

Such is the hymn of Zacharias, a hymn of faith, of hope, of gratitude, a
