
    Thou wilt bind the stubborn will,
      Wound the callous breast,
    Make self-righteousness be still,
      Break earth's stupid rest.
    Strangers on a barren shore,
      Lab'ring long and lone,
    We would enter by the door,
      And Thou know'st Thine own;

    So, when day grows dark and cold,
      Tear or triumph harms,
    Lead Thy lambkins to the fold,
      Take them in Thine arms;
    Feed the hungry, heal the heart,
      Till the morning's beam;
    White as wool, ere they depart,
      Shepherd, wash them clean.




_THE VALLEY CEMETERY_


    Ye soft sighing zephyrs through foliage and vine!
    Ye echoing moans from the footsteps of time!
    Break not on the silence, unless thou canst bear
    A message from heaven--"No partings are there."

    Here gloom hath enchantment in beauty's array,
    And whispering voices are calling away--
    Their wooings are soft as the vision more vain--
    I would live in their empire, or die in their chain.

    Here smileth the blossom and sunshine not dead--
    Flowers fresh as the pang in the bosom that bled,--
    Yes, constant as love that outliveth the grave,
    And time cannot quench in oblivion's wave.

    And thou, gentle cypress, in evergreen tears,
    Art constant and hopeful though winter appears.
    My heart hath thy verdure, it blossoms above;
    Like thee, it endureth and liveth in love.

    Ambition, come hither! These vaults will unfold
    The sequel of power, of glory, or gold;
    Then rush into life, and roll on with its tide,
    And bustle and toil for its pomp and its pride.

    The tired wings flitting through far crimson glow,
    Which steepeth the trees when the day-god is low;
    The voice of the night-bird must here send a thrill
    To the heart of the leaves when the winds are all still.

    'Mid graves do I hear the glad voices that swell,
    And call to my spirit with seraphs to dwell;
    They come with a breath from the verdant springtime,
    And waken my joy, as in earliest prime.

    Blest beings departed! Ye echoes at dawn!
    O tell of their radiant home and its morn!
    Then I'll think of its glory, and rest till I see
    My loved ones in glory still waiting for me.




_UPWARD_


    I've watched in the azure the eagle's proud wing,
    His soaring majestic, and feathersome fling--
    Careening in liberty higher and higher--
    Like genius unfolding a quenchless desire.

    Would a tear dim his eye, or pinion lose power
    To gaze on the lark in her emerald bower?
    When higher he soareth to compass his rest,
    What vision so bright as the dream in his breast!

    God's eye is upon him. He penciled his path
    Whose omniscient notice the frail fledgling hath.
    Though lightnings be lurid and earthquakes may shock,
    He rides on the whirlwind or rests on the rock.

    My course, like the eagle's, oh, still be it high,
    Celestial the breezes that waft o'er its sky!
    God's eye is upon me--I am not alone
    When onward and upward and heavenward borne.

    Written in early years.




_THE OAK ON THE MOUNTAIN'S SUMMIT_


    Oh, mountain monarch, at whose feet I stand,--
    Clouds to adorn thy brow, skies clasp thy hand,--
    Nature divine, in harmony profound,
    With peaceful presence hath begirt thee round.

    And thou, majestic oak, from yon high place
    Guard'st thou the earth, asleep in night's embrace,--
    And from thy lofty summit, pouring down
    Thy sheltering shade, her noonday glories crown?

    Whate'er thy mission, mountain sentinel,
    To my lone heart thou art a power and spell;
    A lesson grave, of life, that teacheth me
    To love the Hebrew figure of a tree.

    Faithful and patient be my life as thine;
    As strong to wrestle with the storms of time;
    As deeply rooted in a soil of love;
    As grandly rising to the heavens above.




_WOMAN'S RIGHTS_


    Grave on her monumental pile;
    She won from vice, by virtue's smile,
    Her dazzling crown, her sceptered throne,
    Affection's wreath, a happy home;

    The right to worship deep and pure,
    To bless the orphan, feed the poor;
    Last at the cross to mourn her Lord,
    First at the tomb to hear his word;

    To fold an angel's wings below;
    And hover o'er the couch of woe;
    To nurse the Bethlehem babe so sweet,
    The right to sit at Jesus' feet;

    To form the bud for bursting bloom,
    The hoary head with joy to crown;
    In short, the right to work and pray,
    "To point to heaven and lead the way."

    Lynn, Mass., _May 6, 1876_.




_THE NEW CENTURY_


    Thou God-crowned, patient century,
    Thine hour hath come! Eternity
    Draws nigh--and, beckoning from above,
    One hundred years, aflame with Love,
    Again shall bid old earth good-by--
    And, lo, the light! far heaven is nigh!
    New themes seraphic, Life divine,
    And bliss that wipes the tears of time
    Away, will enter, when they may,
    And bask in one eternal day.

    'Tis writ on earth, on leaf and flower:
    Love hath one race, one realm, one power.
    Dear God! how great, how good Thou art
    To heal humanity's sore heart;
    To probe the wound, then pour the balm--
    A life perfected, strong and calm.
    The dark domain of pain and sin
    Surrenders--Love doth enter in,
    And peace is won, and lost is vice:
    Right reigns, and blood was not its price.

    Pleasant View, Concord, N. H., _January, 1901_.




_TO MY ABSENT BROTHER_


    Dwells there a shadow on thy brow--
      A look that years impart?
    Does there a thought of vanished hours
      Come ever o'er thy heart?

    Or give those earnest eyes yet back
      An image of the soul,
    Mirrored in truth, in light and joy,
      Above the world's control?

    So may their gaze be ever fraught
      With utterance deep and strong,
    Yielding a holy strength to right,
      A stern rebuke to wrong!

    Thy soul, upborne on wisdom's wings,
      In brighter morn will find
    Life hath a higher recompense
      Than just to please mankind.

    Supreme and omnipresent God,
      Guide him in wisdom's way!
    Give peaceful triumph to the truth,
      Bid error melt away!

    Lynn, Mass., _November 8, 1866_.




_SIGNS OF THE HEART_


    Come to me, joys of heaven!
      Breathe through the summer air
    A balm--the long-lost leaven
      Dissolving death, despair!
        O little heart,
        To me thou art
    A sign that never can depart.

    Come to me, peace on earth!
      From out life's billowy sea,--
    A wave of welcome birth,--
      The Life that lives in Thee!
        O Love divine,
        This heart of Thine
