immediate future to a more distant day. The slaying of the heir was
the last act of the vine-dressers. The owner would act next. Luke,
like Mark, puts the threatening of retribution into Christ's lips,
while Matthew makes it the answer of the rulers to his question.
Luke alone gives the exclamation, 'God forbid!' The ready answer in
Matthew, and the pious interjection in Luke, have the same purpose,--to
blunt the application of the parable to themselves by appearing to be
unconcerned.

Their levity and reluctance to take home the lesson moved our Lord
to sternness, which burned in His steadfast eyes as He looked on
them, and must have been remembered by some disciple whose memory
has preserved that look for us. It was the prelude to a still less
veiled prophecy of the fall of Israel. Jesus lays His hand on the
ancient prophecy of the stone rejected by the builders, and applies
it to Himself. He is the sure foundation of which Isaiah had spoken.
He is the stone rejected by Israel, but elevated to the summit of
the building, and there joining two diverging walls.

The solemn warning closing the parable had its special meaning in
regard to Israel, but its dread force extends to us. To fall on the
stone while it lies lowly on the earth is to lame one's self, but to
have it fall on a man when it rushes down from its elevation is ruin
utter and irremediable. 'If they escaped not who refused Him that
spake on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from
Him that speaketh from heaven.'




WHOSE IMAGE AND SUPERSCRIPTION?


    'Whose image and superscription hath it?'--Luke xx. 24.

It is no unusual thing for antagonists to join forces in order to
crush a third person obnoxious to both. So in this incident we have
an unnatural alliance of the two parties in Jewish politics who were
at daggers drawn. The representatives of the narrow conservative
Judaism, which loathed a foreign yoke, in the person of the
Pharisees and Scribes, and the Herodians, the partisans of a
foreigner and a usurper, lay their heads together to propose a
question to Christ which they think will discredit or destroy Him.
They would have answered their own question in opposite ways. One
would have said, 'It _is_ lawful to give tribute to Caesar';
the other would have said, 'It is not.' But that is a small matter
when malice prompts. They calculate, 'If He says, No! we will
denounce Him to Pilate as a rebel. If He says, Yes! we will go to
the people and say, Here is a pretty Messiah for you, that has no
objection to the foreign yoke. Either way we shall end Him.'

Jesus Christ serenely walks through the cobwebs, and lays His hand
upon the fact. 'Let Me see a silver penny!'--which, by the bye, was
the amount of the tribute--'Whose head is that?' The currency of the
country proclaims the monarch of the country. To stamp his image on
the coin is an act of sovereignty. 'Caesar's head declares that you
are Caesar's subjects, whether you like it or not, and it is too
late to ask questions about tribute when you pay your bills in
his money.' 'Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's.'

Does not the other side of Christ's answer--'to God the things that
are God's'--rest upon a similar fact? Does not the parallelism
require that we should suppose that the destiny of things to be
devoted to God is stamped upon them, whatever they are, at least as
plainly as the right of Caesar to exact tribute was inferred from
the fact that his money was the currency of the country? The thought
widens out in a great many directions, but I want to confine it to
one special line of contemplation, and to take it as suggesting to
each of us this great truth, that the very make of men shows that
they belong to God, and are bound to yield themselves to Him. If the
answer to the question be plain, and the conclusion irresistible,
about the penny with the image of Tiberius, the answer is no less
plain, nor the conclusion less irresistible, when we turn the
interrogation within, and, looking at our own being, say to
ourselves, 'Whose image and superscription hath _it_?'

I. First, then, note the image stamped upon man, and the consequent
obligation.

We can very often tell what a thing is for by noticing its make. The
instructed eye of an anatomist will, from a bone, divine the sphere
in which the creature to whom it belonged was intended to live. Just
as plainly as gills or lungs, fins or wings, or legs and arms,
declare the element in which the creature that possesses them is
intended to move, so plainly stamped upon all our natures is this,
that God is our Lord since we are made in a true sense in His image,
and that only in Him can we find rest.

I need not remind you, I suppose, of the old word, 'Let us make man
in our own image.' Nor need I, I suppose, insist at any length upon
the truth that though, by the fact of man's sin, the whole glory and
splendour of the divine image in which he was made is marred and
defaced, there still remain such solemn, blessed, and awful
resemblances between man and God that there can be no mistake as to
which beings in the universe are the most kindred; nor any
misunderstanding as to who it is after whose likeness we are formed,
and in whose love and life alone we can be blessed.

I am not going to weary you with thoughts for which, perhaps, the
pulpit is not the proper place; but let me just remind you of one or
two points. Is there any other being on this earth that can say of
itself 'I am'? God says '_I am that I am'_. You and I cannot
say that, but we alone, in this order of things, possess that solemn
and awful gift, the consciousness of our personal being. And,
brethren, whoever is able to say to himself 'I am' will never know
rest until he can turn to God and say 'Thou art,' and then, laying
his hand in the Great Father's hand, venture to say '_We_ are.'
We are made in His image, in that profoundest of all senses.

But to come to something less recondite. We are like God in that we
can love; we are like Him in that we can perceive the right, and
that the right is supreme; we are like Him in that we have the power
to say 'I will.' And these great capacities demand that the creature
who thus knows himself to be, who thus knows the right, who thus can
love, who thus can purpose, resolve, and act, should find his home
and his refuge in fellowship with God.

But if you take a coin, and compare it with the die from which it
has been struck, you will find that wherever in the die there is a
relief, in the coin there is a sunken place; and conversely. So
there are not only resemblances in man to the divine nature, which
bear upon them the manifest marks of his destiny, but there are
correspondences, wants, on our side, being met by gifts upon His;
hollow emptinesses in us being filled, when we are brought into
contact with Him, by the abundance of His outstanding supplies and
gifts. So the poorest, narrowest, meanest life has in it a depth of
desire, an ardour, and sometimes a pain and a madness of yearning
and longing which nothing but God can fill. Though we often
misunderstand the voice, and so make ourselves miserable by vain
efforts, our 'heart and our flesh,' in every fibre of our being,
'cry out for the living God.' And what we all want is some one Pearl
of great price into which all the dispersed preciousness and
fragmentary brilliances that dazzle the eye shall be gathered. We
want a Person, a living Person, a present Person, a sufficient
Person, who shall satisfy our hearts, our whole hearts, and that at
one and the same time, or else we shall never be at rest.

Because, then, we are made dependent, because we possess these wild
desires, because immortal thirst attaches to our nature, because we
have consciences that need illuminating, wills that are only free
when they are absolutely submissive, hearts that are dissatisfied,
and left yearning, after all the sweetnesses of limited, transient,
and creatural affections, we bear on our very fronts the image of
God; and any man that wisely looks at himself can answer the
question, 'Whose image and superscription hath it?' in but one way.
'In the image of God created He him.'

Therefore by loving fellowship, by lowly trust, by ardour of love,
by submissiveness of obedience, by continuity of contemplation, by
the sacrifice of self, we must yield ourselves to God if we would
pay the tribute manifestly owing to the Emperor by the fact that His
image and superscription are upon the coin.

II. And so let me ask you to look, in the next place, at the
defacement of the image and the wrong expenditure of the coin.

You sometimes get into your hands money on which there has been
stamped, by mischief, or for some selfish purpose, the name of some
one else than the king's or queen's which surrounds the head upon it.
And in like manner our nature has gone through the stamping-press
again, and another likeness has been deeply imprinted upon it. The
image of God, which every man has, is in some senses and aspects
ineffaceable by any course of conduct of theirs. But in another
aspect it is not like the permanent similitude stamped upon the
solid metal of the penny, but like the reflection, rather, that
falls upon some polished plate, or that is cast upon the white sheet
from a lantern. If the polished plate be rusty and stained, the
image is faint and indistinct; if it be turned away from the light
the image passes. And that is what some of you are doing. By living
to yourselves, by living day in and day out without ever remembering
God, by yielding to passions, lusts, ambitions, low desires, and the
like, you are doing your very best to erase the likeness which still
lingers in your nature. Is there any one here that has yielded to
some lust of the flesh, some appetite, drunkenness, gluttony,
impurity, or the like, and has so sold himself to it, as that that
part of the divine image, the power of saying 'I will,' has pretty
nearly gone? I am afraid there must be some who, by long submission
to passion, have lost the control that reason and conscience and a
firm steady purpose ought to give. Is there any man here who, by
long course of utter neglect of the divine love, has ceased to feel
that there is a heart at the centre of the universe, or that He has
anything to do with it? Brethren, the awful power that is given
to men of degrading themselves till, lineament by lineament, the
likeness in which they are made vanishes, is the saddest and most
tragical thing in the world. 'Like the beasts that perish,' says one
of the psalms, the men become who, by the acids and the files of
worldliness and sensuality and passion, have so rubbed away the
likeness of God that it is scarcely perceptible in them. Do I speak
to some such now? If there is nothing else left there is this, a
hunger for absolute good and for the satisfaction of your desires.
That is part of the proof that you are made for God, and that only
in Him can you find rest.

All occupations of heart and mind and will and active life with
other things to the exclusion of supreme devotion to God are, then,
sacrilege and rebellion. The emperor's head was the token of
sovereignty and carried with it the obligation to pay tribute. Every
fibre in your nature protests against the prostitution of itself to
anything short of God. You remember the story in the Old Testament
about that saturnalia of debauchery, the night when Babylon fell,
when Bel-shazzar, in the very wantonness of godless insolence, could
not be satisfied with drinking his wine out of anything less sacred
than the vessels that had been brought from the Temple at Jerusalem.
That is what many of us are doing, taking the sacred cup which is
meant to be filled with the wine of the kingdom and pouring into it
the foaming but poisonous beverages which steal away our brains and
make us drunk, the moment before our empire totters to its fall and
we to our ruin. 'All the consecrated things of the house of the Lord
they dedicated to Baal,' says one of the narratives in the Book of
Chronicles. That is what some of us are doing, taking the soul that
is meant to be consecrated to God and find its blessedness there,
and offering it to false gods in whose service there is no
blessedness.

For, dear friends, I beseech you, lay this to heart that you cannot
thus use the Godlike being that you possess without bringing down
upon your heads miseries and unrest. The raven, that black bird of
evil omen, went out from the ark, and flew homeless over the
weltering ocean. The souls that seek not God fly thus, strangers and
restless, through a drowned and lifeless world. The dove came back
with an olive branch in its beak. Souls that are wise and have made
their nests in the sanctuary can there fold their wings and be at
peace. As the ancient saint said, 'We are made for God, and only in
God have we rest.' 'Oh, that thou hadst hearkened to me, then had
thy peace been as a river, and thy righteousness as the waves of the
sea.' Cannot you see the blessed, gentle gliding of the full stream
through the meadows with the sunshine upon its ripples? Such is the
heart that has yielded itself to God. In solemn contrast to that
lovely image, the same prophet has for a repeated refrain in his
book, 'The wicked is like the troubled sea which cannot rest,' but
goes moaning round the world, and breaking in idle foam upon every
shore, and still is unquiet for evermore. Brethren, only when we
render to God the thing that is God's--our hearts and ourselves-have
we repose.

III. Now, lastly, notice the restoration and perfecting of the
defaced image.

Because man is like God, it is possible for God to become like man.
The possibility of Revelation and of Redemption by an incarnate
Saviour depend upon the reality of the fact that man is made in the
image of God. Thus there comes to us that divine Christ, who lays
'His hands upon both' and being on the one hand the express image of
His person, so that He can say, 'He that hath seen Me hath seen the
Father,' on the other hand 'was in all points made like unto His
brethren,' with only the exception that the defacement which had
obliterated the divine image in them left it clear, untarnished, and
sharply cut in Him.

Therefore, because Jesus Christ has come, our Brother, 'bone of our
bone, and flesh of our flesh,' made like unto us, and in our
likeness presenting to us the very image of God and eradiation of
His light, therefore no defacement that it is possible for men or
devils to make on this poor humanity of ours need be irrevocable and
final. All the stains may be blotted out, all the usurping
superscriptions may be removed and the original imprint restored.
The dints may be elevated, the too lofty points may be lowered, the
tarnish and the rust may be rubbed off, and, fairer than before, the
likeness of God may be stamped on every one of us, 'after the image
of Him that created us,' if only we will turn ourselves to that dear
Lord, and cast our souls upon Him. Christ hath become like us that
we might become like Him, and therein be partakers of the divine
nature. 'We all, reflecting as a glass does the glory of the Lord,
may be changed into the same image from glory to glory.'

Nor do the possibilities stop there, for we look forward to a time
when, if I might pursue the metaphor of my text, the coinage shall
be called in and reminted, in new forms of nobleness and of
likeness. We have before us this great prospect, that 'we shall be
like Him, for we shall see Him as He is'; and in all the glories of
that heaven we shall partake, for all that is Christ's is ours, and
'we that have borne the image of the earthly shall also bear the
image of the heavenly.'

I come to you, then, with this old question: 'Whose image and
superscription hath it?' and the old exhortation founded thereupon:
'Render therefore to  God the thing that is God's'; and yield
yourselves to Him. Another question I would ask, and pray that you
may lay it to heart, 'To what purpose is this waste?' What are you
doing with the silver penny of your own soul? Wherefore do ye 'spend
it for that which is not bread?' Give yourselves to God; trust
yourselves to the Christ who is like you, and like Him. And, resting
upon His great love you will be saved from the prostitution of
capacities, and the vain attempts to satisfy your souls with the
husks of earth; and whilst you remain here will be made partakers of
Christ's life, and growingly of His likeness, and when you remove
yonder, your body, soul, and spirit will be conformed to His image,
and transformed into the likeness of His glory, 'according to the
mighty working whereby He is able even to subdue all things unto
Himself.'




WHEN SHALL THESE THINGS BE?


    'And when ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with armies,
    then know that the desolation thereof is nigh. 21. Then
    let them which are in Judea flee to the mountains; and
    let them which are in the midst of it depart out; and
    let not them that are in the countries enter thereinto.
    22. For these be the days of vengeance, that all things
    which are written may he fulfilled. 23. But woe unto
    them that are with child, and to them that give suck,
    in those days! for there shall be great distress in the
    land, and wrath upon this people. 24. And they shall
    fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led away
    captive into all nations; and Jerusalem shall be
    trodden down of the Gentiles, until the times of the
    Gentiles be fulfilled. 25. And there shall be signs in
    the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and upon
    the earth distress of nations, with perplexity; the sea
    and the waves roaring; 26. Men's hearts failing them
    for fear, and for looking after those things which are
    coming on the earth; for the powers of heaven shall be
    shaken. 27. And then shall they see the Son of man
    coming in a cloud, with power and great glory. 28. And
    when these things begin to come to pass, then look up,
    and lift up your heads; for your redemption draweth
    nigh. 29. And He spake to them a parable; Behold the
    fig-tree, and all the trees; 30. When they now shoot
    forth, ye see and know of your own selves that summer
    is now nigh at hand. 31. So likewise ye, when ye see
    these things come to pass, know ye that the kingdom of
    God is nigh at hand. 32. Verily I say unto you, This
    generation shall not pass away till all be fulfilled.
    33. Heaven and earth shall pass away; but My words
    shall not pass away. 34. And take heed to yourselves,
    lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with
    surfeiting, and drunkenness, and cares of this life,
    and so that day come upon you unawares. 35. For as a
    snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face
    of the whole earth. 36. Watch ye therefore, and pray
    always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape all
    these things that shall come to pass, and to stand
    before the Son of Man.'--LUKE xxi. 20-36.

This discourse of our Lord's is in answer to the disciples' double
question as to the time of the overthrow of the Temple and the
premonitory signs of its approach. The former is answered with the
indefiniteness which characterises prophetic chronology; the
latter is plainly answered in verse 20.

The whole passage divides itself in four well-marked sections.

I. There is the prediction of the fall of Jerusalem (vs. 20-24). The
'sign' of her 'desolation' was to be the advance of the enemy to her
walls. Armies had been many times encamped round her, and many times
been scattered; but this siege was to end in capture, and no angel
of the Lord would stalk by night through the sleeping host, to
stiffen sleep into death, nor would any valour of the besieged
avail. Their cause was to be hopeless from the first. Flight was
enjoined. Usually the inhabitants of the open country took refuge in
the fortified capital when invasion harrowed their fields; but this
time, for 'them that are in the country' to 'enter therein' was to
throw away their last chance of safety. The Christians obeyed, and
fled, as we all know, across Jordan to Pella. The rest despised
Jesus' warning--if they knew it,---and perished.

Mark the reason for the exhortation not to resist, but to flee:
These are days of vengeance, that all things which are written may
be fulfilled.' That is to say, the besiegers are sent by God to
execute His righteous and long-ago-pronounced judgments. Therefore
it is vain to struggle against them. Behind the Roman army is the
God of Israel. To dash against their cohorts is to throw one's self
on the thick bosses of the Almighty's buckler, and none who dare do
that can 'prosper.' Submission to His retributive hand is the only
way to escape being crushed by it. Chastisement accepted is
salutary, but kicking against it drives the goad deeper into the
rebellious limb.

So great is the agony to be, that what should be a joy, the birth of
children, will be a woe, and the sweet duties of motherhood a curse,
while the childless will be happier than the fugitives burdened with
helpless infancy. We should note, too, that the 'distress' which
comes upon the land is presented in darker colours, and traced to
its origin, in (God's)'wrath' dealt out 'unto this people.' Happier
they who 'fall by the edge of the sword' than they who are led
'captive into all the nations.'

A gleam of hope shoots through the stormy prospect, for the treading
down of Jerusalem by the Gentiles has a term set to it. It is to
continue 'till the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.' That
expression is important, for it clearly implies that these 'times'
are of considerable duration, and it thus places a period of
undefined extent between the fall of Jerusalem and the subsequent
prophecy. The word used for 'times' generally carries with it the
notion of opportunity, and here seems to indicate that the break-up
of the Jewish national existence would usher in a period in which
the 'Gentiles' would have the kingdom of God offered to them. The
history of the world since the city fell is the best comment on this
saying.

II. Since the 'times of the Gentiles' are thus of indefinite
duration, they make a broad line of demarcation between what
precedes and what follows them. Clearly the prophecy in verses 25-27
is separated in time from the fall of Jerusalem, and it is no
objection to that view that the separation is not more emphatically
pointed out by our Lord. These verses distinctly refer to His last
coming to judgment. Verse 27 is too grand and too distinctly cast in
the mould of the other predictions of that coming to be interpreted
of His ideal coming in the judgments on the city.

The 'signs in sun and moon and stars' may refer in accordance with a
familiar symbolism, to the overthrow of royalties and dominions; the
sea roaring may, in like manner, symbolise agitations among the
people; but the 'cloud' and the 'power and great glory' with which
the Son of man comes, can mean nothing else than what they mean in
other prophetic passages; namely, His visible appearance, invested
with the shekinah light, and wielding divine authority before the
gaze of a world.

The city's fall, then, was the initial stage of a process, the
duration of which is undefined here, but implied to be considerable,
and of which the closing stage is the personal coming of Jesus. The
same conclusion is supported by verse 28, which treats that fall as
the beginning of the fulfilment of the prophecy.

III. That verse forms a transition to the section containing the
illustrative parable and the reiteration of the assurance that
Christ's words would certainly be fulfilled. The disciples might
naturally quake at the prospect, and wonder how they could face the
reality. Jesus gives them strong words of cheer, which apply to all
dreaded contingencies and to all social convulsions. What is a
messenger of destruction to Christless men and institutions is a
harbinger of full 'redemption' to His servants. Earthquakes but open
their prison doors and loose their bands, they should not shake
their hearts.

Historically the fall of Jerusalem was a powerful factor in the
deliverance of the Church from Jewish swaddling-bands which hampered
its growing limbs. For all Christians the destruction of what can
perish brings fuller vision and possession of what cannot be shaken.
To Christ's friends, all things work for good. So the parable which
at first sight seems strangely incongruous becomes blessedly
significant and fitting. The gladsome blossoming of the trees, the
herald of the glories of summer, is a strange emblem of such a
tragedy, and summer itself is a still stranger one of that solemn
last judgment. But the might of humble trust in Him who comes to
judge makes His coming summer-like in the light and warmth with
which it floods the soul, and the rich fruitage which it produces
there.

Observe, too, that the parable confirms the idea of a process having
stages, for the lesson of the blossoming fig-tree is not that summer
has come, but that it is nigh.

The solemn assurance in verse 32, made more weighty by the 'Verily I
say,' seems at first sight to bring the final judgment within the
lifetime of the generation of the hearers. But it is noteworthy that
the expression 'till all things are fulfilled' is almost verbally
identical with that in verse 22, which refers only to the
destruction of Jerusalem, and is therefore most naturally
interpreted as having the same restricted application here. The
difference between the two phrases is significant, since in the
former the certainty of fulfilment is deduced from the fact of 'the
things' being written--that is, they must be accomplished because
they have been foretold in Scripture,--whereas in the latter Christ
rests the certainty of fulfilment on His own word. That majestic
assurance in verse 33 comes well from His lips, and makes claim that
His word shall outlast the whole present material order, and be
fulfilled in every detail. Think of a mere man saying that!

IV. Exhortations corresponding to the predictions follow. Christ's
revelation of the future was neither meant to gratify idle curiosity
nor to supply a timetable in advance, but to minister encouragement
and to lead to watchfulness. Whether 'that day' (ver. 34) is
understood of the fall of Jerusalem or of the final coming of the
Lord, it will come 'as a snare' upon men who are absorbed with the
earth which they inhabit. They will be captured by it, as a covey of
birds in a field busily picking up grain, are netted by one sudden
fling of the fowler's net. A wary eye would have saved them.

The exhortation is as applicable to us, for, whatever are our views
about unfulfilled prophecy, death comes to us all at a time which we
know not, as the Book of Ecclesiastes, using the same figure, says;
'Man knoweth not his time ... as the birds that are caught in the
snare.' Hearts must be kept above the grosser satisfactions of sense
and the less gross cares of life, being neither stupefied with
gorging earth's good, nor preoccupied with its gnawing anxieties,
both of which are destructive of the clear realisation of the
certain future. We are to preserve an attitude of wakefulness and of
expectancy, and, as the sure way to it, and to clearing our hearts
of perishable delights and shortsighted, self-consuming cares, we
are to keep them in a continual posture of supplication. If our
study of unfulfilled prophecy does that for us, it will have done
what Jesus means it to do; if it does not it matters little what
theories about its chronology we may adopt.

The two stages which we have tried to point out in this passage are
clearly marked at the close, where escaping  'all these things that
shall come to pass' and standing  'before the Son of man' are
distinguished. True, both stages were to be included in the
experience of Christ's hearers, but they are none the less separate
stages.

Luke's version of this great discourse gives less prominence to the
final coming than does Matthew's, and does not blend the two stages
so inextricably together; but it gives no hint of the duration of
the 'times of the Gentiles,' and might well leave the impression
that these were brief. Now in this close setting together of a
nearer and a much more remote future, with little prominence given
to the interval between, our Lord is but bringing His prophecy into
line with the constant manner of the older prophets. They and He
paint the future in perspective, and the distance, seen behind the
foreground, seems nearer than it really is. The spectator does not
know how many weary miles have to be traversed before the distant
blue hills are to be reached, nor what deep gorges lie between.

Such bringing together of events far apart in time of fulfilment
rests in part on the fact that there have been many 'days of the
Lord,' many 'comings of Christ,' each of which is a result on a
small scale of the same retributive action of the Judge of all, as
shall be manifested on the largest scale in the last and greatest
day of the Lord. Therefore the true use of all these predictions is
that which Christ enforces here; namely, that they should lead us to
prayerful watchfulness and to living above earth, its goods and
cares.




THE LORD'S SUPPER


    'Then came the day of unleavened bread, when the
    passover must be killed. 8. And He sent Peter and
    John, saying, Go and prepare us the passover, that we
    may eat. 9. And they said unto Him, Where wilt thou
    that we prepare? 10. And He said unto them, Behold,
    when ye are entered into the city, there shall a man
    meet you, bearing a pitcher of water; follow him into
    the house where he entereth in. 11. And ye shall say
    unto the goodman of the house, The Master saith unto
    thee, Where is the guestchamber, where I shall eat the
    passover with My disciples? 12. And he shall shew you
    a large upper room furnished: there make ready.
    13. And they went, and found as He had said unto them:
    and they made ready the passover. 14. And when the
    hour was come, He sat down, and the twelve apostles
    with Him. 15. And He said unto them, With desire I
    have desired to eat this passover with you before I
    suffer: 16. For I say unto you, I will not any more
    eat thereof, until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of
    God. 17. And He took the cup, and gave thanks, and
    said, Take this, and divide it among yourselves:
    18. For I say unto you, I will not drink of the fruit
    of the vine, until the kingdom of God shall come.
    19. And He took bread, and gave thanks, and brake it,
    and gave unto them, saying, This is My body which is
    given for you: this do in remembrance of Me.
    20. Likewise also the cup after supper, saying, This
    cup is the new testament in My blood, which is shed
    for you.'--LUKE xxii. 7-20.

Paul had his account of the Last Supper direct from Christ. Luke
apparently had his from Paul, so that the variations from Matthew and
Mark are invested with singular interest, as probably traceable to
the Lord of the feast Himself. Our passage has three sections--the
preparation, the revelation of Christ's heart, and the institution
of the rite.

I. The Preparation.--Peculiar to Luke are the names of the disciples
entrusted with it, and the representation of the command, as
preceding the disciples' question 'Where?' The selection of Peter
and John indicates the confidential nature of the task, which comes
out still more plainly in the singular directions given to them.
Luke's order of command and question seems more precise than that of
the other Gospels, as making our Lord the originator instead of
merely responsive to the disciples' suggestion.


How is the designation of the place which Christ gives to be
understood? Was it supernatural knowledge, or was it the result of
previous arrangement with the 'goodman of the house'? Most probably
the latter; for he was in so far a disciple that he recognised Jesus
as 'the Master,' and was glad to have Him in his house, and the
chamber on the roof was ready 'furnished' when they came. Why this
mystery about the place? The verses before our passage tell the
reason.

Judas was listening, too, for the answer to 'Where?' thinking that
it would give him the 'opportunity' which he sought 'to betray Him
in the absence of the multitude.' Jesus had much to say to His
disciples, and needed the quiet hours in the upper room, and
therefore sent away the two with directions which revealed nothing
to the others. If He had told the group where the house was, the
last supper might never have been instituted, nor the precious
farewell words, the holy of holies of John's Gospel, ever been
spoken. Jesus takes precautions to delay the Cross. He takes none to
escape it, but rather sets Himself in these last days to bring it
near. The variety in His action means no change in His mind, but
both modes are equally the result of His self-forgetting love to us
all. So He sends away Peter and John with sealed orders, as it were,
and the greedy ears of the traitor are balked, and none know the
appointed place till Jesus leads them to it. The two did not come
back, but Christ guided the others to the house, when the hour was
come.

II. Verses 14-18 give a glimpse into Christ's heart as He partook,
for the last time, of the Passover. He discloses His earnest desire
for that last hour of calm before He went out to face the storm, and
reveals His vision of the future feast in the perfect kingdom. That
desire touchingly shows His brotherhood in all our shrinking from
parting with dear ones, and in our treasuring of the last sweet, sad
moments of being together. That was a true human heart, 'fashioned
alike' with ours, which longed and planned for one quiet hour before
the end, and found some bracing for Gethsemane and Calvary in the
sanctities of the Upper Room. But the desire was not for Himself
only. He wished to partake of that Passover, and then to transform
it for ever, and to leave the new rite to His servants.

Our Lord evidently ate of the Passover; for we cannot suppose that
His words in verse 15 relate to an ungratified wish, but, as
evidently, that eating was finished before He spoke. We shall best
conceive the course of events if we suppose that the earlier stages
of the paschal ceremonial were duly attended to, and that the Lord's
Supper was instituted in connection with its later parts. We need
not discuss what was the exact stage at which our Lord spoke and
acted as in verses 15-17. It is sufficient to note that in them He
gives what He does not taste, and that, in giving, His thoughts
travel beyond all the sorrow and death to reunion and perfected
festal joys. These anticipations solaced His heart in that supreme
hour. 'For the joy that was set before Him' He 'endured the Cross,'
and this was the crown of His joy, that all His friends should share
it with Him, and sit at His table in His kingdom.

The prophetic aspect of the Lord's Supper should never be left out
of view. It is at once a feast of memory and of hope, and is also a
symbol for the present, inasmuch as it represents the conditions of
spiritual life as being participation in the body and blood of
Christ. This is where Paul learned his 'till He come'; and that hope
which filled the Saviour's heart should ever fill ours when we
remember His death.

III. Verses 19 and 20 record the actual institution of the Lord's
Supper. Note its connection with the rite which it transforms. The
Passover was the memorial of deliverance, the very centre of Jewish
ritual. It was a family feast, and our Lord took the place of the
head of the household. That solemnly appointed and long-observed
memorial of the deliverance which made a mob of slaves into a nation
is transfigured by Jesus, who calls upon Jew and Gentile to forget
the venerable meaning of the rite, and remember rather His work for
all men. It is strange presumption thus to brush aside the Passover,
and in effect to say, 'I abrogate a divinely enjoined ceremony, and
breathe a new meaning into so much of it as I retain.' Who is He who
thus tampers with God's commandments? Surely He is either One having
a co-ordinate authority, or----? But perhaps the alternative is best
left unspoken.

The separation of the symbols of the body and blood plainly
indicates that it is the death of Jesus, and that a violent one,
which is commemorated. The double symbol carries in both its parts
the same truth, but with differences. Both teach that all our hopes
are rooted in the death of Jesus, and that the only true life of our
spirits comes from participation in His death, and thereby in His
life. But in addition to this truth common to both, the wine, which
represents His blood, is the seal of the 'new covenant.' Again we
mark the extraordinary freedom with which Christ handles the most
sacred parts of the former revelation, putting them aside as He
wills, to set Himself in their place. He declares, by this rite,
that through His death a new 'covenant' comes into force as between
God and man, in which all the anticipations of prophets are more
than realised, and sins are remembered no more, and the knowledge of
God becomes the blessing of all, and a close relationship of mutual
possession is established between God and us, and His laws are
written on loving hearts and softened wills.

Nor is even this all the meaning of that cup of blessing; for blood
is the vehicle of life, and whoso receives Christ's blood on his
conscience, to sprinkle it from dead works, therein receives, not
only cleansing for the past, but a real communication of 'the Spirit
of life' which was 'in Christ' to be the life of his life, so as
that he can say, 'I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.' Nor
is even this all; for, as wine is, all the world over, the emblem of
festivity, so this cup declares that to partake of Christ is to have
a fountain of joy in ourselves, which yet has a better source than
ourselves. Nor is this all; for 'this cup' is prophecy as well as
memorial and symbol, and shadows the new wine of the kingdom and the
marriage supper of the Lamb.

'This is My body' could not have meant to the hearers, who saw Him
sitting there in bodily form, anything but 'this is a symbol of My
body.' It is but the common use of the word in explaining a
figurative speech or act. 'The field is the world; the tares are the
children of the wicked one; the reapers are the angels,'--and so in
a hundred cases.

Luke alone preserves for us the command to 'do this,' which at once
establishes the rite as meant to be perpetual, and defines the true
nature of it. It is a memorial, and, if we are to take our Lord's
own explanation, only a memorial. There is nothing here of
sacramental efficacy, but simply the loving desire to be remembered
and the condescending entrusting of some power to recall him to
these outward symbols. Strange that, if the communion were so much
more, as the sacramentarian theory makes it, the feast's own Founder
should not have said a word to hint that it was.

And how deep and yet lowly an insight into His hold on our hearts
the institution of this ordinance shows Him to have had! The Greek
is, literally, 'In order to My remembrance.' He knew that--strange
and sad as it may seem, and impossible as, no doubt, it did seem to
the disciples--we should be in constant danger of forgetting Him;
and therefore, in this one case, He enlists sense on the side of
faith, and trusts to these homely memorials the recalling, to our
treacherous memories, of His dying love. He wished to live in our
hearts, and that for the satisfaction of His own love and for the
deepening of ours.

The Lord's Supper is a standing evidence of Christ's own estimate of
where the centre of His work lies. We are to remember His death. Why
should it be selected as the chief treasure for memory, unless it
was something altogether different from the death of other wise
teachers and benefactors? If it were in His case what it is in all
others, the end of His activity for blessing, and no part of His
message to the world, what need is there for the Lord's Supper, and
what meaning is there in it, if Christ's death were not the
sacrifice for the world's sin? Surely no view of the significance
and purpose of the Cross but that which sees in it the propitiation
for the world's sins accounts for this rite. A Christianity which
strikes the atoning death of Jesus out of its theology is sorely
embarrassed to find a worthy meaning for His dying command, 'This do
in remembrance of Me.'

But if the breaking of the precious alabaster box of His body was
needed in order that 'the house' might be 'filled with the odour of
the ointment,' and if His death was the indispensable condition of
pardon and impartation of His life, then 'wheresoever this gospel
shall be preached in the whole world, there,' as its vital centre,
shall His death be proclaimed, and this rite shall speak of it for a
memorial of Him, and 'show the Lord's death till He come.'




PARTING PROMISES AND WARNINGS


    'And there was also a strife among them, which of them
    should be accounted the greatest. 25. And He said unto
    them, The kings of the Gentiles exercise lordship over
    them; and they that exercise authority upon them are
    called benefactors. 26. But ye shall not be so: but he
    that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger;
    and he that is chief, as he that doth serve. 27. For
    whether is greater, he that sitteth at meat, or he
    that serveth? is not he that sitteth at meat? but I am
    among you as He that serveth. 28. Ye are they which
    have continued with Me in My temptations. 29. And I
    appoint unto you a kingdom, as My Father hath
    appointed unto Me; 30. That ye may eat and drink at My
    table in My kingdom and sit on thrones judging the
    twelve tribes of Israel. 31. And the Lord said, Simon,
    Simon, behold, Satan hath desired to have you, that he
    may sift you as wheat: 32. But I have prayed for thee,
    that thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted,
    strengthen thy brethren. 33. And he said unto Him,
    Lord, I am ready to go with Thee, both into prison,
    and to death. 34. And He said, I tell thee, Peter, the
    cock shall not crow this day, before that thou shalt
    thrice deny that thou knowest Me. 35. And He said unto
    them, When I sent you without purse, and scrip, and
    shoes, lacked ye any thing? And they said, Nothing.
    36. Then said He unto them, But now, he that hath a
    purse, let him take it, and likewise his scrip: and he
    that hath no sword, let him sell his garment, and buy
    one. 37. For I say unto you, that this that is written
    must yet be accomplished in Me, And He was reckoned
    among the transgressors: for the things concerning Me
    have an end.'--LUKE xxii. 24-37.

It was blameworthy, but only too natural, that, while Christ's heart
was full of His approaching sufferings, the Apostles should be
squabbling about their respective dignity. They thought that the
half-understood predictions pointed to a brief struggle immediately
preceding the establishment of the kingdom, and they wished to have
their rank settled in advance. Possibly, too, they had been
disputing as to whose office was the menial task of presenting the
basin for foot-washing. So little did the first partakers of the
Lord's Supper 'discern the Lord's body,' and so little did His most
loving friends share His sorrows.

I. Our Lord was not so absorbed in His anticipations of the near
Cross as to be unobservant of the wrangling among the Apostles. Even
then His heart was enough at leisure from itself to observe, to
pity, and to help. So He at once turns to deal with the false ideas
of greatness betrayed by the dispute. The world's notion is that the
true use and exercise of superiority is to lord it over others.
Tyrants are flattered by the title of benefactor, which they do not
deserve, but the giving of which shows that, even in the world, some
trace of the true conception lingers. It was sadly true, at that
time, that power was used for selfish ends, and generally meant
oppression. One Egyptian king, who bore the title Benefactor, was
popularly known as Malefactor, and many another old-world monarch
deserved a like name.

Jesus lays down the law for His followers as being the exact
opposite of the world's notion. Dignity and pre-eminence carry
obligations to serve. In His kingdom power is to be used to help
others, not to glorify oneself. In other sayings of Christ's,
service is declared to be the way to _become_ great in the
kingdom, but here the matter is taken up at another point, and
greatness, already attained on whatever grounds, is commanded to be
turned to its proper use. The way to become great is to become
small, and to serve. The right use of greatness is to become a
servant. That has become a familiar commonplace now, but its
recognition as the law for civic and other dignity is all but
entirely owing to Christianity. What conception of such a use of
power has the Sultan of Turkey, or the petty tyrants of heathen
lands? The worst of European rulers have to make pretence to be
guided by this law; and even the Pope calls himself 'the servant of
servants.'

It is a commonplace, but like many another axiom, universal
acceptance and almost as universal neglect are its fate. Ingrained
selfishness fights against it. Men admire it as a beautiful saying,
and how many of us take it as our life's guide? We condemn the
rulers of old who wrung wealth out of their people and neglected
every duty; but what of our own use of the fraction of power we
possess, or our own demeanour to our inferiors in world or church?
Have all the occupants of royal thrones or presidential chairs, all
peers, members of Parliament, senators, and congressmen, used their
position for the public weal? Do we regard ours as a trust to be
administered for others? Do we feel the weight of our crown, or are
we taken up with its jewels, and proud of ourselves for it? Christ's
pathetic words, giving Himself as the example of greatness that
serves, are best understood as referring to His wonderful act of
washing the disciples' feet. Luke does not record it, and probably
did not know it, but how the words are lighted up if we bring them
into connection with it!

II. Verses 28 to 30 naturally flow from the preceding. They lift a
corner of the veil, and show the rewards, when the heavenly form of
the kingdom has come, of the right use of eminence in its earthly
