of the goddess second; but the precedence given to the trade is salved
over by a 'not only,' which tries to make the religious motive the
chief. No doubt Demetrius was a devout worshipper of Artemis, and
thought himself influenced by high motives in stirring up the craft. It
is natural to be devout or moral or patriotic when it pays to be so.
One would not expect a shrine-maker to be easily accessible to the
conviction that 'they be no gods which are made with hands.'

Such admixture of zeal for some great cause, with a shrewd eye to
profit, is very common, and may deceive us if we are not always
watchful. Jehu bragged about his 'zeal for the Lord' when it urged him
to secure himself on the throne by murder; and he may have been quite
honest in thinking that the impulse was pure, when it was really
mingled. How many foremost men in public life everywhere pose as pure
patriots, consumed with zeal for national progress, righteousness,
etc., when all the while they are chiefly concerned about some private
bit of log-rolling of their own! How often in churches there are men
professing to be eager for the glory of God, who are, perhaps
half-unconsciously, using it as a stalking-horse, behind which they may
shoot game for their own larder! A drop of quicksilver oxidises and
dims as soon as exposed to the air. The purest motives get a scum on
them quickly unless we constantly keep them clear by communion with God.

Demetrius may teach us another lesson. His opposition to Paul was based
on the plain fact that, if Paul's teaching prevailed, no more shrines
would be wanted. That was a new ground of opposition to the Gospel,
resembled only by the motive for the action of the owners of the slave
girl at Philippi; but it is a perennial source of antagonism to it. In
our cities especially there are many trades which would be wiped out if
Christ's laws of life were universally adopted. So all the purveyors of
commodities and pleasures which the Gospel forbids a Christian man to
use are arrayed against it. We have to make up our minds to face and
fight them. A liquor-seller, for instance, is not likely to look
complacently on a religion which would bring his 'trade into
disrepute'; and there are other occupations which would be gone if
Christ were King, and which therefore, by the instinct of
self-preservation, are set against the Gospel, unless, so to speak, its
teeth are drawn.

According to one reading, the shouts of the craftsmen which told that
Demetrius had touched them in the tenderest part, their pockets, was an
invocation, 'Great Diana!' not a profession of faith; and we have a
more lively picture of an excited crowd if we adopt the alteration. It
is easy to get a mob to yell out a watchword, whether religious or
political; and the less they understand it, the louder are they likely
to roar. In Athanasius' days the rabble of Constantinople made the city
ring with cries, degrading the subtlest questions as to the Trinity,
and examples of the same sort have not been wanting nearer home. It is
criminal to bring such incompetent judges into religious or political
or social questions, it is cowardly to be influenced by them. 'The
voice of the people' is not always 'the voice of God.' It is better to
'be in the right with two or three' than to swell the howl of Diana's
worshippers,

II. A various reading of verse 28 gives an additional particular, which
is of course implied in the received text, but makes the narrative more
complete and vivid if inserted. It adds that the craftsmen rushed 'into
the street,' and there raised their wild cry, which naturally 'filled'
the city with confusion. So the howling mob, growing larger and more
excited every minute, swept through Ephesus, and made for the theatre,
the common place of assembly.

On their road they seem to have come across two of Paul's companions,
whom they dragged with them. What they meant to do with the two they
had probably not asked themselves. A mob has no plans, and its most
savage acts are unpremeditated. Passion let loose is almost sure to end
in bloodshed, and the lives of Gaius and Aristarchus hung by a thread.
A gust of fury storming over the mob, and a hundred hands might have
torn them to atoms, and no man have thought himself their murderer.

What a noble contrast to the raging crowd the silent submission, no
doubt accompanied by trustful looks to Heaven and unspoken prayers,
presents! And how grandly Paul comes out! He had not been found,
probably had not been sought for, by the rioters, whose rage was too
blind to search for him, but his brave soul could not bear to leave his
friends in peril and not plant himself by their sides. So he 'was
minded to enter in unto the people,' well knowing that there he had to
face more ferocious 'wild beasts' than if a cageful of lions had been
loosed on him. Faith in God and fellowship with Christ lift a soul
above fear of death. The noblest kind of courage is not that born of
flesh or temperament, or of the madness of battle, but that which
springs from calm trust in and absolute surrender to Christ.

Not only did the disciples restrain Paul as feeling that if the
shepherd were smitten the sheep would be scattered, but interested
friends started up in an unlikely quarter. The 'chief of Asia' or
Asiarchs, who sent to dissuade him, 'were the heads of the imperial
political-religious organisation of the province, in the worship of
"Rome and the emperors"; and their friendly attitude is a proof both
that the spirit of the imperial policy was not as yet hostile to the
new teaching, and that the educated classes did not share the hostility
of the superstitious vulgar' (Ramsay, _St. Paul the Traveller_, p.
281). It is probable that, in that time of crumbling faith and
religious unrest, the people who knew most about the inside of the
established worship believed in it least, and in their hearts agreed
with Paul that 'they be no gods which are made with hands.'

So we have in these verses the central picture of calm Christian faith
and patient courage, contrasted on the one hand with the ferocity and
excitement of heathen fanatical devotees, and on the other with the
prudent regard to their own safety of the Asiarchs, who had no such
faith in Diana as to lead them to joining the rioters, nor such faith
in Paul's message as to lead them to oppose the tumult, or to stand by
his side, but contented themselves with _sending_ to warn him. Who can
doubt that the courage of the Christians is infinitely nobler than the
fury of the mob or the cowardice of the Asiarchs, kindly as they were?
If they were his friends, why did they not do something to shield him?
'A plague on such backing!'

III. The scene in the theatre, to which Luke returns in verse 32, is
described with a touch of scorn for the crowd, who mostly knew not what
had brought them together. One section of it kept characteristically
cool and sharp-eyed for their own advantage. A number of Jews had
mingled in it, probably intending to fan the flame against the
Christians, if they could do it safely. As in so many other cases in
Acts, common hatred brought Jew and Gentile together, each pocketing
for the time his disgust with the other. The Jews saw their
opportunity. Half a dozen cool heads, who know what they want, can
often sway a mob as they will. Alexander, whom they 'put forward,' was
no doubt going to make a speech disclaiming for the Jews settled in
Ephesus any connection with the obnoxious Paul. We may be very sure
that his 'defence' was of the former, not of the latter.

But the rioters were in no mood to listen to fine distinctions among
the members of a race which they hated so heartily. Paul was a Jew, and
this man was a Jew; that was enough. So the roar went up again to Great
Diana, and for two long hours the crowd surged and shouted themselves
hoarse, Gaius and Aristarchus standing silent all the while and
expecting every moment to be their last. The scene reminds one of
Baal's priests shrieking to him on Carmel. It is but too true a
representation of the wild orgies which stand for worship in all
heathen religions. It is but too lively an example of what must always
happen when excited crowds are ignorantly stirred by appeals to
prejudice or self-interest.

The more democratic the form of government under which we live, the
more needful is it to distinguish the voice of the people from the
voice of the mob, and to beware of exciting, or being governed by,
clamour however loud and long.



PARTING COUNSELS

'And now, behold, I go bound in the spirit unto Jerusalem, not knowing
the things that shall befall me there: 23. Save that the Holy Ghost
witnesseth in every city, saying that bonds and afflictions abide me.
24. But none of these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto
myself, so that I might finish my course with joy, and the ministry,
which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify the gospel of the
grace of God. 25. And now, behold, I know that ye all, among whom I
have gone preaching the kingdom of God, shall see my face no more. 26.
Wherefore I take you to record this day, that I am pure from the blood
of all men. 27. For I have not shunned to declare unto you all the
counsel of God. 28. Take heed therefore unto yourselves, and to all the
flock, over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you overseers, to feed
the church of God, which He hath purchased with His own blood. 29. For
I know this, that after my departing shall grievous wolves enter in
among you, not sparing the flock. 30. Also of your own selves shall men
arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. 31.
Therefore watch, and remember, that by the space of three years I
ceased not to warn every one night and day with tears. 32. And now,
brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of His grace, which is
able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them
which are sanctified. 33. I have coveted no man's silver, or gold, or
apparel. 34. Yea, ye yourselves know, that these hands have ministered
unto my necessities, and to them that were with me. 35. I have shewed
you all things, how that so labouring ye ought to support the weak, and
to remember the words of the Lord Jesus, how He said, It is more
blessed to give than to receive.'--ACTS xx. 22-35.

This parting address to the Ephesian elders is perfect in simplicity,
pathos, and dignity. Love without weakness and fervent yet restrained
self-devotion throb in every line. It is personal without egotism, and
soars without effort. It is 'Pauline' through and through, and if Luke
or some unknown second-century Christian made it, the world has lost
the name of a great genius. In reading it, we have to remember the
Apostle's long stay in Ephesus, and his firm conviction that he was
parting for ever from those over whom he had so long watched, and so
long loved, as well as guided. Parting words should be tender and
solemn, and these are both in the highest degree.

The prominence given to personal references is very marked and equally
natural. The whole address down to verse 27 inclusive is of that
nature, and the same theme recurs in verse 31, is caught up again in
verse 33, and continues thence to the end. That abundance of allusions
to himself is characteristic of the Apostle, even in his letters; much
more is it to be looked for in such an outpouring of his heart to
trusted friends, seen for the last time. Few religious teachers have
ever talked so much of themselves as Paul did, and yet been as free as
he is from taint of display or self-absorption.

The personal references in verses 22 to 27 turn on two points--his
heroic attitude in prospect of trials and possible martyrdom, and his
solemn washing his hands of all responsibility for 'the blood' of those
to whom he had declared all the counsel of God. He looks back, and his
conscience witnesses that he has discharged his ministry; he looks
forward, and is ready for all that may confront him in still
discharging it, even to the bloody end.

Nothing tries a man's mettle more than impending evil which is equally
certain and undefined. Add that the moment of the sword's falling is
unknown, and you have a combination which might shake the firmest
nerves. Such a combination fronted Paul now. He told the elders, what
we do not otherwise know, that at every halting-place since setting his
face towards Jerusalem he had been met by the same prophetic warnings
of 'bonds and afflictions' waiting for him. The warnings were vague,
and so the more impressive. Fear has a vivid imagination, and
anticipates the worst.

Paul was not afraid, but he would not have been human if he had not
recognised the short distance for him between a prison and a scaffold.
But the prospect did not turn him a hairsbreadth from his course. True,
he was 'bound in the spirit,' which may suggest that he was not so much
going joyfully as impelled by a constraint felt to be irresistible. But
whatever his feelings, his will was iron, and he went calmly forward on
the road, though he knew that behind some turn of it lay in wait, like
beasts of prey, dangers of unknown kinds.

And what nerved him thus to front death itself without a quiver? The
supreme determination to do what Jesus had given him to do. He knew
that his Lord had set him a task, and the one thing needful was to
accomplish that. We have no such obstacles in our course as Paul had in
his, but the same spirit must mark us if we are to do our work.
Consciousness of a mission, fixed determination to carry it out, and
consequent contempt of hindrances, belong to all noble lives, and
especially to true Christian ones. Perils and hardships and possible
evils should have no more power to divert us from the path which Christ
marks for us than storms or tossing of the ship have to deflect the
needle from pointing north.

It is easy to talk heroically when no foes are in sight; but Paul was
looking dangers in the eyes, and felt their breath on his cheeks when
he spoke. His longing was to 'fulfil his course.' 'With joy' is a
weakening addition. It was not 'joy,' but the discharge of duty, which
seemed to him infinitely desirable. What was aspiration at Miletus
became fact when, in his last Epistle, he wrote, 'I have finished my
course.'

In verses 25 to 27 the Apostle looks back as well as forward. His
anticipation that he was parting for ever from the Ephesian elders was
probably mistaken, but it naturally leads him to think of the long
ministry among them which was now, as he believed, closed. And his
retrospect was very different from what most of us, who are teachers,
feel that ours must be. It is a solemn thought that if we let either
cowardice or love of ease and the good opinion of men hold us back from
speaking out all that we know of God's truth, our hands are reddened
with the blood of souls.

We are all apt to get into grooves of favourite thoughts, and to teach
but part of the whole Gospel. If we do not seek to widen our minds to
take in, and our utterances to give forth, all the will of God as seen
by us, our limitations and repetitions will repel some from the truth,
who might have been won by a completer presentation of it, and their
blood will be required at our hands. None of us can reach to the
apprehension, in its full extent and due proportion of its parts, of
that great gospel; but we may at least seek to come nearer the ideal
completeness of a teacher, and try to remember that we are 'pure from
the blood of all men,' only when we have not 'shrunk from declaring all
God's counsel.' We are not required to know it completely, but we are
required not to shrink from declaring it as far as we know it.

Paul's purpose in this retrospect was not only to vindicate himself,
but to suggest to the elders their duty. Therefore he passes
immediately to exhortation to them, and a forecast of the future of the
Ephesian Church. 'Take heed to yourselves.' The care of one's own soul
comes first. He will be of little use to the Church whose own personal
religion is not kept warm and deep. All preachers and teachers and men
who influence their fellows need to lay to heart this exhortation,
especially in these days when calls to outward service are so
multiplied. The neglect of it undermines all real usefulness, and is a
worm gnawing at the roots of the vines.

We note also the condensed weightiness of the following exhortation, in
which solemn reasons are suggested for obeying it. The divine
appointment to office, the inclusion of the 'bishops' in the flock, the
divine ownership of the flock, and the cost of its purchase, are all
focussed on the one point, 'Take heed to all the flock.' Of course a
comparison with verse 17 shows that _elder_ and _bishop_ were two
designations for one officer; but the question of the primitive
organisation of church offices, important as it is, is less important
than the great thoughts as to the relation of the Church to God, and as
to the dear price at which men have been won to be truly His.

We note the reading in the Revised Version of v.28 (margin), 'the flock
of the Lord,' but do not discuss it. The chief thought of the verse is
that the Church is God's flock, and that the death of Jesus has bought
it for His, and that negligent under-shepherds are therefore guilty of
grievous sin.

The Apostle had premonitions of the future for the Church as well as
for himself, and the horizons were dark in both outlooks. He foresaw
evils from two quarters, for 'wolves' would come from without, and
perverse teachers would arise within, drawing the disciples after them
and away from the Lord. The simile of wolves may be an echo of Christ's
warning in Matthew vii 15. How sadly Paul's anticipations were
fulfilled the Epistle to the Church in Ephesus (Revelation ii.) shows
too clearly. Unslumbering alertness, as of a sentry in front of the
enemy, is needed if the slinking onset of the wolf is to be beaten
back. Paul points to his own example, and that in no vainglorious
spirit, but to stimulate and also to show how watchfulness is to be
carried out. It must be unceasing, patient, tenderly solicitous, and
grieving over the falls of others as over personal calamities. If there
were more such 'shepherds,' there would be fewer stray sheep.

Anxious forebodings and earnest exhortations naturally end in turning
to God and invoking His protecting care. The Apostle's heart runs over
in his last words (vs. 32-35). He falls back for himself, in the
prospect of having to cease his care of the Church, on the thought that
a better Guide will not leave it, and he would comfort the elders as
well as himself by the remembrance of God's power to keep them. So
Jacob, dying, said, 'I die, but God shall be with you.' So Moses,
dying, said, 'The Lord hath said unto me, thou shalt not go over this
Jordan. The Lord thy God, He will go before thee.' Not even Paul is
indispensable. The under-shepherds die, _the_ Shepherd lives, and
watches against wolves and dangers. Paul had laid the foundation, and
the edifice would not stand unfinished, like some half-reared palace
begun by a now dead king. The growth of the Church and of its
individual members is sure. It is wrought by God.

His instrument is 'the word of His grace.' Therefore if we would grow,
we must use that word. Christian progress is no more possible, if the
word of God is not our food, than is an infant's growth if it refuses
milk. That building up or growth or advance (for all three metaphors
are used, and mean the same thing) has but one natural end, the
entrance of each redeemed soul into its own allotment in the true land
of promise, the inheritance of those who are sanctified. If we
faithfully use that word which tells of and brings God's grace, that we
may grow thereby, He will bring us at last to dwell among those who
here have growingly been made saints. He is able to do these things. It
is for us to yield to His power, and to observe the conditions on which
it will work on us.

Even at the close Paul cannot refrain from personal references. He
points to his example of absolute disinterestedness, and with a
dramatic gesture holds out 'these hands' to show how they are hardened
by work. Such a warning against doing God's work for money would not
have been his last word, at a time when all hearts were strung up to
the highest pitch, unless the danger had been very real. And it is very
real to-day. If once the suspicion of being influenced by greed of gain
attaches to a Christian worker, his power ebbs away, and his words lose
weight and impetus.

It is that danger which Paul is thinking of when he tells the elders
that by 'labouring' they 'ought to support the weak'; for by _weak_ he
means not the poor, but those imperfect disciples who might be repelled
or made to stumble by the sight of greed in an elder. Shepherds who
obviously cared more for wool than for the sheep have done as much harm
as 'grievous wolves.'

Paul quotes an else unrecorded saying of Christ's which, like a
sovereign's seal, confirms the subject's words. It gathers into a
sentence the very essence of Christian morality. It reveals the inmost
secret of the blessedness of the giving God. It is foolishness and
paradox to the self-centred life of nature. It is blessedly true in the
experience of all who, having received the 'unspeakable gift,' have
thereby been enfranchised into the loftier life in which self is dead,
and to which it is delight, kindred with God's own blessedness, to
impart.



A FULFILLED ASPIRATION

'So that I might finish my course....'--ACTS xx. 24.

'I have finished my course....'--2 TIM. iv. 7.

I do not suppose that Paul in prison, and within sight of martyrdom,
remembered his words at Ephesus. But the fact that what was aspiration
whilst he was in the very thick of his difficulties came to be calm
retrospect at the close is to me very beautiful and significant. 'So
that I may finish my course,' said he wistfully; whilst before him
there lay dangers clearly discerned and others that had all the more
power over the imagination because they were but dimly discerned--'Not
knowing the things that shall befall me there,' said he, but knowing
this, that 'bonds and afflictions abide me.' When a man knows exactly
what he has to be afraid of he can face it. When he knows a little
corner of it, and also knows that there is a great stretch behind that
is unknown, that is a state of things that tries his mettle. Many a man
will march up to a battery without a tremor who would not face a hole
where a snake lay. And so Paul's ignorance, as well as Paul's
knowledge, made it very hard for him to say 'None of these things move
me' if only 'I might finish my course.'

Now there are in these two passages, thus put together, three points
that I touch for a moment. These are, What Paul thought that life
chiefly was; what Paul aimed at; and what Paul won thereby.

I. What he thought that life chiefly was.

'That I may finish my course.' Now 'course,' in our modern English, is
far too feeble a word to express the Apostle's idea here. It has come
to mean with us a quiet sequence or a succession of actions which,
taken together, complete a career; but in its original force the
English word 'course,' and still more the Greek, of which it is a
translation, contain a great deal more than that. If we were to read
'race,' we should get nearer to at least one side of the Apostle's
thought. This was the image under which life presented itself to him,
as it does to every man that does anything in the world worth doing,
whether he be Christian or not--as being not a place for enjoyment, for
selfish pursuits, making money, building family, satisfying love,
seeking pleasure, or the like; but mainly as being an appointed field
for a succession of efforts, all in one direction, and leading
progressively to an end. In that image of life as a race, threadbare as
it is, there are several grave considerations involved, which it will
contribute to the nobleness of our own lives to keep steadily in view.

To begin with, the metaphor regards life as a track or path marked out
and to be kept to by us. Paul thought of his life as a racecourse,
traced for him by God, and from which it would be perilous and
rebellious to diverge. The consciousness of definite duties loomed
larger than anything else before him. His first waking thought was,
'What is God's will for me to-day? What stage of the course have I to
pass over to-day?' Each moment brought to him an appointed task which
at all hazards he must do. And this elevating, humbling, and bracing
ever-present sense of responsibility, not merely to circumstances, but
to God, is an indispensable part of any life worth the living, and of
any on which a man will ever dare to look back.

'My course.' O brethren! if we carried with us, always present, that
solemn, severe sense of all-pervading duty and of obligation laid upon
us to pursue faithfully the path that is appointed us, there would be
less waste, less selfishness, less to regret, and less that weakens and
defiles, in the lives of us all. And blessed be His name! however
trivial be our tasks, however narrow our spheres, however secular and
commonplace our businesses or trades, we may write upon them, as on all
sorts of lives, except weak and selfish ones, this inscription,
'Holiness to the Lord.'

The broad arrow stamped on Crown property gives a certain dignity to
whatever bears it, and whatever small duty has the name of God written
across it is thereby ennobled. If our days are to be full-fraught with
the serenity and purity which it is possible for them to attain, and if
we ourselves are to put forth all our powers and make the most of
ourselves, we must cultivate the continual sense that life is a
course--a series of definite duties marked out for us by God.

Again, the image suggests the strenuous efforts needed for discharge of
our appointed tasks. The Apostle, like all men of imaginative and
sensitive nature, was accustomed to speak in metaphors, which expressed
his fervid convictions more adequately than more abstract expressions
would have done. That vigorous figure of a 'course' speaks more
strongly of the stress of continual effort than many words. It speaks
of the straining muscles, and the intense concentration, and the
forward-flung body of the runner in the arena. Paul says in effect, 'I,
for my part, live at high pressure. I get the most that I can out of
myself. I do the very best that is in me.' And that is a pattern for us.

There is nothing to be done unless we are contented to live on the
stretch. Easygoing lives are always contemptible lives. A man who never
does anything except what he can do easily never comes to do anything
greater than what he began with, and never does anything worth doing at
all. Effort is the law of life in all departments, as we all of us know
and practise in regard to our daily business. But what a strange thing
it is that we seem to think that our Christian characters can be formed
and perfected upon other conditions, and in other fashions, than those
by which men make their daily bread or their worldly fortunes!

The direction which effort takes is different in these two regions. The
necessity for concentration and vigorous putting into operation of
every faculty is far more imperative in the Christian course than in
any other form of life.

I believe most earnestly that we grow Christlike, not by effort only,
but by faith. But I believe that there is no faith without effort, and
that the growth which comes from faith will not be appropriated and
made ours without it. And so I preach, without in the least degree
feeling that it impinges upon the great central truth that we are
cleansed and perfected by the power of God working upon us, the sister
truth that we must 'work out our own salvation with fear and trembling.'

Brethren, unless we are prepared for the dust and heat of the race, we
had better not start upon the course. Christian men have an appointed
task, and to do it will take all the effort that they can put forth,
and will assuredly demand continuous concentration and the summoning of
every faculty to its utmost energy.

Still further, there is another idea that lies in the emblem, and that
is that the appointed task which thus demands the whole man in vigorous
exercise ought in fact to be, and in its nature is, progressive. Is the
Christianity of the average church member and professing Christian a
continuous advance? Is to-day better than yesterday? Are former
attainments continually being left behind? Does it not seem the
bitterest irony to talk about the usual life of a Christian as a
course? Did you ever see a squad of raw recruits being drilled in the
barrack-yard? The first thing the sergeants do is to teach them the
'goose-step,' which consists in lifting up one foot and then the other,
_ad infinitum_, and yet always keeping on the same bit of ground. That
is the kind of 'course' which hosts of so-called Christians content
themselves with running--a vast deal of apparent exercise and no
advance. They are just at the same spot at which they stood five, ten,
or twenty years ago; not a bit wiser, more like Christ, less like the
devil and the world; having gained no more mastery over their
characteristic evils; falling into precisely the same faults of temper
and conduct as they used to do in the far-away past. By what right can
_they_ talk of running the Christian race? Progress is essential to
real Christian life.

II. Turn now to another thought here, and consider what Paul aimed at.

It is a very easy thing for a man to say, 'I take the discharge of my
duty, given to me by Jesus Christ, as my great purpose in life,' when
there is nothing in the way to prevent him from carrying out that
purpose. But it is a very different thing when, as was the case with
Paul, there lie before him the certainties of affliction and bonds, and
the possibilities which very soon consolidated themselves into
certainties, of a bloody death and that swiftly. To say _then_, without
a quickened pulse or a tremor in the eyelid, or a quiver in the voice,
or a falter in the resolution, to say then, 'none of these things move
me, if only I may do what I was set to do'--that is to be in Christ
indeed; and that is the only thing worth living for.

Look how beautifully we see in operation in these heartfelt and few
words of the Apostle the power that there is in an absolute devotion to
God-enjoined duty, to give a man 'a solemn scorn of ills,' and to lift
him high above everything that would bar or hinder his path. Is it not
bracing to see any one actuated by such motives as these? And why
should they not be motives for us all? The one thing worth our making
our aim in life is to accomplish our course.

Now notice that the word in the original here, 'finish,' does not
merely mean 'end,' which would be a very poor thing. Time will do that
for us all. It will end our course. But an ended course may yet be an
unfinished course. And the meaning that the Apostle attaches to the
word in both of our texts is not merely to scramble through anyhow, so
as to get to the last of it; but to complete, accomplish the course,
or, to put away the metaphor, to do all that it was meant by God that
he should do.

Now some very early transcriber of the Acts of the Apostles mistook the
Apostle's meaning, and thought that he only said that he desired to end
his career; and so, with the best intentions in the world, he inserted,
probably on the margin, what he thought was a necessary addition--that
unfortunate 'with joy,' which appears in our Authorised Version, but
has no place in the true text. If we put it in we necessarily limit the
meaning of the word 'finish' to that low, superficial sense which I
have already dismissed. If we leave it out we get a far nobler thought.
Paul was not thinking about the joy at the end. What he wanted was to
do his work, all of it, right through to the very last. He knew there
would be joy, but he does not speak about it. What he wanted, as all
faithful men do, was to do the work, and let the joy take care of
itself.

And so for all of us, the true anaesthetic or 'painkiller' is that
all-dominant sense of obligation and duty which lays hold upon us, and
grips us, and makes us, not exactly indifferent to, but very partially
conscious of, the sorrows or the hindrances or the pains that may come
in our way. You cannot stop an express train by stretching a rope
across the line, nor stay the flow of a river with a barrier of straw.
And if a man has once yielded himself fully to that great conception of
God's will driving him on through life, and prescribing his path for
him, it is neither in sorrow nor in joy to arrest his course. They may
roll all the golden apples out of the garden of the Hesperides in his
path, and he will not stop to pick one of them up; or Satan may block
it with his fiercest flames, and the man will go into them, saying,
'When I pass through the fires He will be with me.'

III. Lastly, what Paul won thereby.

'That I _may_ finish my course ... I _have_ finished my course'; in the
same lofty meaning, not merely _ended_, though that was true, but
'completed, accomplished, perfected.'

Now some hyper-sensitive people have thought that it was very strange
that the Apostle, who was always preaching the imperfection of all
human obedience and service, should, at the end of his life, indulge in
such a piece of what they fancy was self-complacent retrospect as to
say 'I have kept the faith; I have fought a good fight; I have finished
my course.' But it was by no means complacent self-righteousness. Of
course he did not mean that he looked back upon a career free from
faults and flecks and stains. No. There is only one pair of human lips
that ever could say, in the full significance of the word, 'It is
finished! ... I have completed the work which Thou gavest Me to do.'
Jesus Christ's retrospect of a stainless career, without defect or
discordance at any point from the divine ideal, is not repeated in any
of His servants' experiences. But, on the other hand, if a man in the
middle of his difficulties and his conflict pulls himself habitually
together and says to himself, 'Nothing shall move me, so that I may
complete this bit of my course,' depend upon it, his effort, his
believing effort, will not be in vain; and at the last he will be able
to look back on a career which, though stained with many imperfections,
and marred with many failures, yet on the whole has realised the divine
purpose, though not with absolute completeness, at least sufficiently
to enable the faithful servant to feel that all his struggle has not
been in vain.

Brethren, no one else can. And oh! how different the two 'courses' of
the godly man and the worldling look, in their relative importance,
when seen from this side, as we are advancing towards them, and from
the other as we look back upon them! Pleasures, escape from pains,
ease, comfort, popularity, quiet lives--all these things seem very
attractive; and God's will often seems very hard and very repulsive,
when we are advancing towards some unwelcome duty. But when we get
beyond it and look back, the two careers have changed their characters;
and all the joys that could be bought at the price of the smallest
neglected duty or the smallest perpetrated sin, dwindle and dwindle and
dwindle, and the light is out of them, and they show for what they
are--nothings, gilded nothings, painted emptinesses, lies varnished
over. And on the other hand, to do right, to discharge the smallest
duty, to recognise God's will, and with faithful effort to seek to do
it in dependence upon Him, that towers and towers and towers, and there
seems to be, as there really is, nothing else worth living for.

So let us live with the continual remembrance in our minds that all
which we do has to be passed in review by us once more, from another
standpoint, and with another illumination falling upon it. And be sure
of this, that the one thing worth looking back upon, and possible to be
looked back upon with peace and quietness, is the humble, faithful,
continual discharge of our appointed tasks for the dear Lord's sake. If
you and I, whilst work and troubles last, do truly say, 'None of these
things move me, so that I _might_ finish my course,' we too, with all
our weaknesses, may be able to say at the last, 'Thanks be to God! I
_have_ finished my course.'



PARTING WORDS [Footnote: Preached prior to a long absence in Australia.]

'And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of His
grace....'--ACTS xx. 32.

I may be pardoned if my remarks now should assume somewhat of a more
personal character than is my wont. I desire to speak mainly to my own
friends, the members of my own congregation; and other friends who have
come to give me a parting 'Godspeed' will forgive me if my observations
have a more special bearing on those with whom I am more immediately
connected.

The Apostle whose words I have taken for my text was leaving, as he
supposed, for the last time, the representatives of the Church in
Ephesus, to whom he had been painting in very sombre colours the
dangers of the future and his own forebodings and warnings.
Exhortations, prophecies of evil, expressions of anxious solicitude,
motions of Christian affection, all culminate in this parting
utterance. High above them all rises the thought of the present God,
and of the mighty word which in itself, in the absence of all human
teachers, had power to 'build them up, and to give them an inheritance
amongst them that are sanctified.'

If we think of that Church in Ephesus, this brave confidence of the
Apostle's becomes yet more remarkable. They were set in the midst of a
focus of heathen superstition, from which they themselves had only
recently been rescued. Their knowledge was little, they had no
Apostolic teacher to be present with them; they were left alone there
to battle with the evils of that corrupt society in which they dwelt.
And yet Paul leaves them--'sheep in the midst of wolves,' with a very
imperfect Christianity, with no Bible, with no teachers--in the sure
confidence that no harm will come to them, because God is with them,
and the 'word of His grace' is enough.

And that is the feeling, dear brethren, with which I now look you in
the face for the last time for a little while. I desire that you and I
should together share the conviction that each of us is safe because
God and the 'word of His grace' will go and remain with us.

I. So then, first of all, let me point you to the one source of
security and enlightenment for the Church and for the individual.

We are not to separate between God and the 'word of His grace,' but
rather to suppose that the way by which the Apostle conceived of God as
working for the blessing and the guardianship of that little community
in Ephesus was mainly, though not exclusively, through that which he
here designates 'the word of His grace.' We are not to forget the
ever-abiding presence of the indwelling Spirit who guards and keeps the
life of the individual and of the community. But what is in the
Apostle's mind here is the objective revelation, the actual spoken word
(not yet written) which had its origin in God's condescending love, and
had for its contents, mainly, the setting forth of that love. Or to put
it into other words, the revelation of the grace of God in Jesus
Christ, with all the great truths that cluster round and are evolved
from it, is the all-sufficient source of enlightenment and security for
individuals and for Churches. And whosoever will rightly use and
faithfully keep that great word, no evil shall befall him, nor shall he
ever make shipwreck of the faith. It is 'able to build you up,' says
Paul. In God's Gospel, in the truth concerning Jesus Christ the divine
Redeemer, in the principles that flow from that Cross and Passion, and
that risen life and that ascension to God, there is all that men need,
all that they want for life, all that they want for godliness. The
basis of their creed, the sufficient guide for their conduct, the
formative powers that will shape into beauty and nobleness their
characters, all lie in the germ in this message, 'God was in Christ
reconciling the world unto Himself.' Whoever keeps that in mind and
memory, ruminates upon it till it becomes the nourishment of his soul,
meditates on it till the precepts and the promises and the principles
that are enwrapped in it unfold themselves before Him, needs none other
guide for life, none other solace in sorrow, none other anchor of hope,
none other stay in trial and in death. 'I commend you to God and the
word of His grace,' which is a storehouse full of all that we need for
life and for godliness. Whoever has it is like a landowner who has a
quarry on his estate, from which at will he can dig stones to build his
house. If you truly possess and faithfully adhere to this Gospel, you
have enough.

Remember that these believers to whom Paul thus spoke had no New
Testament, and most of them, I dare say, could not read the Old. There
were no written Gospels in existence. The greater part of the New
Testament was not written; what was written was in the shape of two or
three letters that belonged to Churches in another part of the world
altogether. It was to the spoken word that he commended them. How much
more securely may we trust one another to that permanent record of the
divine revelation which we have here in the pages of Scripture!

As for the individual, so for the Church, that written word is the
guarantee for its purity and immortality. Christianity is the only
religion that has ever passed through periods of decadence and purified
itself again. They used to say that Thames water was the best to put on
shipboard because, after it became putrid, it cleared itself and became
sweet again. I do not know anything about whether that is true or not,
but I know that it is true about Christianity. Over and over again it
has rotted, and over and over again it has cleared itself, and it has
always been by the one process. Men have gone back to the word and laid
hold again of it in its simple omnipotence, and so a decadent
Christianity has sprung up again into purity and power. The word of
God, the principles of the revelation contained in Christ and recorded
for ever in this New Testament, are the guarantee of the Church's
immortality and of the Church's purity. This man and that man may fall
away, provinces may be lost from the empire for a while, standards of
rebellion and heresy may be lifted, but 'the foundation of God standeth
sure,' and whoever will hark back again and dig down through the
rubbish of human buildings to the living Rock will build secure and
dwell at peace. If all our churches were pulverised to-morrow, and
every formal creed of Christendom were torn in pieces, and all the
institutions of the Church were annihilated--if there was a New
Testament left they would all be built up again. 'I commend you to God,
and to the word of His grace.'

II. Secondly, notice the possible benefit of the silencing of the
_human_ voice.

Paul puts together his absence and the power of the word. 'Now I know
that you will see my face no more'--'I commend you to God.' That is to
say, it is often a good thing that the voice of man may be hushed in
order that the sweeter and deeper music of the word of God, sounding
from no human lips, may reach our hearts. Of course I am not going to
depreciate preachers and books and religious literature and the thought
and the acts of good and wise men who have been interpreters of God's
meaning and will to their brethren, but the human ministration of the
divine word, like every other help to knowing God, may become a
hindrance instead of a help; and in all such helps there is a tendency,
unless there be continual jealous watchfulness on the part of those who
minister them, and on the part of those who use them, to assert
themselves instead of leading to God, and to become not mirrors in
which we may behold God, but obscuring _media_ which come between us
and Him. This danger belongs to the great ordinance and office of the
Christian ministry, large as its blessings are, just as it belongs to
all other offices which are appointed for the purpose of bringing men
to God. We may make them ladders or we may make them barriers; we may
climb by them or we may remain in them. We may look at the colours on
the painted glass until we do not see or think of the light which
strikes through the colours.

So it is often a good thing that a human voice which speaks the divine
word, should be silenced; just as it is often a good thing that other
helps and props should be taken away. No man ever leans all his weight
upon God's arm until every other crutch on which he used to lean has
been knocked from him.

And therefore, dear brethren, applying these plain things to ourselves,
may I not say that it may and should be the result of my temporary
absence from you that some of you should be driven to a more first-hand
acquaintance with God and with His word? I, like all Christian
ministers, have of course my favourite ways of looking at truth,
limitations of temperament, and idiosyncrasies of various sorts, which
colour the representations that I make of God's great word. All the
river cannot run through any pipe; and what does run is sure to taste
somewhat of the soil through which it runs. And for some of you, after
thirty years of hearing my way of putting things--and I have long since
told you all that I have got to say--it will be a good thing to have
some one else to speak to you, who will come with other aspects of that
great Truth, and look at it from other angles and reflect other hues of
its perfect whiteness. So partly because of these limitations of mine,
partly because you have grown so accustomed to my voice that the things
that I say do not produce half as much effect on many of you as if I
were saying them to somebody else, or somebody else were saying them to
you, and partly because the affection, born of so many years of united
worship, for which in many respects I am your debtor, may lead you to
look at the vessel rather than the treasure, do you not think it may be
a means of blessing and help to this congregation that I should step
aside for a little while and some one else should stand here, and you
should be driven to make acquaintance with 'God and the word of His
grace' a little more for yourselves? What does it matter though you do
not have nay sermons? You have your Bibles and you have God's Spirit.
And if my silence shall lead any of you to prize and to use _these_
more than you have done, then my silence will have done a great deal
more than my speech. Ministers are like doctors, the test of their
success is that they are not needed any more. And when we can say,
'They can stand without us, and they do not need us,' that is the crown
of our ministry.

III. Thirdly, notice the best expression of Christian solicitude and
affection.

'I commend you,' says Paul, 'to God, and to the word of His grace.' If
we may venture upon a very literal translation of the word, it is, 'I
lay you down beside God.' That is beautiful, is it not? Here had Paul
been carrying the Ephesian Church on his back for a long time now. He
had many cares about them, many forebodings as to their future, knowing
very well that after his departure grievous wolves were going to enter
