of them be wronged.

P: And Allah hath created the heavens and the earth with truth, and that
every soul may be repaid what it hath earned. And they will not be
wronged.

S: And Allah created the heavens and the earth with truth and that every
soul may be rewarded for what it has earned and they shall not be
wronged.

045.023
Y: Then seest thou such a one as takes as his god his own vain desire?
Allah has, knowing (him as such), left him astray, and sealed his
hearing and his heart (and understanding), and put a cover on his
sight. Who, then, will guide him after Allah (has withdrawn Guidance)?
Will ye not then receive admonition?

P: Hast thou seen him who maketh his desire his god, and Allah sendeth
him astray purposely, and sealeth up his hearing and his heart, and
setteth on his sight a covering? Then who will lead him after Allah
(hath condemned him)? Will ye not then heed?

S: Have you then considered him who takes his low desire for his god,
and Allah has made him err having knowledge and has set a seal upon his
ear and his heart and put a covering upon his eye. Who can then guide
him after Allah? Will you not then be mindful?

045.024
Y: And they say: "What is there but our life in this world? We shall die
and we live, and nothing but time can destroy us." But of that they
have no knowledge: they merely conjecture:

P: And they say: There is naught but our life of the world; we die and
we live, and naught destroyeth us save time; when they have no
knowledge whatsoever of (all) that; they do but guess.

S: And they say: There is nothing but our life in this world; we live
and die and nothing destroys us but time, and they have no knowledge of
that; they only conjecture.

045.025
Y: And when Our Clear Signs are rehearsed to them their argument is
nothing but this: They say, "Bring (back) our forefathers, if what ye
say is true!"

P: And when Our clear revelations are recited unto them their only
argument is that they say: Bring (back) our fathers then, if ye are
truthful.

S: And when Our clear communications are recited to them, their argument
is no other than that they say: Bring our fathers (back) if you are
truthful.

045.026
Y: Say: "It is Allah Who gives you life, then gives you death; then He
will gather you together for the Day of Judgment about which there is
no doubt": But most men do not understand.

P: Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Allah giveth life to you, then causeth
you to die, then gathereth you unto the Day of Resurrection whereof
there is no doubt. But most of mankind know not.

S: Say: Allah gives you life, then He makes you die, then will He gather
you to the day of resurrection wherein is no doubt, but most people do
not know.

045.027
Y: To Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth, and the
Day that the Hour of Judgment is established,- that Day will the
dealers in Falsehood perish!

P: And unto Allah belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and the
earth; and on the day when the Hour riseth, on that day those who
follow falsehood will be lost.

S: And Allah's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; and on the
day when the hour shall come to pass, on that day shall they perish who
say false things.

045.028
Y: And thou wilt see every sect bowing the knee: Every sect will be
called to its Record: "This Day shall ye be recompensed for all that ye
did!"

P: And thou wilt see each nation crouching, each nation summoned to its
record. (And it will be said unto them): This day ye are requited what
ye used to do.

S: And you shall see every nation kneeling down; every nation shall be
called to its book: today you shall be rewarded for what you did.

045.029
Y: "This Our Record speaks about you with truth: For We were wont to put
on Record all that ye did."

P: This Our Book pronounceth against you with truth. Lo! We have caused
(all) that ye did to be recorded.

S: This is Our book that speaks against you with justice; surely We
wrote what you did,

045.030
Y: Then, as to those who believed and did righteous deeds, their Lord
will admit them to His Mercy that will be the achievement for all to
see.

P: Then, as for those who believed and did good works, their Lord will
bring them in unto His mercy. That is the evident triumph.

S: Then as to those who believed and did good, their Lord will make them
enter into His mercy; that is the manifest achievement.

045.031
Y: But as to those who rejected Allah, (to them will be said): "Were not
Our Signs rehearsed to you? But ye were arrogant, and were a people
given to sin!"

P: And as for those who disbelieved (it will be said unto them): Were
not Our revelations recited unto you? But ye were scornful and became a
guilty folk.

S: As to those who disbelieved: What! were not My communications recited
to you? But you were proud and you were a guilty people.

04.032
Y: "And when it was said that the promise of Allah was true, and that
the Hour- there was no doubt about its (coming), ye used to say, 'We
know not what is the hour: we only think it is an idea, and we have no
firm assurance.'"

P: And when it was said: Lo! Allah's promise is the truth, and there is
no doubt of the Hour's coming, ye said: We know not what the Hour is.
We deem it naught but a conjecture, and we are by no means convinced.

S: And when it was said, Surely the promise of Allah is true and as for
the hour, there is no doubt about it, you said: We do not know what the
hour is; we do not think (that it will come to pass) save a passing
thought, and we are not at all sure.

045.033
Y: Then will appear to them the evil (fruits) of what they did, and they
will be completely encircled by that which they used to mock at!

P: And the evils of what they did will appear unto them, and that which
they used to deride will befall them.

S: And the evil (consequences) of what they did shall become manifest to
them and that which they mocked shall encompass them.

045.034
Y: It will also be said: "This Day We will forget you as ye forgot the
meeting of this Day of yours! and your abode is the Fire, and no
helpers have ye!"

P: And it will be said: This day We forget you, even as ye forgot the
meeting of this your day; and your habitation is the Fire, and there is
none to help you.

S: And it shall be said: Today We forsake you as you neglected the
meeting of this day of yours and your abode is the fire, and there are
not for you any helpers:

045.035
Y: "This, because ye used to take the Signs of Allah in jest, and the
life of the world deceived you:" (From) that Day, therefore, they shall
not be taken out thence, nor shall they be received into Grace.

P: This, forasmuch as ye made the revelations of Allah a jest, and the
life of the world beguiled you. Therefor this day they come not forth
from thence, nor can they make amends.

S: That is because you took the communications of Allah for a jest and
the life of this world deceived you. So on that day they shall not be
brought forth from it, nor shall they be granted goodwill.

045.036
Y: Then Praise be to Allah, Lord of the heavens and Lord of the earth,-
Lord and Cherisher of all the Worlds!

P: Then praise be to Allah, Lord of the heavens and Lord of the earth,
the Lord of the Worlds.

S: Therefore to Allah is due (all) praise, the Lord of the heavens and
the Lord of the earth, the Lord of the worlds.

045.037
Y: To Him be glory throughout the heavens and the earth: and He is
Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom!

P: And unto Him (alone) belongeth Majesty in the heavens and the earth,
and He is the Mighty, the Wise.

S: And to Him belongs greatness in the heavens and the earth, and He is
the Mighty, the Wise.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 46:

              AL-AHQAF (THE WIND-CURVED SANDHILLS, THE DUNES)
 Total Verses: 35 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

046.001
Y: Ha-Mim.

P: Ha. Mim.

S: Ha Mim.

046.002
Y: The Revelation of the Book is from Allah the Exalted in Power, Full
of Wisdom.

P: The revelation of the Scripture is from Allah the Mighty, the Wise.

S: The revelation of the Book is from Allah, the Mighty, the Wise.

046.003
Y: We created not the heavens and the earth and all between them but for
just ends, and for a Term Appointed: But those who reject Faith turn
away from that whereof they are warned.

P: We created not the heavens and the earth and all that is between them
save with truth, and for a term appointed. But those who disbelieve
turn away from that whereof they are warned.

S: We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them
two save with truth and (for) an appointed term; and those who
disbelieve turn aside from what they are warned of.

046.004
Y: Say: "Do ye see what it is ye invoke besides Allah? Show me what it
is they have created on earth, or have they a share in the heavens
bring me a book (revealed) before this, or any remnant of knowledge (ye
may have), if ye are telling the truth!"

P: Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Have ye thought on all that ye invoke
beside Allah? Show me what they have created of the earth. Or have they
any portion in the heavens? Bring me a scripture before this
(Scripture), or some vestige of knowledge (in support of what ye say),
if ye are truthful.

S: Say: Have you considered what you call upon besides Allah? Show me
what they have created of the earth, or have they a share in the
heavens? Bring me a book before this or traces of knowledge, if you are
truthful.

046.005
Y: And who is more astray than one who invokes besides Allah, such as
will not answer him to the Day of Judgment, and who (in fact) are
unconscious of their call (to them)?

P: And who is further astray than those who, instead of Allah, pray unto
such as hear not their prayer until the Day of Resurrection, and are
unconscious of their prayer,

S: And who is in greater error than he who calls besides Allah upon
those that will not answer him till the day of resurrection and they
are heedless of their call?

046.006
Y: And when mankind are gathered together (at the Resurrection), they
will be hostile to them and reject their worship (altogether)!

P: And when mankind are gathered (to the Judgment) will become enemies
for them, and will become deniers of having been worshipped.

S: And when men are gathered together they shall be their enemies, and
shall be deniers of their worshipping (them).

046.007
Y: When Our Clear Signs are rehearsed to them, the Unbelievers say, of
the Truth when it comes to them: "This is evident sorcery!"

P: And when Our clear revelations are recited unto them, those who
disbelieve say of the Truth when it reacheth them: This is mere magic.

S: And when Our clear communications are recited to them, those who
disbelieve say with regard to the truth when it comes to them: This is
clear magic.

046.008
Y: Or do they say, "He has forged it"? Say: "Had I forged it, then can
ye obtain no single (blessing) for me from Allah. He knows best of that
whereof ye talk (so glibly)! Enough is He for a witness between me and
you! And he is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

P: Or say they: He hath invented it? Say (O Muhammad): If I have
invented it, still ye have no power to support me against Allah. He is
Best Aware of what ye say among yourselves concerning it. He sufficeth
for a witness between me and you. And He is the Forgiving, the
Merciful.

S: Nay! they say: He has forged it. Say: If I have forged it, you do not
control anything for me from Allah; He knows best what you utter
concerning it; He is enough as a witness between me and you, and He is
the Forgiving, the Merciful.

046.009
Y: Say: "I am no bringer of new-fangled doctrine among the messengers,
nor do I know what will be done with me or with you. I follow but that
which is revealed to me by inspiration; I am but a Warner open and
clear."

P: Say: I am no new thing among the messengers (of Allah), nor know I
what will be done with me or with you. I do but follow that which is
inspired in me, and I am but a plain warner.

S: Say: I am not the first of the messengers, and I do not know what
will be done with me or with you: I do not follow anything but that
which is revealed to me, and I am nothing but a plain warner.

046.010
Y: Say: "See ye? If (this teaching) be from Allah, and ye reject it, and
a witness from among the Children of Israel testifies to its similarity
(with earlier scripture), and has believed while ye are arrogant, (how
unjust ye are!) truly, Allah guides not a people unjust."

P: Bethink you: If it is from Allah and ye disbelieve therein, and a
witness of the Children of Israel hath already testified to the like
thereof and hath believed, and ye are too proud (what plight is yours)?
Lo! Allah guideth not wrong-doing folk.

S: Say: Have you considered if it is from Allah, and you disbelieve in
it, and a witness from among the children of Israel has borne witness
of one like it, so he believed, while you are big with pride; surely
Allah does not guide the unjust people.

046.011
Y: The Unbelievers say of those who believe: "If (this Message) were a
good thing, (such men) would not have gone to it first, before us!" And
seeing that they guide not themselves thereby, they will say, "this is
an (old,) falsehood!"

P: And those who disbelieve say of those who believe: If it had been
(any) good, they would not have been before us in attaining it. And
since they will not be guided by it, they say: This is an ancient lie;

S: And those who disbelieve say concerning those who believe: If it had
been a good, they would not have gone ahead of us therein. And as they
do not seek to be rightly directed thereby, they say: It is an old lie.

046.012
Y: And before this, was the Book of Moses as a guide and a mercy: And
this Book confirms (it) in the Arabic tongue; to admonish the unjust,
and as Glad Tidings to those who do right.

P: When before it there was the Scripture of Moses, an example and a
mercy; and this is a confirming Scripture in the Arabic language, that
it may warn those who do wrong and bring good tidings for the
righteous.

S: And before it the Book of Musa was a guide and a mercy: and this is a
Book verifying (it) in the Arabic language that it may warn those who
are unjust and as good news for the doers of good.

046.013
Y: Verily those who say, "Our Lord is Allah," and remain firm (on that
Path),- on them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.

P: Lo! those who say: Our Lord is Allah, and thereafter walk aright,
there shall no fear come upon them neither shall they grieve.

S: Surely those who say, Our Lord is Allah, then they continue on the
right way, they shall have no fear nor shall they grieve.

046.014
Y: Such shall be Companions of the Gardens, dwelling therein (for aye):
a recompense for their (good) deeds.

P: Such are rightful owners of the Garden, immortal therein, as a reward
for what they used to do.

S: These are the dwellers of the garden, abiding therein: a reward for
what they did.

046.015
Y: We have enjoined on man kindness to his parents: In pain did his
mother bear him, and in pain did she give him birth. The carrying of
the (child) to his weaning is (a period of) thirty months. At length,
when he reaches the age of full strength and attains forty years, he
says, "O my Lord! Grant me that I may be grateful for Thy favour which
Thou has bestowed upon me, and upon both my parents, and that I may
work righteousness such as Thou mayest approve; and be gracious to me
in my issue. Truly have I turned to Thee and truly do I bow (to Thee)
in Islam."

P: And We have commended unto man kindness toward parents. His mother
beareth him with reluctance, and bringeth him forth with reluctance,
and the bearing of him and the weaning of him is thirty months, till,
when he attaineth full strength and reacheth forty years, he saith: My
Lord! Arouse me that I may give thanks for the favour wherewith Thou
hast favoured me and my parents, and that I may do right acceptable
unto Thee. And be gracious unto me in the matter of my seed. Lo! I have
turned unto Thee repentant, and lo! I am of those who surrender (unto
Thee).

S: And We have enjoined on man doing of good to his parents; with
trouble did his mother bear him and with trouble did she bring him
forth; and the bearing of him and the weaning of him was thirty months;
until when he attains his maturity and reaches forty years, he says: My
Lord! grant me that I may give thanks for Thy favor which Thou hast
bestowed on me and on my parents, and that I may do good which pleases
Thee and do good to me in respect of my offspring; surely I turn to
Thee, and surely I am of those who submit.

046.016
Y: Such are they from whom We shall accept the best of their deeds and
pass by their ill deeds: (They shall be) among the Companions of the
Garden: a promise! of truth, which was made to them (in this life).

P: Those are they from whom We accept the best of what they do, and
overlook their evil deeds. (They are) among the owners of the Garden.
This is the true promise which they were promised (in the world).

S: These are they from whom We accept the best of what they have done
and pass over their evil deeds, among the dwellers of the garden; the
promise of truth which they were promised.

046.017
Y: But (there is one) who says to his parents, "Fie on you! Do ye hold
out the promise to me that I shall be raised up, even though
generations have passed before me (without rising again)?" And they two
seek Allah's aid, (and rebuke the son): "Woe to thee! Have faith! for
the promise of Allah is true." But he says, "This is nothing but tales
of the ancients!"

P: And whoso saith unto his parents: Fie upon you both! Do ye threaten
me that I shall be brought forth (again) when generations before me
have passed away? And they twain cry unto Allah for help (and say): Woe
unto thee! Believe! Lo! the promise of Allah is true. But he saith:
This is naught save fables of the men of old:

S: And he who says to his parents: Fie on you! do you threaten me that I
shall be brought forth when generations have already passed away before
me? And they both call for Allah's aid: Woe to you! believe, surely the
promise of Allah is true. But he says: This is nothing but stories of
the ancients.

046.018
Y: Such are they against whom is proved the sentence among the previous
generations of jinns and men, that have passed away; for they will be
(utterly) lost.

P: Such are those on whom the Word concerning nations of the jinn and
mankind which have passed away before them hath effect. Lo! they are
the losers.

S: These are they against whom the word has proved true among nations of
the jinn and the men that have already passed away before them; surely
they are losers.

046.019
Y: And to all are (assigned) degrees according to the deeds which they
(have done), and in order that (Allah) may recompense their deeds, and
no injustice be done to them.

P: And for all there will be ranks from what they do, that He may pay
them for their deeds; and they will not be wronged.

S: And for all are degrees according to what they did, and that He may
pay them back fully their deeds and they shall not be wronged.

046.020
Y: And on the Day that the Unbelievers will be placed before the Fire,
(It will be said to them): "Ye received your good things in the life of
the world, and ye took your pleasure out of them: but today shall ye be
recompensed with a Penalty of humiliation: for that ye were arrogant on
earth without just cause, and that ye (ever) transgressed."

P: And on the day when those who disbelieve are exposed to the Fire (it
will be said): Ye squandered your good things in the life of the world
and sought comfort therein. Now this day ye are rewarded with the doom
of ignominy because ye were disdainful in the land without a right, and
because ye used to transgress.

S: And on the day when those who disbelieve shall be brought before the
fire: You did away with your good things in your life of the world and
you enjoyed them for a while, so today you shall be rewarded with the
punishment of abasement because you were unjustly proud in the land and
because you transgressed.

046.021
Y: Mention (Hud) one of 'Ad's (own) brethren: Behold, he warned his
people about the winding Sand-tracts: but there have been warners
before him and after him: "Worship ye none other than Allah: Truly I
fear for you the Penalty of a Mighty Day."

P: And make mention (O Muhammad) of the brother of A'ad when he warned
his folk among the wind-curved sandhills - and verily warners came and
went before and after him - saying: Serve none but Allah. Lo! I fear
for you the doom of a tremendous Day.

S: And mention the brother of Ad; when he warned his people in the sandy
plains,-- and indeed warners came before him and after him-- saying
Serve none but Allah; surely I fear for you the punishment of a
grievous day.

046.022
Y: They said: "Hast thou come in order to turn us aside from our gods?
Then bring upon us the (calamity) with which thou dost threaten us, if
thou art telling the truth?"

P: They said: Hast come to turn us away from our gods? Then bring upon
us that wherewith thou threatenest us, if thou art of the truthful.

S: They said: Have you come to us to turn us away from our gods; then
bring us what you threaten us with, if you are of the truthful ones.

046.023
Y: He said: "The Knowledge (of when it will come) is only with Allah: I
proclaim to you the mission on which I have been sent: But I see that
ye are a people in ignorance!"..

P: He said: The knowledge is with Allah only. I convey unto you that
wherewith I have been sent, but I see you are a folk that know not.

S: He said: The knowledge is only with Allah, and I deliver to you the
message with which I am sent, but I see you are a people who are
ignorant.

046.024
Y: Then, when they saw the (Penalty in the shape of) a cloud traversing
the sky, coming to meet their valleys, they said, "This cloud will give
us rain!" "Nay, it is the (Calamity) ye were asking to be hastened!- A
wind wherein is a Grievous Penalty!"

P: Then, when they beheld it as a dense cloud coming toward their
valleys, they said: Here is a cloud bringing us rain. Nay, but it is
that which ye did seek to hasten, a wind wherein is painful torment,

S: So when they saw it as a cloud appearing in the sky advancing towards
their valleys, they said: This is a cloud which will give us rain. Nay!
it is what you sought to hasten on, a blast of wind in which is a
painful punishment,

046.025
Y: "Everything will it destroy by the command of its Lord!" Then by the
morning they - nothing was to be seen but (the ruins of) their houses!
thus do We recompense those given to sin!

P: Destroying all things by commandment of its Lord. And morning found
them so that naught could be seen save their dwellings. Thus do We
reward the guilty folk.

S: Destroying everything by the command of its Lord, so they became such
that naught could be seen except their dwellings. Thus do We reward the
guilty people.

046.026
Y: And We had firmly established them in a (prosperity and) power which
We have not given to you (ye Quraish!) and We had endowed them with
(faculties of) hearing, seeing, heart and intellect: but of no profit
to them were their (faculties of) hearing, sight, and heart and
intellect, when they went on rejecting the Signs of Allah; and they
were (completely) encircled by that which they used to mock at!

P: And verily We had empowered them with that wherewith We have not
empowered you, and had assigned them ears and eyes and hearts; but
their ears and eyes and hearts availed them naught since they denied
the revelations of Allah; and what they used to mock befell them.

S: And certainly We had established them in what We have not established
you in, and We had given-- them ears and eyes and hearts, but neither
their ears, nor their eyes, nor their hearts availed them aught, since
they denied the communications of Allah, and that which they mocked
encompassed them.

046.027
Y: We destroyed aforetime populations round about you; and We have shown
the Signs in various ways, that they may turn (to Us).

P: And verily We have destroyed townships round about you, and displayed
(for them) Our revelation, that haply they might return.

S: And certainly We destroyed the towns which are around you, and We
repeat the communications that they might turn.

046.028
Y: Why then was no help forthcoming to them from those whom they
worshipped as gods, besides Allah, as a means of access (to Allah)?
Nay, they left them in the lurch: but that was their falsehood and
their invention.

P: Then why did those whom they had chosen for gods as a way of approach
(unto Allah) not help them? Nay, but they did fail them utterly. And
(all) that was their lie, and what they used to invent.

S: Why did not then those help them whom they took for gods besides
Allah to draw (them) nigh (to Him)? Nay! they were lost to them; and
this was their lie and what they forged.

046.029
Y: Behold, We turned towards thee a company of jinns (quietly) listening
to the Qur'an: when they stood in the presence thereof, they said,
"Listen in silence!" When the (reading) was finished, they returned to
their people, to warn (them of their sins).

P: And when We inclined toward thee (Muhammad) certain of the jinn, who
wished to hear the Qur'an and, when they were in its presence, said:
Give ear! and, when it was finished, turned back to their people,
warning.

S: And when We turned towards you a party of the jinn who listened to
the Quran; so when they came to it, they said: Be silent; then when it
was finished, they turned back to their people warning (them).

046.030
Y: They said, "O our people! We have heard a Book revealed after Moses,
confirming what came before it: it guides (men) to the Truth and to a
Straight Path."

P: They said: O our people! Lo! we have heard a Scripture which hath
been revealed after Moses, confirming that which was before it, guiding
unto the truth and a right road.

S: They said: O our people! we have listened to a Book revealed after
Musa verifying that which is before it, guiding to the truth and to a
right path:

046.031
Y: "O our people, hearken to the one who invites (you) to Allah, and
believe in him: He will forgive you your faults, and deliver you from a
Penalty Grievous."

P: O our people! respond to Allah's summoner and believe in Him. He will
forgive you some of your sins and guard you from a painful doom.

S: O our people! accept the Divine caller and believe in Him, He will
forgive you of your faults and protect you from a painful punishment.

046.032
Y: "If any does not hearken to the one who invites (us) to Allah, he
cannot frustrate (Allah's Plan) on earth, and no protectors can he have
besides Allah: such men (wander) in manifest error."

P: And whoso respondeth not to Allah's summoner he can nowise escape in
the earth, and he hath no protecting friends instead of Him. Such are
in error manifest.

S: And whoever does not accept the-Divine caller, he shall not escape in
the earth and he shall not have guardians besides Him, these are in
manifest error.

046.033
Y: See they not that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, and
never wearied with their creation, is able to give life to the dead?
Yea, verily He has power over all things.

P: Have they not seen that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth
and was not wearied by their creation, is Able to give life to the
dead? Aye, He verily is Able to do all things.

S: Have they not considered that Allah, Who created the heavens and the
earth and was not tired by their creation, is able to give life to the
dead? Aye! He has surely power over all things.

046.034
Y: And on the Day that the Unbelievers will be placed before the Fire,
(they will be asked,) "Is this not the Truth?" they will say, "Yea, by
our Lord!" (One will say:) "Then taste ye the Penalty, for that ye were
wont to deny (Truth)!"

P: And on the day when those who disbelieve are exposed to the Fire
(they will be asked): Is not this real? They will say: Yea, by our
Lord. He will say: Then taste the doom for that ye disbelieved.

S: And on the day when those who disbelieve shall be brought before the
fire: Is it not true? They shall say: Aye! by our Lord! He will say:
Then taste the punishment, because you disbelieved.

046.035
Y: Therefore patiently persevere, as did (all) messengers of inflexible
purpose; and be in no haste about the (Unbelievers). On the Day that
they see the (Punishment) promised them, (it will be) as if they had
not tarried more than an hour in a single day. (Thine but) to proclaim
the Message: but shall any be destroyed except those who transgress?

P: Then have patience (O Muhammad) even as the stout of heart among the
messengers (of old) had patience, and seek not to hasten on (the doom)
for them. On the day when they see that which they are promised (it
will seem to them) as though they had tarried but an hour of daylight.
A clear message. Shall any be destroyed save evil-living folk?

S: Therefore bear up patiently as did the messengers endowed with
constancy bear up with patience and do not seek to hasten for them
(their doom). On the day that they shall see what they are promised
they shall be as if they had not tarried save an hour of the day. A
sufficient exposition! Shall then any be destroyed save the
transgressing people?

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 47:

                            MUHAMMAD (MUHAMMAD)
 Total Verses: 38 Revealed At: MADINA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

047.001
Y: Those who reject Allah and hinder (men) from the Path of Allah,-
their deeds will Allah render astray (from their mark).

P: Those who disbelieve and turn (men) from the way of Allah, He
rendereth their actions vain.

S: (As for) those who disbelieve and turn away from Allah's way, He
shall render their works ineffective.

047.002
Y: But those who believe and work deeds of righteousness, and believe in
the (Revelation) sent down to Muhammad - for it is the Truth from their
Lord,- He will remove from them their ills and improve their condition.

P: And those who believe and do good works and believe in that which is
revealed unto Muhammad - and it is the truth from their Lord - He
riddeth them of their ill-deeds and improveth their state.

S: And (as for) those who believe and do good, and believe in what has
been revealed to Muhammad, and it is the very truth from their Lord, He
will remove their evil from them and improve their condition.

047.003
Y: This because those who reject Allah follow vanities, while those who
believe follow the Truth from their Lord: Thus does Allah set forth for
men their lessons by similitudes.

P: That is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood and because
those who believe follow the truth from their Lord. Thus Allah coineth
their similitudes for mankind.

S: That is because those who disbelieve follow falsehood, and have given
them their dowries, taking (them) in marriage, not fornicating nor
taking them for paramours in secret; and whoever denies faith, his work
indeed is of no account, and in the hereafter he shall be one of the
losers.

047.004
Y: Therefore, when ye meet the Unbelievers (in fight), smite at their
necks; At length, when ye have thoroughly subdued them, bind a bond
firmly (on them): thereafter (is the time for) either generosity or
ransom: Until the war lays down its burdens. Thus (are ye commanded):
but if it had been Allah's Will, He could certainly have exacted
retribution from them (Himself); but (He lets you fight) in order to
test you, some with others. But those who are slain in the Way of
Allah,- He will never let their deeds be lost.

P: Now when ye meet in battle those who disbelieve, then it is smiting
of the necks until, when ye have routed them, then making fast of
bonds; and afterward either grace or ransom till the war lay down its
burdens. That (is the ordinance). And if Allah willed He could have
punished them (without you) but (thus it is ordained) that He may try
some of you by means of others. And those who are slain in the way of
Allah, He rendereth not their actions vain.

S: So when you meet in battle those who disbelieve, then smite the necks
until when you have overcome them, then make (them) prisoners, and
afterwards either set them free as a favor or let them ransom
(themselves) until the war terminates. That (shall be so); and if Allah
had pleased He would certainly have exacted what is due from them, but
that He may try some of you by means of others; and (as for) those who
are slain in the way of Allah, He will by no means allow their deeds to
perish.

047.005
Y: Soon will He guide them and improve their condition,

P: He will guide them and improve their state,

S: He will guide them and improve their condition.

047.006
Y: And admit them to the Garden which He has announced for them.

P: And bring them in unto the Garden which He hath made known to them.

S: And cause them to enter the garden which He has made known to them.

047.007
Y: O ye who believe! If ye will aid (the cause of) Allah, He will aid
you, and plant your feet firmly.

P: O ye who believe! If ye help Allah, He will help you and will make
your foothold firm.

S: O you who believe! if you help (the cause of) Allah, He will help
you and make firm your feet.

047.008
Y: But those who reject (Allah),- for them is destruction, and (Allah)
will render their deeds astray (from their mark).

P: And those who disbelieve, perdition is for them, and He will make
their actions vain.

S: And (as for) those who disbelieve, for them is destruction and He has
made their deeds ineffective.

047.009
Y: That is because they hate the Revelation of Allah; so He has made
their deeds fruitless.

P: That is because they are averse to that which Allah hath revealed,
therefor maketh He their actions fruitless.

S: That is because they hated what Allah revealed, so He rendered their
deeds null.

047.010
Y: Do they not travel through the earth, and see what was the End of
those before them (who did evil)? Allah brought utter destruction on
them, and similar (fates await) those who reject Allah.

P: Have they not travelled in the land to see the nature of the
consequence for those who were before them? Allah wiped them out. And
for the disbelievers there will be the like thereof.

S: Have they not then journeyed in the land and seen how was the end of
those before them: Allah brought down destruction upon them, and the
unbelievers shall have the like of it.

047.011
Y: That is because Allah is the Protector of those who believe, but
those who reject Allah have no protector.

P: That is because Allah is patron of those who believe, and because the
disbelievers have no patron.

S: That is because Allah is the Protector of those who believe, and
because the unbelievers shall have no protector for them.

047.012
Y: Verily Allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds, to
Gardens beneath which rivers flow; while those who reject Allah will
enjoy (this world) and eat as cattle eat; and the Fire will be their
abode.

P: Lo! Allah will cause those who believe and do good works to enter
Gardens underneath which rivers flow; while those who disbelieve take
their comfort in this life and eat even as the cattle eat, and the Fire
is their habitation.

S: Surely Allah will make those who believe and do good enter gardens
beneath which rivers flow; and those who disbelieve enjoy themselves
and eat as the beasts eat, and the fire is their abode.

047.013
Y: And how many cities, with more power than thy city which has driven
thee out, have We destroyed (for their sins)? and there was none to aid
them.

P: And how many a township stronger than thy township (O Muhammad) which
hath cast thee out, have We destroyed, and they had no helper!

S: And how many a town which was far more powerful than the town of
yours which has driven you out: We destroyed them so there was no
helper for them.

047.014
Y: Is then one who is on a clear (Path) from his Lord, no better than
one to whom the evil of his conduct seems pleasing, and such as follow
their own lusts?

P: Is he who relieth on a clear proof from his Lord like those for whom
the evil that they do is beautified while they follow their own lusts?

S: What! is he who has a clear argument from his Lord like him to whom
the evil of his work is made fairseeming: and they follow their low
desires.

047.015
Y: (Here is) a Parable of the Garden which the righteous are promised:
in it are rivers of water incorruptible; rivers of milk of which the
taste never changes; rivers of wine, a joy to those who drink; and
rivers of honey pure and clear. In it there are for them all kinds of
fruits; and Grace from their Lord. (Can those in such Bliss) be
compared to such as shall dwell for ever in the Fire, and be given, to
drink, boiling water, so that it cuts up their bowels (to pieces)?

P: A similitude of the Garden which those who keep their duty (to Allah)
are promised: Therein are rivers of water unpolluted, and rivers of
milk whereof the flavour changeth not, and rivers of wine delicious to
the drinkers, and rivers of clear-run honey; therein for them is every
kind of fruit, with pardon from their Lord. (Are those who enjoy all
this) like those who are immortal in the Fire and are given boiling
water to drink so that it teareth their bowels?

S: A parable of the garden which those guarding (against evil) are
promised: Therein are rivers of water that does not alter, and rivers
of milk the taste whereof does not change, and rivers of drink
delicious to those who drink, and rivers of honey clarified and for
them therein are all fruits and protection from their Lord. (Are these)
like those who abide in the fire and who are made to drink boiling
water so it rends their bowels asunder.

047.016
Y: And among them are men who listen to thee, but in the end, when they
go out from thee, they say to those who have received Knowledge, "What
is it he said just then?" Such are men whose hearts Allah has sealed,
and who follow their own lusts.

P: Among them are some who give ear unto thee (Muhammad) till, when they
go forth from thy presence they say unto those who have been given
knowledge: What was that he said just now? Those are they whose hearts
Allah hath sealed, and they follow their own lusts.

S: And there are those of them who seek to listen to you, until when
they go forth from you, they say to those who have been given the
knowledge: What was it that he said just now? These are they upon whose
hearts Allah has set a seal and they follow their low desires.

047.017
Y: But to those who receive Guidance, He increases the (light of)
Guidance, and bestows on them their Piety and Restraint (from evil).

P: While as for those who walk aright, He addeth to their guidance, and
giveth them their protection (against evil).

S: And (as for) those who follow the right direction, He increases them
in guidance and gives them their guarding (against evil).

047.018
Y: Do they then only wait for the Hour,- that it should come on them of
a sudden? But already have come some tokens thereof, and when it
(actually) is on them, how can they benefit then by their admonition?

P: Await they aught save the Hour, that it should come upon them
unawares? And the beginnings thereof have already come. But how, when
it hath come upon them, can they take their warning?

S: Do they then wait for aught but the hour that it should come to them
all of a sudden? Now indeed the tokens of it have (already) come, but
how shall they have their reminder when it comes on them?

047.019
Y: Know, therefore, that there is no god but Allah, and ask forgiveness
for thy fault, and for the men and women who believe: for Allah knows
how ye move about and how ye dwell in your homes.

P: So know (O Muhammad) that there is no God save Allah, and ask
forgiveness for thy sin and for believing men and believing women.
Allah knoweth (both) your place of turmoil and your place of rest.

S: So know that there is no god but Allah, and, ask protection for your
fault and for the believing men and the believing women; and Allah
knows the place of your returning and the place of your abiding.

047.020
Y: Those who believe say, "Why is not a sura sent down (for us)?" But
when a sura of basic or categorical meaning is revealed, and fighting
is mentioned therein, thou wilt see those in whose hearts is a disease
looking at thee with a look of one in swoon at the approach of death.
But more fitting for them-

P: And those who believe say: If only a surah were revealed! But when a
decisive surah is revealed and war is mentioned therein, thou seest
those in whose hearts is a disease looking at thee with the look of men
fainting unto death. Therefor woe unto them!

S: And those who believe say: Why has not a Chapter been revealed? But
when a decisive Chapter is revealed, and fighting is mentioned therein
you see those in whose hearts is a disease look to you with the look of
one fainting because of death. Woe to them then!

047.021
Y: Were it to obey and say what is just, and when a matter is resolved
on, it were best for them if they were true to Allah.

P: Obedience and a civil word. Then, when the matter is determined, if
they are loyal to Allah it will be well for them.

S: Obedience and a gentle word (was proper); but when the affair becomes
settled, then if they remain true to Allah it would certainly be better
for them.

047.022
Y: Then, is it to be expected of you, if ye were put in authority, that
ye will do mischief in the land, and break your ties of kith and kin?

P: Would ye then, if ye were given the command, work corruption in the
land and sever your ties of kinship?

S: But if you held command, you were sure to make mischief in the land
and cut off the ties of kinship!

047.023
Y: Such are the men whom Allah has cursed for He has made them deaf and
blinded their sight.

P: Such are they whom Allah curseth so that He deafeneth them and maketh
blind their eyes.

S: Those it is whom Allah has cursed so He has made them deaf and
blinded their eyes.

047.024
Y: Do they not then earnestly seek to understand the Qur'an, or are
their hearts locked up by them?

P: Will they then not meditate on the Qur'an, or are there locks on the
hearts?

S: Do they not then reflect on the Quran? Nay, on the hearts there are
locks.

047.025
Y: Those who turn back as apostates after Guidance was clearly shown to
them,- the Evil One has instigated them and busied them up with false
hopes.

P: Lo! those who turn back after the guidance hath been manifested unto
them, Satan hath seduced them, and He giveth them the rein.

S: Surely (as for) those who return on their backs after that guidance
has become manifest to them, the Shaitan has made it a light matter to
them; and He gives them respite.

047.026
Y: This, because they said to those who hate what Allah has revealed,
"We will obey you in part of (this) matter"; but Allah knows their
(inner) secrets.

P: That is because they say unto those who hate what Allah hath
revealed: We will obey you in some matters; and Allah knoweth their
secret talk.

S: That is because they say to those who hate what Allah has revealed:
We will obey you in some of the affairs; and Allah knows their secrets.

047.027
Y: But how (will it be) when the angels take their souls at death, and
smite their faces and their backs?

P: Then how (will it be with them) when the angels gather them, smiting
their faces and their backs!

S: But how will it be when the angels cause them to die smiting their
backs.

047.028
Y: This because they followed that which called forth the Wrath of
Allah, and they hated Allah's good pleasure; so He made their deeds of
no effect.

P: That will be because they followed that which angereth Allah, and
hated that which pleaseth Him. Therefor He hath made their actions
vain.

S: That is because they follow what is displeasing to Allah and are
averse to His pleasure, therefore He has made null their deeds.

047.029
Y: Or do those in whose hearts is a disease, think that Allah will not
bring to light all their rancour?

P: Or do those in whose hearts is a disease deem that Allah will not
bring to light their (secret) hates?

S: Or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that Allah will not
bring forth their spite?

047.030
Y: Had We so wiled, We could have shown them up to thee, and thou
shouldst have known them by their marks: but surely thou wilt know them
by the tone of their speech! And Allah knows all that ye do.

P: And if We would, We could show them unto thee (Muhammad) so that thou
shouldst know them surely by their marks. And thou shalt know them by
the burden of their talk. And Allah knoweth your deeds.

S: And if We please We would have made you know them so that you would
certainly have recognized them by their marks and most certainly you
can recognize them by the intent of (their) speech; and Allah knows
your deeds.

047.031
Y: And We shall try you until We test those among you who strive their
utmost and persevere in patience; and We shall try your reported
(mettle).

P: And verily We shall try you till We know those of you who strive hard
(for the cause of Allah) and the steadfast, and till We test your
record.

S: And most certainly We will try you until We have known those among
you who exert themselves hard, and the patient, and made your case
manifest.

047.032
Y: Those who reject Allah, hinder (men) from the Path of Allah, and
resist the Messenger, after Guidance has been clearly shown to them,
will not injure Allah in the least, but He will make their deeds of no
effect.

P: Lo! those who disbelieve and turn from the way of Allah and oppose
the messenger after the guidance hath been manifested unto them, they
hurt Allah not a jot, and He will make their actions fruitless.

S: Surely those who disbelieve and turn away from Allah's way and oppose
the Messenger after that guidance has become clear to them cannot harm
Allah in any way, and He will make null their deeds.

047.033
Y: O ye who believe! Obey Allah, and obey the messenger, and make not
vain your deeds!

P: O ye who believe! Obey Allah and obey the messenger, and render not
your actions vain.

S: O you who believe! obey Allah and obey the Messenger, and do not make
your deeds of no effect.

047.034
Y: Those who reject Allah, and hinder (men) from the Path of Allah, then
die rejecting Allah,- Allah will not forgive them.

P: Lo! those who disbelieve and turn from the way of Allah and then die
disbelievers, Allah surely will not pardon them.

S: Surely those who disbelieve and turn away from Allah's way, then they
die while they are unbelievers, Allah will by no means forgive them.

047.035
Y: Be not weary and faint-hearted, crying for peace, when ye should be
uppermost: for Allah is with you, and will never put you in loss for
your (good) deeds.

P: So do not falter and cry out for peace when ye (will be) the
uppermost, and Allah is with you, and He will not grudge (the reward
of) your actions.

S: And be not slack so as to cry for peace and you have the upper hand,
and Allah is with you, and He will not bring your deeds to naught.

047.036
Y: The life of this world is but play and amusement: and if ye believe
and guard against Evil, He will grant you your recompense, and will not
ask you (to give up) your possessions.

P: The life of the world is but a sport and a pastime. And if ye believe
and ward off (evil). He will give you your wages, and will not ask of
you your wordly wealth.

S: The life of this world is only idle sport and play, and if you
believe and guard (against evil) He will give you your rewards, and
will not ask of you your possessions.

047.037
Y: If He were to ask you for all of them, and press you, ye would
covetously withhold, and He would bring out all your ill-feeling.

P: If He should ask it of you and importune you, ye would hoard it, and
He would bring to light your (secret) hates.

S: If He should ask you for it and urge you, you will be niggardly, and
He will bring forth your malice.

047.038
Y: Behold, ye are those invited to spend (of your substance) in the Way
of Allah: But among you are some that are niggardly. But any who are
niggardly are so at the expense of their own souls. But Allah is free
of all wants, and it is ye that are needy. If ye turn back (from the
Path), He will substitute in your stead another people; then they would
not be like you!

P: Lo! ye are those who are called to spend in the way of Allah, yet
among you there are some who hoard. And as for him who hoardeth, he
hoardeth only from his soul. And Allah is the Rich, and ye are the
poor. And if ye turn away He will exchange you for some other folk, and
they will not be the likes of you.

S: Behold! you are those who are called upon to spend in Allah's way,
but among you are those who are niggardly, and whoever is niggardly is
niggardly against his own soul; and Allah is Self-sufficient and you
have need (of Him), and if you turn back He will bring in your place
another people, then they will not be like you.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 48:

                        AL-FATH (VICTORY, CONQUEST)
 Total Verses: 29 Revealed At: MADINA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

048.001
Y: Verily We have granted thee a manifest Victory:

P: Lo! We have given thee (O Muhammad) a signal victory,

S: Surely We have given to you a clear victory

048.002
Y: That Allah may forgive thee thy faults of the past and those to
follow; fulfil His favour to thee; and guide thee on the Straight Way;

P: That Allah may forgive thee of thy sin that which is past and that
which is to come, and may perfect His favour unto thee, and may guide
thee on a right path,

S: That Allah may forgive your community their past faults and those to
follow and complete His favor to you and keep you on a right way,

048.003
Y: And that Allah may help thee with powerful help.

P: And that Allah may help thee with strong help -

S: And that Allah might help you with a mighty help.

048.004
Y: It is He Who sent down tranquillity into the hearts of the Believers,
that they may add faith to their faith;- for to Allah belong the Forces
of the heavens and the earth; and Allah is Full of Knowledge and
Wisdom;-

P: He it is Who sent down peace of reassurance into the hearts of the
believers that they might add faith unto their faith. Allah's are the
hosts of the heavens and the earth, and Allah is ever Knower, Wise -

S: He it is Who sent down tranquillity into the hearts of the believers
that they might have more of faith added to their faith-- and Allah's
are the hosts of the heavens and the earth, and Allah is Knowing,
Wise-

048.005
Y: That He may admit the men and women who believe, to Gardens beneath
which rivers flow, to dwell therein for aye, and remove their ills from
them;- and that is, in the sight of Allah, the highest achievement (for
man),-

P: That He may bring the believing men and the believing women into
Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide, and may
remit from them their evil deeds - That, in the sight of Allah, is the
supreme triumph -

S: That He may cause the believing men and the believing women to enter
gardens beneath which rivers flow to abide therein and remove from them
their evil; and that is a grand achievement with Allah;

048.006
Y: And that He may punish the Hypocrites, men and women, and the
Polytheists, men and women, who imagine an evil opinion of Allah. On
them is a round of Evil: the Wrath of Allah is on them: He has cursed
them and got Hell ready for them: and evil is it for a destination.

P: And may punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women, and
the idolatrous men and the idolatrous women, who think an evil thought
concerning Allah. For them is the evil turn of fortune, and Allah is
wroth against them and hath cursed them, and hath made ready for them
hell, a hapless journey's end.

S: And (that) He may punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical
women, and the polytheistic men and the polytheistic women, the
entertainers of evil thoughts about Allah. On them is the evil turn,
and Allah is wroth with them and has cursed them and prepared hell for
them, and evil is the resort.

048.007
Y: For to Allah belong the Forces of the heavens and the earth; and
Allah is Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom.

P: Allah's are the hosts of the heavens and the earth, and Allah is ever
Mighty, Wise.

S: And Allah's are the hosts of the heavens and the earth; and Allah is
Mighty, Wise.

048.008
Y: We have truly sent thee as a witness, as a bringer of Glad Tidings,
and as a Warner:

P: Lo! We have sent thee (O Muhammad) as a witness and a bearer of good
tidings and a warner,

S: Surely We have sent you as a witness and as a bearer of good news and
as a warner,

048.009
Y: In order that ye (O men) may believe in Allah and His Messenger, that
ye may assist and honour Him, and celebrate His praise morning and
evening.

P: That ye (mankind) may believe in Allah and His messenger, and may
honour Him, and may revere Him, and may glorify Him at early dawn and
at the close of day.

S: That you may believe in Allah and His Messenger and may aid him and
revere him; and (that) you may declare His glory, morning and evening.

048.010
Y: Verily those who plight their fealty to thee do no less than plight
their fealty to Allah: the Hand of Allah is over their hands: then any
one who violates his oath, does so to the harm of his own soul, and any
one who fulfils what he has covenanted with Allah,- Allah will soon
grant him a great Reward.

P: Lo! those who swear allegiance unto thee (Muhammad), swear allegiance
only unto Allah. The Hand of Allah is above their hands. So whosoever
breaketh his oath, breaketh it only to his soul's hurt; while whosoever
keepeth his covenant with Allah, on him will He bestow immense reward.

S: Surely those who swear allegiance to you do but swear allegiance to
Allah; the hand of Allah is above their hands. Therefore whoever breaks
(his faith), he breaks it only to the injury of his own soul, and
whoever fulfills what he has covenanted with Allah, He will grant him a
mighty reward.

048.011
Y: The desert Arabs who lagged behind will say to thee: "We were engaged
in (looking after) our flocks and herds, and our families: do thou then
ask forgiveness for us." They say with their tongues what is not in
their hearts. Say: "Who then has any power at all (to intervene) on
your behalf with Allah, if His Will is to give you some loss or to give
you some profit? But Allah is well acquainted with all that ye do."

P: Those of the wandering Arabs who were left behind will tell thee: Our
possessions and our households occupied us, so ask forgiveness for us!
They speak with their tongues that which is not in their hearts. Say:
Who can avail you aught against Allah, if He intend you hurt or intend
you profit? Nay, but Allah is ever Aware of what ye do.

S: Those of the dwellers of the desert who were left behind will say to
you: Our property and our families kept us busy, so ask forgiveness for
us. They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say: Then
who can control anything for you from Allah if He intends to do you
harm or if He intends to do you good; nay, Allah is Aware of what you
do:

048.012
Y: "Nay, ye thought that the Messenger and the Believers would never
return to their families; this seemed pleasing in your hearts, and ye
conceived an evil thought, for ye are a people lost (in wickedness)."

P: Nay, but ye deemed that the messenger and the believers would never
return to their own folk, and that was made fairseeming in your hearts,
and ye did think an evil thought, and ye were worthless folk.

S: Nay! you rather thought that the Messenger and the believers would
not return to their families ever, and that was made fairseeming to
your hearts and you thought an evil thought and you were a people
doomed to perish.

048.013
Y: And if any believe not in Allah and His Messenger, We have prepared,
for those who reject Allah, a Blazing Fire!

P: And so for him who believeth not in Allah and His messenger - Lo! We
have prepared a flame for disbelievers.

S: And whoever does not believe in Allah and His Messenger, then surely
We have prepared burning fire for the unbelievers.

048.014
Y: To Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth: He
forgives whom He wills, and He punishes whom He wills: but Allah is
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: And Allah's is the Sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. He
forgiveth whom He will, and punisheth whom He will. And Allah is ever
Forgiving, Merciful.

S: And Allah's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He forgives
whom He pleases and punishes whom He pleases, and Allah is Forgiving,
Merciful.

048.015
Y: Those who lagged behind (will say), when ye (are free to) march and
take booty (in war): "Permit us to follow you." They wish to change
Allah's decree: Say: "Not thus will ye follow us: Allah has already
declared (this) beforehand": then they will say, "But ye are jealous of
us." Nay, but little do they understand (such things).

P: Those who were left behind will say, when ye set forth to capture
booty: Let us go with you. They fain would change the verdict of Allah.
Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Ye shall not go with us. Thus hath Allah
said beforehand. Then they will say: Ye are envious of us. Nay, but
they understand not, save a little.

S: Those who are left behind will say when you set forth for the gaining
of acquisitions: Allow us (that) we may follow you. They desire to
change the world of Allah. Say: By no means shall you follow us; thus
did Allah say before. But they will say: Nay! you are jealous of us.
Nay! they do not understand but a little.

048.016
Y: Say to the desert Arabs who lagged behind: "Ye shall be summoned (to
fight) against a people given to vehement war: then shall ye fight, or
they shall submit. Then if ye show obedience, Allah will grant you a
goodly reward, but if ye turn back as ye did before, He will punish you
with a grievous Penalty."

P: Say unto those of the wandering Arabs who were left behind: Ye will
be called against a folk of mighty prowess, to fight them until they
surrender; and if ye obey, Allah will give you a fair reward; but if ye
turn away as ye did turn away before, He will punish you with a painful
doom.

S: Say to those of the dwellers of the desert who were left behind: You
shall soon be invited (to fight) against a people possessing mighty
prowess; you will fight against them until they submit; then if you
obey, Allah will grant you a good reward; and if you turn back as you
turned back before, He will punish you with a painful punishment.

048.017
Y: No blame is there on the blind, nor is there blame on the lame, nor
on one ill (if he joins not the war): But he that obeys Allah and his
Messenger,- (Allah) will admit him to Gardens beneath which rivers
flow; and he who turns back, (Allah) will punish him with a grievous
Penalty.

P: There is no blame for the blind, nor is there blame for the lame, nor
is there blame for the sick (that they go not forth to war). And whoso
obeyeth Allah and His messenger, He will make him enter Gardens
underneath which rivers flow; and whoso turneth back, him will He
punish with a painful doom.

S: There is no harm in the blind, nor is there any harm in the lame, nor
is there any harm in the sick (if they do not go forth); and whoever
obeys Allah and His Messenger, He will cause him to enter gardens
beneath which rivers flow, and whoever turns back, He will punish him
with a painful punishment.

048.018
Y: Allah's Good Pleasure was on the Believers when they swore Fealty to
thee under the Tree: He knew what was in their hearts, and He sent down
Tranquillity to them; and He rewarded them with a speedy Victory;

P: Allah was well pleased with the believers when they swore allegiance
unto thee beneath the tree, and He knew what was in their hearts, and
He sent down peace of reassurance on them, and hath rewarded them with
a near victory;

S: Certainly Allah was well pleased with the believers when they swore
allegiance to you under the tree, and He knew what was in their hearts,
so He sent down tranquillity on them and rewarded them with a near
victory,

048.019
Y: And many gains will they acquire (besides): and Allah is Exalted in
Power, Full of Wisdom.

P: And much booty that they will capture. Allah is ever Mighty, Wise.

S: And many acquisitions which they will take; and Allah is Mighty,
Wise.

048.020
Y: Allah has promised you many gains that ye shall acquire, and He has
given you these beforehand; and He has restrained the hands of men from
you; that it may be a Sign for the Believers, and that He may guide you
to a Straight Path;

P: Allah promiseth you much booty that ye will capture, and hath given
you this in advance, and hath withheld men's hands from you, that it
may be a token for the believers, and that He may guide you on a right
path.

S: Allah promised you many acquisitions which you will take, then He
hastened on this one for you and held back the hands of men from you,
and that it may be a sign for the believers and that He may guide you
on a right path.

048.021
Y: And other gains (there are), which are not within your power, but
which Allah has compassed: and Allah has power over all things.

P: And other (gain), which ye have not been able to achieve, Allah will
compass it, Allah is Able to do all things.

S: And others which you have not yet been able to achieve Allah has
surely encompassed them, and Allah has power over all things.

048.022
Y: If the Unbelievers should fight you, they would certainly turn their
backs; then would they find neither protector nor helper.

P: And if those who disbelieve join battle with you they will take to
flight, and afterward they will find no protecting friend nor helper.

S: And if those who disbelieve fight with you, they would certainly turn
(their) backs, then they would not find any protector or a helper.

048.023
Y: (Such has been) the practice (approved) of Allah already in the past:
no change wilt thou find in the practice (approved) of Allah.

P: It is the law of Allah which hath taken course aforetime. Thou wilt
not find for the law of Allah aught of power to change.

S: Such has been the course of Allah that has indeed run before, and you
shall not find a change in Allah's course.

048.024
Y: And it is He Who has restrained their hands from you and your hands
from them in the midst of Makka, after that He gave you the victory
over them. And Allah sees well all that ye do.

P: And He it is Who hath withheld men's hands from you, and hath
withheld your hands from them, in the valley of Mecca, after He had
made you victors over them. Allah is Seer of what ye do.

S: And He it is Who held back their hands from you and your hands from
them in the valley of Mecca after He had given you victory over them;
and Allah is Seeing what you do.

048.025
Y: They are the ones who denied Revelation and hindered you from the
Sacred Mosque and the sacrificial animals, detained from reaching their
place of sacrifice. Had there not been believing men and believing
women whom ye did not know that ye were trampling down and on whose
account a crime would have accrued to you without (your) knowledge,
(Allah would have allowed you to force your way, but He held back your
hands) that He may admit to His Mercy whom He will. If they had been
apart, We should certainly have punished the Unbelievers among them
with a grievous Punishment.

P: These it was who disbelieved and debarred you from the Inviolable
Place of Worship, and debarred the offering from reaching its goal. And
if it had not been for believing men and believing women, whom ye know
not - lest ye should tread them under foot and thus incur guilt for
them unknowingly; that Allah might bring into His mercy whom He will -
If (the believers and the disbelievers) had been clearly separated We
verily had punished those of them who disbelieved with painful
punishment.

S: It is they who disbelieved and turned you away from the Sacred Mosque
and (turned off) the offering withheld from arriving at its destined
place; and were it not for the believing men and the believing women,
whom, not having known, you might have trodden down, and thus something
hateful might have afflicted you on their account without knowledge--
so that Allah may cause to enter into His mercy whomsoever He pleases;
had they been widely separated one from another, We would surely have
punished those who disbelieved from among them with a painful
punishment.

048.026
Y: While the Unbelievers got up in their hearts heat and cant - the heat
and cant of ignorance,- Allah sent down His Tranquillity to his
Messenger and to the Believers, and made them stick close to the
command of self-restraint; and well were they entitled to it and worthy
of it. And Allah has full knowledge of all things.

P: When those who disbelieve had set up in their hearts zealotry, the
zealotry of the Age of Ignorance, then Allah sent down His peace of
reassurance upon His messenger and upon the believers and imposed on
them the word of self-restraint, for they were worthy of it and meet
for it. And Allah is Aware of all things.

S: When those who disbelieved harbored in their hearts (feelings of)
disdain, the disdain of (the days of) ignorance, but Allah sent down
His tranquillity on His Messenger and on the believers, and made them
keep the word of guarding (against evil), and they were entitled to it
and worthy of it; and Allah is Cognizant of all things.

048.027
Y: Truly did Allah fulfil the vision for His Messenger: ye shall enter
the Sacred Mosque, if Allah wills, with minds secure, heads shaved,
hair cut short, and without fear. For He knew what ye knew not, and He
granted, besides this, a speedy victory.

P: Allah hath fulfilled the vision for His messenger in very truth. Ye
shall indeed enter the Inviolable Place of Worship, if Allah will,
secure, (having your hair) shaven and cut, not fearing. But He knoweth
that which ye know not, and hath given you a near victory beforehand.

S: Certainly Allah had shown to His Messenger the vision with truth: you
shall most certainly enter the Sacred Mosque, if Allah pleases, in
security, (some) having their heads shaved and (others) having their
hair cut, you shall not fear, but He knows what you do not know, so He
brought about a near victory before that.

048.028
Y: It is He Who has sent His Messenger with Guidance and the Religion of
Truth, to proclaim it over all religion: and enough is Allah for a
Witness.

P: He it is Who hath sent His messenger with the guidance and the
religion of truth, that He may cause it to prevail over all religion.
And Allah sufficeth as a Witness.

S: He it is Who sent His Messenger with the guidance and the true
religion that He may make it prevail over all the religions; and Allah
is enough for a witness.

048.029
Y: Muhammad is the messenger of Allah; and those who are with him are
strong against Unbelievers, (but) compassionate amongst each other.
Thou wilt see them bow and prostrate themselves (in prayer), seeking
Grace from Allah and (His) Good Pleasure. On their faces are their
marks, (being) the traces of their prostration. This is their
similitude in the Taurat; and their similitude in the Gospel is: like a
seed which sends forth its blade, then makes it strong; it then becomes
thick, and it stands on its own stem, (filling) the sowers with wonder
and delight. As a result, it fills the Unbelievers with rage at them.
Allah has promised those among them who believe and do righteous deeds
forgiveness, and a great Reward.

P: Muhammad is the messenger of Allah. And those with him are hard
against the disbelievers and merciful among themselves. Thou (O
Muhammad) seest them bowing and falling prostrate (in worship), seeking
bounty from Allah and (His) acceptance. The mark of them is on their
foreheads from the traces of prostration. Such is their likeness in the
Torah and their likeness in the Gospel - like as sown corn that sendeth
forth its shoot and strengtheneth it and riseth firm upon its stalk,
delighting the sowers - that He may enrage the disbelievers with (the
sight of) them. Allah hath promised, unto such of them as believe and
do good works, forgiveness and immense reward.

S: Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah, and those with him are firm of
heart against the unbelievers, compassionate among themselves; you will
see them bowing down, prostrating themselves, seeking grace from Allah
and pleasure; their marks are in their faces because of the effect of
prostration; that is their description in the Taurat and their
description in the Injeel; like as seed-produce that puts forth its
sprout, then strengthens it, so it becomes stout and stands firmly on
its stem, delighting the sowers that He may enrage the unbelievers on
account of them; Allah has promised those among them who believe and do
good, forgiveness and a great reward.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 49:

         AL-HUJRAAT (THE PRIVATE APARTMENTS, THE INNER APARTMENTS)
 Total Verses: 18 Revealed At: MADINA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

049.001
Y: O Ye who believe! Put not yourselves forward before Allah and His
Messenger; but fear Allah: for Allah is He Who hears and knows all
things.

P: O ye who believe! Be not forward in the presence of Allah and His
messenger, and keep your duty to Allah. Lo! Allah is Hearer, Knower.

S: O you who believe! be not forward in the presence of Allah and His
Messenger, and be careful of (your duty to) Allah; surely Allah is
Hearing, Knowing.

049.002
Y: O ye who believe! Raise not your voices above the voice of the
Prophet, nor speak aloud to him in talk, as ye may speak aloud to one
another, lest your deeds become vain and ye perceive not.

P: O ye who believe! Lift not up your voices above the voice of the
Prophet, nor shout when speaking to him as ye shout one to another,
lest your works be rendered vain while ye perceive not.

S: O you who believe! do not raise your voices above the voice of the
Prophet, and do not speak loud to him as you speak loud to one another,
lest your deeds became null while you do not perceive.

049.003
Y: Those that lower their voices in the presence of Allah's Messenger,-
their hearts has Allah tested for piety: for them is Forgiveness and a
great Reward.

P: Lo! they who subdue their voices in the presence of the messenger of
Allah, those are they whose hearts Allah hath proven unto
righteousness. Theirs will be forgiveness and immense reward.

S: Surely those who lower their voices before Allah's Messenger are they
whose hearts Allah has proved for guarding (against evil); they shall
have forgiveness and a great reward.

049.004
Y: Those who shout out to thee from without the inner apartments - most
of them lack understanding.

P: Lo! those who call thee from behind the private apartments, most of
them have no sense.

S: (As for) those who call out to you from behind the private chambers,
surely most of them do not understand.

049.005
Y: If only they had patience until thou couldst come out to them, it
would be best for them: but Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: And if they had had patience till thou camest forth unto them, it had
been better for them. And Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: And if they wait patiently until you come out to them, it would
certainly be better for them, and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

049.006
Y: O ye who believe! If a wicked person comes to you with any news,
ascertain the truth, lest ye harm people unwittingly, and afterwards
become full of repentance for what ye have done.

P: O ye who believe! If an evil-liver bring you tidings, verify it, lest
ye smite some folk in ignorance and afterward repent of what ye did.

S: O you who believe! if an evil-doer comes to you with a report, look
carefully into it, lest you harm a people in ignorance, then be sorry
for what you have done.

049.007
Y: And know that among you is Allah's Messenger: were he, in many
matters, to follow your (wishes), ye would certainly fall into
misfortune: But Allah has endeared the Faith to you, and has made it
beautiful in your hearts, and He has made hateful to you Unbelief,
wickedness, and rebellion: such indeed are those who walk in
righteousness;-

P: And know that the messenger of Allah is among you. If he were to obey
you in much of the government, ye would surely be in trouble; but Allah
hath endeared the faith to you and hath beautified it in your hearts,
and hath made disbelief and lewdness and rebellion hateful unto you.
Such are they who are the rightly guided.

S: And know that among you is Allah's Messenger; should he obey you in
many a matter, you would surely fall into distress, but Allah has
endeared the faith to you and has made it seemly in your hearts, and He
has made hateful to you unbelief and transgression and disobedience;
these it is that are the followers of a right way.

049.008
Y: A Grace and Favour from Allah; and Allah is full of Knowledge and
Wisdom.

P: (It is) a bounty and a grace from Allah; and Allah is Knower, Wise.

S: By grace from Allah and as a favor; and Allah is Knowing, Wise.

049.009
Y: If two parties among the Believers fall into a quarrel, make ye peace
between them: but if one of them transgresses  beyond bounds against the
other, then fight ye (all) against the one that transgresses until it
complies with the command of Allah; but if it complies, then make peace
between them with justice, and be fair: for Allah loves those who
are fair (and just).

P: And if two parties of believers fall to fighting, then make peace
between them. And if one party of them doeth wrong to the other, fight
ye that which doeth wrong till it return unto the ordinance of Allah;
then, if it return, make peace between them justly, and act equitably.
Lo! Allah loveth the equitable.

S: And if two parties of the believers quarrel, make peace between them;
but if one of them acts wrongfully towards the other, fight that which
acts wrongfully until it returns to Allah's command; then if it
returns, make peace between them with justice and act equitably; surely
Allah loves those who act equitably.

049.010
Y: The Believers are but a single Brotherhood: So make peace and
reconciliation between your two (contending) brothers; and fear Allah,
that ye may receive Mercy.

P: The believers are naught else than brothers. Therefore make peace
between your brethren and observe your duty to Allah that haply ye may
obtain mercy.

S: The believers are but brethren, therefore make peace between your
brethren and be careful of (your duty to) Allah that mercy may be had
on you.

049.011
Y: O ye who believe! Let not some men among you laugh at others: It may
be that the (latter) are better than the (former): Nor let some women
laugh at others: It may be that the (latter) are better than the
(former): Nor defame nor be sarcastic to each other, nor call each
other by (offensive) nicknames: Ill-seeming is a name connoting
wickedness, (to be used of one) after he has believed: And those who do
not desist are (indeed) doing wrong.

P: O ye who believe! Let not a folk deride a folk who may be better than
they (are), not let women (deride) women who may be better than they
are; neither defame one another, nor insult one another by nicknames.
Bad is the name of lewdness after faith. And whoso turneth not in
repentance, such are evil-doers.

S: O you who believe! let not (one) people laugh at (another) people
perchance they may be better than they, nor let women (laugh) at
(other) women, perchance they may be better than they; and do not find
fault with your own people nor call one another by nicknames; evil is a
bad name after faith, and whoever does not turn, these it is that are
the unjust.

049.012
Y: O ye who believe! Avoid suspicion as much (as possible): for
suspicion in some cases is a sin: And spy not on each other behind
their backs. Would any of you like to eat the flesh of his dead
brother? Nay, ye would abhor it...But fear Allah: For Allah is
Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

P: O ye who believe! Shun much suspicion; for lo! some suspicion is a
crime. And spy not, neither backbite one another. Would one of you love
to eat the flesh of his dead brother? Ye abhor that (so abhor the
other)! And keep your duty (to Allah). Lo! Allah is Relenting,
Merciful.

S: O you who believe! avoid most of suspicion, for surely suspicion in
some cases is a sin, and do not spy nor let some of you backbite
others. Does one of you like to eat the flesh of his dead brother? But
you abhor it; and be careful of (your duty to) Allah, surely Allah is
Oft-returning (to mercy), Merciful.

049.013
Y: O mankind! We created you from a single (pair) of a male and a
female, and made you into nations and tribes, that ye may know each
other (not that ye may despise each other). Verily the most honoured
of you in the sight of Allah is (he who is) the most righteous of you.
And Allah has full knowledge and is well acquainted (with all things).

P: O mankind! Lo! We have created you male and female, and have made you
nations and tribes that ye may know one another. Lo! the noblest of
you, in the sight of Allah, is the best in conduct. Lo! Allah is
Knower, Aware.

S: O you men! surely We have created you of a male and a female, and
made you tribes and families that you may know each other; surely the
most honorable of you with Allah is the one among you most careful (of
his duty); surely Allah is Knowing, Aware.

049.014
Y: The desert Arabs say, "We believe." Say, "Ye have no faith; but ye
(only) say, 'We have submitted our wills to Allah,' For not yet has
Faith entered your hearts. But if ye obey Allah and His Messenger, He
will not belittle aught of your deeds: for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful."

P: The wandering Arabs say: We believe. Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Ye
believe not, but rather say "We submit," for the faith hath not yet
entered into your hearts. Yet, if ye obey Allah and His messenger, He
will not withhold from you aught of (the reward of) your deeds. Lo!
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: The dwellers of the desert say: We believe. Say: You do not believe
but say, We submit; and faith has not yet entered into your hearts; and
if you obey Allah and His Messenger, He will not diminish aught of your
deeds; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

049.015
Y: Only those are Believers who have believed in Allah and His
Messenger, and have never since doubted, but have striven with their
belongings and their persons in the Cause of Allah: Such are the
sincere ones.

P: The (true) believers are those only who believe in Allah and His
messenger and afterward doubt not, but strive with their wealth and
their lives for the cause of Allah. Such are the sincere.

S: The believers are only those who believe in Allah and His Messenger
then they doubt not and struggle hard with their wealth and their lives
in the way of Allah; they are the truthful ones.

049.016
Y: Say: "What! Will ye instruct Allah about your religion? But Allah
knows all that is in the heavens and on earth: He has full knowledge of
all things."

P: Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Would ye teach Allah your religion, when
Allah knoweth all that is in the heavens and all that is in the earth,
and Allah is Aware of all things?

S: Say: Do you apprise Allah of your religion, and Allah knows what is
in the heavens and what is in the earth; and Allah is Cognizant of all
things.

049.017
Y: They impress on thee as a favour that they have embraced Islam. Say,
"Count not your Islam as a favour upon me: Nay, Allah has conferred a
favour upon you that He has guided you to the faith, if ye be true and
sincere."

P: They make it a favour unto thee (Muhammad) that they have surrendered
(unto Him). Say: Deem not your Surrender a favour unto me; but Allah
doth confer a favour on you, inasmuch as He hath led you to the Faith,
if ye are earnest.

S: They think that they lay you under an obligation by becoming Muslims.
Say: Lay me not under obligation by your Islam: rather Allah lays you
under an obligation by guiding you to the faith if you are truthful.

049.018
Y: "Verily Allah knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth: and
Allah Sees well all that ye do."

P: Lo! Allah knoweth the Unseen of the heavens and the earth. And Allah
is Seer of what ye do.

S: Surely Allah knows the unseen things of the heavens and the earth;
and Allah sees what you do.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 50:

                            QAF (THE LETTER QAF)
 Total Verses: 45 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

050.001
Y: Qaf: By the Glorious Qur'an (Thou art Allah's Messenger).

P: Qaf. By the Glorious Qur'an,

S: Qaf. I swear by the glorious Quran (that Muhammad is the Messenger of
Allah)

050.002
Y: But they wonder that there has come to them a Warner from among
themselves. So the Unbelievers say: "This is a wonderful thing!"

P: Nay, but they marvel that a warner of their own hath come unto them;
and the disbelievers say: This is a strange thing:

S: Nay! they wonder that there has come to them a warner from among
themselves, so the unbelievers say: This is a wonderful thing:

050.003
Y: "What! When we die and become dust, (shall we live again?) That is a
(sort of) return far (from our understanding)."

P: When we are dead and have become dust (shall we be brought back
again)? That would be a far return!

S: What! when we are dead and have become dust? That is afar (from
probable) return.

050.004
Y: We already know how much of them the earth takes away: With Us is a
record guarding (the full account).

P: We know that which the earth taketh of them, and with Us is a
recording Book.

S: We know indeed what the earth diminishes of them, and with Us is a
writing that preserves.

050.005
Y: But they deny the Truth when it comes to them: so they are in a
confused state.

P: Nay, but they have denied the truth when it came unto them, therefor
they are now in troubled case.

S: Nay, they rejected the truth when it came to them, so they are (now)
in a state of confusion.

050.006
Y: Do they not look at the sky above them?- How We have made it and
adorned it, and there are no flaws in it?

P: Have they not then observed the sky above them, how We have
constructed it and beautified it, and how there are no rifts therein?

S: Do they not then look up to heaven above them how We have made it and
adorned it and it has no gaps?

050.007
Y: And the earth- We have spread it out, and set thereon mountains
standing firm, and produced therein every kind of beautiful growth (in
pairs)-

P: And the earth have We spread out, and have flung firm hills therein,
and have caused of every lovely kind to grow thereon,

S: And the earth, We have made it plain and cast in it mountains and We
have made to grow therein of all beautiful kinds,

050.008
Y: To be observed and commemorated by every devotee turning (to Allah).

P: A vision and a reminder for every penitent slave.

S: To give sight and as a reminder to every servant who turns frequently
(to Allah).

050.009
Y: And We send down from the sky rain charted with blessing, and We
produce therewith gardens and Grain for harvests;

P: And We send down from the sky blessed water whereby We give growth
unto gardens and the grain of crops,

S: And We send down from the cloud water abounding in good, then We
cause to grow thereby gardens and the grain that is reaped,

050.010
Y: And tall (and stately) palm-trees, with shoots of fruit-stalks, piled
one over another;-

P: And lofty date-palms with ranged clusters,

S: And the tall palm-trees having spadices closely set one above
another,

050.011
Y: As sustenance for (Allah's) Servants;- and We give (new) life
therewith to land that is dead: Thus will be the Resurrection.

P: Provision (made) for men; and therewith We quicken a dead land. Even
so will be the resurrection of the dead.

S: A sustenance for the servants, and We give life thereby to a dead
land; thus is the rising.

050.012
Y: Before them was denied (the Hereafter) by the People of Noah, the
Companions of the Rass, the Thamud,

P: The folk of Noah denied (the truth) before them, and (so did) the
dwellers at Ar-Rass and (the tribe of) Thamud,

S: (Others) before them rejected (prophets): the people of Nuh and the
dwellers of Ar-Rass and Samood,

050.013
Y: The 'Ad, Pharaoh, the brethren of Lut,

P: And (the tribe of) A'ad, and Pharaoh, and the brethren of Lot,

S: And Ad and Firon and Lut's brethren,

050.014
Y: The Companions of the Wood, and the People of Tubba'; each one (of
them) rejected the messengers, and My warning was duly fulfilled (in
them).

P: And the dwellers in the wood, and the folk of Tubb'a: every one
denied their messengers, therefor My threat took effect.

S: And the dwellers of the grove and the people of Tuba; all rejected
the messengers, so My threat came to pass.

050.015
Y: Were We then weary with the first creation, that they should be in
confused doubt about a new Creation?

P: Were We then worn out by the first creation? Yet they are in doubt
about a new creation.

S: Were We then fatigued with the first creation? Yet are they in doubt
with regard to a new creation.

050.016
Y: It was We Who created man, and We know what dark suggestions his soul
makes to him: for We are nearer to him than (his) jugular vein.

P: We verily created man and We know what his soul whispereth to him,
and We are nearer to him than his jugular vein.

S: And certainly We created man, and We know what his mind suggests to
him, and We are nearer to him than his life-vein.

050.017
Y: Behold, two (guardian angels) appointed to learn (his doings) learn
(and noted them), one sitting on the right and one on the left.

P: When the two Receivers receive (him), seated on the right hand and on
the left,

S: When the two receivers receive, sitting on the right and on the left.

050.018
Y: Not a word does he utter but there is a sentinel by him, ready (to
note it).

P: He uttereth no word but there is with him an observer ready.

S: He utters not a word but there is by him a watcher at hand.

050.019
Y: And the stupor of death will bring Truth (before his eyes): "This was
the thing which thou wast trying to escape!"

P: And the agony of death cometh in truth. (And it is said unto him):
This is that which thou wast wont to shun.

S: And the stupor of death will come in truth; that is what you were
trying to escape.

050.020
Y: And the Trumpet shall be blown: that will be the Day whereof Warning
(had been given).

P: And the trumpet is blown. This is the threatened Day.

S: And the trumpet shall be blown; that is the day of the threatening.

050.021
Y: And there will come forth every soul: with each will be an (angel) to
drive, and an (angel) to bear witness.

P: And every soul cometh, along with it a driver and a witness.

S: And every soul shall come, with it a driver and a witness.

050.022
Y: (It will be said:) "Thou wast heedless of this; now have We removed
thy veil, and sharp is thy sight this Day!"

P: (And unto the evil-doer it is said): Thou wast in heedlessness of
this. Now We have removed from thee thy covering, and piercing is thy
sight this day.

S: Certainly you were heedless of it, but now We have removed from you
your veil, so your sight today is sharp.

050.023
Y: And his Companion will say: "Here is (his Record) ready with me!"

P: And (unto the evil-doer) his comrade saith: This is that which I have
ready (as testimony).

S: And his companions shall say: This is what is ready with me.

050.024
Y: (The sentence will be:) "Throw, throw into Hell every contumacious
Rejecter (of Allah)!"-

P: (And it is said): Do ye twain hurl to hell each rebel ingrate,

S: Do cast into hell every ungrateful, rebellious one,

050.025
Y: "Who forbade what was good, transgressed all bounds, cast doubts and
suspicions;"

P: Hinderer of good, transgressor, doubter,

S: Forbidder of good, exceeder of limits, doubter,

050.026
Y: "Who set up another god beside Allah: Throw him into a severe
penalty."

P: Who setteth up another god along with Allah. Do ye twain hurl him to
the dreadful doom.

S: Who sets up another god with Allah, so do cast him into severe
chastisement.

050.027
Y: His Companion will say: "Our Lord! I did not make him transgress, but
he was (himself) far astray."

P: His comrade saith: Our Lord! I did not cause him to rebel, but he was
(himself) far gone in error.

S: His companion will say: Our Lord! I did not lead him into inordinacy
but he himself was in a great error.

050.028
Y: He will say: "Dispute not with each other in My Presence: I had
already in advance sent you Warning."

P: He saith: Contend not in My presence, when I had already proffered
unto you the warning.

S: He will say: Do not quarrel in My presence, and indeed I gave you the
threatening beforehand:

050.029
Y: "The Word changes not before Me, and I do not the least injustice to
My Servants."

P: The sentence that cometh from Me cannot be changed, and I am in no
wise a tyrant unto the slaves.

S: My word shall not be changed, nor am I in the least unjust to the
servants.

050.030
Y: One Day We will ask Hell, "Art thou filled to the full?" It will say,
"Are there any more (to come)?"

P: On the day when We say unto hell: Art thou filled? and it saith: Can
there be more to come?

S: On the day that We will say to hell: Are you filled up? And it will
say: Are there any more?

050.031
Y: And the Garden will be brought nigh to the Righteous,- no more a
thing distant.

P: And the Garden is brought nigh for those who kept from evil, no
longer distant.

S: And the garden shall be brought near to those who guard (against
evil), not far off:

050.032
Y: (A voice will say:) "This is what was promised for you,- for every
one who turned (to Allah) in sincere repentance, who kept (His Law),"

P: (And it is said): This is that which ye were promised. (It is) for
every penitent and heedful one,

S: This is what you were promised, (it is) for every one who turns
frequently (to Allah), keeps (His limits);

050.033
Y: "Who feared (Allah) Most Gracious Unseen, and brought a heart turned
in devotion (to Him):"

P: Who feareth the Beneficent in secret and cometh with a contrite
heart.

S: Who fears the Beneficent Allah in secret and comes with a penitent
heart:

050.034
Y: "Enter ye therein in Peace and Security; this is a Day of Eternal
Life!"

P: Enter it in peace. This is the day of immortality.

S: Enter it in peace, that is the day of abiding.

050.035
Y: There will be for them therein all that they wish, and more besides
in Our Presence.

P: There they have all that they desire, and there is more with Us.

S: They have therein what they wish and with Us is more yet.

050.036
Y: But how many generations before them did We destroy (for their
sins),- stronger in power than they? Then did they wander through the
land: was there any place of escape (for them)?

P: And how many a generation We destroyed before them, who were mightier
than these in prowess so that they overran the lands! Had they any
place of refuge (when the judgment came)?

S: And how many a generation did We destroy before them who were
mightier in prowess than they, so they went about and about in the
lands. Is there a place of refuge?

050.037
Y: Verily in this is a Message for any that has a heart and
understanding or who gives ear and earnestly witnesses (the truth).

P: Lo! therein verily is a reminder for him who hath a heart, or giveth
ear with full intelligence.

S: Most surely there is a reminder in this for him who has a heart or he
gives ear and is a witness.

050.038
Y: We created the heavens and the earth and all between them in Six
Days, nor did any sense of weariness touch Us.

P: And verily We created the heavens and the earth, and all that is
between them, in six Days, and naught of weariness touched Us.

S: And certainly We created the heavens and the earth and what is
between them in six periods and there touched Us not any fatigue.

050.039
Y: Bear, then, with patience, all that they say, and celebrate the
praises of thy Lord, before the rising of the sun and before (its)
setting.

P: Therefor (O Muhammad) bear with what they say, and hymn the praise of
thy Lord before the rising and before the setting of the sun;

S: Therefore be patient of what they say, and sing the praise of your
Lord before the rising of the sun and before the setting.

050.040
Y: And during part of the night, (also,) celebrate His praises, and (so
likewise) after the postures of adoration.

P: And in the night-time hymn His praise, and after the (prescribed)
prostrations.

S: And glorify Him in the night and after the prayers.

050.041
Y: And listen for the Day when the Caller will call out from a place
quiet near,-

P: And listen on the day when the crier crieth from a near place,

S: And listen on the day when the crier shall cry from a near place

050.042
Y: The Day when they will hear a (mighty) Blast in (very) truth: that
will be the Day of Resurrection.

P: The day when they will hear the (Awful) Cry in truth. That is the day
of coming forth (from the graves).

S: The day when they shall hear the cry in truth; that is the day of
coming forth.

050.043
Y: Verily it is We Who give Life and Death; and to Us is the Final Goal-

P: Lo! We it is Who quicken and give death, and unto Us is the
journeying.

S: Surely We give life and cause to die, and to Us is the eventual
coming;

050.044
Y: The Day when the Earth will be rent asunder, from (men) hurrying out:
that will be a gathering together,- quite easy for Us.

P: On the day when the earth splitteth asunder from them, hastening
forth (they come). That is a gathering easy for Us (to make).

S: The day on which the earth shall cleave asunder under them, they will
make haste; that is a gathering together easy to Us.

050.045
Y: We know best what they say; and thou art not one to overawe them by
force. So admonish with the Qur'an such as fear My Warning!

P: We are Best Aware of what they say, and thou (O Muhammad) art in no
wise a compeller over them. But warn by the Qur'an him who feareth My
threat.

S: We know best what they say, and you are not one to compel them;
therefore remind him by means of the Quran who fears My threat.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 51:

                     ADH-DHARIYAT (THE WINNOWING WINDS)
 Total Verses: 60 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

051.001
Y: By the (Winds) that scatter broadcast;

P: By those that winnow with a winnowing

S: I swear by the wind that scatters far and wide,

051.002
Y: And those that lift and bear away heavy weights;

P: And those that bear the burden (of the rain)

S: Then those clouds bearing the load (of minute things in space).

051.003
Y: And those that flow with ease and gentleness;

P: And those that glide with ease (upon the sea)

S: Then those (ships) that glide easily,

051.004
Y: And those that distribute and apportion by Command;-

P: And those who distribute (blessings) by command,

S: Then those (angels who) distribute blessings by Our command;

051.005
Y: Verily that which ye are promised is true;

P: Lo! that wherewith ye are threatened is indeed true,

S: What you are threatened with is most surely true,

051.006
Y: And verily Judgment and Justice must indeed come to pass.

P: And lo! the judgment will indeed befall.

S: And the judgment must most surely come about.

051.007
Y: By the Sky with (its) numerous Paths,

P: By the heaven full of paths,

S: I swear by the heaven full of ways.

051.008
Y: Truly ye are in a doctrine discordant,

P: Lo! ye, forsooth, are of various opinion (concerning the truth).

S: Most surely you are at variance with each other in what you say,

051.009
Y: Through which are deluded (away from the Truth) such as would be
deluded.

P: He is made to turn away from it who is (himself) averse.

S: He is turned away from it who would be turned away.

