Neither need you contemplate the absolute. Hold fast to the love of
Hari's name. Says Nama, be steadfast in singing the name and then Hari
will appear to you."[642]

Tukaram is better known than Namdev and his poetry which was part of
the intellectual awakening that accompanied the rise of the Maratha
power is still a living force wherever Marathi is spoken. He lived
from 1607 to 1649 and was born in a family of merchants near Poona.
But he was too generous to succeed in trade and a famine, in which one
of his two wives died, brought him to poverty. Thenceforth he devoted
himself to praying and preaching. He developed a great aptitude for
composing rhyming songs in irregular metre,[643] and like Caitanya he
held services consisting of discourses interspersed with such songs,
prepared or extempore. In spite of persecution by the Brahmans, these
meetings became very popular and were even attended by the great
Sivaji.

His creed is the same as that of Namdev and finds expression in verses
such as these. "This thy nature is beyond the grasp of mind or words,
and therefore I have made love a measure. I measure the Endless by the
measure of love: he is not to be truly measured otherwise. Thou art
not to be found by Yoga, sacrifice, fasting, bodily exertions or
knowledge. O Kesava, accept the service which we render."

But if he had no use for asceticism he also feared the passions. "The
Endless is beyond; between him and me are the lofty mountains of
desire and anger. I cannot ascend them and find no pass." In poems
which are apparently later, his tone is more peaceful. He speaks much
of the death of self, of purity of heart, and of self-dedication to
God. "Dedicate all you do to God and have done with it: Tuka says, do
not ask me again and again: nothing else is to be taught but this."

Maratha critics have discussed whether Tukaram followed the monistic
philosophy of Sankara or not and it must be confessed that his
utterances are contradictory. But the gist of the matter is that he
disliked not so much monism as philosophy. Hence he says "For me there
is no use in the Advaita. Sweet to me is the service of thy feet. The
relation between God and his devotee is a source of high joy. Make me
feel this, keeping me distinct from thee." But he can also say almost
in the language of the Upanishads. "When salt is dissolved in water,
what remains distinct? I have thus become one in joy with thee and
have lost myself in thee. When fire and camphor are brought together,
is there any black remnant? Tuka says, thou and I were one light."


5


There are interesting Vishnuite sects in Assam.[644] Until the
sixteenth century Hinduism was represented in those regions by
Saktism, which was strong among the upper classes, though the mass of
the people still adhered to their old tribal worships. The first
apostle of Vishnuism was Sankar Deb in the sixteenth century. He
preached first in the Ahom kingdom but was driven out by the
opposition of Saktist Brahmans, and found a refuge at Barpeta. He
appears to have inculcated the worship of Krishna as the sole divine
being and to have denounced idolatry, sacrifices and caste. These
views were held even more strictly by his successor, Madhab Deb, a
writer of repute whose works, such as the Namghosha and Ratnavali, are
regarded as scripture by his followers. Though the Brahmans of Assam
were opposed to the introduction of Vishnuism and a section of them
continued to instigate persecutions for two centuries or more, yet
when it became clear that the new teaching had a great popular
following another section were anxious that it should not pass out of
sacerdotal control and organized it as a legitimate branch of
Hinduism. While fully recognizing the doctrine of justification by
faith, they also made provision for due respect to caste and Brahmanic
authority.

According to the last census of India[645] the common view that
Sankar Deb drew his inspiration from Caitanya meets with criticism in
Assam. His biographies say that he lived 120 years and died in 1569.
It has been generally assumed that his age has been exaggerated but
that the date of his death is correct. If it can be proved, as
contended, that he was preaching in 1505, there would be no difficulty
in admitting that he was independent of Caitanya and belonged to an
earlier phase of the Vishnuite movement which produced the activity of
Vallabha and the poetry of Vidyapati. It is a further argument for
this independence that he taught the worship of Vishnu only and not
of Radha and discountenanced the use of images. On the other hand it
is stated that he sojourned in Bengal and it appears that soon after
his death his connection with the teaching of Caitanya was recognized
in Assam.

At present there are three sects in Assam. Firstly, the Mahapurushias,
who follow more or less faithfully the doctrines of Sankar and
Madhab. They admit Sudras as religious teachers and abbots, and lay
little stress on caste while not entirely rejecting it. They abstain
almost entirely from the use of images in worship, the only exception
being that a small figure of Krishna in the form of Vaikuntha
Natha is found in their temples. It is not the principal object of
veneration but stands to the left of a throne on which lies a copy of
the Namghosha.[646] This, together with the foot-prints of Sankar and
Madhab, receives the homage of the faithful. The chief centre of the
Mahapurushias is Barpeta, but they have also monasteries on the Majuli
Island and elsewhere. Secondly, the Bamunia monasteries, with a large
lay following, represent a brahmanized form of the Mahapurushia faith.
This movement began in the life-time of Madhab. Many of his Brahman
disciples seceded from him and founded separate communities which
insisted on the observance of caste (especially on the necessity of
religious teachers being Brahmans) but tolerated image-worship and the
use of some kinds of flesh as food. Though this sect was persecuted by
the Ahom kings,[647] they were strong enough to maintain themselves. A
compromise was effected in the reign of Rudra Singh (1696-1714), by
which their abbots were shown all honour but were assigned the Majuli
Island in the upper Brahmaputra as their chief, if not only,
residence. This island is still studded with numerous _Sattras_ or
monasteries, the largest of which contain three or four hundred monks,
known as Bhakats (Bhaktas). They take no vows and wear no special
costume but are obliged to be celibate while they remain in the
sattra. The Mahapurushia and Bamunia monasteries are of similar
appearance, and in externals (though not in doctrine) seem to have
been influenced by the Lamaism of the neighbouring regions of Sikhim
and Tibet. The temples are long, low, wooden buildings, covered by
roofs of corrugated iron or thatched, and containing inside a nave
with two rows of wooden pillars which leads to a sanctuary divided
from it by a screen. The third sect are the Moamarias, of political
rather than religious importance. They represent a democratic element,
recruited from non-Hindu tribes, which seceded even in the life-time
of Sankar Deb. They appear to reject nearly all Hindu observances and
to worship aboriginal deities as well as Krishna. Little is known of
their religious teaching, if indeed they have anything worthy of the
name, but in the latter half of the eighteenth century they distracted
the kingdom of Assam with a series of rebellions which were suppressed
with atrocious cruelty.

Caitanya is said to have admitted some Mohammedans as members of his
sect. The precedent has not been followed among most branches of his
later adherents but a curious half-secret sect, found throughout
Bengal in considerable numbers and called Kartabhajas,[648] appears to
represent an eccentric development of his teaching in combination with
Mohammedan elements. Both Moslims and Hindus belong to this sect. They
observe the ordinary social customs of the class to which they belong,
but it is said that those who are nominal Moslims neither circumcize
themselves nor frequent mosques. The founder, called Ram Smaran Pal,
was born in the Nadia district about 1700, and his chief doctrine is
said to have been that there is only one God who is incarnate in the
Head of the sect or Karta.[649] For the first few generations the
headship was invested in the founder and his descendants but
dissensions occurred and there is now no one head: the faithful can
select any male member of the founder's family as the object of their
devotion. The Karta claims to be the owner of every human body and is
said to exact rent for the soul's tenancy thereof. No distinction of
caste or creed is recognized and hardly any ceremonies are prescribed
but meat and wine are forbidden, the mantra of the sect is to be
repeated five times a day and Friday is held sacred. These observances
seem an imitation of Mohammedanism.[650]


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 604: See Bhandarkar, _Vaishn. and Saivism_, pp. 66 ff.,
Grierson in _Ind. Ant._ 1893, p. 226, and also in article Ramanandi in
_E.R.E._; Farquhar, _J.R.A.S._1920, pp. 185 ff. Though Indian
tradition seems to be unanimous in giving 1299 A.D. (4400 Kali) as the
date of Ramanand's birth, all that we know about himself and his
disciples makes it more probable that he was born nearly a century
later. The history of ideas, too, becomes clear and intelligible if we
suppose that Ramanand, Kabir and Nanak flourished about 1400, 1450 and
1500 respectively. One should be cautious in allowing such arguments
to outweigh unanimous tradition, but tradition also assigns to
Ramanand an improbably long life, thus indicating a feeling that he
influenced the fifteenth century. Also the traditions as to the number
of teachers between Ramanuja and Ramanand differ greatly.]

[Footnote 605: One of them is found in the Granth of the Sikhs.]

[Footnote 606: Ramanand's maxim was "Jati pati puchai nahikoi: Hari-ku
bhajai so Hari-kau hoi." Let no one ask a man's caste or sect. Whoever
adores God, he is God's own.]

[Footnote 607: Bhattacharya, _Hindu Castes and Sects_, p. 445.]

[Footnote 608: Thus we have the poems of Kabir, Nanak and others
contained in the Granth of the Sikhs and tending to Mohammedanism: the
hymns wherein Mira Bai, Vallabha and his disciples praised Krishna
in Rajputana and Braj: the poets inspired by Caitanya in Bengal:
Sankar Deb and Madhab Deb in Assam: Namdev and Tukaram in the Maratha
country.]

[Footnote 609: See Beames, _J.A._ 1873, pp. 37 ff., and Grierson,
_Maithili Christomathy_, pp. 34 ff., in extra No. to _Journ. As. Soc.
Bengal_, Part I. for 1882 and Coomaraswamy's illustrated translation
of Vidyapati, 1915. It is said that a land grant proves he was a
celebrated Pandit in 1400. The Bengali Vaishnava poet Chandi Das
was his contemporary.]

[Footnote 610: See Grierson, Gleanings from the Bhaktamala, _J.R.A.S._
1909 and 1910.]

[Footnote 611: _Modern Vernacular Literature of Hindustan_, 1889, p.
57.]

[Footnote 612: Similarly Dinesh Chandra Sen (_Lang, and Lit. of
Bengal_, p. 170) says that Krittivasa's translation of the Ramayana
"is the Bible of the people of the Gangetic Valley and it is for the
most part the peasants who read it." Krittivasa was born in 1346 and
roughly contemporary with Ramanand. Thus the popular interest in Rama
was roused in different provinces at the same time.

He also wrote several other poems, among which may be mentioned the
Gitavali and Kavittavali, dedicated respectively to the infancy and
the heroic deeds of Rama, and the Vinaya Pattrika or petition, a
volume of hymns and prayers.]

[Footnote 613: See Growse's _Translation_, vol. I. pp. 60, 62.]

[Footnote 614: Ib. vol. III. p. 190, cf. vol. I. p. 88 and vol. III.
pp. 66-67.]

[Footnote 615: Ib. vol. II. p. 54.]

[Footnote 616: Ib. vol. I. p. 77.]

[Footnote 617: Growse, _l.c._ vol. II. p. 200, cf. p. 204. Maya who sets
the whole world dancing and whose actions no one can understand is
herself set dancing with all her troupe, like an actress on the stage,
by the play of the Lord's eyebrows. Cf. too, for the infinity of
worlds, pp. 210, 211.]

[Footnote 618: Growse aptly compares St. Paul, "I had not known evil
but by the law."]

[Footnote 619: Ib. vol. II. p. 223.]

[Footnote 620: Ib. vol. II. p. 196.]

[Footnote 621: The Vishnuite sect called Nimavat is said to have been
exterminated by Jains (Grierson in _E.R.E._ sub. V. Bhakti-marga, p.
545). This may point to persecution during this period.]

[Footnote 622: For Vallabhacarya and his sect, see especially Growse,
_Mathura, a district memoir_, 1874; _History of the sect of the
Maharajas in western India_ (anonymous), 1865. Also Bhandarkar,
_Vaishn. and Saivism_, pp. 76-82 and Farquhar, _Outlines of Relig.
Lit. of India_, pp. 312-317.]

[Footnote 623: The principal of them are the Siddhanta-Rahasya and the
Bhagavata-Tika-Subodhini, a commentary on the Bhagavata Purana. This
is a short poem of only seventeen lines printed in Growse's _Mathura_,
p. 156. It professes to be a revelation from the deity to the
effect that sin can be done away with by union with Brahma
(Brahma-sambandha-karanat). Other authoritative works of the sect are
the Suddhadvaita martanda, Sakalacaryamatasangraha and
Prameyaratnarnava, all edited in the Chowkhamba Sanskrit series.]

[Footnote 624: Cf. the use of the word poshanam in the Bhagavata
Purana, II. X.]

[Footnote 625: Growse, _Mathura_, p. 157, says this formula is based
on the Naradapancaratra. It is called Samarpana, dedication, or
Brahma-sambandha, connecting oneself with the Supreme Being.]

[Footnote 626: For instance "Whoever holds his Guru and Krishna to
be distinct and different shall be born again as a bird." Harirayaji
32. Quoted in _History of the Sect of the Maharajas_, p. 82.]

[Footnote 627: In the ordinary ceremonial the Maharaj stands beside
the image of Krishna and acknowledges the worship offered. Sometimes
he is swung in a swing with or without the image. The hymns sung on
these occasions are frequently immoral. Even more licentious are the
meetings or dances known as Ras Mandali and Ras Lila. A meal of hot
food seasoned with aphrodisiacs is also said to be provided in the
temples. The water in which the Maharaj's linen or feet have been
washed is sold for a high price and actually drunk by devotees.]

[Footnote 628: Strictly speaking the Radha-Vallabhis are not an
offshoot of Vallabha's school, but of the Nimavats or of the
Madhva-sampradaya. The theory underlying their strange practices seems
to be that Krishna is the only male and that all mankind should
cultivate sentiments of female love for him. See Macnicol, _Indian
Theism_, p. 134.]

[Footnote 629: But other explanations are current such as Lord of the
senses or Lord of the Vedas.]

[Footnote 630: See Growse, _Mathura_, p. 153. I can entirely confirm
what he says. This mean, inartistic, dirty place certainly suggests
moral depravity.]

[Footnote 631: His real name was Sahajananda.]

[Footnote 632: Caran Das (1703-1782) founded a somewhat similar sect
which professed to abolish idolatry and laid great stress on ethics.
See Grierson's article Caran Das in _E.R.E._]

[Footnote 633: But Vishnuite writers distinguish _kama_ desire and
_prema_ love, just as [Greek: _eros_] and [Greek: _haghape_] are
distinguished in Greek. See Dinesh Chandra Sen, _l.c._ p. 485.]

[Footnote 634: Dinesh Chandra Sen, _History of Bengali Language and
Literature_, pp. 134-5.]

[Footnote 635: For Caitanya see Dinesh Chandra Sen, _History of
Bengali Language and Lit._ chap. V. and Jadunath Sarkar, _Chaitanya's
Pilgrimages and teachings from the Caitanya-Caritamrita_ of Krishna
Das (1590) founded on the earlier Caitanya-Caritra of Brindavan.
Several of Caitanya's followers were also voluminous writers.]

[Footnote 636: He married the daughter of a certain Vallabha who
apparently was not the founder of the Sect, as is often stated.]

[Footnote 637: The theology of the sect may be studied in Baladeva's
commentary on the Vedanta sutras and his Prameya Ratnavali, both
contained in vol. V. of the _Sacred Books of the Hindus_. It would
appear that the sect regards itself as a continuation of the
Brahma-sampradaya but its tenets have more resemblance to those of
Vallabha.]

[Footnote 638: No less than 159 padakartas or religious poets are
enumerated by Dinesh Chandra Sen. Several collections of these poems
have been published of which the principal is called Padakalpataru.]

[Footnote 639: See Bhandarkar, _Vaishn. and Saivism_, pp. 87-90, and
Nicol, _Psalms of Maratha Saints_ which gives a bibliography. For
Namdev see also Macauliffe, _The Sikh Religion_, vol. VI. pp. 17-76.
For Ramdas see Rawlinson, _Sivaji the Maratha_, pp. 116 ff.]

[Footnote 640: Bhandarkar, _l.c._ p. 92. An earlier poet of this country
was Jnanesvara who wrote a paraphrase of the Bhagavad-gita in 1290.
His writings are said to be the first great landmark in Marathi
literature.]

[Footnote 641: There is no necessary hostility between the worship of
Siva and of Vishnu. At Pandharpur pilgrims visit first a temple of
Siva and then the principal shrine. This latter, like the temple of
Jagannath at Puri, is suspected of having been a Buddhist shrine. It
is called Vihara, the principal festival is in the Buddhist Lent and
caste is not observed within its precincts.]

[Footnote 642: Quoted by Bhandarkar, p. 90. The subsequent quotations
are from the same source but I have sometimes slightly modified them
and compared them with the original, though I have no pretension to be
a Marathi scholar.]

[Footnote 643: Called Abhangs.]

[Footnote 644: See Eliot, Hinduism in Assam, _J.R.A.S._ 1910, pp.
1168-1186.]

[Footnote 645: _Census of India_, 1911, Assam, p. 41.]

[Footnote 646: Some authorities state that the sacred book thus
venerated is the Bhagavad-gita, but at Kamalabari I made careful
enquiries and was assured it was the Namghosha.]

[Footnote 647: Especially Gadadhar Singh, 1681-96.]

[Footnote 648: See _Census of India_, 1901, Bengal, pp. 183-4 and
Bhattacharya, _Hindu Castes and Sects_, pp. 485-488.]

[Footnote 649: Karta, literally doer, is the name given to the
executive head of a joint family in Bengal. The sect prefer to call
themselves Bhabajanas or Bhagawanis.]

[Footnote 650: Another mixed sect is that of the Dhamis in the Panna
state of Bundelkhand, founded by one Prannath in the reign of
Aurungzeb. Their doctrine is a combination of Hinduism and Islam,
tending towards Krishnaism. See Russell, _Tribes and Castes of Central
Provinces_, p. 217.]




CHAPTER XXXI

AMALGAMATION OF HINDUISM AND ISLAM. KABIR AND THE SIKHS


1


The Kartabhajas mentioned at the end of the last chapter show a
mixture of Hinduism and Mohammedanism, and the mixture[651] is found
in other sects some of which are of considerable importance. A group
of these sects, including the Sikhs and followers of Kabir, arose in
the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Their origin can be traced to
Ramanand but they cannot be called Vaishnavas and they are clearly
distinguished from all the religious bodies that we have hitherto
passed in review. The tone of their writings is more restrained and
severe: the worshipper approaches the deity as a servant rather than a
lover: caste is rejected as useless: Hindu mythology is eschewed or
used sparingly. Yet in spite of these differences the essential
doctrines of Tulsi Das, Kabir and Nanak show a great resemblance. They
all believe in one deity whom they call by various names, but this
deity, though personal, remains of the Indian not of the Semitic type.
He somehow brings the world of transmigration into being by his power
of illusion, and the business of the soul is to free itself from the
illusion and return to him. Almost all these teachers, whether
orthodox or heterodox, had a singular facility for composing hymns,
often of high literary merit, and it is in these emotional utterances,
rather than in dogmatic treatises, that they addressed themselves to
the peoples of northern India.

The earliest of these mixed sects is that founded by Kabir.[652] He
appears to have been a Mohammedan weaver by birth, though tradition is
not unanimous on this point.[653] It is admitted, however, that he was
brought up among Moslims at Benares but became a disciple of Ramanand.
This suggests that he lived early in the fifteenth century.[654]
Another tradition says that he was summoned before Sikander Lodi
(1489-1517), but the details of his life are evidently legendary. We
only know that he was married and had a son, that he taught in
northern and perhaps central India and died at Maghar in the district
of Gorakhpur. There is significance, however, in the legend which
relates that after his decease Hindus and Mohammedans disputed as to
whether his body should be burned or buried. But when they raised the
cloth which covered the corpse, they found underneath it only a heap
of flowers. So the Hindus took part and burnt them at Benares and the
Moslims buried the rest at Maghar. His grave there is still in Moslim
keeping.

In teaching Kabir stands midway between the two religions, but leaning
to the side of Hinduism. It is clear that this Hindu bias became
stronger in his followers, but it is not easy to separate his own
teaching from subsequent embellishments, for the numerous hymns and
sayings attributed to him are collected in compilations made after his
death, such as the Bijak and the Adi-granth of the Sikhs. In hymns
which sound authentic he puts Hindus and Moslims on the same footing.

"Kabir is a child of Ram and Allah," he says, "and accepteth all Gurus
and Pirs." "O God, whether Allah or Ram, I live by thy name."

    "Make thy mind thy Kaaba, thy body its enclosing temple,
    Conscience its prime teacher.
    Then, O priest, call men to pray to that mosque
    Which hath five gates.
    The Hindus and Mussulmans have the same Lord."

But the formalities of both creeds are impartially condemned. "They
are good riders who keep aloof from the Veda and Koran."[655] Caste,
circumcision and idolatry are reprobated. The Hindu deities and their
incarnations are all dead: God was not in any of them.[656] Ram, it
would seem, should be understood not as Ramacandra but as a name of
God.

Yet the general outlook is Hindu rather than Mohammedan. God is the
magician who brings about this illusory world in which the soul
wanders.[657] "I was in immobile and mobile creatures, in worms and in
moths; I passed through many various births. But when I assumed a
human body, I was a Yogi, a Yati, a penitent, a Brahmacari: sometimes
an Emperor and sometimes a beggar." Unlike the Sikhs, Kabir teaches
the sanctity of life, even of plants. "Thou cuttest leaves, O flower
girl: in every leaf there is life." Release, as for all Hindus,
consists in escaping from the round of births and deaths. Of this he
speaks almost in the language of the Buddha.[658]

    "Though I have assumed many shapes, this is my last.
    The strings and wires of the musical instrument are all worn out:
    I am now in the power of God's name.
    I shall not again have to dance to the tune of birth and death.
    Nor shall my heart accompany on the drum."

This deliverance is accomplished by the union or identification of the
soul with God.

    "Remove the difference between thyself and God and thou shalt be
                                                 united with him....
    Him whom I sought without me, now I find within me....
    Know God: by knowing him thou shalt become as he.
    When the soul and God are blended no one can distinguish them."[659]

But if he sometimes writes like Sankara, he also has the note of the
Psalms and Gospels. He has the sense of sin: he thinks of God in vivid
personal metaphors, as a lord, a bridegroom, a parent, both father and
mother.

    "Save me, O God, though I have offended thee....
    I forgot him who made me and did cleave unto strangers."
    "Sing, sing, the marriage song.
    The sovereign God hath come to my house as my husband....
    I obtained God as my bridegroom; so great has been my good
    fortune."

    "A mother beareth not in mind
    All the faults her son committeth.
    O, God, I am thy child:
    Why blottest thou not out my sins?" ...

    "My Father is the great Lord of the Earth;
    To that Father how shall I go?"[660]

