March 12, 1899.

. . . I must forget this world. Here everything wearies me--I find
only one joy, that of suffering, and this joy, which is not one of
sense, is above all joy. Life is passing, and eternity is drawing
near. Soon we shall live the very life of God. After we have been
filled at the source of all bitterness, our thirst will be
quenched at the very Fountain of all sweetness.

"The figure of this world passeth away"[7]--soon we shall see new
skies--a more radiant sun will light with its splendour crystal
seas and infinite horizons. We shall no longer be prisoners in a
land of exile, all will have passed away, and with our Heavenly
Spouse we shall sail upon boundless seas. Now, "our harps are
hanging on the willows which grow by the rivers of Babylon,"[8]
but in the day of our deliverance what harmonies will they not
give forth, how joyfully shall we make all their strings vibrate!
Now, "we shed tears as we remember Sion, for how can we sing the
songs of the Lord in a land of exile?"[9] The burden of our song
is suffering. Jesus offers us a chalice of great bitterness. Let
us not withdraw our lips from it, but suffer in peace. He who says
_peace_ does not say _joy,_ or at least sensible joy: to suffer in
peace it is enough to will heartily all that Our Lord wills. Do
not think we can find love without suffering, for our nature
remains and must be taken into account; but it puts great
treasures within our reach. Suffering is indeed our very
livelihood, and is so precious that Jesus came down upon earth on
purpose to possess it. We should like to suffer generously and
nobly; we should like never to fall. What an illusion! What does
it matter to me if I fall at every moment! In that way I realise
my weakness, and I gain thereby. My God, Thou seest how little I
am good for, when Thou dost carry me in Thy Arms; and if Thou
leavest me alone, well, it is because it pleases Thee to see me
lie on the ground. Then why should I be troubled?

If you are willing to bear in peace the trial of not being pleased
with yourself, you will be offering the Divine Master a home in
your heart. It is true that you will suffer, because you will be
like a stranger to your own house; but do not be afraid--the
poorer you are, the more Jesus will love you. I know that He is
better pleased to see you stumbling in the night upon a stony
road, than walking in the full light of day upon a path carpeted
with flowers, because these flowers might hinder your advance.


VI

July 14, 1889.

MY DARLING SISTER,--I am ever with you in spirit. Yes, it is very
hard to live upon this earth, but to-morrow, in a brief hour, we
shall be at rest. O my God, what shall we then see? What is this
life which will have no end? Our Lord will be the soul of our
soul. O unsearchable mystery! "Eye hath not seen nor ear heard,
neither hath it entered into the heart of man what things God hath
prepared for them that love Him."[10] And all this will come
soon--very soon--if we love Jesus ardently. It seems to me that
God has no need of years to perfect His labour of love in a soul.
One ray from His Heart can in an instant make His flower blossom
forth, never to fade. . . . Celine, during the fleeting moments
that remain to us, let us save souls! I feel that Our Spouse asks
us for souls--above all, for the souls of Priests. . . . It is He
Who bids me tell you this.

There is but one thing to be done here below: to love Jesus, and
to save souls for Him that He may be more loved. We must not let
slip the smallest opportunity of giving Him joy. We must refuse
Him nothing. He is in such need of love.

We are His chosen lilies. He dwells as a King in our midst--He
lets us share the honours of His Royalty--His Divine Blood bedews
our petals--and His Thorns as they wound us spread abroad the
perfume of our love.


VII

October 22, 1889.

MY DEAREST CELINE,--I send you a picture of the Holy Face. The
contemplation of this Divine subject seems to me to belong in a
special way to my little sister, truly the sister of my soul. May
she be another Veronica, and wipe away all the Blood and Tears of
Jesus, her only Love! May she give Him souls! May she force her
way through the soldiers--that is, the world--to come close to His
side. . . . Happy will she be when she sees in Heaven the value of
that mysterious draught with which she quenched the thirst of her
Heavenly Spouse; when she sees His Lips, once parched with burning
thirst, speaking to her the one eternal word--love, and the thanks
which shall have no end. . . .

Good-bye, dear little Veronica;[11] to-morrow, no doubt, your
Beloved will ask some new sacrifice, a fresh relief for His thirst
. . . but "let us go and die with Him!"


VIII

July 18, 1890.

MY DEAR LITTLE SISTER,--I send you a passage from Isaias which
will comfort you. Long ago the Prophet's soul was filled with the
thought of the hidden beauties of the Divine Face, as our souls
are now. Many a century has passed since then. It makes me wonder
what is Time. Time is but a mirage, a dream. Already God sees us
in glory, and rejoices in our everlasting bliss. How much good I
derive from this thought! I understand now why He allows us to
suffer.

Since Our Beloved has "trodden the wine-press alone,"[12] the
wine-press from which He gives us to drink--on our side let us not
refuse to be clothed in blood-stained garments, or to tread out
for Jesus a new wine which may quench His thirst! When "He looks
around Him," He will not be able to say now that "He is
alone"[13]--we shall be there to help Him.

"His look as it were hidden."[14] Alas! it is so even to this day,
and no one understands His Tears. "Open to Me, My Sister, My
Spouse," he says to us, "for My Head is full of dew and My Locks
of the drops of the night."[15] Thus Jesus complains to our souls
when He is deserted and forgotten . . . _To be forgotten._ It is
this, I think, which gives Him most pain.

And our dear Father!--it is heartrending, but how can we repine
since Our Lord Himself was looked upon "as one struck by God and
afflicted"?[16] In this great sorrow we should forget ourselves,
and pray for Priests--our lives must be entirely devoted to them.
Our Divine Master makes me feel more and more that this is what He
asks of you and me.


IX

September 23, 1890.

O Celine, how can I tell you all that is happening within me? What
a wound I have received! And yet I feel it is inflicted by a
loving Hand, by a Hand divinely jealous.

All was ready for my espousals;[17] but do you not think that
something was still wanting to the feast? It is true, Jesus had
already enriched me with many jewels, but no doubt there was one
of incomparable beauty still missing; this priceless diamond He
has given me to-day . . . Papa will not be here to-morrow! Celine,
I confess that I have cried bitterly. . . . I am still crying so
that I can scarcely hold my pen.

You know how intensely I longed to see our dearest Father again;
but now I feel that it is God's Will that he should not be at my
feast. God has allowed it simply to try our love. Jesus wishes me
to be an orphan . . . to be alone, with Him alone, so that He may
unite Himself more closely to me. He wishes, too, to give me back
in Heaven this joy so lawfully desired, but which He has denied me
here on earth.

To-day's trial is one of those sorrows that are difficult to
understand: a joy was set before us, one most natural and easy of
attainment. We stretched forth our hands . . . and the coveted joy
was withdrawn. But it is not the hand of man which has done this
thing--it is God's work. Celine, understand your Therese, and let
us accept cheerfully the thorn which is offered us. To-morrow's
feast will be one of tears, but I feel that Jesus will be greatly
consoled. . . .


X

October 14, 1890.

MY DARLING SISTER,--I know quite well all you are suffering. I
know your anguish, and I share it. Oh! If I could but impart to
you the peace which Jesus has put into my soul amid my most bitter
tears. Be comforted--all passes away. Our life of yesterday is
spent; death too will come and go, and then we shall rejoice in
life, true life, for countless ages, for evermore. Meanwhile let
us make of our heart a garden of delights where Our sweet Saviour
may come and take His rest. Let us plant only lilies there, and
sing with St. John of the Cross:

"There I remained in deep oblivion, My head reposing upon Him I
love, Lost to myself and all! I cast my cares away And let them,
heedless, mid the lilies lie."[18]


XI

April 26, 1891.

MY DEAR LITTLE SISTER,--Three years ago our hearts had not yet
been bruised, and life was one glad smile. Then Jesus looked down
upon us, and all things were changed into an ocean of tears . . .
but likewise into an ocean of grace and of love. God has taken
from us him whom we loved so tenderly--was it not that we might be
able to say more truly than ever: "Our Father Who art in heaven"?
How consoling is this divine word, and what vast horizons it opens
before us!

My darling Celine, you who asked me so many questions when we were
little, I wonder how it was you never asked: "Why has God not made
me an Angel?" Well, I am going to tell you. Our Lord wishes to
have His Court here on earth, as He has in Heaven; He wishes for
angel-martyrs and angel-apostles; and if He has not made you an
Angel in Heaven, it is because He wishes you to be an Angel of
earth, so that you may be able to suffer for His Love.

Dearest sister, the shadows will soon disappear, the rays of the
Eternal Sun will thaw the hoar frost of winter. . . . A little
longer, and we shall be in our true country, and our childhood's
joys--those Sunday evenings, those outpourings of the heart--will
be given back to us for ever!


XII

August 15, 1892.

MY DEAR LITTLE SISTER,--To write to you to-day I am obliged to
steal a little time from Our Lord. He will forgive, because it is
of Him that we are going to speak together. The vast solitudes and
enchanting views which unfold themselves before you ought to
uplift your soul. I do not see those things, and I content myself
by saying with St. John of the Cross in his Spiritual Canticle:

In Christ I have the mountains, The quiet, wooded valleys.

Lately I have been thinking what I could undertake for the
salvation of souls, and these simple words of the Gospel have
given me light. Pointing to the fields of ripe corn, Jesus once
said to His disciples: "Lift up your eyes and see the fields, for
they are already white with the harvest";[19] and again: "The
harvest indeed is great, but the labourers are few; pray ye
therefore the Lord of the harvest that He send forth
labourers."[20]

Here is a mystery indeed! Is not Jesus all-powerful? Do not
creatures belong to Him who hade them? Why does He deign to say:
"Pray ye the Lord of the harvest that He send forth labourers"? It
is because His Love for us is so unsearchable, so tender, that He
wishes us to share in all He does. The Creator of the Universe
awaits the prayer of a poor little soul to save a multitude of
other souls, ransomed, like her, at the price of His Blood.

Our vocation is not to go forth and reap in Our Father's fields.
Jesus does not say to us: "Look down and reap the harvest." Our
mission is even more sublime. "Lift up your eyes and see," saith
our Divine Master, "see how in Heaven there are empty thrones. It
is for you to fill them. . . . You are as Moses praying on the
mountain, so ask Me for labourers and they shall be sent. I only
await a prayer, a sigh! Is not the apostolate of prayer--so to
speak--higher than that of the spoken word? It is for us by prayer
to train workers who will spread the glad tidings of the Gospel
and who will save countless souls--the souls to whom we shall be
the spiritual Mothers. What, then, have we to envy in the Priests
of the Lord?


XIII

MY DARLING SISTER,--The affection of our childhood days has
changed into a closest union of mind and heart. Jesus has drawn us
to Him together, for are you not already His? He has put the world
beneath our feet. Like Zaccheus we have climbed into a tree to
behold Him--mysterious tree, raising us high above all things,
from whence we can say: "All is mine, all is for me: the Earth and
the Heavens are mine, God Himself is mine, and the Mother of my
God is for me."[21]

Speaking of that Blessed Mother, I must tell you of one of my
simple ways. Sometimes I find myself saying to her: "Dearest
Mother, it seems to me that I am happier than you. I have you for
my Mother, and you have no Blessed Virgin to love. . . . It is
true, you are the Mother of Jesus, but you have given Him to me;
and He, from the Cross, has given you to be our Mother--thus we
are richer than you! Long ago, in your humility, you wished to
become the little handmaid of the Mother of God; and I--poor
little creature--am not your handmaid but your child! You are the
Mother of Jesus, and you are also _mine!"_

Our greatness in Jesus is verily marvellous, my Celine. He has
unveiled for us many a mystery by making us climb the mystical
tree of which I spoke above. And now what science is He going to
teach? Have we not learned all things from Him?

"Make haste to come down, for this day I must abide in thy
house."[22] Jesus bids us come down. Where, then, must we go? The
Jews asked Him: "Master, where dwellest thou?"[23] And He
answered, "The foxes have holes and the birds of the air nests,
but the Son of Man hath not where to lay His Head."[24] If we are
to be the dwelling-place of Jesus, we must come down even to
this--we must be so poor that we have not where to lay our heads.

This grace of light has been given to me during my retreat. Our
Lord desires that we should receive Him into our hearts, and no
doubt they are empty of creatures. Alas! mine is not empty of
self; that is why He bids me come down. And I shall come down even
to the very ground, that Jesus may find within my heart a
resting-place for His Divine Head, and may feel that there at
least He is loved and understood.


XIV

April 25, 1893.

MY LITTLE CELINE,--I must come and disclose the desires of Jesus
with regard to your soul. Remember that He did not say: "I am the
flower of the gardens, a carefully-tended Rose"; but, "I am the
Flower of the fields and the Lily of the valleys."[25] Well, you
must be always as a drop of dew hidden in the heart of this
beautiful Lily of the valley.

The dew-drop--what could be simpler, what more pure? It is not the
child of the clouds; it is born beneath the starry sky, and
survives but a night. When the sun darts forth its ardent rays,
the delicate pearls adorning each blade of grass quickly pass into
the lightest of vapour. . . . There is the portrait of my little
Celine! She is a drop of dew, an offspring of Heaven--her true
Home. Through the night of this life she must hide herself in the
_Field-flower's_ golden cup; no eye must discover her abode.

Happy dewdrop, known to God alone, think not of the rushing
torrents of this world! Envy not even the crystal stream which
winds among the meadows. The ripple of its waters is sweet indeed,
but it can be heard by creatures. Besides, the Field-flower could
never contain it in its cup. One must be so little to draw near to
Jesus, and few are the souls that aspire to be little and unknown.
"Are not the river and the brook," they urge, "of more use than a
dewdrop? Of what avail is it? Its only purpose is to refresh for
one moment some poor little field-flower."

Ah! They little know the true _Flower of the field._ Did they know
Him they would understand better Our Lord's reproach to Martha.
Our Beloved needs neither our brilliant deeds nor our beautiful
thoughts. Were He in search of lofty ideas, has He not His Angels,
whose knowledge infinitely surpasses that of the greatest genius
of earth? Neither intellect nor other talents has He come to seek
among us. . . . He has become the _Flower of the field_ to show
how much He loves simplicity.

_The Lily of the valley_ asks but a single dewdrop, which for one
night shall rest in its cup, hidden from all human eyes. But when
the shadows shall begin to fade, when the _Flower of the field_
shall have become the _Sun of Justice,_[26] then the dewdrop--the
humble sharer of His exile--will rise up to Him as love's vapour.
He will shed on her a ray of His light, and before the whole court
of Heaven she will shine eternally like a precious pearl, a
dazzling mirror of the Divine Sun.


XV

August 2, 1893.

MY DEAR CELINE,--What you write fills me with joy; you are making
your way by a royal road. The Spouse in the Canticles, unable to
find her Beloved in the time of repose, went forth to seek Him in
the city. But in vain . . . it was only without the walls she
found Him. It is not in the sweetness of repose that Jesus would
have us discover His Adorable Presence. He hides Himself and
shrouds Himself in darkness. True, this was not His way with the
multitude, for we read that all the people were carried away as
soon as He spoke to them.

The weaker souls He charmed by His divine eloquence with the aim
of strengthening them against the day of temptation and trial, but
His faithful friends were few that day when "He was silent"[27] in
the presence of His judges. Sweet melody to my heart is that
silence of the Divine Master!

He would have us give Him alms as to a poor man, and puts
Himself--so to speak--at our mercy. He will take nothing that is
not cheerfully given, and the veriest trifle is precious in His
Divine Eyes. He stretches forth His Hand to receive a little love,
that in the radiant day of the Judgment He may speak to us those
ineffably sweet words: "Come, ye blessed of My Father, for I was
hungry and you gave Me to drink, I was a stranger and you took Me
in, I was sick and you visited Me, I was in prison and you came to
Me."[28]

Dearest Celine, let us rejoice in the lot that is ours! Let us
give and give again, and give royally, never forgetting that Our
Beloved is a hidden Treasure which few souls know how to find. Now
to discover that which is hidden we must needs hide ourselves in
the hiding-place. Let our life, then, be one of concealment. The
author of the _Imitation_ tells us:

"If thou would'st know and learn something to the purpose, love to
be unknown, and to be esteemed as nothing . . . [29] Having
forsaken all things, a man should forsake himself. . . [30] Let
this man glory in this and another in that, but thou for thy part
rejoice neither in this nor in that, but in the contempt of
thyself."[31]


XVI

MY DEAR CELINE,--You tell me that my letters do good to you. I am
indeed glad, but I assure you that I am under no misapprehension:
"Unless the Lord build the house, they labour in vain who build
it."[32] The greatest eloquence cannot call forth a single act of
love without that grace which touches the heart.

Think of a beautiful peach with its delicate tint of rose, with
its flavour so sweet that no human skill could invent such nectar.
