
 It is scarcely ever possible to understand a passage without some
 acquaintance with the history of the circumstances under which it was
 written.

 At Ephesus, over which Timothy was bishop, people had been bewildered
 by the teaching of converted Jews, who mixed the old leaven of Judaism
 with the new spirituality of Christianity. They maintained the
 perpetual obligation of the Jewish law.--v. 7. They desired to be
 teachers of the law. They required strict performance of a number of
 severe observances. They talked mysteriously of angels and powers
 intermediate between God and the human soul.--v. 4. The result was an
 interminable discussion at Ephesus. The Church was filled with
 disputations and controversies.

 Now there is something always refreshing to see the Apostle Paul
 descending upon an arena of controversy, where minds have been
 bewildered; and so much is to be said on both sides, that people are
 uncertain which to take. You know at once that he will pour light upon
 the question, and illuminate all the dark corners. You know that he
 will not trim, and balance, and hang doubtful, or become a partisan;
 but that he will seize some great principle which lies at the root of
 the whole controversy, and make its true bearings clear at once.

 This he always does, and this he does on the present occasion.--v. 5
 and 6. He does not, like a vehement polemic, say Jewish ceremonies and
 rules are all worthless, nor some ceremonies are worthless, and others
 essential; but he says, the root of the whole matter is charity. If
 you turn aside from this, all is lost; here at once the controversy
 closes. So far as any rule fosters the spirit of love, that is, is
 used lawfully, it is wise, and has a use. So far as it does not, it is
 chaff. So far as it hinders it, it is poison.

 Now observe how different this method is from that which is called the
 sober, moderate way--the _via media_. Some would have said, the great
 thing is to avoid extremes. If the question respects
 fasting--fast--only in _moderation_. If the observance of the Sabbath
 day, observe it on the Jewish principle, only _not so strictly_.

 St. Paul, on the contrary, went down to the root; he said, the true
 question is not whether the law is good or bad, but on what principle;
 he said, you are both wrong--_you_, in saying that the observance of
 the law is essential, for the end of it is charity, and if _that_ be
 got what matter _how_--_you_, in saying rules may be dispensed with
 entirely and always, "for we know that the law is good."

    I. The unlawful use, and
   II. The lawful use of law.


 I. The unlawful use.

 Define law.--By law, Paul almost always means not the Mosaic law, but
 law in its essence and principle, that is, constraint. This chiefly in
 two forms expresses itself--1st, a custom; 2nd, a maxim. As examples
 of custom, we might give Circumcision, or the Sabbath, or Sacrifice,
 or Fasting.

 Law said, thou shalt _do_ these things; and law, as mere law,
 constrained them. Or again, law may express itself in maxims and
 rules.

 In rules, as when law said, "Thou shalt not steal"--not saying a word
 about secret dishonesty of heart, but simply taking cognizance of
 _acts_.

 In maxims, as when it admonished that man ought to give a tenth to
 God, leaving the principle of the matter untouched. Principle is one
 thing, and maxim is another. A principle requires liberality, a maxim
 says one-tenth. A principle says, "A merciful man is merciful to his
 beast," leaves mercy to the heart, and does not define how; a maxim
 says, thou shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth out thy corn. A
 principle says, Forgive; a maxim defines "seven times;" and thus the
 whole law falls into two divisions.

   The ceremonial law, which constrains life by customs.
   The moral law, which guides life by rules and maxims.

 Now it is an illegitimate use of law. First. To expect by obedience to
 it to make out a title to salvation.

 By the deeds of the law, shall no man living be justified. Salvation
 is by faith: a state of heart right with God; faith is the spring of
 holiness--a well of life. Salvation is not the having committed a
 certain number of good acts. Destruction is not the having committed a
 certain number of crimes. Salvation is God's Spirit in us, leading to
 good. Destruction is the selfish spirit in us, leading to wrong.

 For a plain reason then, obedience to law cannot save, because it is
 merely the performance of a certain number of acts which may be done
 by habit, from fear, from compulsion. Obedience remains still
 imperfect. A man may have obeyed the rule, and kept the maxim, and yet
 not be perfect. "All these commandments have I kept from my youth up."
 "Yet lackest thou one thing." The law he had kept. The spirit of
 obedience in its high form of sacrifice he had not.

 Secondly. To use it superstitiously.

 It is plain that this was the use made of it by the Ephesian
 teachers.--v. 4. It seemed to them that _law_ was pleasing to God as
 restraint. Then unnatural restraints came to be imposed--on the
 appetites, fasting; on the affections, celibacy. This is what Paul
 condemns.--ch. iv., v. 8. "Bodily exercise profiteth little."

 And again, this superstition showed itself in a false
 reverence--wondrous stories respecting angels--respecting the eternal
 genealogy of Christ--awful thoughts about spirits. The Apostle calls
 all these, very unceremoniously, "endless genealogies," v. 4, and "old
 wives' fables."--ch. iv., v. 7.

 The question at issue is, wherein true reverence consists: according
 to them, in the multiplicity of the objects of reverence; according to
 St. Paul, in the character of the object revered ... God and Right the
 true object.

 But you are not a whit the better for solemn and reverential feelings
 about a mysterious, invisible world. To tremble before a consecrated
 wafer is spurious reverence. To bend before the Majesty of Right is
 Christian reverence.

 Thirdly. To use it as if the letter of it were sacred. The law
 commanded none to eat the shewbread except the priests. David ate it
 in hunger. If Abimelech had scrupled to give it, he would have used
 the law unlawfully.

 The law commanded no manner of work. The apostles in hunger rubbed the
 ears of corn. The Pharisees used the law unlawfully, in forbidding
 that.


 II. The lawful use of law.

 1. As a restraint to keep outward evil in check ... "The law was made
 for sinners and profane." ... Illustrate this by reference to capital
 punishment. No sane man believes that punishment by death will make a
 nation's heart right, or that the sight of an execution can soften or
 ameliorate. Punishment does not work in that way. It is not meant for
 that purpose. It is meant to guard society.

 The law commanding a blasphemer to be stoned, could not teach one
 Israelite love to God, but it could save the streets of Israel from
 scandalous ribaldry.

 And therefore clearly understand, law is a mere check to bad men: it
 does not improve them; it often makes them worse; it cannot sanctify
 them. God never intended that it should. It saves society from the
 open transgression; it does not contemplate the amelioration of the
 offender.

 Hence we see for what reason the apostle insisted on the use of the
 law for Christians. Law never can be abrogated. Strict rules are
 needed exactly in proportion as we want the power or the will to rule
 ourselves. It is not because the Gospel has come that we are free from
 the law, but because, and only so far, as we are in a Gospel state.
 "It is for a righteous man" that the law is not made, and thus we see
 the true nature of Christian liberty. The liberty to which we are
 called in Christ, is not the liberty of devils, the liberty of doing
 what we will, but the blessed liberty of being on the side of the law,
 and therefore unrestrained by it in doing right.

 Illustrate from laws of coining, housebreaking, &c. We are not under
 them.--Because we may break them as we like? Nay--the moment we
 desire, the law is alive again to us.

 2. As a primer is used by a child to acquire by degrees, principles
 and a spirit.

 This is the use attributed to it in verse 5. "The end of the
 commandment is charity."

 Compare with this, two other passages--"Christ is the end of the law
 for righteousness," and "love is the fulfilling of the law." "Perfect
 love casteth out fear."

 In every law there is a spirit; in every maxim a principle; and the
 law and the maxim are laid down for the sake of conserving the spirit
 and the principle which they enshrine.

 St. Paul compares God's dealing with man to a wise parent's
 instruction of his child.--See the Epistle to the Galatians. Boyhood
 is under law; you appeal not to the boy's reason, but his will, by
 rewards and punishments: Do this, and I will reward you; do it not,
 and you will be punished. So long as a man is under law, this is
 salutary and necessary, but only while under law. He is free when he
 discerns principles, and at the same time has got, by habit, the will
 to obey. So that rules have done for him a double work, taught him the
 principle and facilitated obedience to it.

 Distinguish however.--In point of time, law is first--in point of
 importance, the Spirit.

 In point of _time_, Charity is the "end" of the commandment--in point
 of _importance_, first and foremost.

 The first thing a boy has to do, is to learn implicit obedience to
 rules. The first thing in importance for a man to learn is, to sever
 himself from maxims, rules, laws. Why? That he may become an
 Antinomian, or a Latitudinarian? No. He is severed from submission to
 the _maxim_ because he has got allegiance to the _principle_. He is
 free from the rule and the law because he has got the Spirit written
 in his heart.

 This is the Gospel. A man is redeemed by Christ so far as he is not
 under the law; he is free from the law so far as he is free from the
 evil which the law restrains; he progresses so far as there is no evil
 in him which it is an effort to keep down; and perfect salvation and
 liberty are--when we,--who though having the first fruits of the
 Spirit, yet groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, "to wit,
 the redemption of our body"--shall have been freed in body, soul, and
 spirit, from the last traces of the evil which can only be kept down
 by force. In other words, so far as Christ's statement is true of
 _us_, "The Prince of this world cometh, and hath nothing in me."




 XX.

 _Preached February 21, 1853._

 THE PRODIGAL AND HIS BROTHER.


   "And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I
    have is thine. It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad:
    for this thy brother was dead, and is alive again; was lost, and
    is found."--Luke xv. 31, 32.

 There are two classes of sins. There are some sins by which man
 crushes, wounds, malevolently injures his brother man: those sins
 which speak of a bad, tyrannical, and selfish heart. Christ met those
 with denunciation. There are other sins by which a man injures
 himself. There is a life of reckless indulgence; there is a career of
 yielding to ungovernable propensities, which most surely conducts to
 wretchedness and ruin, but makes a man an object of compassion rather
 than of condemnation.

 The reception which sinners of this class met from Christ was marked
 by strange and pitying mercy. There was no maudlin sentiment on his
 lips. He called sin sin, and guilt guilt. But yet there were sins
 which His lips scourged, and others over which, containing in
 themselves their own scourge, His heart bled. That which was
 melancholy, and marred, and miserable in this world, was more
 congenial to the heart of Christ than that which was proudly happy. It
 was in the midst of a triumph, and all the pride of a procession, that
 He paused to weep over ruined Jerusalem. And if we ask the reason why
 the character of Christ was marked by this melancholy condescension it
 is that he was in the midst of a world of ruins, and there was nothing
 there to gladden, but very much to touch with grief. He was here to
 restore that which was broken down and crumbling into decay. An
 enthusiastic antiquarian, standing amidst the fragments of an ancient
 temple surrounded by dust and moss, broken pillar, and defaced
 architrave, with magnificent projects in his mind of restoring all
 this to _former_ majesty, to draw out to light from mere rubbish the
 ruined glories, and therefore stooping down amongst the dank ivy and
 the rank nettles; such was Christ amidst the wreck of human nature. He
 was striving to lift it out of its degradation. He was searching out
 in revolting places that which had fallen down, that He might build it
 up again in fair proportions a holy temple to the Lord.

 Therefore He laboured among the guilty; therefore He was the companion
 of outcasts; therefore He spoke tenderly and lovingly to those whom
 society counted undone; therefore He loved to bind up the bruised and
 the broken-hearted; therefore His breath fanned the spark which seemed
 dying out in the wick of the expiring taper, when men thought that it
 was too late, and that the hour of _hopeless_ profligacy was come. It
 was that feature in His character, that tender, hoping, encouraging
 spirit of His which the prophet Isaiah fixed upon as characteristic.
 "A bruised reed will He not break."

 It was an illustration of this spirit which He gave in the parable
 which forms the subject of our consideration to-day. We find the
 occasion which drew it from Him in the commencement of this chapter,
 "Then drew near unto Him all the publicans and sinners for to hear
 Him. And the Pharisees and Scribes murmured, saying, This man
 receiveth sinners, and eateth with them." It was then that Christ
 condescended to offer an excuse or an explanation of His conduct. And
 His excuse was this: It is natural, humanly natural, to rejoice more
 over that which has been recovered than over that which has been never
 lost. He proved that by three illustrations taken from human life. The
 first illustration intended to show the feelings of Christ in winning
 back a sinner, was the joy which the shepherd feels in the recovery of
 a sheep from the mountain wilderness. The second was the satisfaction
 which a person feels for a recovered coin. The last was the gladness
 which attends the restoration of an erring son.

 Now the three parables are alike in this, that they all describe more
 or less vividly the feelings of the Redeemer on the recovery of the
 lost. But the third parable differs from the other two in this, that
 besides the feelings of the Saviour, it gives us a multitude of
 particulars respecting the feelings, the steps, and the motives of the
 penitent who is reclaimed back to goodness. In the two first the thing
 lost is a coin or a sheep. It would not be possible to find any
 picture of remorse or gladness there. But in the third parable the
 thing lost is not a lifeless thing, nor a mute thing, but a being, the
 workings of whose human heart are all described. So that the subject
 opened out to us is a more extensive one--not merely the feelings of
 the finder, God in Christ, but besides that, the sensations of the
 wanderer himself.

 In dealing with this parable, this is the line which we shall adopt.
 We shall look at the picture which it draws of--1. God's treatment of
 the penitent. 2. God's expostulation with the saint. God's treatment
 of the penitent divides itself in this parable into three distinct
 epochs. The period of alienation, the period of repentance, and the
 circumstances of a penitent reception. We shall consider all these in
 turn.

 The first truth exhibited in this parable is the alienation of man's
 heart from God. Homelessness, distance from our Father--that is man's
 state by nature in this world. The youngest son gathered all together
 and took his journey into a _far_ country. Brethren, this is the
 history of worldliness. It is a state far from God; in other words, it
 is a state of homelessness. And now let us ask what that means. To
 English hearts it is not necessary to expound elaborately the infinite
 meanings which cluster round that blessed expression "home." Home is
 the one place in all this world where hearts are sure of each other.
 It is the place of confidence. It is the place where we tear off that
 mask of guarded and suspicious coldness which the world forces us to
 wear in self-defence, and where we pour out the unreserved
 communications of full and confiding hearts. It is the spot where
