whose business it is to govern the community; wherefore private
individuals cannot make laws. But custom grows by the acts of private
individuals. Therefore custom cannot obtain force of law, so as to
abolish the law.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (Ep. ad Casulan. xxxvi): "The
customs of God's people and the institutions of our ancestors are to
be considered as laws. And those who throw contempt on the customs of
the Church ought to be punished as those who disobey the law of God."

_I answer that,_ All law proceeds from the reason and will of the
lawgiver; the Divine and natural laws from the reasonable will of
God; the human law from the will of man, regulated by reason. Now
just as human reason and will, in practical matters, may be made
manifest by speech, so may they be made known by deeds: since
seemingly a man chooses as good that which he carries into execution.
But it is evident that by human speech, law can be both changed and
expounded, in so far as it manifests the interior movement and
thought of human reason. Wherefore by actions also, especially if
they be repeated, so as to make a custom, law can be changed and
expounded; and also something can be established which obtains force
of law, in so far as by repeated external actions, the inward
movement of the will, and concepts of reason are most effectually
declared; for when a thing is done again and again, it seems to
proceed from a deliberate judgment of reason. Accordingly, custom has
the force of a law, abolishes law, and is the interpreter of law.

Reply Obj. 1: The natural and Divine laws proceed from the Divine
will, as stated above. Wherefore they cannot be changed by a custom
proceeding from the will of man, but only by Divine authority. Hence
it is that no custom can prevail over the Divine or natural laws: for
Isidore says (Synon. ii, 16): "Let custom yield to authority: evil
customs should be eradicated by law and reason."

Reply Obj. 2: As stated above (Q. 96, A. 6), human laws fail in some
cases: wherefore it is possible sometimes to act beside the law;
namely, in a case where the law fails; yet the act will not be evil.
And when such cases are multiplied, by reason of some change in man,
then custom shows that the law is no longer useful: just as it might
be declared by the verbal promulgation of a law to the contrary. If,
however, the same reason remains, for which the law was useful
hitherto, then it is not the custom that prevails against the law,
but the law that overcomes the custom: unless perhaps the sole reason
for the law seeming useless, be that it is not "possible according to
the custom of the country" [*Q. 95, A. 3], which has been stated to
be one of the conditions of law. For it is not easy to set aside the
custom of a whole people.

Reply Obj. 3: The people among whom a custom is introduced may be of
two conditions. For if they are free, and able to make their own
laws, the consent of the whole people expressed by a custom counts
far more in favor of a particular observance, that does the authority
of the sovereign, who has not the power to frame laws, except as
representing the people. Wherefore although each individual cannot
make laws, yet the whole people can. If however the people have not
the free power to make their own laws, or to abolish a law made by a
higher authority; nevertheless with such a people a prevailing custom
obtains force of law, in so far as it is tolerated by those to whom
it belongs to make laws for that people: because by the very fact
that they tolerate it they seem to approve of that which is
introduced by custom.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 97, Art. 4]

Whether the Rulers of the People Can Dispense from Human Laws?

Objection 1: It would seem that the rulers of the people cannot
dispense from human laws. For the law is established for the "common
weal," as Isidore says (Etym. v, 21). But the common good should not
be set aside for the private convenience of an individual: because,
as the Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 2), "the good of the nation is
more godlike than the good of one man." Therefore it seems that a man
should not be dispensed from acting in compliance with the general
law.

Obj. 2: Further, those who are placed over others are commanded as
follows (Deut. 1:17): "You shall hear the little as well as the
great; neither shall you respect any man's person, because it is the
judgment of God." But to allow one man to do that which is equally
forbidden to all, seems to be respect of persons. Therefore the
rulers of a community cannot grant such dispensations, since this is
against a precept of the Divine law.

Obj. 3: Further, human law, in order to be just, should accord with
the natural and Divine laws: else it would not "foster religion," nor
be "helpful to discipline," which is requisite to the nature of law,
as laid down by Isidore (Etym. v, 3). But no man can dispense from
the Divine and natural laws. Neither, therefore, can he dispense from
the human law.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (1 Cor. 9:17): "A dispensation is
committed to me."

_I answer that,_ Dispensation, properly speaking, denotes a measuring
out to individuals of some common goods: thus the head of a household
is called a dispenser, because to each member of the household he
distributes work and necessaries of life in due weight and measure.
Accordingly in every community a man is said to dispense, from the
very fact that he directs how some general precept is to be fulfilled
by each individual. Now it happens at times that a precept, which is
conducive to the common weal as a general rule, is not good for a
particular individual, or in some particular case, either because it
would hinder some greater good, or because it would be the occasion
of some evil, as explained above (Q. 96, A. 6). But it would be
dangerous to leave this to the discretion of each individual, except
perhaps by reason of an evident and sudden emergency, as stated above
(Q. 96, A. 6). Consequently he who is placed over a community is
empowered to dispense in a human law that rests upon his authority,
so that, when the law fails in its application to persons or
circumstances, he may allow the precept of the law not to be
observed. If however he grant this permission without any such
reason, and of his mere will, he will be an unfaithful or an
imprudent dispenser: unfaithful, if he has not the common good in
view; imprudent, if he ignores the reasons for granting
dispensations. Hence Our Lord says (Luke 12:42): "Who, thinkest thou,
is the faithful and wise dispenser [Douay: steward], whom his lord
setteth over his family?"

Reply Obj. 1: When a person is dispensed from observing the general
law, this should not be done to the prejudice of, but with the
intention of benefiting, the common good.

Reply Obj. 2: It is not respect of persons if unequal measures are
served out to those who are themselves unequal. Wherefore when the
condition of any person requires that he should reasonably receive
special treatment, it is not respect of persons if he be the object
of special favor.

Reply Obj. 3: Natural law, so far as it contains general precepts,
which never fail, does not allow of dispensations. In other precepts,
however, which are as conclusions of the general precepts, man
sometimes grants a dispensation: for instance, that a loan should not
be paid back to the betrayer of his country, or something similar.
But to the Divine law each man stands as a private person to the
public law to which he is subject. Wherefore just as none can
dispense from public human law, except the man from whom the law
derives its authority, or his delegate; so, in the precepts of the
Divine law, which are from God, none can dispense but God, or the man
to whom He may give special power for that purpose.
________________________

QUESTION 98

OF THE OLD LAW
(In Six Articles)

In due sequence we must now consider the Old Law; and (1) The Law
itself; (2) Its precepts. Under the first head there are six points
of inquiry:

(1) Whether the Old Law was good?

(2) Whether it was from God?

(3) Whether it came from Him through the angels?

(4) Whether it was given to all?

(5) Whether it was binding on all?

(6) Whether it was given at a suitable time?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 98, Art. 1]

Whether the Old Law Was Good?

Objection 1: It would seem that the Old Law was not good. For it is
written (Ezech. 20:25): "I gave them statutes that were not good, and
judgments in which they shall not live." But a law is not said to be
good except on account of the goodness of the precepts that it
contains. Therefore the Old Law was not good.

Obj. 2: Further, it belongs to the goodness of a law that it conduce
to the common welfare, as Isidore says (Etym. v, 3). But the Old Law
was not salutary; rather was it deadly and hurtful. For the Apostle
says (Rom. 7:8, seqq.): "Without the law sin was dead. And I lived
some time without the law. But when the commandment came sin revived;
and I died." Again he says (Rom. 5:20): "Law entered in that sin
might abound." Therefore the Old Law was not good.

Obj. 3: Further, it belongs to the goodness of the law that it should
be possible to obey it, both according to nature, and according to
human custom. But such the Old Law was not: since Peter said (Acts
15:10): "Why tempt you (God) to put a yoke on the necks of the
disciples, which neither our fathers nor we have been able to bear?"
Therefore it seems that the Old Law was not good.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Rom. 7:12): "Wherefore the law
indeed is holy, and the commandment holy, and just, and good."

_I answer that,_ Without any doubt, the Old Law was good. For just as
a doctrine is shown to be good by the fact that it accords with right
reason, so is a law proved to be good if it accords with reason. Now
the Old Law was in accordance with reason. Because it repressed
concupiscence which is in conflict with reason, as evidenced by the
commandment, "Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's goods" (Ex. 20:17).
Moreover the same law forbade all kinds of sin; and these too are
contrary to reason. Consequently it is evident that it was a good
law. The Apostle argues in the same way (Rom. 7): "I am delighted,"
says he (verse 22), "with the law of God, according to the inward
man": and again (verse 16): "I consent to the law, that is good."

But it must be noted that the good has various degrees, as Dionysius
states (Div. Nom. iv): for there is a perfect good, and an imperfect
good. In things ordained to an end, there is perfect goodness when a
thing is such that it is sufficient in itself to conduce to the end:
while there is imperfect goodness when a thing is of some assistance
in attaining the end, but is not sufficient for the realization
thereof. Thus a medicine is perfectly good, if it gives health to a
man; but it is imperfect, if it helps to cure him, without being able
to bring him back to health. Again it must be observed that the end
of human law is different from the end of Divine law. For the end of
human law is the temporal tranquillity of the state, which end law
effects by directing external actions, as regards those evils which
might disturb the peaceful condition of the state. On the other hand,
the end of the Divine law is to bring man to that end which is
everlasting happiness; which end is hindered by any sin, not only of
external, but also of internal action. Consequently that which
suffices for the perfection of human law, viz. the prohibition and
punishment of sin, does not suffice for the perfection of the Divine
law: but it is requisite that it should make man altogether fit to
partake of everlasting happiness. Now this cannot be done save by the
grace of the Holy Ghost, whereby "charity" which fulfilleth the law
. . . "is spread abroad in our hearts" (Rom. 5:5): since "the grace of
God is life everlasting" (Rom. 6:23). But the Old Law could not
confer this grace, for this was reserved to Christ; because, as it is
written (John 1:17), the law was given "by Moses, grace and truth
came by Jesus Christ." Consequently the Old Law was good indeed, but
imperfect, according to Heb. 7:19: "The law brought nothing to
perfection."

Reply Obj. 1: The Lord refers there to the ceremonial precepts; which
are said not to be good, because they did not confer grace unto the
remission of sins, although by fulfilling these precepts man
confessed himself a sinner. Hence it is said pointedly, "and
judgments in which they shall not live"; i.e. whereby they are unable
to obtain life; and so the text goes on: "And I polluted them," i.e.
showed them to be polluted, "in their own gifts, when they offered
all that opened the womb, for their offenses."

Reply Obj. 2: The law is said to have been deadly, as being not the
cause, but the occasion of death, on account of its imperfection: in
so far as it did not confer grace enabling man to fulfil what is
prescribed, and to avoid what it forbade. Hence this occasion was not
given to men, but taken by them. Wherefore the Apostle says (Rom.
5:11): "Sin, taking occasion by the commandment, seduced me, and by
it killed me." In the same sense when it is said that "the law
entered in that sin might abound," the conjunction "that" must be
taken as consecutive and not final: in so far as men, taking occasion
from the law, sinned all the more, both because a sin became more
grievous after law had forbidden it, and because concupiscence
increased, since we desire a thing the more from its being forbidden.

Reply Obj. 3: The yoke of the law could not be borne without the help
of grace, which the law did not confer: for it is written (Rom.
9:16): "It is not him that willeth, nor of him that runneth," viz.
that he wills and runs in the commandments of God, "but of God that
showeth mercy." Wherefore it is written (Ps. 118:32): "I have run the
way of Thy commandments, when Thou didst enlarge my heart," i.e. by
giving me grace and charity.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 98, Art. 2]

Whether the Old Law Was from God?

Objection 1: It would seem that the Old Law was not from God. For it
is written (Deut. 32:4): "The works of God are perfect." But the Law
was imperfect, as stated above (A. 1). Therefore the Old Law was not
from God.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Eccles. 3:14): "I have learned that
all the works which God hath made continue for ever." But the Old Law
does not continue for ever: since the Apostle says (Heb. 7:18):
"There is indeed a setting aside of the former commandment, because
of the weakness and unprofitableness thereof." Therefore the Old Law
was not from God.

Obj. 3: Further, a wise lawgiver should remove, not only evil, but
also the occasions of evil. But the Old Law was an occasion of sin,
as stated above (A. 1, ad 2). Therefore the giving of such a law does
not pertain to God, to Whom "none is like among the lawgivers" (Job
36:22).

Obj. 4: Further, it is written (1 Tim. 2:4) that God "will have all
men to be saved." But the Old Law did not suffice to save man, as
stated above (A. 1). Therefore the giving of such a law did not
appertain to God. Therefore the Old Law was not from God.

_On the contrary,_ Our Lord said (Matt. 15:6) while speaking to the
Jews, to whom the Law was given: "You have made void the commandment
of God for your tradition." And shortly before (verse 4) He had said:
"Honor thy father and mother," which is contained expressly in the
Old Law (Ex. 20:12; Deut. 5:16). Therefore the Old Law was from God.

_I answer that,_ The Old Law was given by the good God, Who is the
Father of Our Lord Jesus Christ. For the Old Law ordained men to
Christ in two ways. First by bearing witness to Christ; wherefore He
Himself says (Luke 24:44): "All things must needs be fulfilled, which
are written in the law . . . and in the prophets, and in the psalms,
concerning Me": and (John 5:46): "If you did believe Moses, you would
perhaps believe Me also; for he wrote of Me." Secondly, as a kind of
disposition, since by withdrawing men from idolatrous worship, it
enclosed (_concludebat_) them in the worship of one God, by Whom the
human race was to be saved through Christ. Wherefore the Apostle says
(Gal. 3:23): "Before the faith came, we were kept under the law shut
up (_conclusi_), unto that faith which was to be revealed." Now it is
evident that the same thing it is, which gives a disposition to the
end, and which brings to the end; and when I say "the same," I mean
that it does so either by itself or through its subjects. For the
devil would not make a law whereby men would be led to Christ, Who
was to cast him out, according to Matt. 12:26: "If Satan cast out
Satan, his kingdom is divided" [Vulg.: 'he is divided against
himself']. Therefore the Old Law was given by the same God, from Whom
came salvation to man, through the grace of Christ.

Reply Obj. 1: Nothing prevents a thing being not perfect simply, and
yet perfect in respect of time: thus a boy is said to be perfect, not
simply, but with regard to the condition of time. So, too, precepts
that are given to children are perfect in comparison with the
condition of those to whom they are given, although they are not
perfect simply. Hence the Apostle says (Gal. 3:24): "The law was our
pedagogue in Christ."

Reply Obj. 2: Those works of God endure for ever which God so made
that they would endure for ever; and these are His perfect works. But
the Old Law was set aside when there came the perfection of grace;
not as though it were evil, but as being weak and useless for this
time; because, as the Apostle goes on to say, "the law brought
nothing to perfection": hence he says (Gal. 3:25): "After the faith
is come, we are no longer under a pedagogue."

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 79, A. 4), God sometimes permits
certain ones to fall into sin, that they may thereby be humbled. So
also did He wish to give such a law as men by their own forces could
not fulfill, so that, while presuming on their own powers, they might
find themselves to be sinners, and being humbled might have recourse
to the help of grace.

Reply Obj. 4: Although the Old Law did not suffice to save man, yet
another help from God besides the Law was available for man, viz.
faith in the Mediator, by which the fathers of old were justified
even as we were. Accordingly God did not fail man by giving him
insufficient aids to salvation.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 98, Art. 3]

Whether the Old Law Was Given Through the Angels?

Objection 1: It seems that the Old Law was not given through the
angels, but immediately by God. For an angel means a "messenger"; so
that the word "angel" denotes ministry, not lordship, according to
Ps. 102:20, 21: "Bless the Lord, all ye His Angels . . . you
ministers of His." But the Old Law is related to have been given by
the Lord: for it is written (Ex. 20:1): "And the Lord spoke . . .
these words," and further on: "I am the Lord Thy God." Moreover the
same expression is often repeated in Exodus, and the later books of
the Law. Therefore the Law was given by God immediately.

Obj. 2: Further, according to John 1:17, "the Law was given by
Moses." But Moses received it from God immediately: for it is written
(Ex. 33:11): "The Lord spoke to Moses face to face, as a man is wont
to speak to his friend." Therefore the Old Law was given by God
immediately.

Obj. 3: Further, it belongs to the sovereign alone to make a law, as
stated above (Q. 90, A. 3). But God alone is Sovereign as regards the
salvation of souls: while the angels are the "ministering spirits,"
as stated in Heb. 1:14. Therefore it was not meet for the Law to be
given through the angels, since it is ordained to the salvation of
souls.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle said (Gal. 3:19) that the Law was
"given [Vulg.: 'ordained'] by angels in the hand of a Mediator." And
Stephen said (Acts 7:53): "(Who) have received the Law by the
disposition of angels."

_I answer that,_ The Law was given by God through the angels. And
besides the general reason given by Dionysius (Coel. Hier. iv), viz.
that "the gifts of God should be brought to men by means of the
angels," there is a special reason why the Old Law should have been
given through them. For it has been stated (AA. 1, 2) that the Old
Law was imperfect, and yet disposed man to that perfect salvation of
the human race, which was to come through Christ. Now it is to be
observed that wherever there is an order of powers or arts, he that
holds the highest place, himself exercises the principal and perfect
acts; while those things which dispose to the ultimate perfection are
effected by him through his subordinates: thus the ship-builder
himself rivets the planks together, but prepares the material by
means of the workmen who assist him under his direction. Consequently
it was fitting that the perfect law of the New Testament should be
given by the incarnate God immediately; but that the Old Law should
be given to men by the ministers of God, i.e. by the angels. It is
thus that the Apostle at the beginning of his epistle to the Hebrews
(1:2) proves the excellence of the New Law over the Old; because in
the New Testament "God . . . hath spoken to us by His Son," whereas
in the Old Testament "the word was spoken by angels" (Heb. 2:2).

Reply Obj. 1: As Gregory says at the beginning of his Morals (Praef.
chap. i), "the angel who is described to have appeared to Moses, is
sometimes mentioned as an angel, sometimes as the Lord: an angel, in
truth, in respect of that which was subservient to the external
delivery; and the Lord, because He was the Director within, Who
supported the effectual power of speaking." Hence also it is that the
angel spoke as personating the Lord.

Reply Obj. 2: As Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 27), it is stated
in Exodus that "the Lord spoke to Moses face to face"; and shortly
afterwards we read, "'Show me Thy glory.' Therefore He perceived what
he saw and he desired what he saw not." Hence he did not see the very
Essence of God; and consequently he was not taught by Him
immediately. Accordingly when Scripture states that "He spoke to him
face to face," this is to be understood as expressing the opinion of
the people, who thought that Moses was speaking with God mouth to
mouth, when God spoke and appeared to him, by means of a subordinate
creature, i.e. an angel and a cloud. Again we may say that this
vision "face to face" means some kind of sublime and familiar
contemplation, inferior to the vision of the Divine Essence.

Reply Obj. 3: It is for the sovereign alone to make a law by his own
authority; but sometimes after making a law, he promulgates it
through others. Thus God made the Law by His own authority, but He
promulgated it through the angels.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q, 98, Art. 4]

Whether the Old Law Should Have Been Given to the Jews Alone?

Objection 1: It would seem that the Old Law should not have been
given to the Jews alone. For the Old Law disposed men for the
salvation which was to come through Christ, as stated above (AA. 2,
3). But that salvation was to come not to the Jews alone but to all
nations, according to Isa. 49:6: "It is a small thing that thou
shouldst be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to
convert the dregs of Israel. Behold I have given thee to be the light
of the Gentiles, that thou mayest be My salvation, even to the
farthest part of the earth." Therefore the Old Law should have been
given to all nations, and not to one people only.

Obj. 2: Further, according to Acts 10:34, 35, "God is not a respecter
of persons: but in every nation, he that feareth Him, and worketh
justice, is acceptable to Him." Therefore the way of salvation should
not have been opened to one people more than to another.

Obj. 3: Further, the law was given through the angels, as stated
above (A. 3). But God always vouchsafed the ministrations of the
angels not to the Jews alone, but to all nations: for it is written
(Ecclus. 17:14): "Over every nation He set a ruler." Also on all
nations He bestows temporal goods, which are of less account with God
than spiritual goods. Therefore He should have given the Law also to
all peoples.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Rom. 3:1, 2): "What advantage then
hath the Jew? . . . Much every way. First indeed, because the words
of God were committed to them": and (Ps. 147:9): "He hath not done in
like manner to every nation: and His judgments He hath not made
manifest unto them."

_I answer that,_ It might be assigned as a reason for the Law being
given to the Jews rather than to other peoples, that the Jewish
people alone remained faithful to the worship of one God, while the
others turned away to idolatry; wherefore the latter were unworthy to
receive the Law, lest a holy thing should be given to dogs.

But this reason does not seem fitting: because that people turned to
idolatry, even after the Law had been made, which was more grievous,
as is clear from Ex. 32 and from Amos 5:25, 26: "Did you offer
victims and sacrifices to Me in the desert for forty years, O house
of Israel? But you carried a tabernacle for your Moloch, and the
image of your idols, the star of your god, which you made to
yourselves." Moreover it is stated expressly (Deut. 9:6): "Know
therefore that the Lord thy God giveth thee not this excellent land
in possession for thy justices, for thou art a very stiff-necked
people": but the real reason is given in the preceding verse: "That
the Lord might accomplish His word, which He promised by oath to thy
fathers Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob."

What this promise was is shown by the Apostle, who says (Gal. 3:16)
that "to Abraham were the promises made and to his seed. He saith
not, 'And to his seeds,' as of many: but as of one, 'And to thy
seed,' which is Christ." And so God vouchsafed both the Law and other
special boons to that people, on account of the promised made to
their fathers that Christ should be born of them. For it was fitting
that the people, of whom Christ was to be born, should be signalized
by a special sanctification, according to the words of Lev. 19:2: "Be
ye holy, because I . . . am holy." Nor again was it on account of the
merit of Abraham himself that this promise was made to him, viz. that
Christ should be born of his seed: but of gratuitous election and
vocation. Hence it is written (Isa. 41:2): "Who hath raised up the
just one form the east, hath called him to follow him?"

It is therefore evident that it was merely from gratuitous election
that the patriarchs received the promise, and that the people sprung
from them received the law; according to Deut. 4:36, 37: "Ye did
[Vulg.: 'Thou didst'] hear His words out of the midst of the fire,
because He loved thy fathers, and chose their seed after them." And
if again it asked why He chose this people, and not another, that
Christ might be born thereof; a fitting answer is given by Augustine
(Tract. super Joan. xxvi): "Why He draweth one and draweth not
another, seek not thou to judge, if thou wish not to err."

Reply Obj. 1: Although the salvation, which was to come through
Christ, was prepared for all nations, yet it was necessary that
Christ should be born of one people, which, for this reason, was
privileged above other peoples; according to Rom. 9:4: "To whom,"
namely the Jews, "belongeth the adoption as of children (of God)
. . . and the testament, and the giving of the Law . . . whose are
the fathers, and of whom is Christ according to the flesh."

Reply Obj. 2: Respect of persons takes place in those things which
are given according to due; but it has no place in those things which
are bestowed gratuitously. Because he who, out of generosity, gives
of his own to one and not to another, is not a respecter of persons:
but if he were a dispenser of goods held in common, and were not to
distribute them according to personal merits, he would be a respecter
of persons. Now God bestows the benefits of salvation on the human
race gratuitously: wherefore He is not a respecter of persons, if He
gives them to some rather than to others. Hence Augustine says (De
Praedest. Sanct. viii): "All whom God teaches, he teaches out of
pity; but whom He teaches not, out of justice He teaches not": for
this is due to the condemnation of the human race for the sin of the
first parent.

Reply Obj. 3: The benefits of grace are forfeited by man on account
of sin: but not the benefits of nature. Among the latter are the
ministries of the angels, which the very order of various natures
demands, viz. that the lowest beings be governed through the
intermediate beings: and also bodily aids, which God vouchsafes not
only to men, but also to beasts, according to Ps. 35:7: "Men and
beasts Thou wilt preserve, O Lord."
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 98, Art. 5]

Whether All Men Were Bound to Observe the Old Law?

Objection 1: It would seem that all men were bound to observe the Old
Law. Because whoever is subject to the king, must needs be subject to
his law. But the Old Law was given by God, Who is "King of all the
earth" (Ps. 46:8). Therefore all the inhabitants of the earth were
bound to observe the Law.

Obj. 2: Further, the Jews could not be saved without observing the
Old Law: for it is written (Deut. 27:26): "Cursed be he that abideth
not in the words of this law, and fulfilleth them not in work." If
therefore other men could be saved without the observance of the Old
Law, the Jews would be in a worse plight than other men.

Obj. 3: Further, the Gentiles were admitted to the Jewish ritual and
to the observances of the Law: for it is written (Ex. 12:48): "If any
stranger be willing to dwell among you, and to keep the Phase of the
Lord, all his males shall first be circumcised, and then shall he
celebrate it according to the manner; and he shall be as he that is
born in the land." But it would have been useless to admit strangers
to the legal observances according to Divine ordinance, if they could
have been saved without the observance of the Law. Therefore none
could be saved without observing the Law.

_On the contrary,_ Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. ix) that many of the
Gentiles were brought back to God by the angels. But it is clear that
the Gentiles did not observe the Law. Therefore some could be saved
without observing the Law.

_I answer that,_ The Old Law showed forth the precepts of the natural
law, and added certain precepts of its own. Accordingly, as to those
precepts of the natural law contained in the Old Law, all were bound
to observe the Old Law; not because they belonged to the Old Law, but
because they belonged to the natural law. But as to those precepts
which were added by the Old Law, they were not binding on any save
the Jewish people alone.

The reason of this is because the Old Law, as stated above (A. 4),
was given to the Jewish people, that it might receive a prerogative
of holiness, in reverence for Christ Who was to be born of that
people. Now whatever laws are enacted for the special sanctification
of certain ones, are binding on them alone: thus clerics who are set
aside for the service of God are bound to certain obligations to
which the laity are not bound; likewise religious are bound by their
profession to certain works of perfection, to which people living in
the world are not bound. In like manner this people was bound to
certain special observances, to which other peoples were not bound.
Wherefore it is written (Deut. 18:13): "Thou shalt be perfect and
without spot before the Lord thy God": and for this reason they used
a kind of form of profession, as appears from Deut. 26:3: "I profess
this day before the Lord thy God," etc.

Reply Obj. 1: Whoever are subject to a king, are bound to observe his
law which he makes for all in general. But if he orders certain
things to be observed by the servants of his household, others are
not bound thereto.

Reply Obj. 2: The more a man is united to God, the better his state
becomes: wherefore the more the Jewish people were bound to the
worship of God, the greater their excellence over other peoples.
Hence it is written (Deut. 4:8): "What other nation is there so
renowned that hath ceremonies and just judgments, and all the law?"
In like manner, from this point of view, the state of clerics is
better than that of the laity, and the state of religious than that
of folk living in the world.

Reply Obj. 3: The Gentiles obtained salvation more perfectly and more
securely under the observances of the Law than under the mere natural
law: and for this reason they were admitted to them. So too the laity
are now admitted to the ranks of the clergy, and secular persons to
those of the religious, although they can be saved without this.
________________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 98, Art. 6]

Whether the Old Law Was Suitably Given at the Time of Moses?

Objection 1: It would seem that the Old Law was not suitably given at
the time of Moses. Because the Old Law disposed man for the salvation
which was to come through Christ, as stated above (AA. 2, 3). But man
needed this salutary remedy immediately after he had sinned.
Therefore the Law should have been given immediately after sin.

Obj. 2: Further, the Old Law was given for the sanctification of
those from whom Christ was to be born. Now the promise concerning the
"seed, which is Christ" (Gal. 3:16) was first made to Abraham, as
related in Gen. 12:7. Therefore the Law should have been given at
once at the time of Abraham.

Obj. 3: Further, as Christ was born of those alone who descended from
Noe through Abraham, to whom the promise was made; so was He born of
no other of the descendants of Abraham but David, to whom the promise
was renewed, according to 2 Kings 23:1: "The man to whom it was
appointed concerning the Christ of the God of Jacob . . . said."
Therefore the Old Law should have been given after David, just as it
was given after Abraham.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Gal. 3:19) that the Law "was set
because of transgressions, until the seed should come, to whom He
made the promise, being ordained by angels in the hand of a
Mediator": ordained, i.e. "given in orderly fashion," as the gloss
explains. Therefore it was fitting that the Old Law should be given
in this order of time.

_I answer that,_ It was most fitting for the Law to be given at the
time of Moses. The reason for this may be taken from two things in
respect of which every law is imposed on two kinds of men. Because it
is imposed on some men who are hard-hearted and proud, whom the law
restrains and tames: and it is imposed on good men, who, through
being instructed by the law, are helped to fulfil what they desire to
do. Hence it was fitting that the Law should be given at such a time
as would be appropriate for the overcoming of man's pride. For man
was proud of two things, viz. of knowledge and of power. He was proud
of his knowledge, as though his natural reason could suffice him for
salvation: and accordingly, in order that his pride might be overcome
in this matter, man was left to the guidance of his reason without
the help of a written law: and man was able to learn from experience
that his reason was deficient, since about the time of Abraham man
had fallen headlong into idolatry and the most shameful vices.
Wherefore, after those times, it was necessary for a written law to
be given as a remedy for human ignorance: because "by the Law is the
knowledge of sin" (Rom. 3:20). But, after man had been instructed by
the Law, his pride was convinced of his weakness, through his being
unable to fulfil what he knew. Hence, as the Apostle concludes (Rom.
8:3, 4), "what the Law could not do in that it was weak through the
flesh, God sent [Vulg.: 'sending'] His own Son . . . that the
justification of the Law might be fulfilled in us."

With regard to good men, the Law was given to them as a help; which
was most needed by the people, at the time when the natural law began
to be obscured on account of the exuberance of sin: for it was
fitting that this help should be bestowed on men in an orderly
manner, so that they might be led from imperfection to perfection;
wherefore it was becoming that the Old Law should be given between
the law of nature and the law of grace.

Reply Obj. 1: It was not fitting for the Old Law to be given at once
after the sin of the first man: both because man was so confident in
his own reason, that he did not acknowledge his need of the Old Law;
because as yet the dictate of the natural law was not darkened by
habitual sinning.

Reply Obj. 2: A law should not be given save to the people, since it
is a general precept, as stated above (Q. 90, AA. 2, 3); wherefore at
the time of Abraham God gave men certain familiar, and, as it were,
household precepts: but when Abraham's descendants had multiplied, so
as to form a people, and when they had been freed from slavery, it
was fitting that they should be given a law; for "slaves are not that
part of the people or state to which it is fitting for the law to be
directed," as the Philosopher says (Polit. iii, 2, 4, 5).

Reply Obj. 3: Since the Law had to be given to the people, not only
those, of whom Christ was born, received the Law, but the whole
people, who were marked with the seal of circumcision, which was the
sign of the promise made to Abraham, and in which he believed,
according to Rom. 4:11: hence even before David, the Law had to be
given to that people as soon as they were collected together.
________________________

QUESTION 99

OF THE PRECEPTS OF THE OLD LAW
(In Six Articles)

We must now consider the precepts of the Old Law; and (1) how they
are distinguished from one another; (2) each kind of precept. Under
the first head there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether the Old Law contains several precepts or only one?

(2) Whether the Old Law contains any moral precepts?

(3) Whether it contains ceremonial precepts in addition to the moral
precepts?

(4) Whether besides these it contains judicial precepts?

(5) Whether it contains any others besides these?

(6) How the Old Law induced men to keep its precepts.
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 99, Art. 1]

Whether the Old Law Contains Only One Precept?

Objection 1: It would seem that the Old Law contains but one precept.
Because a law is nothing else than a precept, as stated above (Q. 90,
AA. 2, 3). Now there is but one Old Law. Therefore it contains but
one precept.

Obj. 2: Further, the Apostle says (Rom. 13:9): "If there be any other
commandment, it is comprised in this word: Thou shalt love thy
neighbor as thyself." But this is only one commandment. Therefore the
Old Law contained but one commandment.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Matt. 7:12): "All things . . .
whatsoever you would that men should do to you, do you also to them.
For this is the Law and the prophets." But the whole of the Old Law
is comprised in the Law and the prophets. Therefore the whole of the
Old Law contains but one commandment.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Eph. 2:15): "Making void the Law
of commandments contained in decrees": where he is referring to the
Old Law, as the gloss comments, on the passage. Therefore the Old Law
comprises many commandments.

_I answer that,_ Since a precept of law is binding, it is about
something which must be done: and, that a thing must be done, arises
from the necessity of some end. Hence it is evident that a precept
implies, in its very idea, relation to an end, in so far as a thing
is commanded as being necessary or expedient to an end. Now many
things may happen to be necessary or expedient to an end; and,
accordingly, precepts may be given about various things as being
ordained to one end. Consequently we must say that all the precepts
of the Old Law are one in respect of their relation to one end: and
yet they are many in respect of the diversity of those things that
are ordained to that end.

Reply Obj. 1: The Old Law is said to be one as being ordained to one
end: yet it comprises various precepts, according to the diversity of
the things which it directs to the end. Thus also the art of building
is one according to the unity of its end, because it aims at the
building of a house: and yet it contains various rules, according to
the variety of acts ordained thereto.

Reply Obj. 2: As the Apostle says (1 Tim. 1:5), "the end of the
commandment is charity"; since every law aims at establishing
friendship, either between man and man, or between man and God.
Wherefore the whole Law is comprised in this one commandment, "Thou
shalt love thy neighbor as thyself," as expressing the end of all
commandments: because love of one's neighbor includes love of God,
when we love our neighbor for God's sake. Hence the Apostle put this
commandment in place of the two which are about the love of God and
of one's neighbor, and of which Our Lord said (Matt. 22:40): "On
these two commandments dependeth the whole Law and the prophets."

Reply Obj. 3: As stated in _Ethic._ ix, 8, "friendship towards
another arises from friendship towards oneself," in so far as man
looks on another as on himself. Hence when it is said, "All things
whatsoever you would that men should do to you, do you also to them,"
this is an explanation of the rule of neighborly love contained
implicitly in the words, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself":
so that it is an explanation of this commandment.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 99, Art. 2]

Whether the Old Law Contains Moral Precepts?

Objection 1: It would seem that the Old Law contains no moral
precepts. For the Old Law is distinct from the law of nature, as
stated above (Q. 91, AA. 4, 5; Q. 98, A. 5). But the moral precepts
belong to the law of nature. Therefore they do not belong to the Old
Law.

Obj. 2: Further, the Divine Law should have come to man's assistance
where human reason fails him: as is evident in regard to things that
are of faith, which are above reason. But man's reason seems to
suffice for the moral precepts. Therefore the moral precepts do not
belong to the Old Law, which is a Divine law.

Obj. 3: Further, the Old Law is said to be "the letter that killeth"
(2 Cor. 3:6). But the moral precepts do not kill, but quicken,
according to Ps. 118:93: "Thy justifications I will never forget, for
by them Thou hast given me life." Therefore the moral precepts do not
belong to the Old Law.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Ecclus. 17:9): "Moreover, He gave
them discipline [Douay: 'instructions'] and the law of life for an
inheritance." Now discipline belongs to morals; for this gloss on
Heb. 12:11: "Now all chastisement (_disciplina_)," etc., says:
"Discipline is an exercise in morals by means of difficulties."
Therefore the Law which was given by God comprised moral precepts.

_I answer that,_ The Old Law contained some moral precepts; as is
evident from Ex. 20:13, 15: "Thou shalt not kill," "Thou shalt not
steal." This was reasonable: because, just as the principal intention
of human law is to create friendship between man and man; so the
chief intention of the Divine law is to establish man in friendship
with God. Now since likeness is the reason of love, according to
Ecclus. 13:19: "Every beast loveth its like"; there cannot possibly
be any friendship of man to God, Who is supremely good, unless man
become good: wherefore it is written (Lev. 19:2; 11:45): "You shall
be holy, for I am holy." But the goodness of man is virtue, which
"makes its possessor good" (Ethic. ii, 6). Therefore it was necessary
for the Old Law to include precepts about acts of virtue: and these
are the moral precepts of the Law.

Reply Obj. 1: The Old Law is distinct from the natural law, not as
being altogether different from it, but as something added thereto.
For just as grace presupposes nature, so must the Divine law
presuppose the natural law.

Reply Obj. 2: It was fitting that the Divine law should come to man's
assistance not only in those things for which reason is insufficient,
but also in those things in which human reason may happen to be
impeded. Now human reason could not go astray in the abstract, as to
the universal principles of the natural law; but through being
habituated to sin, it became obscured in the point of things to be
done in detail. But with regard to the other moral precepts, which
are like conclusions drawn from the universal principles of the
natural law, the reason of many men went astray, to the extend of
judging to be lawful, things that are evil in themselves. Hence there
was need for the authority of the Divine law to rescue man from both
these defects. Thus among the articles of faith not only are those
things set forth to which reason cannot reach, such as the Trinity of
the Godhead; but also those to which right reason can attain, such as
the Unity of the Godhead; in order to remove the manifold errors to
which reason is liable.

Reply Obj. 3: As Augustine proves (De Spiritu et Litera xiv), even
the letter of the law is said to be the occasion of death, as to the
moral precepts; in so far as, to wit, it prescribes what is good,
without furnishing the aid of grace for its fulfilment.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 99, Art. 3]

Whether the Old Law Comprises Ceremonial, Besides Moral, Precepts?

Objection 1: It would seem that the Old Law does not comprise
ceremonial, besides moral, precepts. For every law that is given to
man is for the purpose of directing human actions. Now human actions
are called moral, as stated above (Q. 1, A. 3). Therefore it seems
that the Old Law given to men should not comprise other than moral
precepts.

Obj. 2: Further, those precepts that are styled ceremonial seem to
refer to the Divine worship. But Divine worship is the act of a
virtue, viz. religion, which, as Tully says (De Invent. ii) "offers
worship and ceremony to the Godhead." Since, then, the moral precepts
are about acts of virtue, as stated above (A. 2), it seems that the
ceremonial precepts should not be distinct from the moral.

Obj. 3: Further, the ceremonial precepts seem to be those which
signify something figuratively. But, as Augustine observes (De Doctr.
Christ. ii, 3, 4), "of all signs employed by men words hold the first
place." Therefore there is no need for the Law to contain ceremonial
precepts about certain figurative actions.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Deut. 4:13, 14): "Ten words . . .
He wrote in two tables of stone; and He commanded me at that time
that I should teach you the ceremonies and judgments which you shall
do." But the ten commandments of the Law are moral precepts.
Therefore besides the moral precepts there are others which are
ceremonial.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 2), the Divine law is instituted
chiefly in order to direct men to God; while human law is instituted
chiefly in order to direct men in relation to one another. Hence
human laws have not concerned themselves with the institution of
anything relating to Divine worship except as affecting the common
good of mankind: and for this reason they have devised many
institutions relating to Divine matters, according as it seemed
expedient for the formation of human morals; as may be seen in the
rites of the Gentiles. On the other hand the Divine law directed men
to one another according to the demands of that order whereby man is
directed to God, which order was the chief aim of that law. Now man
is directed to God not only by the interior acts of the mind, which
are faith, hope, and love, but also by certain external works,
whereby man makes profession of his subjection to God: and it is
these works that are said to belong to the Divine worship. This
worship is called "ceremony,"--the _munia,_ i.e. gifts, of Ceres (who
was the goddess of fruits), as some say: because, at first, offerings
were made to God from the fruits: or because, as Valerius Maximus
states [*Fact. et Dict. Memor. i, 1], the word "ceremony" was
introduced among the Latins, to signify the Divine worship, being
derived from a town near Rome called "Caere": since, when Rome was
taken by the Gauls, the sacred chattels of the Romans were taken
thither and most carefully preserved. Accordingly those precepts of
the Law which refer to the Divine worship are specially called
ceremonial.

Reply Obj. 1: Human acts extend also to the Divine worship: and
therefore the Old Law given to man contains precepts about these
matters also.

Reply Obj. 2: As stated above (Q. 91, A. 3), the precepts of the
natural law are general, and require to be determined: and they are
determined both by human law and by Divine law. And just as these
very determinations which are made by human law are said to be, not
of natural, but of positive law; so the determinations of the
precepts of the natural law, effected by the Divine law, are distinct
from the moral precepts which belong to the natural law. Wherefore to
worship God, since it is an act of virtue, belongs to a moral
precept; but the determination of this precept, namely that He is to
be worshipped by such and such sacrifices, and such and such
offerings, belongs to the ceremonial precepts. Consequently the
ceremonial precepts are distinct from the moral precepts.

Reply Obj. 3: As Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. i), the things of God
cannot be manifested to men except by means of sensible similitudes.
Now these similitudes move the soul more when they are not only
expressed in words, but also offered to the senses. Wherefore the
things of God are set forth in the Scriptures not only by similitudes
expressed in words, as in the case of metaphorical expressions; but
also by similitudes of things set before the eyes, which pertains to
the ceremonial precepts.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 99, Art. 4]

Whether, Besides the Moral and Ceremonial Precepts, There Are Also
Judicial Precepts?

Objection 1: It would seem that there are no judicial precepts in
addition to the moral and ceremonial precepts in the Old Law. For
Augustine says (Contra Faust. vi, 2) that in the Old Law there are
"precepts concerning the life we have to lead, and precepts regarding
the life that is foreshadowed." Now the precepts of the life we have
to lead are moral precepts; and the precepts of the life that is
foreshadowed are ceremonial. Therefore besides these two kinds of
precepts we should not put any judicial precepts in the Law.

Obj. 2: Further, a gloss on Ps. 118:102, "I have not declined from
Thy judgments," says, i.e. "from the rule of life Thou hast set for
me." But a rule of life belongs to the moral precepts. Therefore the
judicial precepts should not be considered as distinct from the moral
precepts.

Obj. 3: Further, judgment seems to be an act of justice, according to
Ps. 93:15: "Until justice be turned into judgment." But acts of
justice, like the acts of other virtues, belong to the moral
precepts. Therefore the moral precepts include the judicial precepts,
and consequently should not be held as distinct from them.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Deut. 6:1): "These are the precepts
and ceremonies, and judgments": where "precepts" stands for "moral
precepts" antonomastically. Therefore there are judicial precepts
besides moral and ceremonial precepts.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (AA. 2, 3), it belongs to the Divine
law to direct men to one another and to God. Now each of these
belongs in the abstract to the dictates of the natural law, to which
dictates the moral precepts are to be referred: yet each of them has
to be determined by Divine or human law, because naturally known
principles are universal, both in speculative and in practical
matters. Accordingly just as the determination of the universal
principle about Divine worship is effected by the ceremonial
precepts, so the determination of the general precepts of that
justice which is to be observed among men is effected by the judicial
precepts.

We must therefore distinguish three kinds of precept in the Old Law;
viz. _moral_ precepts, which are dictated by the natural law;
_ceremonial_ precepts, which are determinations of the Divine
worship; and _judicial_ precepts, which are determinations of the
justice to be maintained among men. Wherefore the Apostle (Rom. 7:12)
after saying that the "Law is holy," adds that "the commandment is
just, and holy, and good": "just," in respect of the judicial
precepts; "holy," with regard to the ceremonial precepts (since the
word "sanctus"--"holy"--is applied to that which is consecrated to
God); and "good," i.e. conducive to virtue, as to the moral precepts.

Reply Obj. 1: Both the moral and the judicial precepts aim at the
ordering of human life: and consequently they are both comprised
under one of the heads mentioned by Augustine, viz. under the
precepts of the life we have to lead.

Reply Obj. 2: Judgment denotes execution of justice, by an
application of the reason to individual cases in a determinate way.
Hence the judicial precepts have something in common with the moral
precepts, in that they are derived from reason; and something in
common with the ceremonial precepts, in that they are determinations
of general precepts. This explains why sometimes "judgments" comprise
both judicial and moral precepts, as in Deut. 5:1: "Hear, O Israel,
the ceremonies and judgments"; and sometimes judicial and ceremonial
precepts, as in Lev. 18:4: "You shall do My judgments, and shall
observe My precepts," where "precepts" denotes moral precepts, while
"judgments" refers to judicial and ceremonial precepts.

Reply Obj. 3: The act of justice, in general, belongs to the moral
precepts; but its determination to some special kind of act belongs
to the judicial precepts.
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 99, Art. 5]

Whether the Old Law Contains Any Others Besides the Moral, Judicial,
and Ceremonial Precepts?

Objection 1: It would seem that the Old Law contains others besides
the moral, judicial, and ceremonial precepts. Because the judicial
precepts belong to the act of justice, which is between man and man;
while the ceremonial precepts belong to the act of religion, whereby
God is worshipped. Now besides these there are many other virtues,
viz. temperance, fortitude, liberality, and several others, as stated
above (Q. 60, A. 5). Therefore besides the aforesaid precepts, the
Old Law should comprise others.

Obj. 2: Further, it is written (Deut. 11:1): "Love the Lord thy God,
and observe His precepts and ceremonies, His judgments and
commandments." Now precepts concern moral matters, as stated above
(A. 4). Therefore besides the moral, judicial and ceremonial
precepts, the Law contains others which are called "commandments."
[*The "commandments" (mandata) spoken of here and in the body of this
article are not to be confused with the Commandments (praecepta) in
the ordinary acceptance of the word.]

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Deut. 6:17): "Keep the precepts of
the Lord thy God, and the testimonies and ceremonies which I have
[Vulg.: 'He hath'] commanded thee." Therefore in addition to the
above, the Law comprises "testimonies."

Obj. 4: Further, it is written (Ps. 118:93): "Thy justifications
(i.e. "Thy Law," according to a gloss) I will never forget."
Therefore in the Old Law there are not only moral, ceremonial and
judicial precepts, but also others, called "justifications."

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Deut. 6:1): "These are the precepts
and ceremonies and judgments which the Lord your God commanded . . .
you." And these words are placed at the beginning of the Law.
Therefore all the precepts of the Law are included under them.

_I answer that,_ Some things are included in the Law by way of
precept; other things, as being ordained to the fulfilment of the
precepts. Now the precepts refer to things which have to be done: and
to their fulfilment man is induced by two considerations, viz. the
authority of the lawgiver, and the benefit derived from the
fulfilment, which benefit consists in the attainment of some good,
useful, pleasurable or virtuous, or in the avoidance of some contrary
evil. Hence it was necessary that in the Old Law certain things
should be set forth to indicate the authority of God the lawgiver:
e.g. Deut. 6:4: "Hear, O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord"; and
Gen. 1:1: "In the beginning God created heaven and earth": and these
are called "testimonies." Again it was necessary that in the Law
certain rewards should be appointed for those who observe the Law,
and punishments for those who transgress; as it may be seen in Deut.
28: "If thou wilt hear the voice of the Lord thy God . . . He will
make thee higher than all the nations," etc.: and these are called
"justifications," according as God punishes or rewards certain ones
justly.

The things that have to be done do not come under the precept except
in so far as they have the character of a duty. Now a duty is
twofold: one according to the rule of reason; the other according to
the rule of a law which prescribes that duty: thus the Philosopher
distinguishes a twofold just--moral and legal (Ethic. v, 7).

Moral duty is twofold: because reason dictates that something must be
done, either as being so necessary that without it the order of
virtue would be destroyed; or as being useful for the better
maintaining of the order of virtue. And in this sense some of the
moral precepts are expressed by way of absolute command or
prohibition, as "Thou shalt not kill," "Thou shalt not steal": and
these are properly called "precepts." Other things are prescribed or
forbidden, not as an absolute duty, but as something better to be
done. These may be called "commandments"; because they are expressed
by way of inducement and persuasion: an example whereof is seen in
Ex. 22:26: "If thou take of thy neighbor a garment in pledge, thou
shalt give it him again before sunset"; and in other like cases.
Wherefore Jerome (Praefat. in Comment. super Marc.) says that
"justice is in the precepts, charity in the commandments." Duty as
fixed by the Law, belongs to the judicial precepts, as regards human
affairs; to the ceremonial precepts, as regards Divine matters.

Nevertheless those ordinances also which refer to punishments and
rewards may be called "testimonies," in so far as they testify to the
Divine justice. Again all the precepts of the Law may be styled
"justifications," as being executions of legal justice. Furthermore
the commandments may be distinguished from the precepts, so that
those things be called "precepts" which God Himself prescribed; and
those things "commandments" which He enjoined (_mandavit_) through
others, as the very word seems to denote.

From this it is clear that all the precepts of the Law are either
moral, ceremonial, or judicial; and that other ordinances have not
the character of a precept, but are directed to the observance of the
precepts, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 1: Justice alone, of all the virtues, implies the notion
of duty. Consequently moral matters are determinable by law in so far
as they belong to justice: of which virtue religion is a part, as
Tully says (De Invent. ii). Wherefore the legal just cannot be
anything foreign to the ceremonial and judicial precepts.

The Replies to the other Objections are clear from what has been said.
________________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 99, Art. 6]

Whether the Old Law Should Have Induced Men to the Observance of Its
Precepts, by Means of Temporal Promises and Threats?

Objection 1: It would seem that the Old Law should not have induced
men to the observance of its precepts, by means of temporal promises
and threats. For the purpose of the Divine law is to subject man to
God by fear and love: hence it is written (Deut. 10:12): "And now,
Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but that thou
fear the Lord thy God, and walk in His ways, and love Him?" But the
desire for temporal goods leads man away from God: for Augustine says
(Qq. lxxxiii, qu. 36), that "covetousness is the bane of charity."
Therefore temporal promises and threats seem to be contrary to the
intention of a lawgiver: and this makes a law worthy of rejection, as
the Philosopher declares (Polit. ii, 6).

Obj. 2: Further, the Divine law is more excellent than human law.
Now, in sciences, we notice that the loftier the science, the higher
the means of persuasion that it employs. Therefore, since human law
employs temporal threats and promises, as means of persuading man,
the Divine law should have used, not these, but more lofty means.

Obj. 3: Further, the reward of righteousness and the punishment of
guilt cannot be that which befalls equally the good and the wicked.
But as stated in Eccles. 9:2, "all" temporal "things equally happen
to the just and to the wicked, to the good and the evil, to the clean
and to the unclean, to him that offereth victims, and to him that
despiseth sacrifices." Therefore temporal goods or evils are not
suitably set forth as punishments or rewards of the commandments of
the Divine law.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Isa. 1:19, 20): "If you be willing,
and will hearken to Me, you shall eat the good things of the land.
But if you will not, and will provoke Me to wrath: the sword shall
devour you."

_I answer that,_ As in speculative sciences men are persuaded to
assent to the conclusions by means of syllogistic arguments, so too
in every law, men are persuaded to observe its precepts by means of
punishments and rewards. Now it is to be observed that, in
speculative sciences, the means of persuasion are adapted to the
conditions of the pupil: wherefore the process of argument in
sciences should be ordered becomingly, so that the instruction is
based on principles more generally known. And thus also he who would
persuade a man to the observance of any precepts, needs to move him
at first by things for which he has an affection; just as children
are induced to do something, by means of little childish gifts. Now
it has been said above (Q. 98, AA. 1, 2, 3) that the Old Law disposed
men to (the coming of) Christ, as the imperfect in comparison
disposes to the perfect, wherefore it was given to a people as yet
imperfect in comparison to the perfection which was to result from
Christ's coming: and for this reason, that people is compared to a
child that is still under a pedagogue (Gal. 3:24). But the perfection
of man consists in his despising temporal things and cleaving to
things spiritual, as is clear from the words of the Apostle (Phil.
3:13, 15): "Forgetting the things that are behind, I stretch [Vulg.:
'and stretching'] forth myself to those that are before . . . Let us
therefore, as many as are perfect, be thus minded." Those who are yet
imperfect desire temporal goods, albeit in subordination to God:
whereas the perverse place their end in temporalities. It was
therefore fitting that the Old Law should conduct men to God by means
of temporal goods for which the imperfect have an affection.

Reply Obj. 1: Covetousness whereby man places his end in
temporalities, is the bane of charity. But the attainment of temporal
goods which man desires in subordination to God is a road leading the
imperfect to the love of God, according to Ps. 48:19: "He will praise
Thee, when Thou shalt do well to him."

Reply Obj. 2: Human law persuades men by means of temporal rewards or
punishments to be inflicted by men: whereas the Divine law persuades
men by means of rewards or punishments to be received from God. In
this respect it employs higher means.

Reply Obj. 3: As any one can see, who reads carefully the story of
the Old Testament, the common weal of the people prospered under the
Law as long as they obeyed it; and as soon as they departed from the
precepts of the Law they were overtaken by many calamities. But
certain individuals, although they observed the justice of the Law,
met with misfortunes--either because they had already become
spiritual (so that misfortune might withdraw them all the more from
attachment to temporal things, and that their virtue might be
tried)--or because, while outwardly fulfilling the works of the Law,
their heart was altogether fixed on temporal goods, and far removed
from God, according to Isa. 29:13 (Matt. 15:8): "This people honoreth
Me with their lips; but their hearts is far from Me."
________________________

QUESTION 100

OF THE MORAL PRECEPTS OF THE OLD LAW
(In Twelve Articles)

We must now consider each kind of precept of the Old Law: and (1) the
moral precepts, (2) the ceremonial precepts, (3) the judicial
precepts. Under the first head there are twelve points of inquiry:

(1) Whether all the moral precepts of the Old Law belong to the law
of nature?

(2) Whether the moral precepts of the Old Law are about the acts of
all the virtues?

(3) Whether all the moral precepts of the Old Law are reducible to
the ten precepts of the decalogue?

(4) How the precepts of the decalogue are distinguished from one
another?

(5) Their number;

(6) Their order;

(7) The manner in which they were given;

(8) Whether they are dispensable?

(9) Whether the mode of observing a virtue comes under the precept
of the Law?

(10) Whether the mode of charity comes under the precept?

(11) The distinction of other moral precepts;

(12) Whether the moral precepts of the Old Law justified man?
________________________

FIRST ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 100, Art. 1]

Whether All the Moral Precepts of the Old Law Belong to the Law of
Nature?

Objection 1: It would seem that not all the moral precepts belong to
the law of nature. For it is written (Ecclus. 17:9): "Moreover He
gave them instructions, and the law of life for an inheritance." But
instruction is in contradistinction to the law of nature; since the
law of nature is not learnt, but instilled by natural instinct.
Therefore not all the moral precepts belong to the natural law.

Obj. 2: Further, the Divine law is more perfect than human law. But
human law adds certain things concerning good morals, to those that
belong to the law of nature: as is evidenced by the fact that the
natural law is the same in all men, while these moral institutions
are various for various people. Much more reason therefore was there
why the Divine law should add to the law of nature, ordinances
pertaining to good morals.

Obj. 3: Further, just as natural reason leads to good morals in
certain matters, so does faith: hence it is written (Gal. 5:6) that
faith "worketh by charity." But faith is not included in the law of
nature; since that which is of faith is above nature. Therefore not
all the moral precepts of the Divine law belong to the law of nature.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Rom. 2:14) that "the Gentiles,
who have not the Law, do by nature those things that are of the Law":
which must be understood of things pertaining to good morals.
Therefore all the moral precepts of the Law belong to the law of
nature.

_I answer that,_ The moral precepts, distinct from the ceremonial and
judicial precepts, are about things pertaining of their very nature
to good morals. Now since human morals depend on their relation to
reason, which is the proper principle of human acts, those morals are
called good which accord with reason, and those are called bad which
are discordant from reason. And as every judgment of speculative
reason proceeds from the natural knowledge of first principles, so
every judgment of practical reason proceeds from principles known
naturally, as stated above (Q. 94, AA. 2, 4): from which principles
one may proceed in various ways to judge of various matters. For some
matters connected with human actions are so evident, that after very
little consideration one is able at once to approve or disapprove of
them by means of these general first principles: while some matters
cannot be the subject of judgment without much consideration of the
various circumstances, which all are not competent to do carefully,
but only those who are wise: just as it is not possible for all to
consider the particular conclusions of sciences, but only for those
who are versed in philosophy: and lastly there are some matters of
which man cannot judge unless he be helped by Divine instruction;
such as the articles of faith.

It is therefore evident that since the moral precepts are about
matters which concern good morals; and since good morals are those
which are in accord with reason; and since also every judgment of
human reason must needs by derived in some way from natural reason;
it follows, of necessity, that all the moral precepts belong to the
law of nature; but not all in the same way. For there are certain
things which the natural reason of every man, of its own accord and
at once, judges to be done or not to be done: e.g. "Honor thy father
and thy mother," and "Thou shalt not kill," "Thou shalt not steal":
and these belong to the law of nature absolutely. And there are
certain things which, after a more careful consideration, wise men
deem obligatory. Such belong to the law of nature, yet so that they
need to be inculcated, the wiser teaching the less wise: e.g. "Rise
up before the hoary head, and honor the person of the aged man," and
the like. And there are some things, to judge of which, human reason
needs Divine instruction, whereby we are taught about the things of
God: e.g. "Thou shalt not make to thyself a graven thing, nor the
likeness of anything"; "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy
God in vain."

This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.
________________________

SECOND ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 100, Art. 2]

Whether the Moral Precepts of the Law Are About All the Acts of
Virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that the moral precepts of the Law are not
about all the acts of virtue. For observance of the precepts of the
Old Law is called justification, according to Ps. 118:8: "I will keep
Thy justifications." But justification is the execution of justice.
Therefore the moral precepts are only about acts of justice.

Obj. 2: Further, that which comes under a precept has the character
of a duty. But the character of duty belongs to justice alone and to
none of the other virtues, for the proper act of justice consists in
rendering to each one his due. Therefore the precepts of the moral
law are not about the acts of the other virtues, but only about the
acts of justice.

Obj. 3: Further, every law is made for the common good, as Isidore
says (Etym. v, 21). But of all the virtues justice alone regards the
common good, as the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 1). Therefore the
moral precepts are only about the acts of justice.

_On the contrary,_ Ambrose says (De Paradiso viii) that "a sin is a
transgression of the Divine law, and a disobedience to the
commandments of heaven." But there are sins contrary to all the acts
of virtue. Therefore it belongs to Divine law to direct all the acts
of virtue.

_I answer that,_ Since the precepts of the Law are ordained to the
common good, as stated above (Q. 90, A. 2), the precepts of the Law
must needs be diversified according to the various kinds of
community: hence the Philosopher (Polit. iv, 1) teaches that the laws
which are made in a state which is ruled by a king must be different
from the laws of a state which is ruled by the people, or by a few
powerful men in the state. Now human law is ordained for one kind of
community, and the Divine law for another kind. Because human law is
ordained for the civil community, implying mutual duties of man and
his fellows: and men are ordained to one another by outward acts,
whereby men live in communion with one another. This life in common
of man with man pertains to justice, whose proper function consists
in directing the human community. Wherefore human law makes precepts
only about acts of justice; and if it commands acts of other virtues,
this is only in so far as they assume the nature of justice, as the
Philosopher explains (Ethic. v, 1).

But the community for which the Divine law is ordained, is that of
men in relation to God, either in this life or in the life to come.
And therefore the Divine law proposes precepts about all those
matters whereby men are well ordered in their relations to God. Now
man is united to God by his reason or mind, in which is God's image.
Wherefore the Divine law proposes precepts about all those matters
whereby human reason is well ordered. But this is effected by the
acts of all the virtues: since the intellectual virtues set in good
order the acts of the reason in themselves: while the moral virtues
set in good order the acts of the reason in reference to the interior
passions and exterior actions. It is therefore evident that the
Divine law fittingly proposes precepts about the acts of all the
virtues: yet so that certain matters, without which the order of
virtue, which is the order of reason, cannot even exist, come under
an obligation of precept; while other matters, which pertain to the
well-being of perfect virtue, come under an admonition of counsel.

Reply Obj. 1: The fulfilment of the commandments of the Law, even of
those which are about the acts of the other virtues, has the
character of justification, inasmuch as it is just that man should
obey God: or again, inasmuch as it is just that all that belongs to
man should be subject to reason.

Reply Obj. 2: Justice properly so called regards the duty of one man
to another: but all the other virtues regard the duty of the lower
powers to reason. It is in relation to this latter duty that the
Philosopher speaks (Ethic. v, 11) of a kind of metaphorical justice.

The Reply to the Third Objection is clear from what has been said
about the different kinds of community.
________________________

THIRD ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 100, Art. 3]

Whether All the Moral Precepts of the Old Law Are Reducible to the
Ten Precepts of the Decalogue?

Objection 1: It would seem that not all the moral precepts of the Old
Law are reducible to the ten precepts of the decalogue. For the first
and principal precepts of the Law are, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God," and "Thou shalt love thy neighbor," as stated in Matt. 22:37,
39. But these two are not contained in the precepts of the decalogue.
Therefore not all the moral precepts are contained in the precepts of
the decalogue.

Obj. 2: Further, the moral precepts are not reducible to the
ceremonial precepts, but rather vice versa. But among the precepts of
the decalogue, one is ceremonial, viz. "Remember that thou keep holy
the Sabbath-day." Therefore the moral precepts are not reducible to
all the precepts of the decalogue.

Obj. 3: Further, the moral precepts are about all the acts of virtue.
But among the precepts of the decalogue are only such as regard acts
of justice; as may be seen by going through them all. Therefore the
precepts of the decalogue do not include all the moral precepts.

_On the contrary,_ The gloss on Matt. 5:11: "Blessed are ye when they
shall revile you," etc. says that "Moses, after propounding the ten
precepts, set them out in detail." Therefore all the precepts of the
Law are so many parts of the precepts of the decalogue.

_I answer that,_ The precepts of the decalogue differ from the other
precepts of the Law, in the fact that God Himself is said to have
given the precepts of the decalogue; whereas He gave the other
precepts to the people through Moses. Wherefore the decalogue
includes those precepts the knowledge of which man has immediately
from God. Such are those which with but slight reflection can be
gathered at once from the first general principles: and those also
which become known to man immediately through divinely infused faith.
Consequently two kinds of precepts are not reckoned among the
precepts of the decalogue: viz. first general principles, for they
need no further promulgation after being once imprinted on the
natural reason to which they are self-evident; as, for instance, that
one should do evil to no man, and other similar principles: and again
those which the careful reflection of wise men shows to be in accord
with reason; since the people receive these principles from God,
through being taught by wise men. Nevertheless both kinds of precepts
are contained in the precepts of the decalogue; yet in different
ways. For the first general principles are contained in them, as
principles in their proximate conclusions; while those which are
known through wise men are contained, conversely, as conclusions in
their principles.

Reply Obj. 1: Those two principles are the first general principles
of the natural law, and are self-evident to human reason, either
through nature or through faith. Wherefore all the precepts of the
decalogue are referred to these, as conclusions to general principles.

Reply Obj. 2: The precept of the Sabbath observance is moral in one
respect, in so far as it commands man to give some time to the things
of God, according to Ps. 45:11: "Be still and see that I am God." In
this respect it is placed among the precepts of the decalogue: but
not as to the fixing of the time, in which respect it is a ceremonial
precept.

Reply Obj. 3: The notion of duty is not so patent in the other
virtues as it is in justice. Hence the precepts about the acts of the
other virtues are not so well known to the people as are the precepts
about acts of justice. Wherefore the acts of justice especially come
under the precepts of the decalogue, which are the primary elements
of the Law.
________________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 100, Art. 4]

Whether the Precepts of the Decalogue Are Suitably Distinguished from
One Another?

Objection 1: It would seem that the precepts of the decalogue are
unsuitably distinguished from one another. For worship is a virtue
distinct from faith. Now the precepts are about acts of virtue. But
that which is said at the beginning of the decalogue, "Thou shalt not
have strange gods before Me," belongs to faith: and that which is
added, "Thou shalt not make . . . any graven thing," etc. belongs to
worship. Therefore these are not one precept, as Augustine asserts
(Qq. in Exod. qu. lxxi), but two.

Obj. 2: Further, the affirmative precepts in the Law are distinct
from the negative precepts; e.g. "Honor thy father and thy mother,"
and, "Thou shalt not kill." But this, "I am the Lord thy God," is
affirmative: and that which follows, "Thou shalt not have strange
gods before Me," is negative. Therefore these are two precepts, and
do not, as Augustine says (Qq. in Exod. qu. lxxi), make one.

Obj. 3: Further, the Apostle says (Rom. 7:7): "I had not known
concupiscence, if the Law did not say: 'Thou shalt not covet.'" Hence
it seems that this precept, "Thou shalt not covet," is one precept;
and, therefore, should not be divided into two.

_On the contrary,_ stands the authority of Augustine who, in
commenting on Exodus (Qq. in Exod. qu. lxxi) distinguishes three
precepts as referring to God, and seven as referring to our neighbor.

_I answer that,_ The precepts of the decalogue are differently
divided by different authorities. For Hesychius commenting on Lev.
26:26, "Ten women shall bake your bread in one oven," says that the
precept of the Sabbath-day observance is not one of the ten precepts,
because its observance, in the letter, is not binding for all time.
But he distinguishes four precepts pertaining to God, the first
being, "I am the Lord thy God"; the second, "Thou shalt not have
strange gods before Me," (thus also Jerome distinguishes these two
precepts, in his commentary on Osee 10:10, "On thy" [Vulg.: "their"]
"two iniquities"); the third precept according to him is, "Thou shalt
not make to thyself any graven thing"; and the fourth, "Thou shalt
not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain." He states that there
are six precepts pertaining to our neighbor; the first, "Honor thy
father and thy mother"; the second, "Thou shalt not kill"; the third,
"Thou shalt not commit adultery"; the fourth, "Thou shalt not steal";
the fifth, "Thou shalt not bear false witness"; the sixth, "Thou
shalt not covet."

But, in the first place, it seems unbecoming for the precept of the
Sabbath-day observance to be put among the precepts of the decalogue,
if it nowise belonged to the decalogue. Secondly, because, since it
is written (Matt. 6:24), "No man can serve two masters," the two
statements, "I am the Lord thy God," and, "Thou shalt not have
strange gods before Me" seem to be of the same nature and to form one
precept. Hence Origen (Hom. viii in Exod.) who also distinguishes
four precepts as referring to God, unites these two under one
precept; and reckons in the second place, "Thou shalt not make . . .
any graven thing"; as third, "Thou shalt not take the name of the
Lord thy God in vain"; and as fourth, "Remember that thou keep holy
the Sabbath-day." The other six he reckons in the same way as
Hesychius.

Since, however, the making of graven things or the likeness of
anything is not forbidden except as to the point of their being
worshipped as gods--for God commanded an image of the Seraphim
[Vulg.: Cherubim] to be made and placed in the tabernacle, as related
in Ex. 25:18--Augustine more fittingly unites these two, "Thou shalt
not have strange gods before Me," and, "Thou shalt not make . . . any
graven thing," into one precept. Likewise to covet another's wife,
for the purpose of carnal knowledge, belongs to the concupiscence of
the flesh; whereas, to covet other things, which are desired for the
purpose of possession, belongs to the concupiscence of the eyes;
wherefore Augustine reckons as distinct precepts, that which forbids
the coveting of another's goods, and that which prohibits the
coveting of another's wife. Thus he distinguishes three precepts as
referring to God, and seven as referring to our neighbor. And this is
better.

Reply Obj. 1: Worship is merely a declaration of faith: wherefore the
precepts about worship should not be reckoned as distinct from those
about faith. Nevertheless precepts should be given about worship
rather than about faith, because the precept about faith is
presupposed to the precepts of the decalogue, as is also the precept
of charity. For just as the first general principles of the natural
law are self-evident to a subject having natural reason, and need no
promulgation; so also to believe in God is a first and self-evident
principle to a subject possessed of faith: "for he that cometh to
God, must believe that He is" (Heb. 11:6). Hence it needs no other
promulgation that the infusion of faith.

Reply Obj. 2: The affirmative precepts are distinct from the
negative, when one is not comprised in the other: thus that man
should honor his parents does not include that he should not kill
another man; nor does the latter include the former. But when an
affirmative precept is included in a negative, or vice versa, we do
not find that two distinct precepts are given: thus there is not one
precept saying that "Thou shalt not steal," and another binding one
to keep another's property intact, or to give it back to its owner.
In the same way there are not different precepts about believing in
God, and about not believing in strange gods.

Reply Obj. 3: All covetousness has one common ratio: and therefore
the Apostle speaks of the commandment about covetousness as though it
were one. But because there are various special kinds of
covetousness, therefore Augustine distinguishes different
prohibitions against coveting: for covetousness differs specifically
in respect of the diversity of actions or things coveted, as the
Philosopher says (Ethic. x, 5).
________________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 100, Art. 5]

Whether the Precepts of the Decalogue Are Suitably Set Forth?

Objection 1: It would seem that the precepts of the decalogue are
unsuitably set forth. Because sin, as stated by Ambrose (De Paradiso
viii), is "a transgression of the Divine law and a disobedience to
the commandments of heaven." But sins are distinguished according as
man sins against God, or his neighbor, or himself. Since, then, the
decalogue does not include any precepts directing man in his
relations to himself, but only such as direct him in his relations to
God and himself, it seems that the precepts of the decalogue are
insufficiently enumerated.

Obj. 2: Further, just as the Sabbath-day observance pertained to the
worship of God, so also did the observance of other solemnities, and
the offering of sacrifices. But the decalogue contains a precept
about the Sabbath-day observance. Therefore it should contain others
also, pertaining to the other solemnities, and to the sacrificial
rite.

Obj. 3: Further, as sins against God include the sin of perjury, so
also do they include blasphemy, or other ways of lying against the
teaching of God. But there is a precept forbidding perjury, "Thou
shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain." Therefore there
should be also a precept of the decalogue forbidding blasphemy and
false doctrine.

Obj. 4: Further, just as man has a natural affection for his parents,
so has he also for his children. Moreover the commandment of charity
extends to all our neighbors. Now the precepts of the decalogue are
ordained unto charity, according to 1 Tim. 1:5: "The end of the
commandment is charity." Therefore as there is a precept referring to
parents, so should there have been some precepts referring to
children and other neighbors.

Obj. 5: Further, in every kind of sin, it is possible to sin in
thought or in deed. But in some kinds of sin, namely in theft and
adultery, the prohibition of sins of deed, when it is said, "Thou
shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal," is distinct from
the prohibition of the sin of thought, when it is said, "Thou shalt
not covet thy neighbor's goods," and, "Thou shalt not covet thy
neighbor's wife." Therefore the same should have been done in regard
to the sins of homicide and false witness.

Obj. 6: Further, just as sin happens through disorder of the
concupiscible faculty, so does it arise through disorder of the
irascible part. But some precepts forbid inordinate concupiscence,
when it is said, "Thou shalt not covet." Therefore the decalogue
should have included some precepts forbidding the disorders of the
irascible faculty. Therefore it seems that the ten precepts of the
decalogue are unfittingly enumerated.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Deut. 4:13): "He shewed you His
covenant, which He commanded you to do, and the ten words that He
wrote in two tablets of stone."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 2), just as the precepts of
human law direct man in his relations to the human community, so the
precepts of the Divine law direct man in his relations to a community
or commonwealth of men under God. Now in order that any man may dwell
aright in a community, two things are required: the first is that he
behave well to the head of the community; the other is that he behave
well to those who are his fellows and partners in the community. It
is therefore necessary that the Divine law should contain in the
first place precepts ordering man in his relations to God; and in the
second place, other precepts ordering man in his relations to other
men who are his neighbors and live with him under God.

Now man owes three things to the head of the community: first,
fidelity; secondly, reverence; thirdly, service. Fidelity to his
master consists in his not giving sovereign honor to another: and
this is the sense of the first commandment, in the words "Thou shalt
not have strange gods." Reverence to his master requires that he
should do nothing injurious to him: and this is conveyed by the
second commandment, "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God
in vain." Service is due to the master in return for the benefits
which his subjects receive from him: and to this belongs the third
commandment of the sanctification of the Sabbath in memory of the
creation of all things.

To his neighbors a man behaves himself well both in particular and in
general. In particular, as to those to whom he is indebted, by paying
his debts: and in this sense is to be taken the commandment about
honoring one's parents. In general, as to all men, by doing harm to
none, either by deed, or by word, or by thought. By deed, harm is
done to one's neighbor--sometimes in his person, i.e. as to his
personal existence; and this is forbidden by the words, "Thou shalt
not kill": sometimes in a person united to him, as to the propagation
of offspring; and this is prohibited by the words, "Thou shalt not
commit adultery": sometimes in his possessions, which are directed to
both the aforesaid; and with this regard to this it is said, "Thou
shalt not steal." Harm done by word is forbidden when it is said,
"Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor": harm done
by thought is forbidden in the words, "Thou shalt not covet."

The three precepts that direct man in his behavior towards God may
also be differentiated in this same way. For the first refers to
deeds; wherefore it is said, "Thou shalt not make . . . a graven
thing": the second, to words; wherefore it is said, "Thou shalt not
take the name of the Lord thy God in vain": the third, to thoughts;
because the sanctification of the Sabbath, as the subject of a moral
precept, requires repose of the heart in God. Or, according to
Augustine (In Ps. 32: Conc. 1), by the first commandment we reverence
the unity of the First Principle; by the second, the Divine truth; by
the third, His goodness whereby we are sanctified, and wherein we
rest as in our last end.

Reply Obj. 1: This objection may be answered in two ways. First,
because the precepts of the decalogue can be reduced to the precepts
of charity. Now there was need for man to receive a precept about
loving God and his neighbor, because in this respect the natural law
had become obscured on account of sin: but not about the duty of
loving oneself, because in this respect the natural law retained its
vigor: or again, because love of oneself is contained in the love of
God and of one's neighbor: since true self-love consists in directing
oneself to God. And for this reason the decalogue includes those
precepts only which refer to our neighbor and to God.

Secondly, it may be answered that the precepts of the decalogue are
those which the people received from God immediately; wherefore it is
written (Deut. 10:4): "He wrote in the tables, according as He had
written before, the ten words, which the Lord spoke to you." Hence
the precepts of the decalogue need to be such as the people can
understand at once. Now a precept implies the notion of duty. But it
is easy for a man, especially for a believer, to understand that, of
necessity, he owes certain duties to God and to his neighbor. But
that, in matters which regard himself and not another, man has, of
necessity, certain duties to himself, is not so evident: for, at the
first glance, it seems that everyone is free in matters that concern
himself. And therefore the precepts which prohibit disorders of a man
with regard to himself, reach the people through the instruction of
men who are versed in such matters; and, consequently, they are not
contained in the decalogue.

Reply Obj. 2: All the solemnities of the Old Law were instituted in
celebration of some Divine favor, either in memory of past favors, or
in sign of some favor to come: in like manner all the sacrifices were
offered up with the same purpose. Now of all the Divine favors to be
commemorated the chief was that of the Creation, which was called to
mind by the sanctification of the Sabbath; wherefore the reason for
this precept is given in Ex. 20:11: "In six days the Lord made heaven
and earth," etc. And of all future blessings, the chief and final was
the repose of the mind in God, either, in the present life, by grace,
or, in the future life, by glory; which repose was also foreshadowed
in the Sabbath-day observance: wherefore it is written (Isa. 58:13):
"If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy own will
in My holy day, and call the Sabbath delightful, and the holy of the
Lord glorious." Because these favors first and chiefly are borne in
mind by men, especially by the faithful. But other solemnities were
celebrated on account of certain particular favors temporal and
transitory, such as the celebration of the Passover in memory of the
past favor of the delivery from Egypt, and as a sign of the future
Passion of Christ, which though temporal and transitory, brought us
to the repose of the spiritual Sabbath. Consequently, the Sabbath
alone, and none of the other solemnities and sacrifices, is mentioned
in the precepts of the decalogue.

Reply Obj. 3: As the Apostle says (Heb. 6:16), "men swear by one
greater than themselves; and an oath for confirmation is the end of
all their controversy." Hence, since oaths are common to all,
inordinate swearing is the matter of a special prohibition by a
precept of the decalogue. According to one interpretation, however,
the words, "Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in
vain," are a prohibition of false doctrine, for one gloss expounds
them thus: "Thou shalt not say that Christ is a creature."

Reply Obj. 4: That a man should not do harm to anyone is an immediate
dictate of his natural reason: and therefore the precepts that forbid
the doing of harm are binding on all men. But it is not an immediate
dictate of natural reason that a man should do one thing in return
for another, unless he happen to be indebted to someone. Now a son's
debt to his father is so evident that one cannot get away from it by
denying it: since the father is the principle of generation and
being, and also of upbringing and teaching. Wherefore the decalogue
does not prescribe deeds of kindness or service to be done to anyone
except to one's parents. On the other hand parents do not seem to be
indebted to their children for any favors received, but rather the
reverse is the case. Again, a child is a part of his father; and
"parents love their children as being a part of themselves," as the
Philosopher states (Ethic. viii, 12). Hence, just as the decalogue
contains no ordinance as to man's behavior towards himself, so, for
the same reason, it includes no precept about loving one's children.

Reply Obj. 5: The pleasure of adultery and the usefulness of wealth,
in so far as they have the character of pleasurable or useful good,
are of themselves, objects of appetite: and for this reason they
needed to be forbidden not only in the deed but also in the desire.
But murder and falsehood are, of themselves, objects of repulsion
(since it is natural for man to love his neighbor and the truth): and
are desired only for the sake of something else. Consequently with
regard to sins of murder and false witness, it was necessary to
proscribe, not sins of thought, but only sins of deed.

Reply Obj. 6: As stated above (Q. 25, A. 1), all the passions of the
irascible faculty arise from the passions of the concupiscible part.
Hence, as the precepts of the decalogue are, as it were, the first
elements of the Law, there was no need for mention of the irascible
passions, but only of the concupiscible passions.
________________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [I-II, Q. 100, Art. 6]

Whether the Ten Precepts of the Decalogue Are Set in Proper Order?

Objection 1: It would seem that the ten precepts of the decalogue are
not set in proper order. Because love of one's neighbor is seemingly
previous to love of God, since our neighbor is better known to us
than God is; according to 1 John 4:20: "He that loveth not his
brother, whom he seeth, how can he love God, Whom he seeth not?" But
the first three precepts belong to the love of God, while the other
seven pertain to the love of our neighbor. Therefore the precepts of
the decalogue are not set in proper order.

Obj. 2: Further, the acts of virtue are prescribed by the affirmative
precepts, and acts of vice are forbidden by the negative precepts.
But according to Boethius in his commentary on the _Categories_
[*Lib. iv, cap. De Oppos.], vices should be uprooted before virtues
are sown. Therefore among the precepts concerning our neighbor, the
negative precepts should have preceded the affirmative.

Obj. 3: Further, the precepts of the Law are about men's actions. But
actions of thought precede actions of word or outward deed. Therefore
the precepts about not coveting, which regard our thoughts, are
unsuitably placed last in order.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Rom. 13:1): "The things that are
of God, are well ordered" [Vulg.: 'Those that are, are ordained of
God']. But the precepts of the decalogue were given immediately by
God, as stated above (A. 3). Therefore they are arranged in becoming
order.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (AA. 3, 5, ad 1), the precepts of
the decalogue are such as the mind of man is ready to grasp at once.
Now it is evident that a thing is so much the more easily grasped by
the reason, as its contrary is more grievous and repugnant to reason.
Moreover, it is clear, since the order of reason begins with the end,
that, for a man to be inordinately disposed towards his end, is
supremely contrary to reason. Now the end of human life and society
is God. Consequently it was necessary for the precepts of the
