from the inroads of Rome.

It appears to have been the intention of the Turkish government in
1847, doubtless through the influence of the English Ambassador at
Constantinople, to restore the Nestorian Patriarch to his native
regions, and constitute him the civil head of his people; and while
at Mosul, he was invited to the seat of government for that purpose.
Distrusting the motives of the Porte, he fled to Oroomiah, where he
arrived in June. It was a kind Providence that delayed his coming
until there were no longer grounds for dissatisfaction arising from
members of his family being in the employ of the mission. There were
indeed ill disposed Nestorians, who were always ready to fill the
ears of the Patriarch with insinuations against the mission. Among
these were two of his own brothers, the least respectable portion of
his family. But there were others who were watchful to correct
misrepresentations, and to give him right views of the results of
the mission, and of its doctrines. Among these were two of his
brothers, deacon Isaac and deacon Dunka, whom he held in high
esteem.

"These brothers," writes Mr. Stocking in July, 1847, "have appeared
truly friendly for two years, and disposed, to the full extent of
their influence, to aid us in our work. Both have been regular
attendants on our preaching; and, though not pious, they maintain
decidedly evangelical views in regard to the doctrines of grace.
Deacon Isaac especially, one of the most talented of the Nestorians,
is always ready, before the Patriarch and all others, boldly to
advocate the doctrine of justification by faith through grace alone.
He has studied critically, and appears to understand, as well as an
unconverted man can, the book of Romans; without the study of which,
he has been heard to remark, no one can understand what Christianity
really is. We have been interested to learn, through our native
helpers, that these brothers have voluntarily acted in concert, one
or both never failing to be with the Patriarch whenever there was
any one present to assail us and our work, ready to confront them to
their faces, and repel all false charges."

The Patriarch received priests Eshoo, Dunka, Abraham, and John, who
called to obtain his cooeperation, with apparent cordiality, and gave
his full consent to their preaching in all the dioceses. He told
them that his letter from Mosul, forbidding preaching and schools,
was written through the importunity of Mr. Rassam. He spent a month
at Seir, where he had much friendly intercourse with the
missionaries. He even invited Dr. Perkins to preach in his tent, and
Messrs. Wright and Stoddard led in prayer, before and after the
sermon, while the Patriarch himself pronounced the benediction at
the close. The hymns sung on this occasion were from the new
Nestorian Hymnbook.

The Patriarch's friendly deportment continued till some time in
April, 1848, when he threw off the mask, if he had worn one, and
took the stand of open and decided opposition. This was not wholly
unexpected, and while it was matter for regret, it did not occasion
much alarm. His power to do harm had been greatly circumscribed by
the providential embarrassments of his civil and ecclesiastical
relations; by the extensive prevalence of evangelical truth among
the Nestorians; by their friendliness, and the good will of the
Persian government towards the mission; and by the number, standing,
and influence of the religious among his people. His first
unfriendly act he concealed from our brethren, but it was made known
to them by the British Consul at Tabriz. It was a formal
communication to the Russian Consul at that place, designed to
prejudice him against the American missionaries, of whom his Embassy
was the nominal protector. The Consul made no response to this. The
first open attack was on the seminary under the care of Mr.
Stoddard. The Patriarch next endeavored to withdraw the native
assistants from the missionaries; at one time calling into exercise
all his powers of persuasion, and at another uttering the severest
threats. Though his people were deriving great advantages, in many
ways, from the educational system introduced by the mission, he
recklessly determined to deprive them of it, without providing
anything to supply its place. He ordered the leading men of Geog
Tapa to break up the schools in that village, and received a
respectful but decided refusal. The priest of Charbush was ordered
to suspend his school, but declined. The Patriarch came to that
village soon after, and his servants, meeting the priest in the
street, beat him severely and wounded him. Those same servants
returning to the city intoxicated, entered the mission premises, and
fell to beating Mar Yohannan and his brother Joseph, and priest
Dunka, who happened to be sitting within the gate. The Governor at
once interfered. At that juncture, an order arrived from the Heir
Apparent, the ruler of Azerbijan, directing the Mohammedan
authorities to allow no one to molest the missionaries, or any one
in their employment. In September, the Patriarch sought the
intervention of the chief Doctor of the Mohammedan law against the
mission. It so happened that the missionaries were paying their
respects to the Moolah, at the very time when the Patriarch called,
with a large retinue of Nestorians, on this business. The Moslem
doctor made him a public and mortifying reply: "These gentlemen," he
said, "are peaceable men; the Mohammedans respect them, and are
pleased with them. Why are you falling out with them? You, who are
Christians, ought to respect them even more than the Mohammedans."
For a time the Patriarch and the Jesuits, both aiming at the
overthrow of the mission, were in practical combination. As a
necessary means to this end, both wished to expel from office Dawood
Khan, the Christian Governor and civil protector of the Nestorians
of that province; and the Mohammedan nobles were in sympathy with
them in this, as that dignitary stood in the way of their exactions.

But this political alliance, though at first promising success both
to the Patriarch and the Jesuits, in the end led to the signal
overthrow of both. It was stated to the mission by Mr. Stevens, the
English Consul, as a well ascertained fact, that Mar Shimon had
united his interests with the French Jesuits, and that they had
strong hope of making use of him to cast their net over his people.1
Up to this time, the mission had not applied to any European
functionary for interference in their troubles with Mar Shimon. Nor
did they now; but Mr. Stevens, hearing of his persecuting course,
took up the matter of his own accord, gave the information as above
stated, and befriended the missionaries in various ways. The
Patriarch having declared, that he had the countenance and support
of the Russian Consul, that official wrote sharply rebuked him for
so doing. The four bishops of Oroomiah and nearly all the priests
and deacons, with many of the leading Nestorians in the province,
now united in a representation to the Persian Government, highly
commending the character, objects, and labors of the mission. It is
recorded, that the converted Nestorians also, with scarce an
exception, stood firmly by the mission, in the face of trials and
reproaches; and the same was true of many who made no pretensions to
piety.

1 _Missionary Herald_, 1849, p. 30.

News of the death of the King arrived at Oroomiah on the 14th of
September. He was succeeded by his eldest son, a young man of twenty
years, who for the last year had been Prince Governor of Azerbijan.
In Persia, the death of the King interrupts for a time the regular
transaction of public business.

An immediate effect of the news was to displace the Governor of
Oroomiah, Yahyah Khan, with whom Mar Shimon had been forming an
alliance, to strengthen him in his persecutions.

Through the friendly, but unsolicited agency of the English Consul,
five of the most prominent of Mar Shimon's coadjutors were put under
heavy bonds in no way to aid or abet him again in similar
proceedings. Should they violate their written engagements to the
authorities, they would expose themselves to severe corporal
punishment and heavy fines.

Another requisition from the government was, that the two servants
who had entered the mission premises, and beaten and insulted
several of the ecclesiastics, should be taken to that same
inclosure, and be bastinadoed to the satisfaction of the mission.
Only one of the two could be found. He was brought thither, and laid
upon the pavement with his feet tied to a pole, and a large bunch of
rods by his side; and the missionaries were requested to come and
see that due punishment was inflicted. But they, greatly to the
satisfaction of the crowd of Nestorians who had assembled to witness
the punishment, complied with the earnest entreaties of the culprit
to excuse the crime he had committed, and he was at once released.

The repeated mention of Suleiman Bey's friendly attentions to Dr.
Grant, must have interested the reader in his behalf. But we are now
obliged to place him among the persecutors of the Lord's people.
Tamo was teacher in the male seminary for about ten years, and
became hopefully pious in the revival of 1846. He accompanied Dr.
Wright and Mr. Breath in their visit to Bader Khan. His family
resided in the mountain district of Gawar, within the limits of
Turkey. Being fleet, athletic, and capable of great endurance, he
was well fitted for a mountain evangelist. After an extended
preaching tour in the summer of 1848, he spent some time at his
mountain home. The Bishop of Gawar had received a charge from Mar
Shimon to ruin him, and made complaint against him to Suleiman Bey.
He was seized by that chief, heavily fined, and his life threatened.
But Suleiman Bey was taken, meanwhile, a prisoner by the Turks.
Afterwards, Tamo, while on his return to Oroomiah with two of his
brothers and a nephew, all members of the seminary, was attacked in
the night by a party of ruffian Koords, also incited by the
Patriarch, who beat all the company with clubs, and called to each
other to "kill them." Friendly Koords came to their rescue, but not
until they had been stripped of nearly all their clothing and
suffered cruelly from the hands of the barbarians.

In the year 1848, Bader Khan Bey, failing in one of his favorite
night attacks on the Turkish army, was taken prisoner in his own
castle of Dergooleh, and placed, as such, on one of the islands of
the Grecian Archipelago.

Nurullah Bey, also, some time in 1849, was driven from his
stronghold at Julamerk, and fled from castle to castle, till he also
was taken captive by the Turks, whom he had aided to destroy the
Nestorians, and went into captivity, far from the scenes of his
former power. Suleiman Bey, as already stated, was taken captive
while cruelly persecuting deacon Tamo, and died at Erzroom, while on
his way to Constantinople.1

1 _Missionary Herald_, 1850, p. 96.






CHAPTER XX.

THE NESTORIANS.

1848-1852.


The health of Mr. Stoddard became so prostrated, early in the summer
of 1848, as to leave no hope of his recovery without a change of
climate. At Trebizond, on his way home, he and his family were
subjected to a quarantine of eight days. His wife and children were
then in good health, and they had no reason to apprehend cholera
there, as it passed beyond that place westward. But it returned, and
Mrs. Stoddard was one of its victims. The death of this excellent
woman was a grievous loss, not only to her husband and infant
children, but to the mission. The nurse also sickened of the same
disease, while on the voyage to Constantinople, and died soon after
her arrival; and it was a remarkable Providence that spared the
enfeebled and overtasked husband and father. But he lived to serve
Christ in his native land, and afterwards again among the
Nestorians. The Rev. George W. Coan and wife joined the mission in
the autumn of 1849.

Mr. Cochran succeeded Mr. Stoddard in charge of the male seminary.
Twelve had gone from the institution, and most of them were exerting
a good Christian influence. The new scholars, as a consequence of
these village schools, were older and more advanced than their
predecessors had been. The thirty-two schools contained five hundred
and ninety-eight pupils, of whom one hundred and twenty-five were
girls. Twelve of the teachers were priests, and about half of them
would have been welcomed into New England churches. The female
seminary, a most valuable institution, was under the care of Misses
Fiske and Rice.

Mar Shimon returned to the mountains early in 1849, though not
without apprehension of being sent into exile, as the Koordish
chieftains had been.

Hearing that the good seed sown by Dr. Grant and his associates at
Mosul was giving promise of a harvest, the mission deemed it
expedient for Dr. Perkins and Mr. Stocking to visit that city,
preaching the Gospel as they went. Mar Yohannan and deacons Isaac
and Tamo went with them.1 They were hospitably entertained by Mr.
Rassam, the English Consul at Mosul, during the eleven days of their
visit. Many of the Mosulians were thought to have come under
evangelical influences. Some of them were much enlightened, and a
few were regarded as truly pious. All would gladly have welcomed a
Protestant missionary to reside among them. These were chiefly
Jacobites, but a few were Papists. The mountain districts were found
to be accessible to the Gospel; though everywhere they heard of
messengers and letters from the Patriarch, warning the people
against them as deceivers, and particularly against deacon Isaac,
his brother, who, he said, had become "English." Nevertheless they
were treated in all places with kindness, and found attentive
listeners to their preaching.

1 For a full account of this tour by Dr. Perkins, see _Missionary
Herald_ for 1850, pp. 53-61, and 83-97.

The first revival of religion, already described, was in 1846; the
second was in 1849; and there was a third in 1850. The severe trials
of the years 1847 and 1848 seem to have produced in the mission a
subdued feeling, and unusual earnestness in prayer. This resulted in
the revival of 1849.

In the seminary for boys, the converts of the previous revival were,
for two or three days after this began, the subjects of intense
heart-searchings, and of piercing compunctions for their
backslidings. This was not less true of the more devoted Christians,
than of others. The irreligious members of the seminary were also
deeply moved; and there was a similar experience in the girls'
seminary. Geog Tapa again shared largely in the spiritual blessings
of a revived religious feeling. In the village of Seir, hardly a
person was unaffected. In Degala, Charbush, Ardeshai, and other
places, there were large and attentive congregations, and many gave
delightful evidence of having passed from death unto life. A
vacation occurred in the male seminary, and pious students labored
with great zeal and success in the houses of the people. Deacon
Isaac had been known for many years as an evangelical man and a
friend of the mission, but now he gave good evidence of conversion,
and the pious natives beheld the change in him with wonder and
thanksgiving. Mar Yohannan had never before given satisfactory
evidence of a thorough change of heart. He now made full confession
of his sins as a man, and of his unfaithfulness as a bishop. The
revival was marked by a deep sense of the lost condition of men by
nature, by a vivid sense of the evil of sin, by an intelligent and
cordial embrace of salvation as the gift of sovereign grace, by a
hearty self-consecration to the service of Christ, by earnest
desires for the salvation of others, and by a remarkable quickening
of the moral and intellectual powers.

One of the most noted among the native evangelists at this time, was
deacon Guwergis of Tergawar. Before conversion in 1846, he was as
wild and wicked as a Koord. In the autumn of 1845, he brought his
eldest daughter, then twelve years of age, to Oroomiah, and begged
Miss Fiske to receive her into the seminary. She consented
reluctantly, being painfully impressed by the gross avarice and
selfishness of the father, who even asked permission to take away
with him the clothes she had on. He came again in February, with his
belt of ammunition, his dagger at his side, and his gun thrown over
his shoulder. Many of the pupils were then weeping over their sins,
among them his own daughter, and the teacher felt that the wolf had
come into the fold. Guwergis ridiculed the anxiety of the girls for
their souls till his daughter, distressed by his conduct, asked him
to go alone with her to pray. He went and repeated his form in
ancient Syriac, while she, in her native tongue, poured forth her
soul in earnest prayer, first for herself, and then for her father.
When he heard her say, "Save, O save my father, going down to
destruction," as he afterwards confessed, he raised his hand to
strike her. Sabbath morning found him toiling to prevent others from
coming to Christ. At noon, Miss Fiske went to his room, and was
received with sullen rudeness, but he broke down under her
affectionate and faithful appeals, and retired to pray. He soon
entered the place of worship. His gun and his dagger had been laid
aside, and he sank into the nearest seat, and laid his head upon the
desk. That night Mr. Stocking took him to his study, and the recent
blasphemer cried out in agony, "My sins, my sins, they are higher
than the mountains of Jeloo!" Next morning, Mr. Stoddard found him
subdued and humbled. All Guwergis could say was, "My great sins, my
great Saviour." Before noon, he left for his mountain home, saying,
as he left, "I must tell my friends and neighbors of sin and of
Jesus."

Nothing was heard from him for two weeks, when priest Eshoo was sent
to his village to look after him, and found him in his own house,
surrounded by his friends, and discoursing to them on these very
topics,--of sin and of Jesus. The deacon accompanied priest Eshoo to
Oroomiah, and his relations of Christian fellowship with the members
of the mission were at once firmly and forever established.1 His
conversion and his self-consecration to the service of the Lord
Jesus were entire. He became known as the "mountain evangelist," and
was faithful unto death. He rested from his labors on the 12th of
March, 1856.

1 _Woman and her Saviour in Persia_, pp. 87-93.

The revival scenes of 1849, were renewed in the first month of 1850.
The awakening commenced on the same day in each of the seminaries,
without any communication between them, though they were six miles
apart. The first manifestation of deep feeling in the male seminary,
was at the evening prayer-meeting. While deacon Tamo was speaking of
the need of preparation for death, the school gave signs of deep
feeling. The emotion was increased when Dr. Perkins came in, and
took up the same strain, until the weeping became so loud and
general that he feared the result of further excitement, and
requested the pupils to repair to their closets. There were similar
indications the next morning.

The strength of feeling was as intense in the girls' school, but was
manifested in a different manner. The devout among them were
disposed to spend much time in prayer, while at the same time they
were very active in efforts for the conversion of their associates,
as well as of the members of their families that visited the school.
For two months, until the close of the term, there was no diminution
of interest. The regular attendance on preaching at Oroomiah, Seir,
Degala, Geog Tapa, and Ardishai, was greater than ever before. The
same may be said of numerous other villages, where meetings were
occasionally held. Divine truth seemed to reach and affect the mass
of the people. Geog Tapa was specially favored. The people were
affected, not as in former years with the overwhelming convictions
of the law, but with a deep and intelligent persuasion of the claims
of truth.

Perhaps the most distinguished among the Nestorian laborers, at this
time, next to priest Abraham, was deacon John. He is described as
unwearied in the work, often preaching three times a day during the
week, and performing other arduous labors. The missionaries admired
the grace of God, as developed in his active piety, discreet zeal,
