collected by the best critics of Mohammadan traditions like Bokhari and
Muslim, who had sifted the whole incoherent mass of genuine and
apocryphal traditions regarding the Prophet, and had picked up but a
very small portion of them which they thought to be relatively genuine.
We can fairly conclude that such a tradition, which is related by other
non-critics and story-tellers, who have indiscriminately narrated every
tradition--whether genuine or apocryphal--like Wakidi and Ibn Sad, was
surely rejected by these Imams (Doctors in the Science of Tradition) as
having not the least possibility of its genuineness. Even Ibn Ishak
(died 150),[354] Hisham-bin-Abdul Malik (died 213 A.H.),[355] and Abul
Mo'tamar Soleiman (died 143 A.H.[356])[357] have not inserted the
portion of the tradition of Maria the Coptic maid being sent by the
Egyptian Governor to Mohammad. The tradition narrated by Ibn Sad--(1)
through Wakidi and Abd-ul-Hamid from Jafar, (2) and Abdullah bin Abdur
Rahman bin Abi Sasata--is undoubtedly apocryphal, Wakidi and
Abd-ul-Hamid are of impeached integrity, or no authority at all. Ibn
Khallikan, in his Biographical Dictionary, translated by Slane, writes
regarding Wakidi:--"The Traditions received from him are considered of
feeble authority, and doubts have been expressed on the subject of his
(_veracity_.)"[358] Ibn Hajar Askalani writes regarding Wakidi in his
_Takrib_, that "he has been struck off as an authority (literally left
out), notwithstanding his vast knowledge." Zahabi's opinion of Wakidi
in Mizan-al-Etedal is that Ahmed bin Hanbal said "he was the greatest
liar." Bokhari and Abu Hatim say he is struck off (or left out as an
authority).

Regarding Abd-ul-Hamid, Zahabi writes that Abu Hatim said he is not
quoted as an authority, and Sofian said he was a weak authority.

Jafar and Abdullah bin Abdur Rahman bin Abi Sasata are of the middle
period in the Tabaeen's class, and do not quote their authority on the
subject.

[Sidenote: Maria neither a slave;]

10. (2) Supposing that the Governor of Egypt had sent two Coptic maids,
with other presents, to Mohammad, it does not follow necessarily that
they were slave-girls. It is never stated in history that they were
captives of war, or, if they were so, that they were enslaved
subsequently. There is no authority for a haphazard conjecture that they
were slave-girls.

[Sidenote: nor a concubine-slave.]

11. (3) Even if it be admitted that Maria the Coptic was a slave-girl,
there is no proof that she was a concubine-slave. It is a stereotyped
fabrication of traditionists, and the unpardonable blunder on the part
of European writers, that they almost always confound female-slaves, and
even sometimes captives, with concubine-slaves. None of the six standard
collectors of traditions--Imams Bokhari (died 256 A.H.), Muslim (died
261 A.H.), Aboo Daood (died 275 A.H.), Tirmizee (died 279 A.H.), Nasaee
(died 303 A.H.), and Ibn Maja (died 273 A.H.)--has narrated that Maria
the Coptic was a concubine-slave of the Prophet. Even the early
biographers--Ibn Ishak (died 150 A.H.) and Ibn Hisham (died 213 A.H.)
have not made any mention to this effect. It is only Mohammad bin Sad,
the Secretary to Wakidi, who narrates the tradition,--firstly through
Wakidi, Abd-ul-Hamid, and Jafar, and secondly through Wakidi, Yakoob bin
Mohammad, and Abdullah bin Abdur Rahman bin Abi Sasata. These both
ascriptions are apocryphal. I have already quoted my authorities against
Wakidi and Abd-ul-Hamid. Yakoob bin Mohammad has been impeached by Abu
Zaraa, a critic in the Science of Traditions.[359] Jafar and Abdullah
both flourished after the first century. Their evidence to the supposed
fact about a century ago is inadmissible.

In the Biographical Dictionaries of the contemporaries of the Prophet,
there are three persons named Maria.[360] One is said to have been a
housemaid of the Prophet; the second was a housemaid whose _kunniat_
(patronymic) is given as Omm Rabab (mother of Rabab). The third is
called Maria the Coptic. It appears there was only one Maria; she may
have been a female servant in the household of the Prophet. The
narrators have, by citing different circumstances regarding them, made
them three different persons, and one of them a concubine-slave, as they
could not think a house or family complete without a slave-girl or a
concubine-slave. The biographers often commit such blunders. In giving
different anecdotes of really the same persons, they make as many
persons as they have anecdotes. That anyone of the Marias was a
concubine-slave is a mere conjecture, or a stereotyped form of
traditional confusion in mixing up maidservants with slaves or
concubine-slaves.

[Sidenote: Maria had no son.]

12. (4) Those who have converted Maria into a slave or a concubine-slave
have furnished her--the creature of their own imagination--with a son.
There are various traditions as to the number and names of the Prophet's
sons, all of whom died in infancy. Some traditions give different names
to one, and others give as many sons as the names are reported. There
might have been a son of Mohammad by the name of Ibrahim, but that he
was born of Maria the Coptic is a perfect myth. This piece of the story
is the continuation of the traditions of Ibn Sad, which I have already
criticized in paras. 9 and 11. Ibn Sad has related another tradition
through Omar bin Asim and Katada to the effect that Mohammad's son
Ibrahim was born of a captive woman. Asim has been condemned by Abu
Hatim, a doctor and critic in the Mohammadan traditional
literature;[361] and Katada (died 117 A.H.) was not a contemporary
witness of what he relates. Thus he fails in giving any authority to his
narration. There are two more traditions in Ibn Sad from similar
authorities like Katada, namely, Zohri (died 124 A.H.) and Mak-hool
(died 118 A.H.)--not contemporaries of Mohammad, but of the class of
Tabaeen--to the effect that Mohammad had said, "Had Ibrahim lived, the
capitation-tax would have been remitted to every Copt!" and that "Had
Ibrahim lived, his maternal uncles would never have been enslaved!" They
do not say who was Ibrahim!

Another and the last tradition in Ibn Sad through Yahia bin Hammad, Abu
Avana, Soleiman-al-Aamash, Muslim, and Bara is to the effect that
Ibrahim was born from a Coptic maid of the Prophet. The narrator
Soleiman-al-Aamash was a _modallis_ (_Takrib_ in loco), or in other
words, a liar. Besides the whole chain of the narration is _Mo-an-an_.

In none of the canonical collections of traditions like those of
Bokhari, Muslim, and others Ibrahim is said to have been born of Maria.
Therefore any of their traditions regarding Ibrahim is not against us.

It is also related in some genuine traditions that an eclipse of the sun
took place on the day of Ibrahim's death.[362] The historians have
related only one eclipse, which occurred in the sixth year of the
Hejira, when Mohammad was at Hodeibia. This shows that Ibrahim could not
be Maria's son. She only could come to Arabia a year later, as the
dispatches to several princes were sent only in the seventh year.
Yafaee, in his history _Mirat-uz-Zaman_, has noted that the sun was
eclipsed in the sixth year of the Hejira. In the tenth year, he
says,--"A genuine tradition has that the sun was eclipsed on the day of
Ibrahim's death, and it has been stated above that it was eclipsed in
the sixth year. There is some difficulty. It was noted once only during
the time of the Prophet. If it occurred twice, there is no difficulty;
and if not, one of these two events must be wrong, either the eclipse
took place in the tenth year, or the Prophet's son died in the sixth
year." But historically the eclipse was noticed only in the sixth year.
There are different dates of Ibrahim's death reported by the
biographers--the fourth, tenth, and fourteenth of lunar months, but in
none of them can an eclipse take place.

[Sidenote: The story of Haphsa and Maria a spurious one.]

13. (5) Lastly, I have to notice the infamous calumny against Mohammad
concocted up by his enemies, that Haphsa surprized the Prophet in her
own private room with Maria. "She reproached her lord bitterly, and
threatened to make the occurrence known to all his wives. Afraid of the
exposure and anxious to appease his offended wife, he begged of her to
keep the matter quiet, and promised to forego the society of Maria
altogether." But he afterwards released himself from it by a special
revelation--(Sura LXVI, 1). Sir W. Muir remarks:--

     "As in the case of Zeinab, Mahomet produced a message from Heaven,
     which disallowed his promise of separation from Mary...."

The passage in the Koran relating to the affair is as follows:--

     "O Prophet! Why hast thou forbidden thyself that which God hath
     made lawful unto thee,[363] out of desire to please thy wives; for
     God is forgiving and merciful?"[364]

[Sidenote: The affair not noticed in the early biographies.]

14. Now this is perfectly a fictitious story. Neither there was any such
affair, nor is there anything on this head mentioned in the Koran. It is
very strange that Sir W. Muir has abruptly left aside, in this instance,
all his principal authorities, the Arabian biographers, Ibn Ishak,
Wakidi (his secretary), and Tabari. The story is not to be found in any
of these biographies, nor in the canonical collections of Bokhari,
Muslim, and Tirmizee. Sir W. Muir had himself laid down the rule that
only these original authorities are to be depended upon, and the later
authors are to be rejected. He writes:--

     "To the three biographies by Ibn Hisham, by Wackidi his secretary,
     and Tabari, the judicious historian of Mahomet will, as his
     original authorities, confine himself. He will also receive with a
     similar respect such traditions in the general collections of the
     earliest traditionists--Bokhari, Muslim, Tirmizi, &c.--as may bear
     upon his subject. But he will reject as _evidence_ all later
     authors, to whose so-called traditions he will not allow any
     historical weight whatever."[365]

[Sidenote: Sir W. Muir's authorities not valid.]

15. But in this instance, Sir W. Muir, being anxious to quote his
fictitious story to calumniate Mohammad, has ceased to be a judicious
historian, and deviates from his self-imposed rule. He does not reject
the story as he ought judiciously and conscientiously to have done, as
it is not to be found in any of the earliest and original authorities
mentioned by him; on the contrary, he compromises himself by
condescending to quote from secondary and later authors. He writes in a
footnote without quoting his original authority:--

     "The version given in the text is accredited by Jelalood-deen,
     Yahia, Beizawi, and Zamakshari, &c." (Vol. III, page 163.)

These authors were neither biographers nor historians, and are therefore
no authorities at all. Zamakshari and Beizawi were commentators in the
sixth and seventh centuries respectively. They give two stories, one
regarding Maria and another to the effect that the oath or promise of
Mohammad had been to the effect that he would not again partake of a
species of strong-scented honey disliked by his wives. Jelal-ud-deen
Mahalli was a commentator of the ninth century of the Hejira. Yahia is
not known among the commentators. He may be one of the latest authors.

The commentators are generally no authority in the matter of traditional
literature. "To illustrate allusions in the Coran, they are always ready
with a story in point, but unfortunately there are almost always
different tales, all equally opposite to the same allusion. The
allusion, in fact, was often the father of the story. What was
originally, perhaps, a mere conjecture of supposed events that might
have given rise to an expression in the Coran, or was a single surmise
in explanation of some passage, by degrees assume the garb of fact. The
tradition and the facts which it professes to attest thus, no doubt,
often rest on no better authority than that of the verse or passage
itself."[366]

[Sidenote: The best commentators and traditionists refute the story.]

16. Those commentators who are well versed in the Science of Traditions,
as well as doctors in the traditional literature, have rejected the
story of Maria as the subject-matter of Sura LXVI, as apocryphal.

Baghvi, the author of _Misbah_ (the text of Mishkat), says that the Sura
was revealed on the subject of honey, and not in the case of Maria. The
latter story is neither in the _Sahihain_ (Bokhari and Muslim), nor has
it been narrated in any authentic way.

Hafiz Ishmael Ibn Kaseeral Qarashi, as quoted by Kustlanee (notes on
Bokhari, Vol. VII, page 313), says that the Sura was certainly in the
case of honey.

Imam Noavee, in his notes on Muslim, (Vol. I, page 463,) says:--"In fact
it was revealed in the case of the honey, and not in the case of Maria."

[Sidenote: The story not accredited by the Koran.]

17. Sir W. Muir himself admits that the earliest biographers do not
relate the story, but gives a false excuse for his not following their
example. He writes:--

     "The biographers pass over the scene in decent silence, and I
     should gladly have followed their example, if the Coran itself had
     not accredited the facts, and stamped them with unavoidable
     notoriety."[367]

The allegation is absurdly false, as everybody can satisfy himself by
referring to the Koran, which does not contain the fictitious and
spurious story.

[Sidenote: The story when fabricated.]

18. The currency of the story did neither take place during the time of
Mohammad, its proper age, nor during the lifetime of the companions. It
was fabricated and imposed on some of the _Tabaee_ of weak authority in
the second century.[368] There is no doubt that the whole story is a
sheer fabrication from beginning to end.

[Sidenote: Zeinab's case.]

19. In conclusion, I will offer a few remarks in passing regarding Sir
W. Muir's reference here to Zeinab's case. He writes:--

     "The charms of a second Zeinab were by accident discovered too
     fully before the Prophet's admiring gaze. She was the wife of Zeid,
     his adopted son and bosom friend; but he was unable to smother the
     flame she had kindled in his breast, and by _divine_ command she
     was taken to his bed."[369]

The story is from the beginning to end all untrue. Mohammad knew Zeinab
from her infancy, she was his cousin; and he had himself arranged her
marriage with Zeid. When Zeid divorced her, she was thirty-five years
old, and possibly could have no charms to fascinate even a stranger. Had
she been charming or fair to look upon, Zeid should not have separated
himself from her. There is no historical authority for this, or for any
other version of the story. The Koran, while treating the subject, has
not the slightest reference to any of the stories afterwards made out to
the effect that Mohammad had been to Zeid's house, and, having
accidentally seen the beauty of Zeinab's figure through the half-opened
door; or that the wind blew aside the curtain of Zeinab's chamber, and
disclosed her in a scanty undress, was smitten by the sight.[370]

[Sidenote: The story a spurious one.]

20. These stories, and I believe a few more varied accounts of the same,
like those of the story of Maria the Coptic, were originally mere
conjectures of supposed events that might have given rise to an
expression in the Koran (Sura XXXIII, verse 37)--if not wilful
misrepresentations of story-tellers and enemies of Islam--which the
European writers represent in the garb of facts. The words of the Koran
which have been the father of the story are:--

     "And when thou saidst to him unto whom God had shewn favour, and
     unto whom thou also hadst shewn favour, 'keep thy wife to thyself,
     and fear God,' and thou didst hide in thy mind what God would bring
     to light, and thou didst fear men; but more right it had been to
     fear God."

This shows Mohammad dissuaded Zeid from divorcing his wife,
notwithstanding the great facility of divorce common at that time in
Arabia.

Sir W. Muir is not justified in copying these stories from Tabari. They
are not related by earliest biographers from any authentic and reliable
source. He ought to have rejected them as spurious fabrications under
historical criticism, as he rejects other traditions which are on a
better footing of truth than these false and maliciously forged stories.

[Sidenote: Sir W. Muir's conjectures not justified.]

21. Sir W. Muir has exceeded the limit he himself had marked out for a
judicious historian of Mohammad when he abounds in his wild fancies, and
observes--

     "Zeid went straightway to Mahomet, and declared his readiness to
     divorce Zeinab for him. This Mahomet declined: 'Keep thy wife to
     thyself,' he said, 'and fear God.' _But Zeid could plainly see that
     these words proceeded from unwilling lips, and that the Prophet had
     still a longing eye for Zeinab._"[371]

Now this is a mere libellous surmise. He goes on still with his
defamatory conjectures, and writes:--

     "Still the passion for Zeinab could not be smothered; it continued
     to burn within the heart of Mahomet, and at last bursting forth,
     scattered other considerations to the wind."[372]

Mohammad never professed to have received a divine command to marry
Zeinab. It was not necessary for him to have done so. The outcry raised
by the Pagan Arabs was not because they suspected an intrigue on the
Prophet's part to secure a divorce, but because they looked upon an
adopted son in the light of a true son, and considered, therefore, the
marriage with Zeinab, after her divorce from Zeid, as falling within the
prohibited degrees. This adoptive affinity was already abolished in the
Koran (Sura XXXIII, 4): "God hath not made your adopted sons as your own
sons."

Sir W. Muir gravely mistakes in his remarks when he says:--

     "The marriage caused much obloquy, and to save his reputation,
     Mahomet had the impious effrontery to sanction it by special
     Revelation from on high, in which the Almighty is represented as
     formally recording a divine warrant for the union."[373]

He quotes verse 36, Sura XXXIII. But he has himself admitted (Vol. III,
page 229 footnote) "that this verse is rather in a recitative style of a
past event," and not a divine command to marry Zeinab. The words "we
joined thee in marriage unto her" in the verse do not mean a command for
marriage. They simply mean that the marriage had taken place. The phrase
"we joined thee in marriage unto her" is a mere form of expression.
Almost all human actions are attributed to God in the Koran, and
whatever occurs in the world by the ordinary course of nature, and by
the free agency of men, is referred in the Koran to the immediate agency
of God.

[Sidenote: A wrong translation of Sir W. Muir.]

22. In the next verse--"There is no offence chargeable to the Prophet in
that which God hath enjoined upon him"--he wrongly translates _Faraza_
as enjoined, and thus conveys an idea of a divine command. _Faraza_
means he made (a thing) lawful or allowable. [See Lane's Arabic
Dictionary, Bk. I, Pt. VI, page 2373.] In giving the above meaning Mr.
Lane quotes this very verse.[374] Such unions were made lawful not only
to Mohammad, but for all the Moslems, and there was nothing partaking of
a special prerogative for him. No special sanction is conveyed by these
verses. No special revelation from on high was brought forward to secure
his own object or to give him an exceptional privilege. It was merely
said that no blame attached to the Prophet for doing what was lawful.

The word "_Amr_," translated "command" and "behest," in XXXIII, 37 and
38, by Sir W. Muir and others, in fact means here and in other similar
passage (XIX, 21; IV, 50; XI, 76; and VIII, 43, 46),--God's
foreknowledge of future contingencies and not a legal command. The same
is the case with the word "_Qadr_" in XXXIII, 38, as well as in XV, 60,
and LXXIII, 20, which means God's prescience and not a predestinated
decree.

[Sidenote: In Zeinab's case no exceptional privilege was secured.]

23. In conclusion, Sir W. Muir remarks:--

     "Our only matter of wonder is that the Revelations of Mahomet
     continued after this to be regarded by his people as inspired
     communications from the Almighty, when they were so palpably formed
     to secure his own objects, and pander even to his evil desires. We
     hear of no doubts or questionings, and we can only attribute the
     confiding and credulous spirit of his followers to the absolute
     ascendency of his powerful mind over all who came within its
     influence."[375]

The verses 37 and 38 of the thirty-third Sura had not in any way
"secured the objects of Mohammad, much less pandered to his evil
desire." As his marriage with Zeinab had taken place long before they
were published, they could not be said to confer any exceptional
privilege upon him.

[Sidenote: The false story traced to Mukatil.]

24. The story copied by commentators that Mohammad had accidentally seen
Zeinab and admired her is traced to Mukatil,[376] a commentator of the
Koran in the second century, who died at Basra 150 A.H. "The doctors
(_in traditions_)," writes Ibn Khallikan in his Biographical Dictionary,
translated by Slane, "differ in opinion respecting Mukatil: some declare
that, as a traditionist, he was worthy of confidence, and others accused
him of falsehood."

... Ahmed bin Saiyar says:--

"Mukatil Ibn Sulaiman, a native of Balkh, went to Marw, whence he
proceeded to Irak. His veracity is suspected; his Traditions should be
left aside and declarations should be rejected. Speaking of the divine
attributes, he said things which it would be sinful to repeat." Ibrahim
Ibn Yakub-al-Juz-Jani called Mukatil an audacious liar. Abu Abd
ar-Rahman an Nasai said:--"Liars notorious for forging Traditions and
passing them off as coming from the Prophet were four in number: Ibn Abi
Yahya, at Medina; Al-Wakidi, at Baghdad; Mukatil Ibn Sulaiman, in
Khorasan; and Muhammad Ibn Said, surnamed _Al-Maslub_, in Syria." Waki
Ibn al-Jarrah said of Mukatil that he was a confirmed liar. Abu Bakr
al-Ajurri said: "I asked Abu Dawud Sulaiman Ibn al Ashath concerning
Mukatil, and he answered:--'All Traditions given by him should be
rejected.' According to Omar Ibn al-Ghallas, Mukatil Ibn Sulaiman was a
liar, and his traditions were to be rejected." "As for Mukatil Ibn
Sulaiman," said Al-Bukhari, "pass him over in silence." In another
place, he says of him: "He is just nothing at all." Yahya Ibn Moin
declared that Mukatil's traditions were of no value; and Ahmad Ibn
Hanbal said: "As for Mukatil Ibn Sulaiman, the author of the Commentary,
I should not like to cite anything on his authority." "His Traditions
are to be rejected," said Abu Hatim ar-Razi. According to Zakariya Ibn
Yahya as-Saji, people said of Mukatil Ibn Sulaiman, the native of
Khorasan, "that he was a liar, and that his traditions should be
rejected."[377]

[Sidenote: Ikrama.]

Ikrama (died 107 A.H.), another liar, had only surmised before Mukatil
that Mohammad might have admired Zeinab. His words, as related by the
traditionists, Abd bin Hamid and Ibn-al-Munzar, are "as if she had
fallen deep in his mind."[378] But Mukatil has converted this hazardous
conjecture into a fact.

Abd Allah Ibn al-Harith relates as follows:--

     "I went to visit Ali, the son of Abd Allah Ibu Abbas, and I saw
     Ikrama tied up at the door of a privy, on which I said: 'Is it thus
     that you treat your slave?' To which he replied. 'Know that that
     fellow has told lies of my father.'"[379]

[Sidenote: Mohammad bin Yahya.]

Mohammad bin Yahya bin Habban[380] (died 121 A.H.) has also given the
tradition of Mohammad's admiring Zeinab at Zeid's house, but does not
give his authority. He was not a contemporary narrator, therefore his
narration is apocryphal and technically _Mursal_.

[Sidenote: Katada's conjectural interpretation not warranted.]

25. All these silly fables, wild romances, and scandalous conjectures
have their origin in Katada's improper interpretation of these words,
"and thou didst hide in thy mind what God would bring to light" (Sura
XXXIII, 37). Katada (died 117 A.H.) conjectured that the Prophet
