In making the fast one for the day, and none for the night, {249} Muhammad
doubtless had reference to the verse: "God wisheth you ease, but wisheth
not your discomfort." (Sura ii. 181).

The special ceremonies connected with the Ramazan are the Tarawih Namaz and
'Itikaf (retirement). The Tarawih prayers have been described already (p.
205). Each night in Ramazan one-thirtieth part (sipara) of the Quran is
recited in the Mosque. The duty of performing the 'Itikaf is a
Sunnat-ul-maukadda, a very strict duty. The Mu'takif, one who makes
'Itikaf, must remain apart in a Mosque used for public services, and there
meditate. Bukhari says that the Prophet made 'Itikaf the last ten days of
each Ramazan, and that the practice was continued by his wives after his
death. Usually a man should thus sit and meditate one of the days between
the twentieth and the thirtieth of Ramazan. If his meditation is disturbed
by any illegal interruption, another day should be devoted to it; but Imam
Muhammad says: "The least legal time is one hour." Some theologians hold
that 'Itikaf is farz-i-kifaya, that is, if one person of a community does
it the obligation does not rest on the others. If, however, a person makes
a vow in Ramazan, then 'Itikaf is considered wajib. 'Itikaf can be
performed at any time other than the last ten days of Ramazan, but then it
is only mustahab, a work of supererogation. All the sects except the
Shafa'ites hold that the Mu'takif must fast. He should also make the
nizzat, or intention, of performing what he is about to do. The Mu'takif
must not go out of the Mosque except for obviously necessary purposes, and
for making the legal wazu and ghusl (purifications). At night he may eat,
drink and sleep in the Mosque: acts quite unlawful at other times. He may
speak with others on religious matters, and if a man of business, he may
give orders with regard to the purchase and sale of merchandize, but on no
account must any goods be brought to him. It is highly meritorious for him
to read the Quran in an audible voice. By such an act he becomes {250} a
man of penetration, whose words are as powerful as a sharp sword.[257]

When the thirty days have passed the fast is broken. This act is called
Iftar, and the first day on which food is taken is called the
'Id-ul-Fitr--the 'Feast of the breaking of the fast.' On that day the
Sadqa, or alms are given before the Namaz is said in the Mosque. The Sadqa
of the 'Id-ul-Fitr is confined to Muslims: no other persons receive it. If
any one neglects to give these alms before the Namaz is said, he will not
merit so great a reward as he otherwise would. The reason assigned for this
is that, unless they are given early in the day, the poor cannot refresh
themselves before coming to the Mosque for the Namaz. The Sadqa are given
for the good of one's own soul, for that of young children, slaves male and
female--Muslim or Infidel; but not for the spiritual benefit of one's wife
or elder children.

In South India, the Sadqa consists of a gift of sufficient rice to feed one
person. When this has been done the people go to the Mosque saying, 'God is
great! God is great!' The Namaz is like that of a Friday, except that only
two rak'ats are said, and the Khutba which is said after the Namaz is
sunnat; whereas the Friday Khutba is said before the farz rak'ats, and is
itself of farz obligation. After hearing the sermon, the people disperse,
visit each other and thoroughly enjoy themselves.

A very usual form of the Khutba of the 'Id-ul-Fitr which is preached in
Arabic is as follows:--

    SERMON ON THE 'ID-UL-FITR.

    In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.

    "Holy is God who has opened the door of mercy for those who fast, and
    in mercy and kindness has granted them the right of entrance into
    heaven. God is greater than all. There is no God save Him. God is
    great! God is great! and worthy of praise. It {251} is of His grace and
    favour that He rewards those who keep the fast. He has said: 'I will
    give in the future world houses and palaces, and many excellent
    blessings to those who fast. God is great! God is great! Holy is He who
    certainly sent the Quran to our Prophet in the month of Ramazan, and
    who sends angels to grant peace to all true believers. God is great!
    and worthy of all praise. We praise and thank Him for the 'Id-ul-Fitr,
    that great blessing; and we testify that beside Him there is no God. He
    is alone. He has no partner. This witness which we give to His Unity
    will be a cause of our safety here, and finally gain us an entrance to
    Paradise. Muhammad (on whom be the mercy and peace of God) and all
    famous prophets are His slaves. He is the Lord of genii and of men.
    From Him comes mercy and peace upon Muhammad and his family, so long as
    the world shall last. God is greater than all. There is none beside
    Him. God is great! God is great! and worthy of all praise. O company of
    Believers, O congregation of Muslims, the mercy of the True One is on
    you. He says that this Feast day is a blessing to you, and a curse to
    the unbelievers. Your fasting will not be rewarded, and your prayers
    will be stayed in their flight to heaven until you have given the
    sadqa.[258] O congregation of Believers, to give alms is to you a wajib
    duty. Give to the poor some measures of grain or its money equivalent.
    Your duty in Ramazan was to say the Tarawih prayers, to make
    supplication to God, to sit and meditate ('Itikaf) and to read the
    Quran. The religious duties of the first ten days of Ramazan gain the
    mercy of God, those of the second ten merit His pardon; whilst those of
    the last ten save those who do them from the punishment of hell. God
    has declared that Ramazan is a noble month, for is not one of its
    nights, the Laylut-ul-Qadr, better than a thousand months? On that
    night Gabriel and the angels descended from heaven: till the morning
    breaks it is full of blessing. Its eloquent interpreter, and its
    clearest proof is the Quran, the Word of God, most Gracious. Holy is
    God who says in the Quran: "This word of God comes down in the month of
    Ramazan." This is a guide for men, a distinguisher between right and
    wrong. O Believers, in such a month be present, obey the order of your
    God and fast; but let the sick and the travellers substitute some other
    days on which to fast so that no days be lost, and say: "God is great!"
    and praise Him. God has made the fast easy for you. O Believers, God
    will bless you and us by the grace of the Holy Quran. Every verse of it
    is a benefit to us and fills us with wisdom. God is the Bestower, the
    {252} Holy King, the Munificent, the Kind, the Nourisher, the Merciful,
    the Clement."[259]

"The assemblies of the ladies on this 'Id are marked by all the amusements
and indulgences they can possibly invent or enjoy in their secluded state.
Some receiving, others paying visits in covered conveyances; all doing
honour to the day by wearing their best jewellery and splendid dress. The
Zanana rings with festive songs and loud music, the cheerful meeting of
friends, the distribution of presents to dependents, and remembrances to
the poor; all is life and joy, cheerful bustle and amusement, on this happy
day of 'Id, when the good lady of the Mansion sits in state to receive
presents from inferiors and to grant proofs of her favour to others."[260]

6. The Baqr-'Id.--This is the most important Feast in the whole year. It is
also known as the 'Id-i-Qurban, and as the 'Id-ul-Azha, commonly called the
Id-uz-Zuha, the feast of sacrifice. In Turkey and in Egypt it is called
Bairam. Its origin was as follows: A few months after the Hijra, or flight
from Mecca, Muhammad, dwelling in Madina, observed that the Jews kept, on
the tenth day of the seventh month, the great fast of the Atonement. A
Tradition records that the Prophet asked them why they kept this fast. He
was informed that it was a memorial of the deliverance of Moses and the
children of Israel from the hands of Pharaoh. "We have a greater right in
Moses than they," said Muhammad, so he fasted with the Jews and commanded
his followers to fast also. This was at the period of his mission when
Muhammad was friendly with the Jews of Madina, who occasionally came to
hear him preach. The Prophet also occasionally attended the synagogue. Then
came the change of the Qibla from Jerusalem to Mecca, for the Jews were not
so ready to change their {253} creed as Muhammad had at first hoped. In the
second year of the Hijra, Muhammad and his followers did not participate in
the Jewish fast, for the Prophet now instituted the feast of the Baqr-'Id.
The idolatrous Arabs had been in the habit of making an annual pilgrimage
to Mecca at this season of the year. The offering of animals in sacrifice
formed a part of the concluding ceremony of that pilgrimage. That
portion--the sacrifice of animals--Muhammad adopted in the feast which now,
at Madina, he substituted for the Jewish fast. This was well calculated to
attract the attention of the Meccans and to gain the goodwill of the Arabs.
Muhammad could not then make the pilgrimage to Mecca, for as yet there was
a hostile feeling between the inhabitants of the two cities; but on the
tenth day of the month Zu'l-Hajja, at the very time when the Arabs at Mecca
were engaged in sacrificing victims, Muhammad went forth from his house at
Madina, and assembling his followers instituted the Id-uz-Zuha or Baqr-'Id.
Two young kids were brought before him. One he sacrificed and said: "O
Lord! I sacrifice this for my whole people, all those who bear witness to
Thy unity and to my mission. O Lord! this is for Muhammad and for the
family of Muhammad."

Great merit is obtained by all who keep this feast. 'Ayesha relates how the
Prophet once said: "Man hath not done anything on the 'Id-ul-Azha more
pleasing to God than spilling blood; for verily the animal sacrificed will
come on the day of resurrection with its horns, hair and hoofs, and will
make the scale of his good actions very heavy. Verily its blood reached the
acceptance of God before it falleth upon the ground, therefore be joyful in
it."

Musalmans say that the Patriarch Abraham was ordered to sacrifice Ishmael,
and that he made several ineffectual attempts to cut the throat of his son.
Ishmael then said to his father: "It is through pity and compassion for me
that you allow the knife to miss: blindfold yourself and then sacrifice
me." Abraham acted upon this advice, {254} blindfolded himself, drew his
knife, repeated the Bismillah, and, as he thought, cut the throat of his
son; but, behold, in the meantime Gabriel had substituted a sheep for the
lad. This event is commemorated in this feast.

On the day before the feast, the Arfa, or vigil, is kept. Food of various
kinds is prepared, over which a Fatiha is offered, first, in the name of
the Prophet; secondly, in the names of deceased relatives, and of others
for whom a blessing is desired, or from whom some favor is expected. The
food is then sent as a present to friends.

On the morning of the feast day, the devout Muslims proceed to the 'Id-gah
or, if there is no 'Id-gah, to the principal Mosque, repeating on the way
the Takbir "God is Great!" and "There is no other God save the one true
God, God is great, praise be to God." At the time of making wazu, the
worshipper should say: "O God, make this (_i.e._ the sacrifice I shall
offer to-day) an atonement for my sin, and purify my religion and take evil
away from me."

The Service at the 'Id-gah, or in the Mosque consists of two farz rak'ats,
as in the Salat-ul-Juma (p. 201), after the Khutba is delivered. It will,
however, be seen from the following sermon that it is mustahab to say four
more rak'ats.

    SERMON ON THE 'ID-UZ-ZUHA.

    In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful.

    Allahu Akbar! God is Great. There is no God but God. God is Great! God
    is Great and worthy of all praise. He is Holy. Day and night we should
    praise Him. He is without partner, without equal. All praise be to Him.
    Holy is He, Who makes the rich generous, Who provides the sacrifice for
    the wise. He is Great, without an equal. All praise be to Him. Listen!
    I testify that there is no God but God. He is alone, without partner.
    This testimony is as bright as the early dawn, as brilliant as the
    glorious feast day. Muhammad is His servant who delivered His message.
    On Muhammad, and on his family, and on his Companions may the peace of
    God rest. On you who are present, O congregation of Muslimin, may the
    {255} mercy of God for ever rest. O servants of God! our first duty is
    to fear God and to be kind. God has said: "I will be with those who
    fear Me and are kind."

    Know O servants of God! that to rejoice on the feast day is the sign
    and mark of the pure and good. Exalted will be the rank of such in
    Paradise (Dar-ul-Qarar), especially on the day of resurrection will
    they obtain dignity and honour. Do not on this day foolish acts. It is
    no time for amusements and negligence. This is the day on which to
    utter the praises of God. (Tasbih.) Read the Kalima, the Takbir and the
    Tamhid. This is a high festival season and the feast of sacrifice. Read
    now the Takbir-ut-Tashriq. God is great! God is great! There is no God
    but God! God is great! God is great! All praise be to Him! From the
    morning of the 'Arfa, after every farz rak'at it is good (mustahab) for
    a person to repeat the Takbir-ut-Tashriq. The woman before whom is a
    man as Imam, and the traveller whose Imam is a permanent resident
    (Muqim) should also repeat this Takbir. It should be said at each Namaz
    until the Salat-ul-'Asr of the Feast day (10th). Some, however, say
    that it should be recited every day till the afternoon ('Asr) of the
    thirteenth day, as these are the days of the Tashriq (p. 231).[261] If
    the Imam forgets to recite, let not the worshipper forget. Know, O
    believers, that every free man who is a Sahib-i-Nisab (_i.e._ worth Rs.
    52) should offer sacrifice on this day, provided that this sum is
    exclusive of his horse, his clothes, his tools, and his household goods
    and slaves. It is wajib for every one to offer sacrifice for himself,
    but it is not a wajib order that he should do it for his children.[262]
    A goat, a ram or a cow should be offered in sacrifice for every seven
    persons. The victim must not be one-eyed, blind, lame or very thin.

    If you sacrifice a fat animal it will serve you well, and carry you
    across the Sirat. O Believers, thus said the Prophet, on whom be the
    mercy and peace of God, "Sacrifice the victim with your own hands, this
    was the Sunnat of Ibrahim, on whom be peace."

    In the Kitab-uz-zad-ut-Taqwa, it is said that on the 'Id-ul-Fitr and
    the 'Id-uz-Zuha, four nafl rak'ats should be said after the farz Namaz
    {256} of the 'Id. In the first rak'at after the Surat-ul-Fatiha recite
    the Surat-ul-A'la (Sura lxxvii); in the second, the Surat-ush-Shams
    (Sura xci); in the third, the Surat-uz-Zuha (Sura xciii); in the
    fourth, the Surat-ul-Ikhlas (cxii).

    O Believers, if ye do so, God will pardon the sins of fifty years which
    are past and of fifty years to come. The reading of these Suras are
    equal as an act of merit to the reading of all the books God has sent
    by His prophets.

    May God include us amongst those who are accepted by Him, who act
    according to the Law, whose desire will be granted at the last day. To
    all such there will be no fear in the day of resurrection; no sorrow in
    the examination at the day of judgment. The best of all books is the
    Quran. O believers! May God give to us, and to you a blessing for ever
    by the grace of the Noble Quran. May its verses be our guide, and may
    its wise mention of God direct us aright. I desire that God may pardon
    all believers, male and female, the Muslimin and the Muslimat. O
    believers, also seek for pardon. Truly God is the Forgiver, the
    Merciful, the Eternal King, the Compassionate, the Clement. O
    believers, the Khutba is over. Let all desire that on Muhammad Mustafa
    the mercy and peace of God may rest.

The worshippers then return to their respective homes and offer up the
sacrifice,[263] for it is a wajib order that every Muslim should keep this
feast, and sacrifice an animal for himself. He need not fear though he has
to incur debt for the purchase of an animal, for it is said that God will
in some way help him to pay the debt. If a camel is sacrificed, it should
be one not less than five years of age, if a cow or sheep it should at
least be in its second year, though the third year is better; if a goat it
must not be less than six months old. All of these animals must be without
a blemish, or defect of any kind. It is a sunnat order that the head of the
household should himself slay the victim. If, however, from any cause, he
cannot do so, he may call in a butcher; but in that case he must place his
hand upon that of the butcher when the operation is performed. If the {257}
victim is a camel, it must be placed with the head towards Mecca. Its front
legs being bandaged together the sacrificer must stand on the right hand
side of the victim, and plunge the knife into its throat with such force
that the animal may fall at once. Any other mode of slaying it is unlawful.
Other animals must be slain in the same way. Just before slaying the victim
the following verse of the Quran should be repeated: "Say! my prayers, and
my worship, and my life and my death are unto God, the Lord of the worlds.
He hath no associate. This am I commanded, and I am the first of the
Muslims." (Sura vi. 163). The operator also adds: "O God, from Thee, and to
Thee (I do this), in the name of God, God is Great!" Then having slain the
victim he says: "O God accept this for me." The first meal taken should be
prepared from the flesh of the animal just slaughtered, after which the
members of the family, the neighbours, and the poor should receive some
portions.

It is considered highly meritorious to sacrifice one animal for each member
of the family; but as that would involve an expenditure few could bear, it
is allowable to sacrifice one victim for the household. In extreme cases
men may combine together and make one sacrifice do for the whole, but the
number of persons so combining must not exceed seventy. Some authorities
limit the number to seven. This feast is strictly observed by all Muslims
wherever they may be.

The Baqr-'Id and the 'Id-ul-Fitr constitute the 'Idain, the two great
Feasts of Islam. A country in which Musalmans could not observe them both
would at once become Dar-ul-Harb, or House of Enmity, in which it would be
the bounden duty of every Muslim to join in a Jihad, against the Infidel
rulers of the land.

This completes the principal Feasts of the Muslim year.

Among other practices borrowed from the Hindus must be placed the
pilgrimage made by Indian Musalmans to the {258} shrines of Saints, the
ceremonies connected with them and the festivals instituted in their
honour. Properly speaking, the Sunnis have but two festivals--the Baqr-'Id
and the 'Id-ul-Fitr, but many others are now observed. Of these I have
described several. It only remains to notice a few of the festival days
which are peculiar to India. The title of Pir given to a Musalman devotee
is equivalent to the term Guru amongst the Hindus. A man who seeks to be a
'religious' takes a Pir as a spiritual guide. "Follow," says the poet Wali,
"the footsteps of thy Pir, like a shadow." After death these Pirs are
venerated as Walis or Saints. The Pirs when alive, are frequently resorted
to for a ta'wiz, or charm, and the aid of their prayers is often invoked.
The sepulchre of a Wali is called a Dargah, shrine; Mazar, place of
pilgrimage; Rauza, garden. The professional reciter of the Quran, and the
Namaz at such places is called a Rauza Khan. As a rule, processions are
made to the shrines, and flowers, sweetmeats and food over which a Fatiha
has been said are offered. Usually the Fatiha is _for_ the Saint, not _to_
the Saint. It is considered a very meritorious act to give land for the
erection of such shrines and to endow them. An account of many of these
Saints is given in the Bara Masa by Jawan and the Arayish-i-Mahfil by
Afsos. The following selection will give an idea of the customs
prevalent:--

1. FESTIVAL OF MADAR.--Sayyid Badr-ud-din Kutb-ul-Madar is said to have
descended from the Imam Husain. He was born at Aleppo about A.D. 1050, and
received from Muhammad permission to "hold his breath" (Habs-i-dam). Thus
he was able to live to a good old age. He is said to have had 1,442 sons,
and to have died when upwards of 300 years old. More rational people
explain the number of his sons by saying they were his spiritual children.
The length of his life is explained by saying that as each man has to make
a certain number of inspirations, the less frequently he does it the longer
he will live. Jawan in his account of {259} the festival states: "The tomb
of Madar is at Makanpur, a place about forty miles from Cawnpore." On the
seventeenth of the month Jamadi-ul-Awwal an immense crowd fills the village
which is illuminated at night. Fires are lighted, around which Fakirs
dance, and through which they leap calling out "Dam Madar, Dam Madar,"
(breath of Madar.) An order of Fakirs, called Madaria, look to this Saint
as their patron. In distant places where this feast is kept they set up an
Alam, or standard in honour of the Saint, and perform ceremonies common to
such days. The nights are spent in celebrating his praises, &c.
