reference to "the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob." He then added, "He is not the God of the dead, but of the living."
Jesus meant to establish the fact of the continued existence of the dead;
yet not merely this, but to prove the resurrection of the dead. The latter
was the question at issue. The word "living," as used by our Lord,
indicates those who are enjoying a normal life, not that of disembodied
spirits, but of immortal spirits clothed with deathless bodies. Therefore
Jesus added, "for all live unto him." In the mind and purpose of God all
are to be raised from the dead and to enjoy that complete and blessed
existence which resurrection implies. The confident expectation of such a
future state is based on our relation to God. If he is truly our God and
we are his people, the triumph of death is not real and permanent but will
be ended by the glorious immortality of the body and of the soul.




F. The Question Of Jesus. Ch. 20:41-44


    41 And he said unto them, How say they that the Christ is David's
    son? 42 For David himself saith in the book of Psalms,

      The Lord said unto my Lord,
      Sit thou on my right hand,
    43 Till I make thine enemies the footstool of thy feet.

    David therefore calleth him Lord, and how is he his son?


Jesus had defeated his enemies in debate. They had come to him with a
series of crafty questions designed to discredit him as a public teacher
and to secure some ground for his arrest. To each of these questions he
had given a reply by which his foes had been unmasked and condemned. He
then asked them a question. It was intended not only forever to silence
his foes, though it accomplished this, for henceforth no man ventured to
meet him in public discussion; nor yet did Jesus desire further to
humiliate his enemies. In the presence of the people he had already shown
them to be ridiculous, contemptible, impotent, and insincere. His real
motive was to ask a question, the answer to which would embody the chief
of all his claims, namely, the claim that he is divine. It was of supreme
importance that this claim should be made at exactly this time. He knew
that the rulers had been unable to find a charge on which to arraign him
before either the ecclesiastical or the civil court. He realized that they
would dare to make no other attempt in public, but he clearly foresaw the
fact that, through the treachery of Judas, he would be arrested and,
before both these courts, would be arraigned on the charge of blasphemy.
His enemies would accuse him of claiming to be not only the Messiah but
also divine. On this occasion, therefore, in the presence both of the
rulers and the people, he made the defense which never can be broken or
forgotten as he definitely demonstrated from Scripture that the Messiah
was described by the inspired writers as a divine Being. All that Jesus
claimed for himself, as recorded in the Gospel of John, was included in
the answer which was implied by the question which he now asked. Even for
the present day it involves the supreme problem in the sphere of
philosophy and religion. This problem concerns the person of Christ. Is he
to be regarded as Man or God, or at once God and Man? Where is he to be
placed in the scale of being; or, as Jesus voiced the problem, how could
David speak of the coming Messiah as both his son and his Lord? There was
but one answer. There can be but one. The Messiah was to be divine. The
son of David is also the Son of God. The incarnation is the only solution
of our most serious difficulties in the realm of religious belief. By his
question Jesus not only silenced his enemies; he also showed their
insincerity in condemning him to death and their rejection of the inspired
Scriptures in their unwillingness to believe the testimony concerning the
person of the Messiah. Jesus unquestionably claimed to be the divine
Saviour of the world. The ideal Man is also the incarnate God.




G. The Warning Against The Scribes. Ch. 20:45-47


    45 And in the hearing of all the people he said unto his
    disciples, 46 Beware of the scribes, who desire to walk in long
    robes, and love salutations in the marketplaces, and chief seats
    in the synagogues, and chief places at feasts; 47 who devour
    widows' houses, and for a pretence make long prayers: these shall
    receive greater condemnation.


As the long day of public controversy drew to its close, it was not
strange that Jesus turned to warn the people against these enemies who had
been seeking to defeat him and who were determined upon his death. These
professed guides could not be followed safely. These rulers had shown
themselves to be unworthy of their place and power. The people must look
elsewhere for true teachers. They must find other men to interpret for
them the will of God.

The scribes were the professional teachers of the day, the trained
expositors of the Law. Most of them were Pharisees. They were of all men
the most bitter enemies of Christ; they were jealous of his power; they
were angered at his claims; and finally they had been goaded to
desperation by their humiliating defeat at his hands. Upon these men Jesus
pronounced the most stern condemnation. His words are recorded at length
by Matthew. In the brief summary of the discourse made by Mark and by Luke
we find only a few short sentences which sketch three principal features
in the character of these unworthy leaders of religious thought. The first
is their vanity, their ambition for display and for high position, and
their love of flattery. The second is their cruel avarice, expressed by
our Lord in the suggestive clause, "who devour widows' houses." The third
was their shameful hypocrisy; they are described as men who "for a
pretence make long prayers." It has always been remarked that the most
bitter denunciations of Jesus were addressed to the men whose outward
lives were most respectable and whose religious professions were most
loud. This does not mean, however, that open vice and flagrant sin are
better than selfish and proud morality; but it does remind us that great
religious privileges and the possession of revealed truth involve solemn
responsibilities and that hypocrisy and pretense are abominations in the
sight of God.




H. The Widow's Mites. Ch. 21:1-4


    1 And he looked up, and saw the rich men that were casting their
    gifts into the treasury. 2 And he saw a certain poor widow casting
    in thither two mites. 3 And he said, Of a truth I say unto you,
    This poor widow cast in more than they all: 4 for all these did of
    their superfluity cast in unto the gifts; but she of her want did
    cast in all the living that she had.


What a contrast this charming sketch supplies to the picture which Jesus
drew of the Pharisees! In the eyes of the world the service of the poor
widow was meager and worthless, while the gifts of the hypocrites were
costly and great; in the eyes of the Lord their offerings were
comparatively worthless and she gave more than they all. As a matter of
fact, she had brought but two small coins, worth less than a half cent,
but they were all that she had. With this scene in mind we should be
careful not to call our offerings "mites" unless they are all that we
possess; we should be encouraged, however, to know that our Lord looks
upon the heart and estimates the gift by the motive and the love and the
sacrifice involved; above all, we should be reminded that we can best
measure our offerings not by what we give but by how much we keep. The
influence of the woman is still moving multitudes toward the treasury of
the Lord.




I. The Destruction Of Jerusalem And The Coming Of Christ. Ch. 21:5-38


During the days of his ministry Jesus frequently predicted his death and
also his return to glory. He saw clearly before him a cross but on the
distant horizon a throne. Again and again he had warned the Jews that
their rejection of him and of his call to repentance would result in the
destruction of Jerusalem and in the anguish of their race, and quite as
frequently he had told his disciples that while indeed he was to die and
rise again, a long period of time would pass before he would return in
glory to establish his Kingdom. The great, final discourse relating to the
future was delivered at the close of his last day of public controversy
and teaching. As Jesus sat with his disciples on the slope of the Mount of
Olives, as he looked westward and saw the sun sinking behind the majestic
buildings of the sacred city, he realized that in truth the night was
gathering over the nation, that his own day of earthly ministry was done,
and that the true dawning would not break for the world until the Son of
righteousness should arise in true glory, until he himself would return to
fill the earth with the peace and joy and splendor of his universal reign.
He, therefore, told his disciples with much detail the story of the
approaching destruction of Jerusalem and of his own return after the long
years of faithful service and of eager waiting which were appointed for
his followers.

This prophetic discourse of Jesus is difficult to interpret; first of all,
because it is phrased in figurative terms, the exact meaning of which is
not always apparent. Again it appears that we have only a partial report
of the prophecies then spoken by our Lord; it is necessary to compare the
records of Matthew and Mark with the statements here given by Luke, and
then to remember that we have probably only a fraction of the whole
discourse. In the third place, it is evident that our Lord was describing
not one event, but two. He was prophesying the literal overthrow of the
holy city by the armies of Rome, but he was using the colors of this
tragic scene to paint the picture of his own return in glory. So
interwoven are these two series of predictions that it is not always
evident whether the reference is to the nearer or to the more remote of
these events. While we may note with some definiteness the general outline
of the prophecy and while there need be little doubt as to its two
outstanding features, namely, the destruction of the city and the return
of our Lord, the study of this chapter should be undertaken with humility,
and our conclusions should be stated with caution and with reserve. The
result need not be bewilderment or despair; it should be encouragement and
more confident expectation of the coming of Christ and the ultimate
triumph of his cause.



1. The Present Age. Ch. 21:5-19


    5 And as some spake of the temple, how it was adorned with goodly
    stones and offerings, he said, 6 As for these things which ye
    behold, the days will come, in which there shall not be left here
    one stone upon another, that shall not be thrown down. 7 And they
    asked him, saying, Teacher, when therefore shall these things be?
    and what _shall_ be the sign when these things are about to come
    to pass? 8 And he said, Take heed that ye be not led astray: for
    many shall come in my name, saying, I am _he_; and, The time is at
    hand: go ye not after them. 9 And when ye shall hear of wars and
    tumults, be not terrified: for these things must needs come to
    pass first; but the end is not immediately.


    10 Then said he unto them, Nation shall rise against nation, and
    kingdom against kingdom; 11 and there shall be great earthquakes,
    and in divers places famines and pestilences; and there shall be
    terrors and great signs from heaven. 12 But before all these
    things, they shall lay their hands on you, and shall persecute
    you, delivering you up to the synagogues and prisons, bringing you
    before kings and governors for my name's sake. 13 It shall turn
    out unto you for a testimony. Settle it therefore in your hearts,
    not to meditate beforehand how to answer: 15 for I will give you a
    mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries shall not be able to
    withstand or to gainsay. 16 But ye shall be delivered up even by
    parents, and brethren, and kinsfolk, and friends; and _some_ of
    you shall they cause to be put to death. 17 And ye shall be hated
    of all men for my name's sake. 18 And not a hair of your head
    shall perish. 19 In your patience ye shall win your souls.


The occasion of this prophetic message was the question asked by the
disciples, as they gazed on the splendor of the Temple, concerning the
destruction of which Jesus had spoken as he declared that the days would
come "in which there shall not be left here one stone upon another, that
shall not be thrown down. And they asked him, saying, Teacher, when
therefore shall these things be? and what shall be the sign when these
things are about to come to pass?" In the words of Matthew, they also
asked, "What shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the
world?"

First of all, then, Jesus sketched for his disciples the character of this
present age down to its very end, and described the experiences of his
followers urging them to be faithful to him amidst all the commotions and
trials of the coming years until he should return. According to his
description the age will be characterized by the appearance of many
deceivers who will claim the allegiance of his followers and assume to
take the place of Christ. Furthermore, there will be wars and tumults but
by these believers are not to be terrified. It is always a temptation of
shallow minds to interpret every unusual event as a sign of the
approaching end of the world. Our Lord assured his disciples that all
through the passing years such events would happen without warranting the
conclusion that the great event is near; as he declared, "The end is not
immediately;" there would be a long period of delay; there would be a
political commotion, "Nation shall rise against nation, and kingdom
against kingdom." There would also be earthquakes, famines, pestilences,
and "great signs from heaven," but these again must be regarded as
characteristics of the present age and not as signs of its approaching
end.

Furthermore, the followers of Christ must suffer bitter persecution and be
brought before kings and governors for his name's sake. They must continue
steadfast in their testimony. They need not be troubled as to the exact
form of their witness but must trust the unseen Master to give them all
needed wisdom as they speak boldly in his name.

Most distressing of all, they must suffer from the treachery of "parents
and brethren, and kinsfolk, and friends" and some of them must taste the
bitter cup of martyrdom; they will be hated of all men, yet their souls
will not perish. By their steadfast endurance they will win eternal
salvation. It is true, the picture is one of great hardship and distress
but its message has encouraged sufferers who in all ages have been
faithful in their testimony and have found the comfort and inspiration
which is possible for all as they look for the coming and Kingdom of
Christ.



2. The Destruction of Jerusalem. Ch. 21:20-24


    20 But when ye see Jerusalem compassed with armies, then know that
    her desolation is at hand. 21 Then let them that are in Judaea flee
    unto the mountains; and let them that are in the midst of her
    depart out; and let not them that are in the country enter
    therein. 22 For these are days of vengeance, that all things are
    written may be fulfilled. 23 Woe unto them that are with child and
    them that give suck in those days! for there shall be great
    distress upon the land, and wrath unto this people. 24 And they
    shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be led captive into
    all the nations: and Jerusalem shall be trodden down of the
    Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled.


As our Lord scanned the future he now fixed his eyes first of all upon
that dreadful event which in some of its features foreshadowed the end of
that age which he had been describing. On more than one occasion he had
predicted the destruction of Jerusalem. He now declared that the definite
sign of the descending doom would be the siege of the city: "When ye see
Jerusalem compassed with armies, then know that her desolation is at
hand." He warned those within the city to flee to the mountains and
declared that those who were in the country should not turn to the city
for safety, because the days of vengeance will have come and the
prophecies of punishment upon the guilty nation will be about to be
fulfilled. It would be a time of unparalleled distress and horror; as
Jesus declared, "They shall fall by the edge of the sword, and shall be
led captive into all the nations." How literally his words were fulfilled
is a familiar fact of history. It would be difficult to recall another
scene of equally hideous carnage. It is estimated that a million Jews fell
victims to the slaughter and outrage of the soldiers under Titus, and that
unnumbered thousands were led as captives to Egypt and other lands.

Last of all Jesus predicted that Jerusalem would be "trodden down of the
Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled." The first phrase
denotes something more than mere domination and Gentile control; it
