
When the fourth morning dawned, Sigurd drew the ring Andvaranaut from
Brunhild's hand, and, replacing it by another, he received her solemn
promise that in ten days' time she would appear at the Niblung court
to take up her duties as queen and faithful wife.


    "'I thank thee, King, for thy goodwill, and thy pledge of love
    I take,
    Depart with my troth to thy people: but ere full ten days are o'er
    I shall come to the Sons of the Niblungs, and then shall we part
    no more
    Till the day of the change of our life-days, when Odin and Freya
    shall call.'"


The promise given, Sigurd again passed out of the palace, through the
ashes, and joined Gunnar, with whom, after he had reported the success
of his venture, he hastened to exchange forms once more. The warriors
then turned their steeds homeward, and only to Gudrun did Sigurd reveal
the secret of her brother's wooing, and he gave her the fatal ring,
little suspecting the many woes which it was destined to occasion.



The Coming of Brunhild

True to her promise, Brunhild appeared ten days later, and solemnly
blessing the house she was about to enter, she greeted Gunnar
kindly, and allowed him to conduct her to the great hall, where sat
Sigurd beside Gudrun. The Volsung looked up at that moment and as he
encountered Brunhild's reproachful eyes Grimhild's spell was broken and
the past came back in a flood of bitter recollection. It was too late,
however: both were in honour bound, he to Gudrun and she to Gunnar,
whom she passively followed to the high seat, to sit beside him as
the scalds entertained the royal couple with the ancient lays of
their land.

The days passed, and Brunhild remained apparently indifferent, but
her heart was hot with anger, and often did she steal out of her
husband's palace to the forest, where she could give vent to her
grief in solitude.

Meanwhile, Gunnar perceived the cold indifference of his wife to his
protestations of affection, and began to have jealous suspicions,
wondering whether Sigurd had honestly told the true story of the
wooing, and fearing lest he had taken advantage of his position to win
Brunhild's love. Sigurd alone continued the even tenor of his way,
striving against none but tyrants and oppressors, and cheering all
by his kindly words and smile.



The Quarrel of the Queens

On a day the queens went down together to the Rhine to bathe, and as
they were entering the water Gudrun claimed precedence by right of
her husband's courage. Brunhild refused to yield what she deemed her
right, and a quarrel ensued, in the course of which Gudrun accused
her sister-in-law of not having kept her faith, producing the ring
Andvaranaut in support of her charge. The sight of the fatal ring
in the hand of her rival crushed Brunhild, and she fled homeward,
and lay in speechless grief day after day, until all thought she must
die. In vain did Gunnar and the members of the royal family seek her
in turn and implore her to speak; she would not utter a word until
Sigurd came and inquired the cause of her unutterable grief. Then,
like a long-pent-up stream, her love and anger burst forth, and she
overwhelmed the hero with reproaches, until his heart so swelled
with grief for her sorrow that the tight bands of his strong armour
gave way.


    "Out went Sigurd
    From that interview
    Into the hall of kings,
    Writhing with anguish;
    So that began to start
    The ardent warrior's
    Iron-woven sark
    Off from his sides."

            Saemund's Edda (Thorpe's tr.).


Words had no power to mend that woeful situation, and Brunhild
refused to heed when Sigurd offered to repudiate Gudrun, saying,
as she dismissed him, that she would not be faithless to Gunnar. The
thought that two living men had called her wife was unendurable to
her pride, and the next time her husband sought her presence she
implored him to put Sigurd to death, thus increasing his jealousy
and suspicion. He refused to deal violently with Sigurd, however,
because of their oath of good fellowship, and so she turned to Hoegni
for aid. He, too, did not wish to violate his oath, but he induced
Guttorm, by means of much persuasion and one of Grimhild's potions,
to undertake the dastardly deed.



The Death of Sigurd

Accordingly, in the dead of night, Guttorm stole into Sigurd's chamber,
weapon in hand; but as he bent over the bed he saw Sigurd's bright
eyes fixed upon him, and fled precipitately. Later on he returned
and the scene was repeated; but towards morning, stealing in for
the third time, he found the hero asleep, and traitorously drove his
spear through his back.

Although wounded unto death, Sigurd raised himself in bed, and seizing
his renowned sword which hung beside him, he flung it with all his
remaining strength at the flying murderer, cutting him in two as
he reached the door. Then, with a last whispered farewell to the
terrified Gudrun, Sigurd sank back and breathed his last.


                    "'Mourn not, O Gudrun, this stroke is the last
                    of ill;
    Fear leaveth the House of the Niblungs on this breaking of
    the morn;
    Mayst thou live, O woman beloved, unforsaken, unforlorn!'
     
    'It is Brynhild's deed,' he murmured, 'and the woman that loves
    me well;
    Nought now is left to repent of, and the tale abides to tell.
    I have done many deeds in my life-days; and all these, and my love,
    they lie
    In the hollow hand of Odin till the day of the world go by.
    I have done and I may not undo, I have given and I take not again:
    Art thou other than I, Allfather, wilt thou gather my glory
    in vain?'"


Sigurd's infant son was slain at the same time, and poor Gudrun mourned
over her dead in silent, tearless grief; while Brunhild laughed aloud,
thereby incurring the wrath of Gunnar, who repented, too late, that
he had not taken measures to avert the dastardly crime.

The grief of the Niblungs found expression in the public funeral
celebration which was shortly held. A mighty pyre was erected, to
which were brought precious hangings, fresh flowers, and glittering
arms, as was the custom for the burial of a prince; and as these sad
preparations took shape, Gudrun was the object of tender solicitude
from the women, who, fearing lest her heart would break, tried to open
the flood-gate of her tears by recounting the bitterest sorrows they
had known, one telling of how she too had lost all she held dear. But
these attempts to make her weep were utterly vain, until at length
they laid her husband's head in her lap, bidding her kiss him as if
he were still alive; then her tears began to flow in torrents.

The reaction soon set in for Brunhild also; her resentment was all
forgotten when she saw the body of Sigurd laid on the pyre, arrayed
as if for battle in burnished armour, with the Helmet of Dread at his
head, and accompanied by his steed, which was to be burned with him,
together with several of his faithful servants who would not survive
his loss. She withdrew to her apartment, and after distributing her
possessions among her handmaidens, she donned her richest array,
and stabbed herself as she lay stretched upon her bed.

The tidings soon reached Gunnar, who came with all haste to his wife
and just in time to receive her dying injunction to lay her beside the
hero she loved, with the glittering, unsheathed sword between them,
as it had lain when he had wooed her by proxy. When she had breathed
her last, these wishes were faithfully executed, and her body was
burned with Sigurd's amid the lamentations of all the Niblungs.

In Richard Wagner's story of "The Ring" Brunhild's end is more
picturesque. Mounted on her steed, as when she led the battle-maidens
at the command of Odin, she rode into the flames which leaped to heaven
from the great funeral pyre, and passed for ever from the sight of men.


    "They are gone--the lovely, the mighty, the hope of the ancient
    Earth:
    It shall labour and bear the burden as before that day of their
    birth:
    It shall groan in its blind abiding for the day that Sigurd
    hath sped,
    And the hour that Brynhild hath hastened, and the dawn that waketh
    the dead:
    It shall yearn, and be oft-times holpen, and forget their deeds
    no more,
    Till the new sun beams on Baldur and the happy sea-less shore."


The death scene of Sigurd (Siegfried) is far more powerful in the
Nibelungenlied. In the Teutonic version his treacherous assailant
lures him from a hunting party in the forest to quench his thirst at
a brook, where he thrusts him through the back with a spear. His body
was thence borne home by the hunters and laid at his wife's feet.



The Flight of Gudrun

Gudrun, still inconsolable, and loathing the kindred who had
treacherously robbed her of all joy in life, fled from her father's
house and took refuge with Elf, Sigurd's foster father, who, after the
death of Hiordis, had married Thora, the daughter of King Hakon. The
two women became great friends, and here Gudrun tarried several years,
employing herself in embroidering upon tapestry the great deeds of
Sigurd, and watching over her little daughter Swanhild, whose bright
eyes reminded her vividly of the husband whom she had lost.



Atli, King of the Huns

In the meantime, Atli, Brunhild's brother, who was now King of the
Huns, had sent to Gunnar to demand atonement for his sister's death;
and to satisfy his claims Gunnar had promised that when her years of
widowhood had been accomplished he would give him Gudrun's hand in
marriage. Time passed, and Atli clamoured for the fulfilment of his
promise, wherefore the Niblung brothers, with their mother Grimhild,
went to seek the long-absent princess, and by the aid of the magic
potion administered by Grimhild they succeeded in persuading Gudrun
to leave little Swanhild in Denmark and to become Atli's wife in the
land of the Huns.

Nevertheless, Gudrun secretly detested her husband, whose avaricious
tendencies were extremely repugnant to her; and even the birth of
two sons, Erp and Eitel, did not console her for the death of her
loved ones and the absence of Swanhild. Her thoughts were continually
of the past, and she often spoke of it, little suspecting that her
descriptions of the wealth of the Niblungs had excited Atli's greed,
and that he was secretly planning some pretext for seizing it.

Atli at last decided to send Knefrud or Wingi, one of his servants,
to invite the Niblung princes to visit his court, intending to slay
them when he should have them in his power; but Gudrun, fathoming this
design, sent a rune message to her brothers, together with the ring
Andvaranaut, around which she had twined a wolf's hair. On the way,
however, the messenger partly effaced the runes, thus changing their
meaning; and when he appeared before the Niblungs, Gunnar accepted
the invitation, in spite of Hoegni's and Grimhild's warnings, and an
ominous dream of Glaumvor, his second wife.



Burial of the Niblung Treasure

Before departing, however, Gunnar was prevailed upon to bury secretly
the great Niblung hoard in the Rhine, and he sank it in a deep hole
in the bed of the river, the position of which was known to the royal
brothers only, who took a solemn oath never to reveal it.


    "Down then and whirling outward the ruddy Gold fell forth,
    As a flame in the dim grey morning, flashed out a kingdom's worth;
    Then the waters roared above it, the wan water and the foam
    Flew up o'er the face of the rock-wall as the tinkling Gold
    fell home,
    Unheard, unseen for ever, a wonder and a tale,
    Till the last of earthly singers from the sons of men shall fail."



The Treachery of Atli

In martial array the royal band then rode out of the city of the
Niblungs, which they were never again to see, and after many adventures
they entered the land of the Huns, and arrived at Atli's hall, where,
finding that they had been foully entrapped, they slew the traitor
Knefrud, and prepared to sell their lives as dearly as possible.

Gudrun hastened to meet them with tender embraces, and, seeing that
they must fight, she grasped a weapon and loyally aided them in the
terrible massacre which ensued. After the first onslaught, Gunnar kept
up the spirits of his followers by playing on his harp, which he laid
aside only when the assaults were renewed. Thrice the brave Niblungs
resisted the assault of the Huns, until all save Gunnar and Hoegni had
perished, and the king and his brother, wounded, faint, and weary,
fell into the hands of their foes, who cast them, securely bound,
into a dungeon to await death.

Atli had prudently abstained from taking any active part in the
fight, and he now had his brothers-in-law brought in turn before him,
promising them freedom if they would reveal the hiding-place of the
golden hoard; but they proudly kept silence, and it was only after
much torture that Gunnar spake, saying that he had sworn a solemn
oath never to reveal the secret as long as Hoegni lived. At the same
time he declared that he would believe his brother dead only when
his heart was brought to him on a platter.


    "With a dreadful voice cried Gunnar: 'O fool, hast thou heard
    it told
    Who won the Treasure aforetime and the ruddy rings of the Gold?
    It was Sigurd, child of the Volsungs, the best sprung forth from
    the best:
    He rode from the North and the mountains, and became my summer
    guest,
    My friend and my brother sworn: he rode the Wavering Fire,
    And won me the Queen of Glory and accomplished my desire;
    The praise of the world he was, the hope of the biders in wrong,
    The help of the lowly people, the hammer of the strong:
    Ah, oft in the world, henceforward, shall the tale be told of
    the deed,
    And I, e'en I, will tell it in the day of the Niblungs' Need:
    For I sat night-long in my armour, and when light was wide o'er
    the land
    I slaughtered Sigurd my brother, and looked on the work of
    mine hand.
    And now, O mighty Atli, I have seen the Niblung's wreck,
    And the feet of the faint-heart dastard have trodden Gunnar's neck;
    And if all be little enough, and the Gods begrudge me rest,
    Let me see the heart of Hoegni cut quick from his living breast,
    And laid on the dish before me: and then shall I tell of the Gold,
    And become thy servant, Atli, and my life at thy pleasure hold.'"


Urged by greed, Atli gave immediate orders that Hoegni's heart should
be brought; but his servants, fearing to lay hands on such a grim
warrior, slew the cowardly scullion Hialli. The trembling heart
of this poor wretch called forth contemptuous words from Gunnar,
who declared that such a timorous organ could never have belonged
to his fearless brother. Atli again issued angry commands, and this
time the unquivering heart of Hoegni was produced, whereupon Gunnar,
turning to the monarch, solemnly swore that since the secret now
rested with him alone it would never be revealed.



The Last of the Niblungs

Livid with anger, the king bade his servants throw Gunnar, with
hands bound, into a den of venomous snakes; but this did not daunt
the reckless Niblung, and, his harp having been flung after him
in derision, he calmly sat in the pit, harping with his toes, and
lulling to sleep all the reptiles save one only. It was said that
Atli's mother had taken the form of this snake, and that she it was
who now bit him in the side, and silenced his triumphant song for ever.

To celebrate his triumph, Atli now ordered a great feast, commanding
Gudrun to be present to wait upon him. At this banquet he ate and
drank heartily, little suspecting that his wife had slain both his
sons, and had served up their roasted hearts and their blood mixed
with wine in cups made of their skulls. After a time the king and his
guests became intoxicated, when Gudrun, according to one version of
the story, set fire to the palace, and as the drunken men were aroused,
too late to escape, she revealed what she had done, and first stabbing
her husband, she calmly perished in the flames with the Huns. Another
version relates, however, that she murdered Atli with Sigurd's sword,
and having placed his body on a ship, which she sent adrift, she cast
herself into the sea and was drowned.


    "She spread out her arms as she spake it, and away from the earth
    she leapt
    And cut off her tide of returning: for the sea-waves over her
    swept,
    And their will is her will henceforward, and who knoweth the
    deeps of the sea,
    And the wealth of the bed of Gudrun, and the days that yet
    shall be?"


According to a third and very different version, Gudrun was not
drowned, but was borne by the waves to the land where Jonakur was
king. There she became his wife, and the mother of three sons, Soerli,
Hamdir, and Erp. She recovered possession, moreover, of her beloved
daughter Swanhild, who, in the meantime, had grown into a beautiful
maiden of marriageable age.



Swanhild

Swanhild became affianced to Ermenrich, King of Gothland, who sent his
son, Randwer, and one of his servants, Sibich, to escort the bride to
his kingdom. Sibich was a traitor, and as part of a plan to compass the
death of the royal family that he might claim the kingdom, he accused
Randwer of having tried to win his young stepmother's affections. This
accusation so roused the anger of Ermenrich that he ordered his son to
be hanged, and Swanhild to be trampled to death under the feet of wild
horses. The beauty of this daughter of Sigurd and Gudrun was such,
however, that even the wild steeds could not be induced to harm her
until she had been hidden from their sight under a great blanket,
when they trod her to death under their cruel hoofs.

Upon learning the fate of her beloved daughter, Gudrun called her
three sons to her side, and girding them with armour and weapons
against which nothing but stone could prevail, she bade them depart
and avenge their murdered sister, after which she died of grief,
and was burned on a great pyre.

The three youths, Soerli, Hamdir, and Erp, proceeded to Ermenrich's
kingdom, but ere they met their foes, the two eldest, deeming Erp too
young to assist them, taunted him with his small size, and finally
slew him. Soerli and Hamdir then attacked Ermenrich, cut off his hands
and feet, and would have slain him but for a one-eyed stranger who
suddenly appeared and bade the bystanders throw stones at the young
men. His orders were immediately carried out, and Soerli and Hamdir
soon fell slain under the shower of stones, which, as we have seen,
alone had power to injure them.


    "Ye have heard of Sigurd aforetime, how the foes of God he slew;
    How forth from the darksome desert the Gold of Waters he drew;
    How he wakened Love on the Mountain, and wakened Brynhild the
    Bright,
    And dwelt upon Earth for a season, and shone in all men's sight.
    Ye have heard of the Cloudy People, and the dimming of the day,
    And the latter world's confusion, and Sigurd gone away;
    Now ye know of the Need of the Niblungs and the end of broken
    troth,
    All the death of kings and of kindreds and the Sorrow of Odin
    the Goth."



Interpretation of the Saga

This story of the Volsungs is supposed by some authorities to be
a series of sun myths, in which Sigi, Rerir, Volsung, Sigmund, and
Sigurd in turn personify the glowing orb of day. They are all armed
with invincible swords, the sunbeams, and all travel through the world
fighting against their foes, the demons of cold and darkness. Sigurd,
like Balder, is beloved of all; he marries Brunhild, the dawn maiden,
whom he finds in the midst of flames, the flush of morn, and parts
from her only to find her again when his career is ended. His body is
burned on the funeral pyre, which, like Balder's, represents either
the setting sun or the last gleam of summer, of which he too is a
type. The slaying of Fafnir symbolises the destruction of the demon
of cold or darkness, who has stolen the golden hoard of summer or
the yellow rays of the sun.

According to other authorities, this Saga is based upon history. Atli
is the cruel Attila, the "Scourge of God," while Gunnar is Gundicarius,
a Burgundian monarch, whose kingdom was destroyed by the Huns, and who
was slain with his brothers in 451. Gudrun is the Burgundian princess
Ildico, who slew her husband on her wedding-night, as has already
been related, using the glittering blade which had once belonged to
the sun-god to avenge her murdered kinsmen.






CHAPTER XXVII: THE STORY OF FRITHIOF


Bishop Tegner

Probably no writer of the nineteenth century did so much to awaken
interest in the literary treasures of Scandinavia as Bishop Esaias
Tegner, whom a Swedish author characterised as, "that mighty Genie
who organises even disorder."

Tegner's "Frithiof Saga" has been translated once at least into every
European tongue, and some twenty times into English and German. Goethe
spoke of the work with the greatest enthusiasm, and the tale, which
gives a matchless picture of the life of our heathen ancestors in the
North, drew similar praise from Longfellow, who considered it to be
one of the most remarkable productions of his century.

Although Tegner has chosen for his theme the Frithiof saga only, we
find that that tale is the sequel to the older but less interesting
Thorsten saga, of which we give here a very brief outline, merely to
enable the reader to understand clearly every allusion in the more
modern poem.

As is so frequently the case with these ancient tales, the story begins
with Haloge (Loki), who came north with Odin, and began to reign over
