504:3   /Genesis/ i. 5. And God called the light Day, and the
        darkness He called Night. And the evening and the morn-
        ing were the first day.

                         Light preceding the sun

504:6   All questions as to the divine creation being both
        spiritual and material are answered in this passage, for
        though solar beams are not yet included in
504:9   the record of creation, still there is light. This
        light is not from the sun nor from volcanic flames, but it
        is the revelation of Truth and of spiritual ideas. This
504:12  also shows that there is no place where God's light is not
        seen, since Truth, Life, and Love fill immensity and are
        ever-present. Was not this a revelation instead of a
504:15  creation?

                          Evenings and mornings

        The successive appearing of God's ideas is represented
        as taking place on so many /evenings/ and /mornings/, -
504:18  words which indicate, in the absence of solar
        time, spiritually clearer views of Him, views
        which are not implied by material darkness and dawn.
504:21  Here we have the explanation of another passage of
        Scripture, that "one day is with the Lord as a thousand
        years." The rays of infinite Truth, when gathered into
504:24  the focus of ideas, bring light instantaneously, whereas
        a thousand years of human doctrines, hypotheses, and
        vague conjectures emit no such effulgence.

                        Spirit /versus/ darkness

504:27  Did infinite Mind create matter, and call it /light?/
        Spirit is light, and the contradiction of Spirit is matter,
        darkness, and darkness obscures light. Mate-
504:30  rial sense is nothing but a supposition of the
        absence of Spirit. No solar rays nor planetary revolutions
505:1   form the day of Spirit. Immortal Mind makes its own
        record, but mortal mind, sleep, dreams, sin, disease, and
505:3   death have no record in the first chapter of Genesis.

        /Genesis/ i. 6. And God said, Let there be a firmament in
        the midst of the waters, and let it divide the waters from
505:6   the waters.

                           Spiritual firmament

        Spiritual understanding, by which human conception,
        material sense, is separated from Truth, is the firmament.
505:9   The divine Mind, not matter, creates all iden-
        tities, and they are forms of Mind, the ideas of
        Spirit apparent only as Mind, never as mindless matter
505:12  nor the so-called material senses.

        /Genesis/ i. 7. And God made the firmament, and divided
        the waters which were under the firmament from the waters
505:15  which were above the firmament: and it was so.

                         Understanding imparted

        Spirit imparts the understanding which uplifts con-
        sciousness and leads into all truth. The Psalmist saith:
505:18  "The Lord on high is mightier than the noise
        of many waters, yea, than the mighty waves of
        the sea." Spiritual sense is the discernment of spiritual
505:21  good. Understanding is the line of demarcation between
        the real and unreal. Spiritual understanding unfolds
        Mind, - Life, Truth, and Love, - and demonstrates the
505:24  divine sense, giving the spiritual proof of the universe in
        Christian Science.

                           Original reflected

        This understanding is not intellectual, is not the result
505:27  of scholarly attainments; it is the reality of all things
        brought to light. God's ideas reflect the im-
        mortal, unerring, and infinite. The mortal,
505:30  erring, and finite are human beliefs, which apportion to
506:1   themselves a task impossible for them, that of distinguish-
        ing between the false and the true. Objects utterly un-
506:3   like the original do not reflect that original. Therefore
        matter, not being the reflection of Spirit, has no real en-
        tity. Understanding is a quality of God, a quality which
506:6   separates Christian Science from supposition and makes
        Truth final.

        /Genesis/ i. 8. And God called the firmament Heaven.
506:9   And the evening and the morning were the second day.

                             Exalted thought

        Through divine Science, Spirit, God, unites under-
        standing to eternal harmony. The calm and exalted
506:12  thought or spiritual apprehension is at peace.
        Thus the dawn of ideas goes on, forming each
        successive stage of progress.

506:15  /Genesis/ i. 9. And God said, Let the waters under the
        heaven be gathered together unto one place, and let the dry
        land appear: and it was so.

                          Unfolding of thoughts

506:18  Spirit, God, gathers unformed thoughts into their
        proper channels, and unfolds these thoughts,
        even as He opens the petals of a holy purpose
506:21  in order that the purpose may appear.

        /Genesis/ i. 10. And God called the dry land Earth; and
        the gathering together of the waters called He Seas: and
506:24  God saw that it was good.

                        Spirit names and blesses

        Here the human concept and divine idea seem con-
        fused by the translator, but they are not so in the scien-
506:27  tifically Christian meaning of the text. Upon
        Adam devolved the pleasurable task of find-
        ing names for all material things, but Adam has not yet
507:1   appeared in the narrative. In metaphor, the /dry land/
        illustrates the absolute formations instituted by Mind,
507:3   while /water/ symbolizes the elements of Mind. Spirit duly
        feeds and clothes every object, as it appears in the line
        of spiritual creation, thus tenderly expressing the father-
507:6   hood and motherhood of God. Spirit names and blesses
        all. Without natures particularly defined, objects and
        subjects would be obscure, and creation would be full of
507:9   nameless offspring, - wanderers from the parent Mind,
        strangers in a tangled wilderness.

        /Genesis/ i. 11. And God said, Let the earth bring forth
507:12  grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding
        fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the earth:
        and it was so.

                           Divine propagation

507:15  The universe of Spirit reflects the creative power of
        the divine Principle, or Life, which reproduces the multi-
        tudinous forms of Mind and governs the mul-
507:18  tiplication of the compound idea man. The
        tree and herb do not yield fruit because of any propagat-
        ing power of their own, but because they reflect the Mind
507:21  which includes all. A material world implies a mortal
        mind and man a creator. The scientific divine creation
        declares immortal Mind and the universe created by God.

                         Ever-appearing creation

507:24  Infinite Mind creates and governs all, from the men-
        tal molecule to infinity. This divine Principle of all
        expresses Science and art throughout His
507:27  creation, and the immortality of man and the
        universe. Creation is ever appearing, and must ever con-
        tinue to appear from the nature of its inexhaustible source.
507:30  Mortal sense inverts this appearing and calls ideas mate-
        rial. Thus misinterpreted, the divine idea seems to fall
508:1   to the level of a human or material belief, called mortal
        man. But the seed is in itself, only as the divine Mind
508:3   is All and reproduces all - as Mind is the multiplier,
        and Mind's infinite idea, man and the universe, is the
        product. The only intelligence or substance of a thought,
508:6   a seed, or a flower is God, the creator of it. Mind is the
        Soul of all. Mind is Life, Truth, and Love which gov-
        erns all.

508:9   /Genesis/ i. 12. And the earth brought forth grass, and
        herb yielding seed after his kind, and the tree yielding
        fruit, whose seed was in itself, after his kind: and God saw
508:12  that it was good.

                           Mind's pure thought

        God determines the gender of His own ideas. Gen-
        der is mental, not material. The seed within itself is
508:15  the pure thought emanating from divine
        Mind. The feminine gender is not yet ex-
        pressed in the text. /Gender/ means simply /kind/ or /sort/,
508:18  and does not necessarily refer either to masculinity or
        femininity. The word is not confined to sexuality, and
        grammars always recognize a neuter gender, neither
508:21  male nor female. The Mind or intelligence of produc-
        tion names the female gender last in the ascending order
        of creation. The intelligent individual idea, be it male
508:24  or female, rising from the lesser to the greater, unfolds
        the infinitude of Love.

        /Genesis/ i. 13. And the evening and the morning were
508:27  the third day.

                           Rising to the light

        The third stage in the order of Christian Science is an
        important one to the human thought, letting in the light
509:1   of spiritual understanding. This period corresponds to
        the resurrection, when Spirit is discerned to be the Life of
509:3   all, and the deathless Life, or Mind, dependent
        upon no material organization. Our Master
        reappeared to his students, - to their apprehension he
509:6   rose from the grave, - on the third day of his ascending
        thought, and so presented to them the certain sense of
        eternal Life.

509:9   /Genesis/ i. 14. And God said, Let there be lights in the
        firmament of the heaven, to divide the day from the night;
        and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days,
509:12  and years.

                         Rarefaction of thought

        Spirit creates no other than heavenly or celestial bodies,
        but the stellar universe is no more celestial than our earth.
509:15  This text gives the idea of the rarefaction of
        thought as it ascends higher. God forms and
        peoples the universe. The light of spiritual understand-
509:18  ing gives gleams of the infinite only, even as nebulae indi-
        cate the immensity of space.

                         Divine nature appearing

        So-called mineral, vegetable, and animal substances
509:21  are no more contingent now on time or material struc-
        ture than they were when "the morning stars
        sang together." Mind made the "plant of
509:24  the field before it was in the earth." The periods of
        spiritual ascension are the days and seasons of Mind's
        creation, in which beauty, sublimity, purity, and holiness
509:27  - yea, the divine nature - appear in man and the uni-
        verse never to disappear.

                       Spiritual ideas apprehended

        Knowing the Science of creation, in which all is Mind
509:30  and its ideas, Jesus rebuked the material thought of his
        fellow-countrymen: "Ye can discern the face of the
510:1   sky; but can ye not discern the signs of the times?"
        How much more should we seek to apprehend the spirit-
510:3   ual ideas of God, than to dwell on the objects
        of sense! To discern the rhythm of Spirit
        and to be holy, thought must be purely spiritual.

510:6   /Genesis/ i. 15. And let them be for lights in the firma-
        ment of the heaven, to give light upon the earth: and it
        was so.

510:9   Truth and Love enlighten the understanding, in whose
        "light shall we see light;" and this illumination is re-
        flected spiritually by all who walk in the light and turn
510:12  away from a false material sense.

        /Genesis/ i. 16. And God made two great lights; the
        greater light to rule the day, and the lesser light to rule the
510:15  night: He made the stars also.

                            Geology a failure

        The sun is a metaphorical representation of Soul out-
        side the body, giving existence and intelligence to the
510:18  universe. Love alone can impart the limit-
        less idea of infinite Mind. Geology has never
        explained the earth's formations; it cannot explain them.
510:21  There is no Scriptural allusion to solar light until time has
        been already divided into evening and morning; and the
        allusion to fluids (Genesis i. 2) indicates a supposed for-
510:24  mation of matter by the resolving of fluids into solids,
        analogous to the suppositional resolving of thoughts into
        material things.

                          Spiritual subdivision

510:27  Light is a symbol of Mind, of Life, Truth, and Love,
        and not a vitalizing property of matter. Sci-
        ence reveals only one Mind, and this one shin-
510:30  ing by its own light and governing the universe, including
511:1   man, in perfect harmony. This Mind forms ideas, its
        own images, subdivides and radiates their borrowed light,
511:3   intelligence, and so explains the Scripture phrase, "whose
        seed is in itself." Thus God's ideas "multiply and re-
        plenish the earth." The divine Mind supports the sub-
511:6   limity, magnitude, and infinitude of spiritual creation.

        /Genesis/ i. 17, 18. And God set them in the firmament of
        the heaven, to give light upon the earth, and to rule over
511:9   the day and over the night, and to divide the light from the
        darkness: and God saw that it was good.

                           Darkness scattered

        In divine Science, which is the seal of Deity and has
511:12  the impress of heaven, God is revealed as in-
        finite light. In the eternal Mind, no night is
        there.

511:15  /Genesis/ i. 19. And the evening and the morning were
        the fourth day.

        The changing glow and full effulgence of God's infi-
511:18  nite ideas, images, mark the periods of progress.

        /Genesis/ i. 20. And God said, Let the waters bring forth
        abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl
511:21  that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of
        heaven.

                           Soaring aspirations

        To mortal mind, the universe is liquid, solid, and aeri-
511:24  form. Spiritually interpreted, rocks and mountains stand
        for solid and grand ideas. Animals and mor-
        tals metaphorically present the gradation of
511:27  mortal thought, rising in the scale of intelligence, taking
        form in masculine, feminine, or neuter gender. The
        fowls, which fly above the earth in the open firmament
512:1   of heaven, correspond to aspirations soaring beyond and
        above corporeality to the understanding of the incorporeal
512:3   and divine Principle, Love.

        /Genesis/ i. 21. And God created great whales, and every
        living creature that moveth, which the waters brought forth
512:6   abundantly, after their kind, and every winged fowl after
        his kind: and God saw that it was good.

                            Seraphic symbols

        Spirit is symbolized by strength, presence, and power,
512:9   and also by holy thoughts, winged with Love. These an-
        gels of His presence, which have the holiest
        charge, abound in the spiritual atmosphere of
512:12  Mind, and consequently reproduce their own character-
        istics. Their individual forms we know not, but we do
        know that their natures are allied to God's nature; and
512:15  spiritual blessings, thus typified, are the externalized, yet
        subjective, states of faith and spiritual understanding.

        /Genesis/ i. 22. And God blessed them, saying, Be fruit-
512:18  ful, and multiply, and fill the waters in the seas; and let
        fowl multiply in the earth.

                      Multiplication of pure ideas

        Spirit blesses the multiplication of its own pure and
512:21  perfect ideas. From the infinite elements of the one
        Mind emanate all form, color, quality, and
        quantity, and these are mental, both primarily
512:24  and secondarily. Their spiritual nature is discerned only
        through the spiritual senses. Mortal mind inverts the true
        likeness, and confers animal names and natures upon its
512:27  own misconceptions. Ignorant of the origin and opera-
        tions of mortal mind, - that is, ignorant of itself, - this
        so-called mind puts forth its own qualities, and claims
512:30  God as their author; albeit God is ignorant of the ex-
513:1   istence of both this mortal mentality, so-called, and its
        claim, for the claim usurps the deific prerogatives and is
513:3   an attempted infringement on infinity.

        /Genesis/ i. 23. And the evening and the morning were
        the fifth day.

                            Spiritual spheres

513:6   Advancing spiritual steps in the teeming universe of
        Mind lead on to spiritual spheres and exalted beings. To
        material sense, this divine universe is dim and
513:9   distant, gray in the sombre hues of twilight;
        but anon the veil is lifted, and the scene shifts into light.
        In the record, time is not yet measured by solar revolutions,
513:12  and the motions and reflections of deific power cannot be
        apprehended until divine Science becomes the interpreter.

        /Genesis/ i. 24. And God said, Let the earth bring forth
513:15  the living creature after his kind, cattle, and creeping thing,
        and beast of the earth after his kind: and it was so.

                         Continuity of thoughts

        Spirit diversifies, classifies, and individualizes all
513:18  thoughts, which are as eternal as the Mind
        conceiving them; but the intelligence, exist-
        ence, and continuity of all individuality remain in God,
513:21  who is the divinely creative Principle thereof.

        /Genesis/ i. 25. And God made the beast of the earth after
        his kind, and cattle after their kind, and everything that
513:24  creepeth upon the earth after his kind: and God saw that
        it was good.

                  God's thoughts are spiritual realities

        God creates all forms of reality. His thoughts are
513:27  spiritual realities. So-called mortal mind - being non-
        existent and consequently not within the range of im-
514:1   mortal existence - could not by simulating deific power
        invert the divine creation, and afterwards recreate per-
514:3   sons or things upon its own plane, since noth-
        ing exists beyond the range of all-inclusive
        infinity, in which and of which God is the
514:6   sole creator. Mind, joyous in strength, dwells in the
        realm of Mind. Mind's infinite ideas run and dis-
        port themselves. In humility they climb the heights of
514:9   holiness.

                          Qualities of thought

        Moral courage is "the lion of the tribe of Juda," the
        king of the mental realm. Free and fearless it roams in
514:12  the forest. Undisturbed it lies in the open
        field, or rests in "green pastures, . . . beside
        the still waters." In the figurative transmission from the
514:15  divine thought to the human, diligence, promptness, and
        perseverance are likened to "the cattle upon a thousand
        hills." They carry the baggage of stern resolve, and
514:18  keep pace with highest purpose. Tenderness accompa-
        nies all the might imparted by Spirit. The individ-
        uality created by God is not carnivorous, as witness the
514:21  millennial estate pictured by Isaiah: -

             The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb,
             And the leopard shall lie down with the kid;
514:24       And the calf and the young lion, and the fatling together;
             And a little child shall lead them.

                         Creatures of God useful

        Understanding the control which Love held over all,
514:27  Daniel felt safe in the lions' den, and Paul proved the
        viper to be harmless. All of God's creatures
        moving in the harmony of Science, are harm-
514:30  less, useful, indestructible. A realization of this grand
        verity was a source of strength to the ancient worthies.
515:1   It supports Christian healing, and enables its possessor
        to emulate the example of Jesus. "And God saw that
515:3   it was good."

                          The serpent harmless

        Patience is symbolized by the tireless worm, creeping
        over lofty summits, persevering in its intent. The ser-
515:6   pent of God's creating is neither subtle nor
        poisonous, but is a wise idea, charming in its
        adroitness, for Love's ideas are subject to the Mind which
515:9   forms them, - the power which changeth the serpent
        into a staff.

        /Genesis/ i. 26. And God said, Let us make man in our
515:12  image, after our likeness; and let them have dominion over
        the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over
        the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping
515:15  thing that creepeth upon the earth.

                           Elohistic plurality

        The eternal Elohim includes the forever universe.
        The name Elohim is in the plural, but this plurality of
515:18  Spirit does not imply more than one God, nor
        does it imply three persons in one. It relates
        to the oneness, the triunity of Life, Truth, and Love.
515:21  "Let /them/ have dominion." Man is the family name
        for all ideas, - the sons and daughters of God. All that
        God imparts moves in accord with Him, reflecting good-
515:24  ness and power.

                           Reflected likeness

        Your mirrored reflection is your own image or like-
        ness. If you lift a weight, your reflection does this also.
515:27  If you speak, the lips of this likeness move in
        accord with yours. Now compare man before
        the mirror to his divine Principle, God. Call the mirror
515:30  divine Science, and call man the reflection. Then note
516:1   how true, according to Christian Science, is the reflection
        to its original. As the reflection of yourself appears in
516:3   the mirror, so you, being spiritual, are the reflection of
        God. The substance, Life, intelligence, Truth, and Love,
        which constitute Deity, are reflected by His creation;
516:6   and when we subordinate the false testimony of the
        corporeal senses to the facts of Science, we shall see
        this true likeness and reflection everywhere.

                           Love imparts beauty

516:9   God fashions all things, after His own likeness. Life
        is reflected in existence, Truth in truthfulness, God in
        goodness, which impart their own peace and
516:12  permanence. Love, redolent with unselfish-
        ness, bathes all in beauty and light. The grass beneath
        our feet silently exclaims, "The meek shall inherit the
516:15  earth." The modest arbutus sends her sweet breath to
        heaven. The great rock gives shadow and shelter. The
        sunlight glints from the church-dome, glances into the
516:18  prison-cell, glides into the sick-chamber, brightens the
        flower, beautifies the landscape, blesses the earth. Man,
        made in His likeness, possesses and reflects God's domin-
516:21  ion over all the earth. Man and woman as coexistent
        and eternal with God forever reflect, in glorified quality,
        the infinite Father-Mother God.

516:24  /Genesis/ i. 27. So God created man in His own image,
        in the image of God created He him; male and female
        created He them.

                           Ideal man and woman

516:27  To emphasize this momentous thought, it is repeated
        that God made man in His own image, to reflect the
        divine Spirit. It follows that man is a generic
516:30  term. Masculine, feminine, and neuter gen-
        ders are human concepts. In one of the ancient lan-
517:1   guages the word for /man/ is used also as the synonym of
        /mind/. This definition has been weakened by anthropo-
517:3   morphism, or a humanization of Deity. The word /an-
        thropomorphic/, in such a phrase as "an anthropomorphic
        God," is derived from two Greek words, signifying /man/
517:6   and /form/, and may be defined as a mortally mental at-
        tempt to reduce Deity to corporeality. The life-giving
        quality of Mind is Spirit, not matter. The ideal man
517:9   corresponds to creation, to intelligence, and to Truth.
        The ideal woman corresponds to Life and to Love. In
        divine Science, we have not as much authority for con-
517:12  sidering God masculine, as we have for considering
        Him feminine, for Love imparts the clearest idea of
        Deity.

                           Divine personality

517:15  The world believes in many persons; but if God is per-
        sonal, there is but one person, because there is but one
        God. His personality can only be reflected,
517:18  not transmitted. God has countless ideas, and
        they all have one Principle and parentage. The only
        proper symbol of God as person is Mind's infinite ideal.
517:21  What is this ideal? Who shall behold it? This ideal
        is God's own image, spiritual and infinite. Even eternity
        can never reveal the whole of God, since there is no limit
517:24  to infinitude or to its reflections.

        /Genesis/ i. 28. And God blessed them, and God said unto
        them, Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth,
517:27  and subdue it; and have dominion over the fish of the sea,
        and over the fowl of the air, and over every living thing
        that moveth upon the earth.

                            Birthright of man

517:30  Divine Love blesses its own ideas, and causes them to
        multiply, - to manifest His power. Man is not made
518:1   to till the soil. His birthright is dominion, not sub-
        jection. He is lord of the belief in earth
518:3   and heaven, - himself subordinate alone to
        his Maker. This is the Science of being.

        /Genesis/ i. 29, 30. And God said, Behold, I have given
518:6   you every herb bearing seed, which is upon the face of all
        the earth, and every tree, in the which is the fruit of a tree
        yielding seed; to you it shall be for meat. And to every
518:9   beast of the earth, and to every fowl of the air, and to
        everything that creepeth upon the earth, wherein there is
        life, I have given every green herb for meat: and it
518:12  was so.

                        Assistance in brotherhood

        God gives the lesser idea of Himself for a link to the
        greater, and in return, the higher always protects the
518:15  lower. The rich in spirit help the poor in
        one grand brotherhood, all leaving the same
        Principle, or Father; and blessed is that man who seeth
518:18  his brother's need and supplieth it, seeking his own in
        another's good. Love giveth to the least spiritual idea
        might, immortality, and goodness, which shine through
518:21  all as the blossom shines through the bud. All the varied
        expressions of God reflect health, holiness, immortality -
        infinite Life, Truth, and Love.

518:24  /Genesis/ i. 31. And God saw everything that He had
        made, and, behold, it was very good. And the evening and
        the morning were the sixth day.

                         Perfection of creation

518:27  The divine Principle, or Spirit, comprehends and ex-
        presses all, and all must therefore be as perfect is the
        divine Principle is perfect. Nothing is new to Spirit.
519:1   Nothing can be novel to eternal Mind, the author of all
        things, who from all eternity knoweth His own ideas.
519:3   Deity was satisfied with His work. How could
        He be otherwise, since the spiritual creation
        was the outgrowth, the emanation, of His infinite self-
519:6   containment and immortal wisdom?

        /Genesis/ ii. 1. Thus the heavens and the earth were
        finished, and all the host of them.

                          Infinity measureless

519:9   Thus the ideas of God in universal being are complete
        and forever expressed, for Science reveals infinity and
        the fatherhood and motherhood of Love. Hu-
519:12  man capacity is slow to discern and to grasp
        God's creation and the divine power and presence which
        go with it, demonstrating its spiritual origin. Mortals
519:15  can never know the infinite, until they throw off the old
        man and reach the spiritual image and likeness. What
        can fathom infinity! How shall we declare Him, till,
519:18  in the language of the apostle, "we all come in the unity
        of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto
        a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the ful-
519:21  ness of Christ"?

        /Genesis/ ii. 2. And on the seventh day God ended His
        work which He had made; and He rested on the seventh
519:24  day from all His work which He had made.

                          Resting in holy work

        God rests in action. Imparting has not impoverished,
        can never impoverish, the divine Mind. No
519:27  exhaustion follows the action of this Mind,
        according to the apprehension of divine Science. The
520:1   highest and sweetest rest, even from a human standpoint,
        is in holy work.

                         Love and man coexistent

520:3   Unfathomable Mind is expressed. The depth, breadth,
        height, might, majesty, and glory of infinite Love fill all
        space. That is enough! Human language
520:6   can repeat only an infinitesimal part of what
        exists. The absolute ideal, man, is no more seen nor
        comprehended by mortals, than is His infinite Principle,
520:9   Love. Principle and its idea, man, are coexistent and
        eternal. The numerals of infinity, called /seven days/, can
        never be reckoned according to the calendar of time.
520:12  These days will appear as mortality disappears, and they
        will reveal eternity, newness of Life, in which all sense of
        error forever disappears and thought accepts the divine
520:15  infinite calculus.

        /Genesis/ ii. 4, 5. These are the generations of the heavens
        and of the earth when they were created, in the day that the
520:18  Lord God [Jehovah] made the earth and the heavens, and
        every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every
        herb of the field before it grew: for the Lord God [Jehovah]
520:21  had not caused it to rain upon the earth, and there was not
        a man to till the ground.

                           Growth is from Mind

        Here is the emphatic declaration that God creates all
520:24  through Mind, not through matter, - that the plant
        grows, not because of seed or soil, but because
        growth is the eternal mandate of Mind. Mor-
520:27  tal thought drops into the ground, but the immortal creat-
        ing thought is from above, not from beneath. Because
        Mind makes all, there is nothing left to be made by a
520:30  lower power. Spirit acts through the Science of Mind,
        never causing man to till the ground, but making him
521:1   superior to the soil. Knowledge of this lifts man above
        the sod, above earth and its environments, to conscious
521:3   spiritual harmony and eternal being.

                           Spiritual narrative

        Here the inspired record closes its narrative of being
        that is without beginning or end. All that is made is
521:6   the work of God, and all is good. We leave
        this brief, glorious history of spiritual creation
        (as stated in the first chapter of Genesis) in the hands of
521:9   God, not of man, in the keeping of Spirit, not matter, -
        joyfully acknowledging now and forever God's supremacy,
        omnipotence, and omnipresence.

521:12  The harmony and immortality of man are intact. We
        should look away from the opposite supposition that man
        is created materially, and turn our gaze to the spiritual
521:15  record of creation, to that which should be engraved on
        the understanding and heart "with the point of a diamond"
        and the pen of an angel.


521:18  The reader will naturally ask if there is nothing more
        about creation in the book of Genesis. Indeed there is,
        but the continued account is mortal and material.

521:21  /Genesis/ ii. 6. But there went up a mist from the earth,
        and watered the whole face of the ground.

                           The story of error

        The Science and truth of the divine creation have been
521:24  presented in the verses already considered, and now the
        opposite error, a material view of creation, is
        to be set forth. The second chapter of Gene-
521:27  sis contains a statement of this material view of God and
        the universe, a statement which is the exact opposite of
        scientific truth as before recorded. The history of error
521:30  or matter, if veritable, would set aside the omnipotence
522:1   of Spirit; but it is the false history in contradistinction
        to the true.

                             The two records

522:3   The Science of the first record proves the falsity of
        the second. If one is true, the other is false, for they are
        antagonistic. The first record assigns all
522:6   might and government to God, and endows
        man out of God's perfection and power. The second
        record chronicles man as mutable and mortal, - as hav-
522:9   ing broken away from Deity and as revolving in an orbit
        of his own. Existence, separate from divinity, Science
        explains as impossible.

522:12  This second record unmistakably gives the history of
        error in its externalized forms, called life and intelli-
        gence in matter. It records pantheism, opposed to the
522:15  supremacy of divine Spirit; but this state of things is
        declared to be temporary and this man to be mortal, -
        dust returning to dust.

                        Erroneous representation

522:18  In this erroneous theory, matter takes the place of Spirit.
        Matter is represented as the life-giving principle of the
        earth. Spirit is represented as entering mat-
522:21  ter in order to create man. God's glowing
        denunciations of man when not found in His
        image, the likeness of Spirit, convince reason and coincide
522:24  with revelation in declaring this material creation false.

                          Hypothetical reversal

        This latter part of the second chapter of Genesis, which
        portrays Spirit as supposedly cooperating with matter in
522:27  constructing the universe, is based on some
        hypothesis of error, for the Scripture just pre-
        ceding declares God's work to be finished. Does Life,
522:30  Truth, and Love produce death, error, and hatred? Does
        the creator condemn His own creation? Does the un-
        erring Principle of divine law change or repent? It can-
523:1   not be so. Yet one might so judge from an unintelligent
        perusal of the Scriptural account now under comment.

                          Mist, or false claim

523:3   Because of its false basis, the mist of obscurity evolved
        by error deepens the false claim, and finally declares that
        God knows error and that error can improve
523:6   His creation. Although presenting the exact
        opposite of Truth, the lie claims to be truth. The crea-
        tions of matter arise from a mist or false claim, or from
523:9   mystification, and not from the firmament, or under-
        standing, which God erects between the true and false.
        In error everything comes from beneath, not from above.
523:12  All is material myth, instead of the reflection of
        Spirit.

                           Distinct documents

        It may be worth while here to remark that, according
523:15  to the best scholars, there are clear evidences of two dis-
        tinct documents in the early part of the book of
        Genesis. One is called the Elohistic, because
523:18  the Supreme Being is therein called Elohim. The other
        document is called the Jehovistic, because Deity therein is
        always called Jehovah, - or Lord God, as our common
523:21  version translates it.

                            Jehovah or Elohim

        Throughout the first chapter of Genesis and in three
        verses of the second, - in what we understand to be the
523:24  spiritually scientific account of creation, - it is
        Elohim (God) who creates. From the fourth
        verse of chapter two to chapter five, the creator is called
523:27  Jehovah, or the Lord. The different accounts become
        more and more closely intertwined to the end of chapter
        twelve, after which the distinction is not definitely trace-
523:30  able. In the historic parts of the Old Testament, it is
        usually Jehovah, peculiarly the divine sovereign of the
        Hebrew people, who is referred to.

                           Gods of the heathen

524:1   The idolatry which followed this material mythology is
        seen in the Phoenician worship of Baal, in the Moabitish
524:3   god Chemosh, in the Moloch of the Amorites,
        in the Hindoo Vishnu, in the Greek Aphro-
        dite, and in a thousand other so-called deities.

                         Jehovah a tribal deity

524:6   It was also found among the Israelites, who constantly
        went after "strange gods." They called the Supreme
        Being by the national name of Jehovah. In
524:9   that name of Jehovah, the true idea of God
        seems almost lost. God becomes "a man of war," a
        tribal god to be worshipped, rather than Love, the divine
524:12  Principle to be lived and loved.

        /Genesis/ ii. 7. And the Lord God [Jehovah] formed man
        of the dust of the ground, and breathed into his nostrils
524:15  the breath of life; and man became a living soul.

                            Creation reversed

        Did the divine and infinite Principle become a finite
        deity, that he should now be called Jehovah? With
        l8 a single command, Mind had made man,
        both male and female. How then could a
        material organization become the basis of man? How
524:21  could the non-intelligent become the medium of Mind,
        and error be the enunciator of Truth? Matter is not
        the reflection of Spirit, yet God is reflected in all His
524:24  creation. Is this addition to His creation real or un-
        real? Is it the truth, or is it a lie concerning man and
        God?

524:27  It must be a lie, for God presently curses the ground.
        Could Spirit evolve its opposite, matter, and give matter
        ability to sin and suffer? Is Spirit, God, injected into
524:30  dust, and eventually ejected at the demand of matter?
        Does Spirit enter dust, and lose therein the divine nature
525:1   and omnipotence? Does Mind, God, enter matter to be-
        come there a mortal sinner, animated by the breath of
525:3   God? In this narrative, the validity of matter is opposed,
        not the validity of Spirit or Spirit's creations. Man re-
        flects God; /mankind/ represents the Adamic race, and is
525:6   a human, not a divine, creation.

                           Definitions of man

        The following are some of the equivalents of the term
        /man/ in different languages. In the Saxon, /mankind, a
525:9   /woman, any one/; in the Welsh, /that which rises
        up/, - the primary sense being /image, form/; in
        the Hebrew, /image, similitude/; in the Icelandic, /mind/.
525:12  The following translation is from the Icelandic: -

        And God said, Let us make man after our mind and
        our likeness; and God shaped man after His mind; after
525:15  God's mind shaped He Him; and He shaped them male and
        female.

                           No baneful creation

        In the Gospel of John, it is declared that all things were
525:18  made through the Word of God, "and without Him [the
        /logos/, or /word/] was not anything made that
        was made." Everything good or worthy, God
525:21  made. Whatever is valueless or baneful, He did not
        make, - hence its unreality. In the Science of Genesis
        we read that He saw everything which He had made,
525:24  "and, behold, it was very good." The corporeal senses
        declare otherwise; and if we give the same heed to the
        history of error as to the records of truth, the Scriptural
525:27  record of sin and death favors the false conclusion of the
        material senses. Sin, sickness, and death must be deemed
        as devoid of reality as they are of good, God.

525:30  /Genesis/ ii. 9. And out of the ground made the Lord God
        [Jehovah] to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight,
526:1   and good for food; the tree of life also, in the midst of the
        garden, and the tree of knowledge of good and evil.

                      Contradicting first creation

526:3   The previous and more scientific record of creation
        declares that God made "every plant of the field be-
        fore it was in the earth." This opposite
526:6   declaration, this statement that life issues
        from matter, contradicts the teaching of the first chap-
        ter, - namely, that all Life is God. Belief is less than
526:9   understanding. Belief involves theories of material hear-
        ing, sight, touch, taste, and smell, termed the five senses.
        The appetites and passions, sin, sickness, and death,
526:12  follow in the train of this error of a belief in intelligent
        matter.

                             Record of error

        The first mention of evil is in the legendary Scriptural
526:15  text in the second chapter of Genesis. God pronounced
        good all that He created, and the Scriptures
        declare that He created all. The "tree of
526:18  life" stands for the idea of Truth, and the sword which
        guards it is the type of divine Science. The "tree of
        knowledge" stands for the erroneous doctrine that the
526:21  knowledge of evil is as real, hence as God-bestowed, as
        the knowledge of good. Was evil instituted through God,
        Love? Did He create this fruit-bearer of sin in contra-
526:24  diction of the first creation? This second biblical account
        is a picture of error throughout.

        /Genesis/ ii. 15. And the Lord God [Jehovah] took the
526:27  man, and put him into the garden of Eden, to dress it and
        to keep it.

                             Garden of Eden

        The name Eden, according to Cruden, means /pleasure/,
526:30  /delight./ In this text Eden stands for the mortal, mate-
527:1   rial body. God could not put Mind into matter nor in-
        finite Spirit into finite form to dress it and
527:3   keep it, - to make it beautiful or to cause it
        to live and grow. Man is God's reflection, needing no
        cultivation, but ever beautiful and complete.

527:6   /Genesis/ ii. 16, 17. And the Lord God [Jehovah] com-
        manded the man, saying, Of every tree of the garden thou
        mayest freely eat: but of the tree of the knowledge of good
