words of Scripture." Murdock's Commentaries of Mosheim, II. 166.

Essene es account of the doctrines of Cerinthus, a Gnostic Jew, who,
about the close of the first century, appeared as the leader of those
who sought to merge Christianity in Judaism, indicates the confusion and
uncertainty which then, probably to a great extent, perplexed the minds
of the Jewish and Gentile proselytes to the Christian faith. "He taught
that the Creator of this world, whom he considered also as the sovereign
and lawgiver of the Jewish people, was _a being_ endowed with the
greatest virtues, and derived _his birth_ from the _Supreme God;_ [thus
conceding that the Jehovah of the Old Testament was the same as the
Christ;] that this being fell, by degrees, from his native virtue, and
his primitive dignity; [referring, no doubt, to the withdrawment of the
Messenger Jehovah, the Creator, with the visible Shekina, from the
temple, and his apparent abandonment of the Jewish people, as they
themselves considered;] that the Supreme God, in consequence of this,
determined to destroy his empire, [meaning, probably, that as he no
longer appeared as the protector of the Jews, but rather as their
enemy, he was to be superseded,] and sent upon earth for this purpose
one of the ever-happy and glorious _aeons_, whose name was Christ; that
this Christ chose for his habitation [alluding to the doctrine, then
extensively prevalent, of the metempsychosis, or transmigration of one
being into another] the person of Jesus, a man of the most illustrious
sanctity and justice, the son of Joseph and Mary, and descending in the
form of a _dove_, entered into him while he was receiving the baptism of
John in the waters of Jordan; that Jesus, after his union with Christ,
opposed himself with vigor to the _God of the Jews_, [_i. e._, He whom
the Jews originally worshipped as their Creator and Lawgiver, the Angel
Jehovah, now fallen,] and was, by his instigation, seized and crucified
by the Hebrew chiefs; that when Jesus was taken captive, [_i. e._, by
the instigation of Jehovah the Creator,] Christ ascended upon high, so
that the man Jesus alone was subjected to the pains of an ignominious
death. Cerinthus required of his followers that they should worship the
Father of Christ, even the _Supreme God_, in conjunction with the Son;
[_i. e._, the _aeon_ whom he calls Christ;] that they should abandon the
Lawgiver of the Jews, whom he [from his knowledge of the Hebrew
Scriptures, or of the Chaldee paraphrases] looked upon _as the Creator
of the world_; that they should retain a part of the law given by Moses,
but should, nevertheless, employ their principal attention and care to
regulate their lives by the precepts of Christ," [_i. e._, the glorious
_aeon_.] To encourage them to this, "he promised the resurrection of the
body;" [_i. e._, though he denied the death, and therefore the
resurrection of Christ, he held to that of man at the second coming;]
and held "that Christ will one day return upon earth, and, renewing his
former union with the man Jesus, [_i. e._, by then raising him from the
dead,] will reign with his people in the land of Palestine during a
thousand years." Cent. I. part 2, chap. 5, sec. 16. There can be no
mistake as to the source of what is correct in this creed, nor as to the
state of mind in which its stupendous errors were conceived and
propagated.

Marcion, Basilides, and others among the Gnostic leaders of the
_Asiatic_ and _Egyptian_ sects in the second century, held, in respect
to a creator and creation, sentiments very similar to those of
Cerinthus. The Valentinians, a very numerous sect, were taught by
Valentine their chief, as is recorded in Mosheim, "_That the Creator of
this world_," whom, in common with most of the heretics of that period,
he took to be a creature, "_came by degrees to imagine himself to be God
alone_, or, at least, to desire that mankind should consider him as
such." He therefore "sent forth prophets to the Jewish nation, to
declare his claim to the honor that is due to the Supreme Being." The
Patripassians asserted the unity of God in such a manner as to exclude
all distinction of Persons; and in this respect they were imitated by
the Sabellians of the ensuing century.

The leading features of nearly all the heresies of the first three
centuries, especially those which were widely diffused and long
perpetuated, whether invented by minds imbued by the Oriental philosophy
or with hereditary Jewish opinions and prejudices related to the Creator
and the works of creation. The best of them were in that particular, for
substance, like the heresy of Arius in the fourth century, who taught
"that the Son was the _first_ and _noblest_ of these beings, whom God the
_Father_ had created out of nothing, and was the instrument by whose
subordinate operation the universe was made." The Council of Nice,
convened in 325 to suppress this heresy, appears scarcely to have checked
its progress; and during the protracted discussions and contests which
ensued, and which agitated both the eastern and western divisions of the
Church, there is probably no single instance of a simple scriptural
statement respecting the Trinity, and the Person and work of the Mediator,
except in the case of such as dissented and seceded from the Established
Church, and were persecuted by all parties in that Church. The attention
of those whom the Councils called orthodox, in distinction from heretics,
was absorbed by attempts to explain the inexplicable questions in
controversy. They sought in this way to answer and confound their
opponents. The heretics nowhere in these controversies bring into view
anything scriptural, anything better than Paganism, with respect to a
Mediator; nor could they, consistently with the nature of the dogmas and
opinions which they contended for.

The disciples of the reformed Magianism of Zoroaster ascribed the
creation to the one supreme, invisible Deity, who was to be worshipped
directly, not through images, nor through a Mediator, nor any
intermediate agencies.

The Gentile Gnostics, in distinction from Cerinthus and other Judaizers,
in their attempts to subordinate Christianity to their system--which
taught that all evil resided in and proceeded from matter, and therefore
that the world could not have been created by a good being--ascribed the
creation to a created evil being, the evil principle, Satan. They
therefore rejected the Old Testament as irreconcilable with this system.
Prior to the Advent, they worshipped Satan as creator, and as having
chief control in the whole course of things in the world, and being an
over-match for the antagonist, good principle: and honoring him in this
way, they held Cain, and his other most conspicuous followers and
supporters, in the highest veneration. Yearning for some relief from the
unmitigated and intolerable miseries which they suffered in their
warfare with their bodies, which, as matter, they deemed the seat of
corruption, they hailed the appearance of the good principle in
Christianity, supported as it was by demonstrations of resistless power,
as likely to defeat the antagonist evil principle, the Devil, to whom
they still ascribed the creation of the world. Instead of longer
worshipping him, therefore, they now taught _that the Supreme Deity, the
Creator of the Devil, was to be worshipped. This was the doctrine which
undoubtedly had been lost to all idolaters, and which they now promised
to restore_.

Cerinthus, in his attempts to combine Gnosticism and Christianity with
Judaism and the Hebrew Scriptures, as he understood them, maintains, not
that the world was created by the supreme, invisible Deity, for he did
not so understand those writings, but that the Being to whom Moses
ascribes the creation and government of the world (and whom he calls
Jehovah) was a derived, begotten, created being, and therefore liable to
degenerate; that though originally endowed with the greatest virtues, he
fell; (he had forsaken the Jews, and they had renounced him;) that his
Creator, the Supreme Deity, had therefore determined to destroy his
empire, (the dominion and rule which he exercised, prior to his quitting
the temple, and also after becoming, in their opinion, the enemy of the
Jews;) that the Christ, so far from being the same person, Son of the
Supreme Deity, and Creator, was a wholly different being in all
respects, a created being, sent expressly to supersede and destroy the
Creator and Jewish lawgiver; that, taking possession of the person of
Jesus, he set himself vigorously to oppose Jehovah the Creator, who, in
self-defense, contrived to induce the Jews to crucify the man Jesus, the
Christ in the mean time having forsaken him. Accordingly, he taught his
followers that they "should abandon the Lawgiver of the Jews, whom he
looked upon as the Creator of the world," _i. e._, the Jehovah of the
Old Testament; and that they should worship the Supreme Deity as the
Father of the AEon whom he called Christ, in conjunction with that
Christ, or AEon, assuming him to be the same with him whom the Christians
called the Christ and the Son; conformably to his notion that Christ,
having entered the man Jesus at his baptism, withdrew from him before
his death. He denied his resurrection, and was, very probably, a
disciple of the false teacher referred to and refuted in Paul's
argument, 1 Cor. xv.

To show that the Oriental philosophy, which comprehended the leading
principles of the false, in opposition to the revealed system of
religion, and that the early heresies, which, being founded on the
Oriental philosophy, passed under the imposing title of Gnosticism,
ascribed the creation and government of the world to Satan, the
following quotations are made from Mosheim's Commentaries, Cent. I.,
sec. 60, 61:

"By none of its adversaries or corrupters was Christianity, from its
first rise, more seriously injured; by none was the Church more
grievously lacerated, and rendered less attractive to the people, than
by those who were for making the religion of Christ accommodate itself
to the principles of the Oriental philosophy respecting the Deity, the
origin of the world, the nature of matter and the human soul. We allude
to those who, from their pretending that they were able to communicate
to mankind, at present held in bondage by the Architect of the world, a
correct knowledge (_gnosis_) of the true and ever-living God, were
commonly styled Gnostics. Intoxicated with a fondness for these
opinions, not a few of the Christians were induced to secede from all
association with the advocates for the sound doctrine, and to form
themselves into various sects, which, as time advanced, became daily
more extensive and numerous, and were for several ages productive of
very serious inconveniences and evils to the Christian commonwealth....
It is by no means difficult to point out the way in which these people
contrived to make the religion of Christ appear to be altogether in
unison with their favorite system of discipline. All the philosophers of
the East, whose tenets, as we have seen, were, that the Deity had
nothing at all to do with matter, the nature and qualities of which they
considered to be malignant and poisonous; that the body was held in
subjection by a being entirely distinct from Him to whom the dominion
over the rational soul belonged; that the world, and all terrestrial
bodies, were not the work of the Supreme Being, the Author of all good,
but were formed out of matter by a nature either evil in its origin, or
that had fallen into a state of depravity; and lastly, that the
knowledge of the true Deity had become extinct, and that the whole race
of mankind, instead of worshipping the Father of Light and Life, and
source of every thing good, universally paid their homage to the Founder
and Prince of this nether world, or to his substitutes and agents: I say
all these looked forward with earnest expectation for the arrival of an
extraordinary and eminently powerful Messenger of the Most High, who,
they imagined, would deliver the captive souls of men from the bondage
of the flesh, and rescue them from the dominion of those genii by whom
they supposed the world and all matter to be governed; at the same time
communicating to them a correct knowledge of their everlasting Parent,
so as to enable them, upon the dissolution of the body, once more to
regain their long-lost liberty and happiness. An expectation of this
kind even continues to be cherished by their descendants of the present
day. Some of these philosophers, then, being struck with astonishment at
the magnitude and splendor of the miracles wrought by Christ and his
apostles, and perceiving that it was the object of our Lord's ministry
both to abrogate the Jewish law--a law which they conceived to have been
promulgated by the Architect or Founder of the world himself, or by the
chief of his agents--and also to overthrow those gods of the nations
whom they regarded as genii, placed over mankind by the same evil
spirit; hearing him, moreover, invite the whole world to join in the
worship of the one Omnipotent and only true God, and profess that he
came down from heaven for the purpose of redeeming the souls of men, and
restoring them to liberty, were induced to believe that he was that very
Messenger for whom they looked, the Person ordained by the Everlasting
Father, to destroy the dominion of the founder of this world as well as
of the genii who presided over it; to separate light from darkness, and
to deliver the souls of men from that bondage to which they were
subjected, in consequence of their connection with material bodies. To
various articles propounded in the Christian code as essential points of
belief, they utterly refused their assent: such, for instance, as that
which attributes the creation of the world to the Supreme Being, and
those respecting the divine origin of the Mosaic law, the authority of
the Old Testament, the character of human nature, and the like: for it
would have amounted to nothing short of an absolute surrender of the
leading maxims of the system to which they were devoted, had they not
persisted in maintaining that the creator of this world was a being of a
nature vastly inferior to the Supreme Deity, the Father of our Lord, and
that the law of Moses was not dictated by the Almighty, but by this same
inferior being, by whom also the bodies of men were formed and united to
souls of ethereal mould, and under whose influence the various penmen of
the Old Testament composed whatever they have left us on record." Again,
"according to the Gnostic scheme, an absolute and entire dominion over
the human race, and the globe we inhabit, is exercised by the founder of
the material world, a being of unbounded pride and ambition, who makes
use of every means in his power to prevent mankind from attaining to any
knowledge of the true God."

It is too plain to require a comment, that the fallen creature to whom,
in this religious system, the creation of the world is ascribed, and to
whom the nations universally paid their homage, was Satan; and that the
genii, his subordinates, were the angels who fell with him. On the other
hand, the Divine Messenger expected as the antagonist and conqueror of
Satan, could be no other than the Messenger Jehovah, appointed and sent
by the Everlasting Father.

Mosheim, in his Commentaries, Introduction, chap. 2, observes, that the
Jewish religion, at the time of our Saviour's appearance, "was
contaminated by errors of the most flagrant kind; even in the service
of the temple itself, numerous ceremonies and observances, drawn from
the religious worship of heathen nations, had been introduced and
blended with those of Divine institution; and in addition to
superstitions like these of a public nature, many erroneous principles,
probably either brought from Babylon and Chaldea by the ancestors of the
people at their return from captivity, or adopted by the thoughtless
multitude in conformity to the example of their neighbors the Greeks,
the Syrians, and the Egyptians, were cherished and acted upon in
private."

Again, "To the prince of darkness, with his associates and agents, they
attributed an influence over the world and mankind of the most extensive
nature; so predominant, indeed, as scarcely to leave a superior degree
of power even with the Deity himself."

"At the time of Christ's appearance, many of the Jews had imbibed the
principles of the Oriental philosophy respecting the origin of the
world, and were much addicted to the study of a recondite sort of
learning derived from thence, to which they gave the name of _Cabbala_.
The founders of several of the Gnostic sects, all of whom, we know, were
studious to make the Christian religion accommodate itself to the
principles of the ancient Oriental philosophy, _had been originally
Jews_, and exhibited in their tenets a strange mixture of the doctrines
of Moses, Christ, and Zoroaster. This is of itself sufficient to prove
that many of the Jews were in no small degree attached to the opinions
of the ancient Persians and Chaldeans. Such of them as had adopted these
irrational principles would not admit that the world was created by God,
but substituted, in the place of the Deity, _a celestial genius_
endowed with vast powers; from whom, also, they maintained that Moses
had his commission, and the Jewish law its origin. To the coming of the
Messiah, or deliverer, promised by God to their fathers, they looked
forward with hope, expecting that he would put an end to the dominion of
the being whom they thus regarded as the maker and ruler of the world."
Mosheim, Int., Com., chap. 2.

It would be alike tedious and useless much further to multiply citations
from the history of Gnostic and other Oriental writers, to show that the
nations represented by those writers regarded Satan as the creator of
the world and god of their idolatry.

"Beyond that vast expanse, refulgent with everlasting light, which was
considered as the immediate habitation of the Deity and those natures
which had been generated from him, these philosophers placed the seat of
matter, where, according to them, it had lain from all eternity, a rude,
undigested, opaque mass, agitated by turbulent, irregular motions of its
own provoking, and nurturing, as in a seed-bed, the rudiments of vice
and every species of evil. In this state it was found by a genius or
celestial spirit of the higher order, who had been either driven from
the abode of the Deity for some offense, or commissioned by him for the
purpose, _and who reduced it into order, and gave it that arrangement
and fashion which the universe now wears_. Those who spoke the Greek
tongue were accustomed to refer to this _creator of the world_ by the
name of _Demiurgus_. Matter received its inhabitants, both men and other
animals, from the same hand that had given to it disposition and
symmetry.... When all things were thus completed, Demiurgus, _revolting_
against the great First Cause of every thing, the all-wise and
omnipotent God, _assumed to himself the exclusive government of this
new state_, which he apportioned out into provinces or districts;
bestowing the administration and command over them on a number of genii
or spirits of inferior degree, who had been his associates and
assistants." Mosheim, Intro., sec. 34.

"In the following respects, they [the Gnostic sects] appear to have been
all of one mind; namely, that in addition to the Deity, _matter_, the
root and cause of every thing evil and depraved, had existed from all
eternity, that this corrupt matter had not been reduced into order by
the Supreme and all-benevolent Deity, but by a nature of a far inferior
rank; that the founder of the world, therefore, and the Deity, were
beings between whom no sort of relationship whatever existed." Ibid.,
1., sec. 65.

These representations of the sentiments of the Orientals may suffice to
show that the Arch-apostate claimed to be the creator and prince of this
world, and led his followers to adopt that usurped and impious claim as
a primary article of their faith, and to worship and serve him
accordingly. Nor does it otherwise seem possible to account for the
origin and adoption, at a very early period, of the doctrine of two
antagonist principles or powers, one as the creator of the world and
author of all evil, the other as an ineffectually counteracting agent of
good.

Divested of Eastern figure, and of bias from Western notions of
