


Chapter VI.


                       The Seat Of God In The Soul.


    _Whither is thy beloved gone, O thou fairest among women_?--CANT.
    6:1.


Though our "beloved" is always with us, yet he never discovers himself but
when the heart is quiet and composed, and all the senses are collected in
God. When nothing earthly appears in the understanding, but all its animal
and worldly wisdom is swallowed up in faith; then the divine light arises,
darting light and glory through the benighted soul. This is that darkness
which is the habitation of God; that night, in which the will rests in
union with the will of God; and in which the memory forgets all the
impressions of the creatures. Then, in a moment, the divine light strikes
the understanding, heavenly desires inflame the will, and eternal joys
possess and fill the memory; yet neither the understanding, the will, nor
the memory, can comprehend or retain the transcendent joys with which they
are visited of God. For this perception is not lodged in the faculties of
the soul, but lies hid in the very centre of it. Yea, it may sometimes be
awakened through the Word, and break forth in words, so that we may cry
out with St. Augustine's mother Monica, "Let us fly away, let us fly away
to the eternal joy."

2. From this fountain spring all the unutterable groanings of holy souls.
This was the sweetness that St. Paul tasted, when he uttered these words,
"I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor any other creature,
shall be able to separate us from the love of God" (Rom. 8:38): meaning
_that_ love of God to us, which he had tasted in his own soul. Thus St.
Augustine witnesses of himself, "that he sometimes felt such exalted joy
in his inward soul, that if it were but lasting, it could be nothing else
but eternal life." This is that divine pleasure which would fill our
souls, and draw them to itself: and by these foretastes we know what
eternal life is; that it is a state in which our souls shall be fully
satisfied with heavenly joy and sweetness. Hence the devout soul says, "I
am sick of love." Cant. 5:8. That is: "This is the height of my wishes,
this is what I long and sigh after: that I may find my beloved, and be
satisfied with his love, and recover my heavenly nobility, which consists
in union with Christ; that I may nevermore delight in any worldly or
transitory things, much less in sins, or sinful pleasures."

3. This nobility of the soul is but little known to the men of this world,
even those that are accounted wise and learned: and they that have written
volumes about the soul and its faculties, have never come to the
fundamental point. For Christ is the true strength of the soul, its
understanding, will, and memory; that is, light in its understanding;
pleasure in its will; and joy in its memory. So Christ is the true
sanctification, glory, and ornament of the soul; so that a man, for the
love of Christ, which he experiences in himself, does not desire to sin.
Thus we are told, "Whoso abideth in him, sinneth not. Whosoever is born of
God doth not commit sin; for his seed remaineth in him, and he cannot
sin." 1 John 3:6, 9. Yea, from this love of Christ arises often joy so
great as to make crosses and afflictions not only tolerable, but even
desirable for Christ's sake (Acts 5:41); so that the cross is turned into
joy, which is continually springing up from its eternal fountain in the
centre of the soul. There God has sanctified a place for himself, and made
it so peculiarly his own, that neither angel, nor man, nor any other
creature, can enter there. Here it is that God delights to dwell, and he
suffers no other being to dwell with him. God's delight is to dwell in a
pure soul. So he tells us, "My delights are with the sons of men." Prov.
8:31. But what this happiness is, or how great this delight is, no man
knows but he who has experienced it; nor can even he explain it fully in
words.




Chapter VII.


  Of The Dignity Of The Soul; Of True Repentance; And, Of Divine Mercy.


    _My house is the house of prayer._--LUKE 19:46; MATT. 21:13; ISA.
    56:7.


The dignity of the soul consists in this, that it is the habitation and
temple of God, in which he takes more delight than in the whole compass of
heaven and earth. So the believing soul has more of the divine presence
than heaven, than all the temples made with hands, yea, than all the
creatures in the world. For God communicates his whole treasures of love
to such a soul; he rejoices and delights in it; yea, through all creatures
he seeks to make the soul of man happy and glorious. Wherefore, as God
shows so much love, and takes so much pleasure in the soul of man, he may
more properly be said to dwell in it than in any material buildings, yea,
than in heaven itself. Here he displays all the wonders of his providence
and love; yea, for this very end has he created it with nobler faculties
than he has given to the rest of his creatures, that it might be capable
of these exalted communications of the divine grace. And if God should
bestow upon the soul anything less than himself, she would reject it as
being too little. Now St. Paul tells us, "God hath chosen us in Christ
before the foundation of the world." Eph. 1:4. Let this then be our labor,
this our highest endeavor, to be really what we have been from the
beginning of the world. And as the soul ought to be the spouse of the Son
of God, it follows that it is beloved by God above other creatures. It was
this love that brought the blessed Jesus down from heaven to be united to
the beloved soul which the Father had betrothed to him from all eternity,
and to bring it back to the great original from which it at first
proceeded.

2. Now as God has discovered this transcendent love to the soul, it
follows that the soul ought to rest in God alone, and not to waste its
love on any creature, at which it knows that God will be offended. So
great is the loveliness, so great the beauty that is in God, that if the
soul could take ever so remote, ever so obscure a view of it, she would
not be separated from him to gain the whole world. The soul, then, which
is so beloved of God, should be ashamed to fix its love upon any creature
which is offensive to God. She ought to be heartily ashamed and afflicted
if she has not preferred God before all creatures, proposed his glory in
all things, and loved him above all things; this is the true contrition
which is acceptable to God. The whole creation naturally loves God more
than itself, and spends itself in the execution of his commands; but the
miserable sinner loves himself better than his God. If thy sorrow,
therefore, proceed merely from a sense of thy own loss, and not of thy
sins and offences against God, thy contrition is not true, thy sorrow is
not acceptable before God. Though there were no heaven to reward thee, nor
hell to punish thee, yet thou oughtest to be grieved that thou hast
offended and provoked thy God. For the love of God is very heaven, and his
anger is hell. But if thou hast in thy heart that contrition which is here
described, and true faith in Christ, thy sins shall freely be forgiven
thee. For it is more agreeable to him to forgive sins, than to punish
them: not to mention, that as he is our Father, and we are his children,
he is obliged in justice to show mercy to us. For if he be our Father, it
follows that he has a fatherly affection towards us, which will upon all
occasions rejoice and triumph against the severity of his justice. To this
fatherly affection of God, let us perfectly resign ourselves. Whosoever
rests in this, will be well pleased both with the justice and the mercy of
God. For he that truly loves God, will bear patiently all the
determinations of His will, either towards himself or towards any other
creature. Let his will be thine; remember the saying of one of old: "I
would rather be in hell with God, than in heaven without him."




Chapter VIII.


The Calling Of God Is Earnest And Sincere, And Directs Us To Come To Him.


    _He shall call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that
    he may judge his people._--PS. 50:4. _He hath called us with a holy
    calling._--2 TIM. 1:9.


God, our heavenly Father, by all the methods and arguments of love, is
continually calling and drawing us to himself. So great is his love
towards us, that it is as if his own essence and blessedness were affected
by our wandering from him. Hence, all his works of creation, both in
heaven and earth, all the wonders of his providence, tend to this one
great end, namely, to recall and bring back fallen man to himself. All his
words and all his actions, call to the soul to return to the love of God
from which it fell, by hearkening to the tempting insinuations of Satan.

2. God invites us to believe in his Son, and to follow the steps of his
meekness and patience, and by this means, to be reunited to himself, our
chief Good. For as when God called to Elijah, and the fire passed by, and
the strong wind that rent the mountains; yet God was not in them, but came
at last in the still small voice (1 Kings 19:11, 12); so at this day he
descends and manifests himself in humble, quiet, and peaceable souls. And
as Ahasuerus sustained Esther when she fell down at his feet, for fear of
his majesty (Esther 5:2; 8:3, 4); so God comforts and supports the humble
man, who has a true sense of his own nothingness, and trusts not in his
own strength. And were not God to support him with the everlasting arm of
his omnipotence, he would sink under the apprehensions of his own
unworthiness. Such a man is so humbled in his own eyes, that he would seem
to sink below the vilest of all creatures. But no sooner does the mighty
King of heaven cast a look upon such an humble soul, but it is
strengthened and refreshed with the divine consolation. This is the
consequence of true humility, when deeply rooted in the soul; the lower
the soul sinks in its own esteem, the higher it rises in the sight of God.
If to this there be added, external contempt and reproaches, they sink the
soul yet more deeply into self-abasement, and by consequence bring her so
much the nearer to God. This is the soil most fit to produce that peace of
spirit "which passeth all understanding." Phil. 4:7. This is the fruit of
trials, injuries, and afflictions. By these God prepares and purifies thee
for himself, that at length thou mayest return to him, and he return to
thee, and dwell in thee. And this consummation is not to be obtained by
fine words and airy speculations, but by manifold afflictions. It is not
talking or thinking of humility, that makes a man humble; but bearing the
cross with patience; without which thou hast only the appearance, and not
the reality of virtue. Upon this account the man that treats thee with
reproach and contempt, ought to be regarded as in truth thy benefactor.
For these two virtues, meekness and patience, are not to be gained except
by various conflicts and severe trials, which are very great and grievous
to human nature. For how canst thou exercise these virtues, unless in the
time of suffering? Meekness regards the ground of the soul, which is best
tried in the hour of adversity. And patience respects the inner man, who
is to go out with Christ, bearing his reproach. Heb. 13:13. And thus the
man is conformed to the most holy and innocent life of Christ; and Christ,
with his death and passion, lives and governs in him.

3. There is also another, namely, an _inward_ calling of God: when he
kindles in the devout soul the fire of his love. By this means he conveys
himself to the soul, for he himself is love. For it is as impossible to
possess God without a true perception of his love, as for a man to live
without a soul. For that Christ doth "dwell in our hearts by faith"
(Ephes. 3:17), is only to be discovered by love ruling in us. 1 John 4:16.
And this divine love cannot rest in our hearts, until they are emptied of
the love of the world (1 John 2:15), and entirely and absolutely fixed
upon God. It will be, therefore, a very useful exercise for a man often to
examine his own heart, and see what is uppermost in his affections, God,
or himself, or any creature: whether he loves life or death: what it is
that principally engages his affections, and engrosses his thoughts. If
upon inquiry thou findest thy heart set upon anything but God, that thou
hast any affection that does not ultimately centre and terminate in him,
then God cannot enter into thy soul, though thou shed as many tears as
there are drops in the ocean, and thou must abide forever without him.
Unhappy mortals, what are you doing? Why do you suffer a deceitful world
to impose upon you by the love of the creatures, and insinuate itself into
the centre of your souls, which God requires to be consecrated to his own
use? It was for this end that we came into the world, that by
mortification of our own will, and contempt of the world and creatures, we
should return to God, and be reconciled to him; so that as the body is to
return to the earth again, the spirit should also return to God that gave
it. Eccl. 12:7. If thou returnest not in this life, thou art undone to all
eternity. By that in which thou hast placed thy joy and thy delight here,
shalt thou be judged hereafter. Let then this conviction be deeply fixed
in thy heart: Whensoever thy heart is emptied of the world and the
creatures, it shall forthwith be filled with all the fulness of God; yea,
assure thyself, that were it necessary to leave heaven and earth, God
would certainly do it, in order to take possession of a soul thus emptied
of the world, and prepared to receive him. On the other hand, if thou be
full of the world, God cannot enter. The more delight any man takes in the
creatures, the farther is he removed from God. How lamentable a case this
is, I need not stay to explain. This then is a certain conclusion, that
not through worldly joys and pleasures, but through many tribulations, we
must enter into the kingdom of heaven.




Chapter IX.


                  The Purifying Influence Of True Faith.


    _God purifies their hearts by faith._--ACTS 15:9.


The property of true faith, is to purify the heart from the world, and all
earthly, vain, and perishing desires; in a word, from all things in which
corrupt nature delights itself, whether riches, honors, or pleasures.
Faith fixes its eye upon those things only, that are invisible and
eternal; and when all impediments are removed, a union quickly follows;
and there can be no union of things, except they be alike. God is pure
action, and wheresoever he finds a soul empty of the world, there he
delights to operate, and manifest himself, as the spring of life and
comfort to the afflicted longing soul. Therefore the usual language of
Christ in the Gospel to the sick, whom he healed, was, "Thy faith hath
made thee whole." Matt. 9:22; 15:28. His meaning was not, that this was
the effect of the mere act of faith; but that faith had so cleansed,
purified, and humbled the soul, that it was now fit for the more exalted
manifestations of the divine power and presence. Hence, when our blessed
Lord could find no souls so qualified in Nazareth, he could do no mighty
works there. Mark 6:5. For where the creature is, God cannot enter; one
hinders the other. No man can more heartily desire the assistance of God,
than He desires to communicate it to a devout and well-disposed soul. For
as God fills such a soul with his light, consolation, and gracious
presence; so the longing soul rises as naturally towards God, as the fire
burns. When God has once taken possession of such a habitation, he
operates in it all the wonders of his grace, in which he rejoices as once
he did in our Lord Jesus Christ; because in him he accomplished his own
will, without any impediment. For no work or action can please him, which
does not begin and end in him. And as God delights thus to operate in man,
so he continually waits to see when we are fit to receive him; being more
ready to give, than we are either to ask or to receive. Take heed,
therefore, that thou neglect not the present opportunity. For after this
life is over, we shall all receive according to our works, and according
to the principle of love that ruled in our hearts, whether it be good or
bad, God or the creature. And this is so certain, that should all the
saints of God intercede with tears of blood for any one man, it would be
lost labor. For that which has possessed thy heart, and engrossed thy
affections here, shall be thy lot and portion to eternity.

2. And as true faith purifies the heart from worldly love; so it does also
from inordinate affections, as anger and impatience; planting meekness and
patience in respect to our neighbor in their stead. For God works nothing
in the souls of believers, but that which is agreeable to his own nature.
Now what is He, but mere love, patience, and gentleness itself, as he has
manifested himself in our blessed Lord Jesus Christ? As then the love of
God overflows towards all men, having mercy upon all; so it produces the
same love in every Christian soul, a love free and universal; making no
difference either of friend or foe, but being equally united to God, and
to the whole race of mankind. Moreover, this love rejoices in all the good
things that God bestows upon man, and is pleased with that variety of
gifts which are bestowed upon the several members of Christ's body; to
each of which it pays a proper and proportionable respect. For as there is
a mutual agreement between the several members of the natural body, in
which the more ignoble parts, as the hands and feet, serve the more noble,
as the head, the eyes, and the heart; so ought there to be the same
agreement between the members of the spiritual body of Christ. Wherefore,
if we meet with any member of Christ, who is more worthy than ourselves,
we ought proportionably to love and esteem him more than ourselves. And
the greater the portion of divine grace and favor which he has received
from Jesus Christ, our supreme Head, is, the greater respect and love we
ought to pay him. For this good is common to all, as being derived from
our universal Head, Christ Jesus. But we cannot enjoy it without charity,
which makes all our neighbor's blessing our own; and whatsoever we love in
God, and for his sake, considered as a universal good, is properly ours.
And as by charity, all our neighbor's blessings are made our own,
therefore, how many, or how great favors soever God bestows upon a good
man, they are no less mine than his, if I love them as the gifts of God,
and for His sake. Yea, if any man receive the blessings of God with fear
and humility, not being exalted with pride and arrogance; and if I can
behold them in him, and love them for God's sake, and as proceeding from
Him, they are as properly mine as his. This is the way by which we become
spiritually rich in God, and are made partakers of all the blessings of
heaven and earth; yea, and of all the happiness that is laid up in store
for the children of God, by the mediation of our spiritual Head, Christ
Jesus. So deep, so close is this union, that I am actually and properly
possessed of all the blessings which our head Christ Jesus has diffused
through all his members, whether men, or angels, in heaven and earth. And
the effect of this inward love is patience, by which a man readily and
willingly takes up his cross, as a preparation for very exalted gifts of
God. For no cross comes without its special grace. This made one of the
holy men of old exclaim: "Hail, bitter cross, full of grace and glory."
And St. Peter says: "This is thankworthy, if a man for conscience toward
God endure grief." 1 Pet. 2:19.

3. And they, who from love to the cross of Christ, willingly bear their
own, are thereby made partakers of an eminent pleasure and of peace of
mind. He, then, that labors under any cross, external or internal, and
yet, although his heart may bleed, without complaining bears it patiently,
for the sake of his suffering Redeemer, may rest assured, that his
sufferings shall end in glory, and his sorrow shall be turned into joy.
The divine consolations are ever at hand to the resigned and patient soul;
which peace is that inestimable pearl, the riches of the inward man, which
no man can explain or comprehend but he that has it. In a word, this is
that "peace which passeth all understanding," of which St. Paul speaks in
Phil. 4:7.




Chapter X.


Showing How The Natural Light In Us Must Disappear, And The Light Of Grace
                               Shine Forth.


    _God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath
    shined in our hearts._--2 COR. 4:6.


Whosoever would have a just notion of the light of nature, and the light
of grace, must nicely distinguish between the faculties of the soul; that
is to say, the reason, the will, and the senses, and the pure essence of
the soul. (See below, Chap. XXI.) The light of nature resides in the
reason, will, and senses. These faculties, as long as they keep the soul
in subjection to them, hinder the divine light of grace from displaying
itself in the pure essence of the soul; so that before this can rise, the
other must set. For the light of grace is above all sense and reason; yea,
is hindered by them. Thou seest, then, how little the natural man can do
in divine things--even nothing at all.

2. Let us now consider how the light of grace generally arises in the
soul. God has the word of grace, which he has commanded to be preached,
and by which he operates; and this word is spirit and life. John 6:63. And
though God by his power and providence is everywhere present, yet his
proper habitation, in which he peculiarly operates and kindles his divine
light, is the soul of man. So that the divine light in the soul proceeds
not from the senses, nor from reason, nor any natural faculty; but merely
and entirely from the operation of divine grace in the soul. And this is
the eternal fountain of comfort, peace, truth, wisdom, and life, the chief
and everlasting happiness of the soul. Thus the only happiness of the soul
is its union with God, and the operation of his grace: and of this, no
creature that has not the image of God, can partake. For nothing but God's
own image is capable of his light, his grace, and his wisdom.

3. By this light the soul truly recovers its spiritual strength; that is,
understanding, wisdom, and knowledge in the hidden mysteries of God.
Hereby also is produced in the soul such a high relish of divine love, so
sweet and pleasant, that she has, as it were, an aversion and dislike of
everything that is not divine. Hence arise holy desires after goodness,
flowing from that inward spring in the soul, without the concurrence of
any creature. The creatures indeed can excite in us admiration and joy,
but all by external images and impressions; so that we ought carefully to
distinguish between these different motions. The light of grace affects
the very centre of the soul, beyond the comprehension of sense or reason.
So then, the more thou art purified from, and emptied of, the creatures,
the more frequently and plenteously shalt thou be refreshed with the
visits of divine light and truth. Now from this light arises the knowledge
of truth, from which, so soon as a man turns himself, he falls into error.
For the region of truth is not without the soul, but within it; and from
this light, are darted sometimes such flashes and streams of wisdom as
show a man more in an instant than all the men in the world could teach
him. Yea, the perception of this light but for a moment, will give the
attentive soul more joy, comfort, and happiness than all the creatures in
the world can afford. And this is transacted in the inmost recesses of the
soul. This is the fountain at which the royal prophet David drank, as he
tells us: "Thou, through thy commandments, hast made me wiser than mine
enemies; for they are ever with me. I have more understanding than all my
teachers; for thy testimonies are my meditation. I understand more than
the ancients, because I keep thy precepts. I have refrained my feet from
every evil way, that I might keep thy word." Ps. 119:98-101. Thus speaks
David, who, through that whole Psalm, makes it his prayer and request to
God that he would let the divine light shine, and the divine Word speak,
within him; that so, by the fear of God, and the diligent keeping of his
commandments, he might securely preserve this great internal treasure.
Upon which account he says that "the law of God was better unto him than
thousands of gold and silver." Ps. 119:72. In short, the soul that is
sensible of the value and sweetness of this inward and heavenly treasure,
can have no relish or esteem for the pomps and pleasures of this world;
but will say with Solomon, "Vanity of vanities; all is vanity." Eccles.
1:2.

4. But as this light cannot shine in a wicked soul (for "what communion
hath light with darkness?" 2 Cor. 6:14), and yet is the greatest blessing
of the soul, therefore holy David prays (so ardently (Ps. 119), so
devoutly, yea, he falls into eloquence so copious as to astonish the
reader), that it would please God to protect him from the darkness of sin,
and keep him in his fear. Indeed, so exceedingly plentiful is this light,
so wonderful is its charity, that, like a flash of lightning, it often
strikes the hearts of wicked men, warning them of approaching ruin, and,
as it were, snatching them from the jaws of destruction; which is
undoubtedly the effect of this illumination. And in this sense, "the light
shineth in darkness; and the darkness comprehendeth it not." John 1:5. Now
this divine light is hindered from displaying itself in the bottom of the
soul by the restless activity of the external senses. For as the ear is
perpetually longing to hear, the eye always employed in seeing, and the
heart constantly taken up with external objects, this scatters and
distracts the powers of the soul. Whereas, the light of grace cannot shine
except in the most settled and composed frame of spirit; so that from this
inward principle of light, the senses, the reason, the understanding, the
will, and the memory, might be replenished with light and wisdom. For the
enlightened soul neither sees, nor hears, nor speaks as before. It speaks
no more the superficial language of the natural man, but words full of
spirit and life. And now the enlightened soul begins in spirit to
contemplate the glory of God, sighing after Him, and saying: "O God, who
art most beautiful to my eyes, most sweet to my mouth, most charming to my
ears, most dear to my heart!" The works that such a soul performs, are no
longer her own, but the works of God; and so much the more noble than her
own, as God is more noble than all creatures. Then also she comes to
understand, that blessedness cannot be the reward of her own works, but is
the gift of the grace of God. So likewise she finds more contentment when
she suffers God to act in her, than when she works and labors herself; for
by this means she has joy and comfort in all her actions, as knowing that
they are all wrought in God. John 3:21.




Chapter XI.


   God, The Light Of The Soul, Directing Us Not To Judge Our Neighbors.


    _God is light, and in him is no darkness at all_.--1 JOHN 1:5.


God is the supreme, most pure, and beauteous light; flaming with an ardent
desire of enlightening the souls of men, and uniting himself to them, if
not hindered by the darkness which men "love rather than light." John 1:5;
3:19. But the darkness of the soul is the love of itself, and the love of
the world, which obstruct the operations of God in us. Wherefore, if the
soul would be a partaker of this divine light, let her take care not to be
overcome by the love of the creatures, by covetousness, anger, self-love,
ambition, and the lust of the flesh; for all these are the darkness of the
world, in which the god of this world ruleth. 2 Cor. 4:4. A man must then
forsake himself and all creatures, yea, everything that is not God; this
is called the forsaking "all that he hath." Luke 14:33. Such a soul is
fixed entirely upon God, and is enlightened by his truth; and if by the
will of Providence he be required to engage in worldly affairs, he does it
with humility and fear, still keeping the centre of his soul free from the
creature and the world; so that the emanations of divine light are not
obstructed, but flow in perpetual streams from their fountain, which is
God.

2. This inward light breaks forth into external actions, so that
whatsoever a man says, or does, or suffers, is no longer an act of his
own, but of God, to whom he has surrendered and dedicated himself. For how
can he act, who is merely passive? So then, whatsoever impression or
impulse thou findest in thyself, whether it be a devout desire, a good
intention, an inclination to prayer or thanksgiving, all is from God, and
not from thyself. Submit thyself, therefore, to the mighty hand of God,
and suffer him to accomplish his will in thee; for so whatsoever thou
doest, is in him, and through him, and he worketh in thee. For it is a
necessary condition of all good works that they ultimately regard God, and
be wrought in him. John 3:21. Hence we should live in him, pray in him,
and do everything in him. One such work wrought in God, however
insignificant it may be in the eye of the world, is of more value in the
sight of God, than all the actions wrought in human strength. This is the
spring of true virtue, the essence of which is, that it should begin and
end in God. But in proportion as the love of the world and the creature
prevails in thee, thou art farther removed from God: whilst the nearer God
is to the ground of thy heart, the more deeply and plentifully will he
shine forth, and manifest himself by works of charity and compassion
towards thy neighbor. For our blessed Saviour tells us, "I am the light of
the world." John 8:12. In him, therefore, let us act. Let us cleave to the
love of this our Head, that we may be enlightened in Christ.

3. For of all our actions those only may be called "light," which proceed
from God and diffuse themselves through the darkness and miseries of our
neighbors, in patience, in meekness, in humility, in consolation, in
compassion, in gentle reproofs, and charitable censures. Whereas from an
arrogant love of censuring others arise self-esteem, a high mind,
contempt, and insolence toward our neighbors. This is the root of
innumerable sins. But as the light of the Holy Spirit cannot enter into
such souls, so where he inhabits, these vices have no place. The man of
God judges not his neighbor, unless compelled by necessity; and even then
he does it with great gentleness, and in the proper time and place; lest
while he attempt to cure one wound, he should make ten, by an unseasonable
and improper application. One thing ought carefully to be observed in
reproving our neighbor, namely, that we should not publish such
uncharitable reflections upon him, as may in any way injure his
reputation, either in his spiritual or temporal concerns; but on the
contrary, every one should keep himself within the bounds of meekness and
charity, lest he endanger his own humility and poverty of spirit. They
that delight in uncharitable censures and railing accusations, are like
the old serpent; their very breath is infected with his poison, whilst,
like him, they delight in being accusers of the brethren. Whilst they know
not themselves, they will dare to censure and judge their neighbors.
Consider, O man, thy perverse heart, and judge thyself, but no one else.
Luke 6:37. The false light of nature misleads thee, and draws thee blindly
into pride, self-love, and rash censures of others. But know that this is
not the light of God, but the very darkness of Satan.

4. But the true and divine light always discovers itself in modesty and
humility. It hunts not after the empty applause of men, but seeks after
God, from whom it proceeded, and into whom it longs and labors to return.
Such a man thinks himself the weakest, vilest, and most ignorant of all
men; being fully persuaded that whatever good there is in him, it is not
his but God's. Above all things, therefore, endeavor to know thyself, and
trouble not thyself about thy neighbor, particularly his faults; lest in
the bitterness of thine heart thou be tempted to condemn him; for thereby
thou canst do great harm to thine own soul. Turn away, then, thy eyes, for
God's sake, from any vices of thy neighbor, and turn into thyself, and see
whether thou art not, or hast not been as deep in the mire as he. And if
this appear to be the case, consider it in the order of Providence as an
opportunity of reading thy own defects in the life of thy neighbor, and as
a means of bringing thee to the knowledge of thyself, to true repentance
and amendment of life. Then turn thine eyes upon thy neighbor, and pray to
God for him, that He would be pleased, of his fatherly compassion, to
grant unto him also the same knowledge and amendment of life. The man that
is thus disposed, profits by his neighbor's faults, and is preserved from
the sin of rashly judging or condemning him.




Chapter XII.


The Christian Ought Daily, Once At Least, Wholly To Abstract Himself From
All External Objects, And Retire Into His Own Soul; The Advantages Of This
                                 Course.


    _Return unto thy rest, O my soul; for the Lord hath dealt
    bountifully with thee._--PS. 116:7.


The soul of man, flowing out into worldly things, and cleaving entirely to
the creatures, is like a wandering sheep. Now, the great Shepherd of souls
tries, by all the methods of his mercy and wisdom, to bring him back to
the fold, by emptying him of the creatures, and filling him with all the
fulness of God. Thus the royal Psalmist concludes the 119th Psalm: "I have
gone astray like a lost sheep; seek thy servant." This expression, how
oddly soever it may sound to carnal ears, discovers, nevertheless, to the
spiritual man, the whole work of illumination and divine wisdom. For as
the soul of man is placed between time and eternity, so soon as ever it
turns to time, it forgets eternity, and withdraws every day further and
further from divine things. But if it returns to eternity, then it forgets
the creatures, recovers its liberty, draws nearer to God, and is
thoroughly drawn unto him. For there is nothing dearer to God, than a soul
abstracted from the creatures, and resigned to him. Then, and not till
then, the soul enjoys true peace, tastes the food of life, and feels in
herself the true fruits of that divine _anointing_, which denominates us
truly Christians (the name "Christ" signifying: "The Anointed One.")

2. And if these things are so, who can doubt that it is the duty of every
true Christian, if not oftener, yet once a day at least, to taste this
divine food of the soul, which is God himself, that thereby he may be
refreshed with true peace, and be replenished with the fulness of divine
life and grace? Wouldest thou, O man, but thoroughly consider this, thou
wouldest be much more in love with heaven, than with earth! Wert thou but
thus disposed, though the burden of a whole kingdom lay upon thy
shoulders, as it did upon David's, yet it should be no hindrance to thy
holy exercises. For the creatures are not in themselves hurtful, but are
only so to him whose soul is in captivity to them; or, as it is said, "who
sets his heart upon them" (Ps. 62:10), which ought to be entirely
consecrated and devoted to God. Upon this foundation stood the Psalmist,
when he cried out, "Lord, whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is
none upon earth that I desire besides thee." Ps. 73:25. For so great is
the sweetness of divine love, that the soul that has once tasted it,
despises sufferings, and looks upon the love or hatred of this world with
indifference. They that are admitted to these joys, have perpetual peace
in God with all creatures, whether friends or enemies. To these "the yoke
of Christ is easy" (Matt. 11:30); for they are in Christ, and Christ is in
them; and his presence makes their burden light, whilst he bears it in
them, and they bear it in him. Therefore, such a believer says with St.
Paul, "I can do all things through Christ which strengtheneth me." Phil.
4:13.

3. From what has been said, it appears plainly, how necessary and
profitable an exercise it is for every Christian, once a day at least, to
retire into his own heart, into God, and into Christ, to draw thence true
peace of soul, and to learn there the true use of temporal blessings. For
God does not forbid us the use of these, provided we walk in humility, and
in his fear, and continue faithful in our attendance upon him. Our misery
requires this of us, which in such a soul God will not suffer to last
long; and so does, lastly, our daily cross, which Christ by this means
makes light and easy to us. Not to say, that thou, O Christian, art
continually admonished by the Spirit of God within thee, to sigh and pray
for the love of God, and of God alone, and to grieve within thyself, when
any worldly impediments draw and separate thee from it. This is the true
and inward calling of the Holy Ghost, this is the well-beloved's knocking
at the door of thy heart (Cant. 1:13; Rev. 3:20), as a living testimony
that our hearts ought to be the chamber of our heavenly bridegroom.




Chapter XIII.


Showing How The Love Of God Enters Into The Soul, When It Is Empty Of The
                          Love Of The Creatures.


    _If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in
    him._--1 JOHN 2:15.


He that desires to become the habitation of God, must first divest himself
of the love of the world, and then exercise himself in the love of God. No
man can receive the one, without quitting the other; or be filled with the
Spirit of God, before he be emptied of the spirit of the world. As the
magnet by a touch draws iron to it; so God first touches, with his divine
love, the soul which he intends to draw and unite to himself.

2. Now this divine love is so great, that, like the sun, it shines upon
all; yea, it shines more universally than the sun itself, displaying
itself equally upon all men. So that it is not the fault of God, who is
pure light, and pure love, but of men, if they do not perceive or enjoy
it. For when God approaches men with the highest love, and most ardent
affection, he generally finds their hearts full of the love of the world,
and all uncleanness, that is, of covetousness, pride, lust, hatred, envy,
and evil thoughts, which force him to retire and to withdraw his graces
from them. Whence it appears, that since God is ready, like the sun in the
firmament, to communicate the rays of his light freely to every purified
soul, it is not His fault, but theirs, if they are not enlightened by it.
As, therefore, we know these things, let us keep ourselves from the love
of the world, and turn to the living God, watching diligently unto prayer;
let us labor earnestly for the love of God in Christ, by which we are
united to him. Let us knock at the door of his holy wounds, and from
thence expect salvation. If we do this, God will open to us, and give us
admission into that high state of uniting love, in which we shall be
refreshed with all the treasures of God. And who can doubt that the God of
mercy, the fountain of happiness, will fill the heart of man with greater
and more substantial joys, than any which this perishing world can afford?

3. Whosoever, therefore, loves God, shall be loved by all the saints and
holy angels. If I love God, then I share in the love of all the
inhabitants of the city of God, a love that far surpasses the highest
degree of worldly affection. And as all the heavenly host have the highest
love of God, and rejoice in his honor, so is their joy proportionably
great at every step of our conversion, and their happiness is enhanced by
every advance which we make in the love of God.

4. Now one evidence of divine love is this, that we use the creatures with
fear and humility. He that is endued with a habit of divine love, whether
he eat or drink, or whatever he doth, doth everything like a dutiful son,
with reverence and fear, having his eye constantly fixed upon the glory of
his Heavenly Father. 1 Cor. 10:31. From this fear of God flow the many
deep sighs and passionate groans of the devout soul, which, by degrees,
raise him from earth to heaven. For he discovers so many corruptions and
impurities in himself, obstructing the light and quenching the flames of
the Holy Spirit, that he is forced to cry out with St. Paul, "O wretched
man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this death?" Rom.
7:24. And truly, these sighs and groanings must frequently ascend to the
mercy-seat of God, that by the assistance of divine grace we may bear up,
and not faint under the manifold miseries of this wretched state, and the
pressure of a vile earthly body. Thus did all the holy men of old time
when they labored under the sense of spiritual infirmities: they raised
their broken spirits unto God by devout sighs, penitential tears, and
humble acknowledgments of their misery, which reverted into their own
bosoms with a large increase of grace and spiritual strength. He that does
not sincerely seek after God, but has his soul intent on something else
besides him, shall never find him. On the other hand, he that seeks him
alone, in the integrity of his heart, shall surely find him, and be
admitted to all the blessings and happiness that are to be found in the
presence of God. He that seeks God in truth, finds God, and all things
that are God's; and whosoever seeks for nothing else, and looks for
nothing else but God only, unto him God manifests himself, and confers
upon him all whatsoever is laid up in his divine heart, that the same may
as properly be said to belong to man, as to God.




Chapter XIV.


                  Of The Exercise Of Patience And Love.


    _He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter._--ISA. 53:7.


Whosoever would rightly prepare his soul for union with Jesus Christ,
must, like him, be clothed with the meekness and patience of the lamb.
Yea, he must have the very same mind that was in Christ, and become a lamb
even as he was. Let this be thy rule and thy guide in all thy actions. He
tells us himself, "Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the midst of
wolves." Matt. 10:16. This is truly thy case; and whatever way thou
turnest thyself, remember that thou art in the midst of wolves, to whose
violence thou art continually exposed; and against this thou hast no other
remedy but patience, meekness, and submission, according to the example of
the Lamb of God, thy Saviour, Jesus Christ. And as this meekness of the
blessed Jesus was acceptable to his Heavenly Father, so also is thine,
when by patience thou dost triumph over persecution. So that it is thy
business to submit cheerfully to his will, whensoever he shall be pleased
to lay his afflicting hand upon thee, either more immediately from heaven,
or by any suffering which may fall upon thee by means of any creature. It
must all be borne with patience, as coming from the hand of God; and
assure thyself that the faithful Shepherd is at hand to seek and save the
lost sheep, and bring it home "upon his shoulders, rejoicing." Luke 15:5.
Thus the patient soul is, by every impetuous wave of affliction, wafted
nearer to God. But if thy blind carnal reason suggest to thee any excuses
or objections against thy submission, hearken not to them; but fix thine
eyes upon the exemplary patience of thy Redeemer; look steadfastly to thy
crucified Saviour, who did no evil, yet suffered all injuries without
thoughts of revenge.

2. Endeavor to acquire more and more the meekness of the Lamb, and, above
all things, preserve the love of God, which cannot abide in a wrathful
soul. And here consider well with thyself what that love is. Do not fancy
it to be that inward joy, that unspeakable pleasure, which sometimes
elevates devout souls; that is not the essence of love, but the brightness
of it, differing from its root and cause as much as the light does from
the fire whence it proceeds. But the true essence of love to God is, to be
resigned to the will of God, to depend entirely upon him, and to submit to
every affliction as coming immediately from his hand. Thus did Job, who,
taking the loss of his children, his goods, his health, and his honor, as
coming from the hand of God, still "blessed the name of the Lord." Job
1:21. So, too, David humbly submitted to the curses of Shimei, as being
ordered by the Lord. 2 Sam. 16:10. By this means the essence, the root,
and spring of love, are preserved pure and unshaken; and by love we rest
in God, and rejoice in all his dispensations. So that if it should please
God to sink such a man with Christ to hell, he would not open his mouth,
but rest satisfied with the will of God, in which only he finds happiness
and rest. In this love true peace is to be found, when in God, and for
God's sake, we love everything, crosses and tribulations not excepted.
True love unites us to God, and to all the world: and the happiness of
such a state is inexpressibly great.




Chapter XV.


 Showing How Christ, The Eternal Word Of The Father, Perfects His Work In
            The Hearts Of The Faithful, By Love And Humility.


    _Examine yourselves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus
    Christ is in you?_--2 COR. 13:5.


As the faithful soul is often obliged to bear the temptations and
suggestions of the Evil Spirit; so, on the other hand, it receives the
divine consolations from the mouth of the eternal Word speaking in it. Of
this Tauler speaks: "We know," says he, "that the eternal Word is so very
near the ground of the human soul, that its own nature and being are not
more essential and familiar to it, than that Word is. This eternal Word is
continually speaking in man, though his perverse heart, deluded by the
devil, neither hearkens nor attends to it. For the great adversary makes
him deaf by his wicked insinuations, the love of the world, and carnal
inclinations." For the devil to this day tempts all men, as he did Eve
(Gen. 3:4), by those things which he knows to be most agreeable to our
tempers and inclinations,--by riches, honors, friendships, our own nature,
the love of the creatures, and infinite other ways, in which he influences
and affects our imaginations. For as he is industriously busy about us for
our destruction, so he narrowly observes the particular bias of our
affections, and knows all the secret arts of raising our passions; and
when by thus striking our imaginations, he has discomposed our spirits, we
immediately become deaf to the calls of the Holy Spirit and the Word.
These suggestions of Satan we must oppose; for so far as we attend to
them, we are the nearer to our ruin; but if thou stop thine ears to his
insinuations, and turn thyself unto God in the centre of thy soul, thou
hast already conquered him. And as true friends, united in affection, are
particularly delighted in mutual conversation; so if thou sincerely love
God, thou shalt frequently hear his voice within thee. "If a man love me,"
saith Christ, "he will keep my words" (John 14:23): not only those which
he hears in the outward and visible temple and congregation of the
faithful; but those also which are heard in the true temple of the soul,
without which the outward hearing availeth little. And this inward voice
of God thou canst not hear, unless the love of God be in thee.

2. "The most certain token of love to God," saith St. Gregory, "is this,
that we receive all the adversities which God shall think fit to lay upon
us, without any impatience in thought, word, or actions. If we do this,
without doubt we truly love God; if not, it is certain that we do not love
him sincerely, but prefer ourselves and our own things to him; though
nothing can be properly said to be a man's own but sin; everything else is
God's." Take heed, therefore, that thou prefer not even the gifts of God
before Himself; whom if thou love purely and above all things, then thou
shalt continually hear him speaking peace to thy soul, according to that
saying of our blessed Lord, "He that loveth me, to him will I manifest
myself." John 14:21. This manifestation is made by the opening of the
understanding, by the illumination of the heart, by the spirit of wisdom,
of understanding, of might, and of fear (Isa. 11:2), and especially by the
purifying and enlightening of the inward eyes (Eph. 1:18), to see and know
Jesus Christ.

3. But as the devil is wont to stop the inward ears of men by his
suggestions; so he also blinds their eyes by self-love, by the love of the
world and the creatures, and by inward and outward pride. For as by true
and genuine love, we hear Christ; so by faith and profound humility, we
must see him; for that only can purify our hearts from vain pride. For it
is not without reason that our blessed Lord tells us, "Blessed are the
pure in heart; for they shall see God." Matt. 5:8. And for this cause it
is that God sends us so many crosses and afflictions, that we may thereby
be brought into the depths of profound humility, which is an exercise more
profitable to us than all the delights and glories of this world. And now,
though heaven, and earth, and hell itself, should unite their forces
against thee, yet bear up with constancy and patience, remembering that
all shall work together for thy good; as it serves to produce in thee true
humility, by which thou shalt see Christ. Look at him, O man, and consider
how he that is God (John 1:1; Acts 20:28; Rom. 9:5), most high and
omnipotent, by whom were made the heavens and the earth, and who could
easily again have reduced all things into nothing; yet for the sake of
this wretched creature man, submitted himself to the most bitter
sufferings. Phil. 2:5-8. Be thou, therefore, O sinful and wretched
creature, ashamed of that pride, vainglory, and self-love, which have
taken possession of thy heart. Learn to submit thyself to every cross that
shall be laid upon thee, of what sort soever it be, whether inward or
outward; and so subject thy proud, swelling spirit to the thorny crown of
Christ, that thou mayest imitate thy humble and crucified Lord by a true
contempt of thyself; making this the great end and design of all thy
actions, to be conformed to the meek and suffering life of the blessed
Jesus, that so thou mayest come to an experimental knowledge of him. For
what avail a few cold, formal reflections upon the sufferings of our Lord,
whilst we are destitute of that meek and patient spirit with which he bore
them? Of what benefit is it to entertain our fancies with a few dead
speculations about his passion, whilst our hearts are full of pride,
ambition, and worldly love? This, surely, is not the way to the true
vision and experimental knowledge of Jesus Christ. The Spirit of Jesus
operates most deeply in the valley of humility. And in this consists the
essence of humility, that a man look upon himself and all that he ever
has, or ever can do, as nothing. For if there be any good in thee, it is
not of thyself; it is the gift of God.

4. And this humility thou must practise, if ever thou expect to see
Christ. For the hidden mysteries and wisdom of God are revealed to the
meek and humble, but are hidden from the wise men of this world. Ps. 51:6;
Matt. 11:25; 1 Cor. 1:20, 26. For in this humility alone consist the
knowledge and understanding of pure and divine truth, in which is the
essence of eternal blessedness. In this the greatness of the divine
majesty manifests itself, which the more clearly we discern, the deeper
root humility takes in our souls. And the most certain sign of divine
illumination is, that a man grow daily more and more humble, and be less
fond of himself. For self-love and pride are the fountains of all the
darkness, error, and iniquity that are in us. On the other hand, they that
are truly enlightened by God, glory in contempt and sufferings, and
rejoice to imitate their suffering Redeemer. This is the groundwork and
spirit of Psalm 119. The royal prophet well knew that without such a
thirst after godliness, no divine light and wisdom would enter the soul,
and no divine answer be given to it. And this is the real purport of that
long Psalm.

5. In a word, this humble and resigned state of soul, is that in which God
particularly delights to operate. And he that has this, carries in his
soul the comfortable presence, and in his body the suffering marks of the
Lord Jesus; and considering himself as unworthy of the least of God's
mercies, he uses them all with reverence and fear, having his eye, like a
good servant, fixed on his Master; and therefore he is honored with His
more immediate conversation, and grace.




Chapter XVI.


            Showing How The Holy Spirit Operates In Our Souls.


    _I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the
    dry ground._--ISA. 44:3.


If after a drought and dearth of three years and a half (such as happened
in the time of Elijah, 1 Kings 17:1; 18:45), it should please God to send
rain upon all the earth, one man's field only excepted; he would truly
have reason to think that God was angry with him, and that his case was
most deplorably miserable. But how much more miserable and unhappy is he,
who, though hungering and thirsting, like a parched ground, after faith,
charity, and all Christian graces, yet cannot receive one drop of
spiritual consolation in the inward ground of his soul!

2. But if this ever happen, it is not God's fault, for he is ready "to
pour out his Spirit upon all flesh" (Joel 2:28), but man's, who prepareth
not his heart to receive it. The best preparation to receive this holy
guest, is to turn our hearts by faith and prayer from the world unto God,
as the Apostles did at Pentecost (Acts 2:4); and whensoever God shall find
us thus prepared, he will forthwith visit us with all the fulness of
spiritual blessings. On the other hand, if the heart be full of the world,
there will be no room for the Spirit of God to enter; for where the one
is, the other cannot be. As in nature there is no vacuum, so it is in the
spiritual world. Let this then be thy care, and this thy chief concern,
not to fix thy heart upon any creature, either inwardly or outwardly, not
on the love of thyself, nor upon thine own will, but upon God alone;
assuring thyself, that this is the most noble and useful exercise for
thee. As the finest work of the most skilful workman may be broken and
destroyed by a heedless child; so it often happens with the works and
gifts of God, which men destroy by their rash and unadvised management.
Thus they break and deface the most noble designs and operations of the
Spirit of God within them; they attribute that to themselves which is the
work of God, and patch their own vile rags upon the fine linen of Christ's
righteousness. For it is most certain that we are "unprofitable servants"
(Luke 17:10), and by consequence can do nothing but what is unprofitable.
And, in the same degree, as God is more noble than man, so the works of
the Divine Spirit are more noble and precious than those of the human
spirit. Hence it follows, that if thou wouldest have God to operate more
eminently in thee, thou must surrender all the passions, affections, and
powers of thy soul, to be possessed, governed, and directed by Him. For
unless the creature be entirely still, thou canst not hear the voice of
God. Think not then that every inward motion which thou perceivest, is the
work of God; whereas some are merely the product of thy own flesh and
blood. Take heed therefore to thyself, and learn to distinguish well, lest
thou ascribe to God the very operations of the devil.

3. But in order to the more perfect operation of the Holy Ghost in thee,
there are two rules proper to be observed: first, that thou turn away
thine heart from the world, the creatures, thyself, and thine own will and
affections, that so this Holy Spirit may have room to act freely;
secondly, to receive all crosses and afflictions as coming from the hand
of God, without any respect or reference to the creatures, and to embrace
them as preparations for receiving more plentiful communications of divine
grace and blessing. Suppose, for instance, thou wert engaged in some good
work or act of devotion, and some intimate friend should break in upon
thee with abusive and reproachful language; if thou couldest bear this
with silence and patience, thou mightest be assured that that was the work
of the Holy Spirit, in order to prepare thee for greater blessings. But if
wicked thoughts be suggested to thee, by the devil, yet satisfy thyself
that they do thee no harm, because they are involuntary. Lastly, if thou
art engaged in any worldly calling or profession, see that thou perform
thy duty in it with thine eye fixed upon the glory of God, and the good of
thy neighbor. By this means all thy works shall be wrought in God, and his
Spirit.




Chapter XVII.


             Signs Of The Presence Of The Holy Spirit In Us.


    _The Comforter will reprove the world._--JOHN 16:8.

