        shall loathe sin and rebuke it under every mask. Only
        in this way can we bless our enemies, though they
30:30   may not so construe our words. We cannot choose for
        ourselves, but must work out our salvation in the way
        Jesus taught. In meekness and might, he was found
31:1    preaching the gospel to the poor. Pride and fear are unfit
        to bear the standard of Truth, and God will never place
31:3    it in such hands.

                          Fleshly ties temporal

        Jesus acknowledged no ties of the flesh. He said: "Call
        no man your father upon the earth: for one is your Father,
31:6    which is in heaven." Again he asked: "Who
        is my mother, and who are my brethren," im-
        plying that it is they who do the will of his Father. We
31:9    have no record of his calling any man by the name of
        /father/. He recognized Spirit, God, as the only creator, and
        therefore as the Father of all.

                             Healing primary

31:12   First in the list of Christian duties, he taught his fol-
        lowers the healing power of Truth and Love. He attached
        no importance to dead ceremonies. It is the
31:15   living Christ, the practical Truth, which makes
        Jesus "the resurrection and the life" to all who follow him
        in deed. Obeying his precious precepts, - following his
31:18   demonstration so far as we apprehend it, - we drink of
        his cup, partake of his bread, are baptized with his pu-
        rity; and at last we shall rest, sit down with him, in a full
31:21   understanding of the divine Principle which triumphs
        over death. For what says Paul? "As often as ye eat
        this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show the Lord's
31:24   death till he come."

                            Painful prospect

        Referring to the materiality of the age, Jesus said:
        "The hour cometh, and now is, when the true wor-
31:27   shippers shall worship the Father in spirit
        and in truth." Again, foreseeing the perse-
        cution which would attend the Science of Spirit, Jesus
31:30   said: "They shall put you out of the synagogues; yea,
        the time cometh, that whosoever killeth you will think
        that he doeth God service; and these things will they
32:1    do unto you, because they have not known the Father
        nor me."

                            Sacred sacrament

32:3    In ancient Rome a soldier was required to swear
        allegiance to his general. The Latin word for this oath
        was /sacramentum/, and our English word
32:6    /sacrament/ is derived from it. Among the
        Jews it was an ancient custom for the master of a
        feast to pass each guest a cup of wine. But the
32:9    Eucharist does not commemorate a Roman soldier's
        oath, nor was the wine, used on convivial occasions and
        in Jewish rites, the cup of our Lord. The cup shows
32:12   forth his bitter experience, - the cup which he prayed
        might pass from him, though he bowed in holy submis-
        sion to the divine decree.

32:15   "As they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed
        it and brake it, and gave it to the disciples, and said,
        Take, eat; this is my body. And he took the cup, and
32:18   gave thanks, and gave it to them saying, Drink ye all
        of it."

                          Spiritual refreshment

        The true sense is spiritually lost, if the sacrament is
32:21   confined to the use of bread and wine. The disciples
        had eaten, yet Jesus prayed and gave them
        bread. This would have been foolish in a
32:24   literal sense; but in its spiritual signification, it was nat-
        ural and beautiful. Jesus prayed; he withdrew from the
        material senses to refresh his heart with brighter, with
32:27   spiritual views.

                            Jesus' sad repast

        The Passover, which Jesus ate with his disciples in
        the month Nisan on the night before his crucifixion,
32:30   was a mournful occasion, a sad supper taken
        at the close of day, in the twilight of a
        glorious career with shadows fast falling around; and
33:1    this supper closed forever Jesus' ritualism or concessions
        to matter.

                            Heavenly supplies

33:3    His followers, sorrowful and silent, anticipating the hour
        of their Master's betrayal, partook of the heavenly manna,
        which of old had fed in the wilderness the
33:6    persecuted followers of Truth. Their bread
        indeed came down from heaven. It was the great truth
        of spiritual being, healing the sick and casting out error.
33:9    Their Master had explained it all before, and now this
        bread was feeding and sustaining them. They had borne
        this bread from house to house, /breaking/ (explaining) it to
33:12   others, and now it comforted themselves.

        For this truth of spiritual being, their Master was about
        to suffer violence and drain to the dregs his cup of sorrow.
33:15   He must leave them. With the great glory of an everlast-
        ing victory overshadowing him, he gave thanks and said,
        "Drink ye all of it."

                            The holy struggle

33:18   When the human element in him struggled with the
        divine, our great Teacher said: "Not my will, but
        Thine, be done!"- that is, Let not the flesh,
33:21   but the Spirit, be represented in me. This
        is the new understanding of spiritual Love. It gives all
        for Christ, or Truth. It blesses its enemies, heals the
33:24   sick, casts out error, raises the dead from trespasses
        and sins, and preaches the gospel to the poor, the meek
        in heart.

                           Incisive questions

33:27   Christians, are you drinking his cup? Have you
        shared the blood of the New Covenant, the persecutions
        which attend a new and higher understand-
33:30   ing of God? If not, can you then say that
        you have commemorated Jesus in his cup? Are all
        who eat bread and drink wine in memory of Jesus willing
34:1    truly to drink his cup, take his cross, and leave all for
        the Christ-principle? Then why ascribe this inspira-
34:3    tion to a dead rite, instead of showing, by casting out
        error and making the body "holy, acceptable unto God,"
        that Truth has come to the understanding? If Christ,
34:6    Truth, has come to us in demonstration, no other com-
        memoration is requisite, for demonstration is Immanuel,
        or /God with us/; and if a friend be with us, why need we
34:9    memorials of that friend?

                            Millennial glory

        If all who ever partook of the sacrament had really
        commemorated the sufferings of Jesus and drunk of
34:12   his cup, they would have revolutionized the
        world. If all who seek his commemoration
        through material symbols will take up the cross, heal
34:15   the sick, cast out evils, and preach Christ, or Truth,
        to the poor, - the receptive thought, - they will bring
        in the millennium.

                         Fellowship with Christ

34:18   Through all the disciples experienced, they became more
        spiritual and understood better what the Master had
        taught. His resurrection was also their resur-
34:21   rection. It helped them to raise themselves and
        others from spiritual dulness and blind belief in God into
        the perception of infinite possibilities. They needed this
34:24   quickening, for soon their dear Master would rise again
        in the spiritual realm of reality, and ascend far above
        their apprehension. As the reward for his faithfulness,
34:27   he would disappear to material sense in that change which
        has since been called the ascension.

                           The last breakfast

        What a contrast between our Lord's last supper and
34:30   his last spiritual breakfast with his disciples
        in the bright morning hours at the joyful
        meeting on the shore of the Galilean Sea! His gloom
35:1    had passed into glory, and His disciples' grief into repent-
        ance, - hearts chastened and pride rebuked. Convinced
35:3    of the fruitlessness of their toil in the dark and wakened
        by their Master's voice, they changed their methods, turned
        away from material things, and cast their net on the right
35:6    side. Discerning Christ, Truth, anew on the shore of
        time, they were enabled to rise somewhat from mortal
        sensuousness, or the burial of mind in matter, into new-
35:9    ness of life as Spirit.

        This spiritual meeting with our Lord in the dawn of a
        new light is the morning meal which Christian Scientists
35:12   commemorate. They bow before Christ, Truth, to re-
        ceive more of his reappearing and silently to commune
        with the divine Principle, Love. They celebrate their
35:15   Lord's victory over death, his probation in the flesh
        after death, its exemplification of human probation, and
        his spiritual and final ascension above matter, or the flesh,
35:18   when he rose out of material sight.

                           Spiritual Eucharist

        Our baptism is a purification from all error. Our
        church is built on the divine Principle, Love. We can
35:21   unite with this church only as we are new-
        born of Spirit, as we reach the Life which
        is Truth and the Truth which is Life by bringing forth
35:24   the fruits of Love, - casting out error and healing the
        sick. Our Eucharist is spiritual communion with the one
        God. Our bread, "which cometh down from heaven,"
35:27   is Truth. Our cup is the cross. Our wine the inspira-
        tion of Love, the draught our Master drank and com-
        mended to his followers.

                              Final purpose

35:30   The design of Love is to reform the sinner. If the
        sinner's punishment here has been insufficient to re-
        form him, the good man's heaven would be a hell to
36:1    the sinner. They, who know not purity and affection by
        experience, can never find bliss in the blessed company of
36:3    Truth and Love simply through translation
        into another sphere. Divine Science reveals
        the necessity of sufficient suffering, either before or after
36:6    death, to quench the love of sin. To remit the penalty
        due for sin, would be for Truth to pardon error. Escape
        from punishment is not in accordance with God's govern-
36:9    ment, since justice is the handmaid of mercy.

        Jesus endured the shame, that he might pour his
        dear-bought bounty into barren lives. What was his
36:12   earthly reward? He was forsaken by all save John,
        the beloved disciple, and a few women who bowed in
        silent woe beneath the shadow of his cross. The earthly
36:15   price of spirituality in a material age and the great moral
        distance between Christianity and sensualism preclude
        Christian Science from finding favor with the worldly-
36:18   minded.

                          Righteous retribution

        A selfish and limited mind may be unjust, but the un-
        limited and divine Mind is the immortal law of justice as
36:21   well as of mercy. It is quite as impossible for
        sinners to receive their full punishment this
        side of the grave as for this world to bestow on the right-
36:24   eous their full reward. It is useless to suppose that the
        wicked can gloat over their offences to the last moment
        and then be suddenly pardoned and pushed into heaven,
36:27   or that the hand of Love is satisfied with giving us only
        toil, sacrifice, cross-bearing, multiplied trials, and mock-
        ery of our motives in return for our efforts at well doing.

                           Vicarious suffering

36:30   Religious history repeats itself in the suf-
        fering of the just for the unjust. Can God
        therefore overlook the law of righteousness which de-
37:1    stroys the belief called sin? Does not Science show that
        sin brings suffering as much to-day as yesterday? They
37:3    who sin must suffer. "With what measure ye mete, it
        shall be measured to you again."

                           Martyrs inevitable

        History is full of records of suffering. "The blood of
37:6    the martyrs is the seed of the Church." Mortals try in
        vain to slay Truth with the steel or the stake,
        but error falls only before the sword of Spirit.
37:9    Martyrs are the human links which connect one stage with
        another in the history of religion. They are earth's lumi-
        naries, which serve to cleanse and rarefy the atmosphere of
37:12   material sense and to permeate humanity with purer ideals.
        Consciousness of right-doing brings its own reward; but
        not amid the smoke of battle is merit seen and appreciated
37:15   by lookers-on.

                           Complete emulation

        When will Jesus' professed followers learn to emulate
        him in /all/ his ways and to imitate his mighty works?
37:18   Those who procured the martyrdom of that
        righteous man would gladly have turned his
        sacred career into a mutilated doctrinal platform. May
37:21   the Christians of to-day take up the more practical im-
        port of that career! It is possible, - yea, it is the duty
        and privilege of every child, man, and woman, - to follow
37:24   in some degree the example of the Master by the demon-
        stration of Truth and Life, of health and holiness. Chris-
        tians claim to be his followers, but do they follow him in
37:27   the way that he commanded? Hear these imperative com-
        mands: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father
        which is in heaven is perfect!" "Go ye into all the world,
37:30   and preach the gospel to every creature!" "/Heal the
        sick/!"

                        Jesus' teaching belittled

        Why has this Christian demand so little inspiration
38:1    to stir mankind to Christian effort? Because men are
        assured that this command was intended only for a par-
38:3    ticular period and for a select number of fol-
        lowers. This teaching is even more pernicious
        than the old doctrine of foreordination, - the election of a
38:6    few to be saved, while the rest are damned; and so it will
        be considered, when the lethargy of mortals, produced
        by man-made doctrines, is broken by the demands of
38:9    divine Science.

        Jesus said: "These signs shall follow them that be-
        lieve; . . . they shall lay hands on the sick, and they
38:12   shall recover." Who believes him? He was addressing
        his disciples, yet he did not say, " These signs shall follow
        /you/," but /them/- "them that believe" in all time to come.
38:15   Here the word /hands/ is used metaphorically, as in the text,
        "The right hand of the Lord is exalted." It expresses
        spiritual power; otherwise the healing could not have
38:18   been done spiritually. At another time Jesus prayed, not
        for the twelve only, but for as many as should believe
        "through their word."

                           Material pleasures

38:21   Jesus experienced few of the pleasures of the physical
        senses, but his sufferings were the fruits of other peo-
        ple's sins, not of his own. The eternal Christ,
38:24   his spiritual selfhood, never suffered. Jesus
        mapped out the path for others. He unveiled the Christ,
        the spiritual idea of divine Love. To those buried in the
38:27   belief of sin and self, living only for pleasure or the grati-
        fication of the senses, he said in substance: Having eyes
        ye see not, and having ears ye hear not; lest ye should un-
38:30   derstand and be converted, and I might heal you. He
        taught that the material senses shut out Truth and its
        healing power.

                            Mockery of truth

39:1    Meekly our Master met the mockery of his unrecog-
        nized grandeur. Such indignities as he received, his fol-
39:3    lowers will endure until Christianity's last
        triumph. He won eternal honors. He over-
        came the world, the flesh, and all error, thus proving
39:6    their nothingness. He wrought a full salvation from sin,
        sickness, and death. We need "Christ, and him cruci-
        fied." We must have trials and self-denials, as well as
39:9    joys and victories, until all error is destroyed.

                            A belief suicidal

        The educated belief that Soul is in the body causes
        mortals to regard death as a friend, as a stepping-stone
39:12   out of mortality into immortality and bliss.
        The Bible calls death an enemy, and Jesus
        overcame death and the grave instead of yielding to them.
39:15   He was "the way." To him, therefore, death was not
        the threshold over which he must pass into living
        glory.

                            Present salvation

39:18   "/Now/," cried the apostle, "is the accepted time; be-
        hold, /now/ is the day of salvation," - meaning, not that
        now men must prepare for a future-world salva-
39:21   tion, or safety, but that now is the time in which
        to experience that salvation in spirit and in life. Now is
        the time for so-called material pains and material pleas-
39:24   ures to pass away, for both are unreal, because impossible
        in Science. To break this earthly spell, mortals must get
        the true idea and divine Principle of all that really exists
39:27   and governs the universe harmoniously. This thought is
        apprehended slowly, and the interval before its attain-
        ment is attended with doubts and defeats as well as
39:30   triumphs.

                             Sin and penalty

        Who will stop the practice of sin so long as he believes
        in the pleasures of sin? When mortals once admit that
40:1    evil confers no pleasure, they turn from it. Remove error
        from thought, and it will not appear in effect. The ad-
40:3    vanced thinker and devout Christian, perceiv-
        ing the scope and tendency of Christian healing
        and its Science, will support them. Another will say:
40:6    "Go thy way for this time; when I have a convenient
        season I will call for thee."

        Divine Science adjusts the balance as Jesus adjusted
40:9    it. Science removes the penalty only by first removing
        the sin which incurs the penalty. This is my sense of
        divine pardon, which I understand to mean God's method
40:12   of destroying sin. If the saying is true, "While there's
        life there's hope," its opposite is also true, While there's
        sin there's doom. Another's suffering cannot lessen our
40:15   own liability. Did the martyrdom of Savonarola make
        the crimes of his implacable enemies less criminal?

                          Suffering inevitable

        Was it just for Jesus to suffer? No; but it was
40:18   inevitable, for not otherwise could he show us the way
        and the power of Truth. If a career so great
        and good as that of Jesus could not avert a
40:21   felon's fate, lesser apostles of Truth may endure human
        brutality without murmuring, rejoicing to enter into
        fellowship with him through the triumphal arch of
40:24   Truth and Love.

                           Service and worship

        Our heavenly Father, divine Love, demands that all
        men should follow the example of our Master and his
40:27   apostles and not merely worship his personal-
        ity. It is sad that the phrase /divine service/
        has come so generally to mean public worship instead of
40:30   daily deeds.

                             Within the veil

        The nature of Christianity is peaceful and blessed,
        but in order to enter into the kingdom, the anchor of
41:1    hope must be cast beyond the veil of matter into the
        Shekinah into which Jesus has passed before us; and
41:3    this advance beyond matter must come
        through the joys and triumphs of the right-
        eous as well as through their sorrows and afflictions.
41:6    Like our Master, we must depart from material sense
        into the spiritual sense of being.

                         The thorns and flowers

        The God-inspired walk calmly on though it be with
41:9    bleeding footprints, and in the hereafter they will reap
        what they now sow. The pampered hypo-
        crite may have a flowery pathway here, but
41:12   he cannot forever break the Golden Rule and escape the
        penalty due.

                           Healing early lost

        The proofs of Truth, Life, and Love, which Jesus gave
41:15   by casting out error and healing the sick, completed his
        earthly mission; but in the Christian Church
        this demonstration of healing was early lost,
41:18   about three centuries after the crucifixion. No ancient
        school of philosophy, /materia medica/, or scholastic theol-
        ogy ever taught or demonstrated the divine healing of
41:21   absolute Science.

                            Immortal achieval

        Jesus foresaw the reception Christian Science would have
        before it was understood, but this foreknowledge hindered
41:24   him not. He fulfilled his God-mission, and
        then sat down at the right hand of the Father.
        Persecuted from city to city, his apostles still went about
41:27   doing good deeds, for which they were maligned and
        stoned. The truth taught by Jesus, the elders scoffed at.
        Why? Because it demanded more than they were willing
41:30   to practise. It was enough for them to believe in a national
        Deity; but that belief, from their time to ours, has never
        made a disciple who could cast out evils and heal the sick.
42:1    Jesus' life proved, divinely and scientifically, that God
        is Love, whereas priest and rabbi affirmed God to be a
42:3    mighty potentate, who loves and hates. The Jewish the-
        ology gave no hint of the unchanging love of God.

                            A belief in death

        The universal belief in death is of no advantage. It
42:6    cannot make Life or Truth apparent. Death
        will be found at length to be a mortal dream,
        which comes in darkness and disappears with the light.

                             Cruel desertion

42:9    The "man of sorrows" was in no peril from salary or
        popularity. Though entitled to the homage of the world
        and endorsed pre-eminently by the approval
42:12   of God, his brief triumphal entry into Jerusa-
        lem was followed by the desertion of all save a few friends,
        who sadly followed him to the foot of the cross.

                              Death outdone

42:15   The resurrection of the great demonstrator of God's
        power was the proof of his final triumph over body
        and matter, and gave full evidence of divine
42:18   Science, - evidence so important to mortals.
        The belief that man has existence or mind separate from
        God is a dying error. This error Jesus met with divine
42:21   Science and proved its nothingness. Because of the won-
        drous glory which God bestowed on His anointed, temp-
        tation, sin, sickness, and death had no terror for Jesus.
42:24   Let men think they had killed the body! Afterwards he
        would show it to them unchanged. This demonstrates
        that in Christian Science the true man is governed by
42:27   God - by good, not evil - and is therefore not a mortal
        but an immortal. Jesus had taught his disciples the
        Science of this proof. He was here to enable them to
42:30   test his still uncomprehended saying, "He that believ-
        eth on me, the works that I do shall he do also." They
        must understand more fully his Life-principle by casting
43:1    out error, healing the sick, and raising the dead, even as
        they did understand it after his bodily departure.

                           Pentecost repeated

43:3    The magnitude of Jesus' work, his material disappear-
        ance before their eyes and his reappearance, all enabled
        the disciples to understand what Jesus had
43:6    said. Heretofore they had only believed;
        now they understood. The advent of this understanding
        is what is meant by the descent of the Holy Ghost, - that
43:9    influx of divine Science which so illuminated the Pentecos-
        tal Day and is now repeating its ancient history.

                           Convincing evidence

        Jesus' last proof was the highest, the most convincing,
43:12   the most profitable to his students. The malignity of
        brutal persecutors, the treason and suicide of
        his betrayer, were overruled by divine Love to
43:15   the glorification of the man and of the true idea of God,
        which Jesus' persecutors had mocked and tried to slay.
        The final demonstration of the truth which Jesus taught,
43:18   and for which he was crucified, opened a new era for the
        world. Those who slew him to stay his influence perpetu-
        ated and extended it.

                             Divine victory

43:21   Jesus rose higher in demonstration because of the cup
        of bitterness he drank. Human law had condemned
        him, but he was demonstrating divine Science.
43:24   Out of reach of the barbarity of his enemies,
        he was acting under spiritual law in defiance of mat-
        ter and mortality, and that spiritual law sustained him.
43:27   The divine must overcome the human at every point.
        The Science Jesus taught and lived must triumph over
        all material beliefs about life, substance, and intelli-
43:30   gence, and the multitudinous errors growing from such
        beliefs.

        Love must triumph over hate. Truth and Life must
44:1    seal the victory over error and death, before the thorns
        can be laid aside for a crown, the benediction follow,
44:3    "Well done, good and faithful servant," and the suprem-
        acy of Spirit be demonstrated.

                            Jesus in the tomb

        The lonely precincts of the tomb gave Jesus a refuge
44:6    from his foes, a place in which to solve the great
        problem of being. His three days' work in
        the sepulchre set the seal of eternity on time.
44:9    He proved Life to be deathless and Love to be the mas-
        ter of hate. He met and mastered on the basis of Chris-
        tian Science, the power of Mind over matter, all the claims
44:12   of medicine, surgery, and hygiene.

        He took no drugs to allay inflammation. He did not
        depend upon food or pure air to resuscitate wasted
44:15   energies. He did not require the skill of a surgeon to
        heal the torn palms and bind up the wounded side and
        lacerated feet, that he might use those hands to remove
44:18   the napkin and winding-sheet, and that he might employ
        his feet as before.

                          The deific naturalism

        Could it be called supernatural for the God of nature
44:21   to sustain Jesus in his proof of man's truly derived power?
        It was a method of surgery beyond material
        art, but it was not a supernatural act. On
44:24   the contrary, it was a divinely natural act, whereby divinity
        brought to humanity the understanding of the Christ-
        healing and revealed a method infinitely above that of
44:27   human invention.

                           Obstacles overcome

        His disciples believed Jesus to be dead while he was
        hidden in the sepulchre, whereas he was alive, demon-
44:30   strating within the narrow tomb the power
        of Spirit to overrule mortal, material sense.
        There were rock-ribbed walls in the way, and a great
45:1    stone must be rolled from the cave's mouth; but Jesus
        vanquished every material obstacle, overcame every law
45:3    of matter, and stepped forth from his gloomy resting-place,
        crowned with the glory of a sublime success, an everlasting
        victory.

                         Victory over the grave

45:6    Our Master fully and finally demonstrated divine Sci-
        ence in his victory over death and the grave. Jesus'
        deed was for the enlightenment of men and
45:9    for the salvation of the whole world from sin,
        sickness, and death. Paul writes: "For if, when we were
        enemies, we were reconciled to God by the [seeming] death
45:12   of His Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved
        by his life." Three days after his bodily burial he talked
        with his disciples. The persecutors had failed to hide im-
45:15   mortal Truth and Love in a sepulchre.

                          The stone rolled away

        Glory be to God, and peace to the struggling hearts!
        Christ hath rolled away the stone from the door of hu-
45:18   man hope and faith, and through the reve-
        lation and demonstration of life in God, hath
        elevated them to possible at-one-ment with the spiritual
45:21   idea of man and his divine Principle, Love.

                         After the resurrection

        They who earliest saw Jesus after the resurrection
        and beheld the final proof of all that he had taught,
45:24   misconstrued that event. Even his disciples
        at first called him a spirit, ghost, or spectre,
        for they believed his body to be dead. His reply was:
45:27   "Spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have."
        The reappearing of Jesus was not the return of a spirit.
        He presented the same body that he had before his cru-
45:30   cifixion, and so glorified the supremacy of Mind over
        matter.

        Jesus' students, not sufficiently advanced fully to un-
46:1    derstand their Master's triumph, did not perform many
        wonderful works, until they saw him after his crucifixion
46:3    and learned that he had not died. This convinced them
        of the truthfulness of all that he had taught.

                        Spiritual interpretation

        In the walk to Emmaus, Jesus was known to his friends
46:6    by the words, which made their hearts burn within them,
        and by the breaking of bread. The divine
        Spirit, which identified Jesus thus centuries
46:9    ago, has spoken through the inspired Word and will speak
        through it in every age and clime. It is revealed to the
        receptive heart, and is again seen casting out evil and
46:12   healing the sick.

                         Corporeality and Spirit

        The Master said plainly that physique was not Spirit,
        and after his resurrection he proved to the physical senses
46:15   that his body was not changed until he himself
        ascended, - or, in other words, rose even
        higher in the understanding of Spirit, God. To convince
46:18   Thomas of this, Jesus caused him to examine the nail-
        prints and the spear-wound.

                           Spiritual ascension

        Jesus' unchanged physical condition after what seemed
46:21   to be death was followed by his exaltation above all ma-
        terial conditions; and this exaltation explained
        his ascension, and revealed unmistakably a
46:24   probationary and progressive state beyond the grave.
        Jesus was "the way;" that is, he marked the way for
        all men. In his final demonstration, called the ascen-
46:27   sion, which closed the earthly record of Jesus, he rose
        above the physical knowledge of his disciples, and the
        material senses saw him no more.

                            Pentecostal power

46:30   His students then received the Holy Ghost. By this is
        meant, that by all they had witnessed and suffered, they
        were roused to an enlarged understanding of divine Sci-
47:1    ence, even to the spiritual interpretation and discernment
        of Jesus' teachings and demonstrations, which gave them
47:3    a faint conception of the Life which is God.
        They no longer measured man by material
        sense. After gaining the true idea of their glorified Master,
47:6    they became better healers, leaning no longer on matter,
        but on the divine Principle of their work. The influx of
        light was sudden. It was sometimes an overwhelming
47:9    power as on the Day of Pentecost.

                        The traitor's conspiracy

        Judas conspired against Jesus. The world's ingratitude
        and hatred towards that just man effected his betrayal.
47:12   The traitor's price was thirty pieces of silver
        and the smiles of the Pharisees. He chose his
        time, when the people were in doubt concerning Jesus'
47:15   teachings.

        A period was approaching which would reveal the in-
        finite distance between Judas and his Master. Judas
47:18   Iscariot knew this. He knew that the great goodness of
        that Master placed a gulf between Jesus and his betrayer,
        and this spiritual distance inflamed Judas' envy. The
47:21   greed for gold strengthened his ingratitude, and for a time
        quieted his remorse. He knew that the world generally
        loves a lie better than Truth; and so he plotted the be-
47:24   trayal of Jesus in order to raise himself in popular esti-
        mation. His dark plot fell to the ground, and the
        traitor fell with it.
47:27   The disciples' desertion of their Master in his last
        earthly struggle was punished; each one came to a vio-
        lent death except St. John, of whose death we have no
47:30   record.

                          Gethsemane glorified

        During his night of gloom and glory in the garden,
        Jesus realized the utter error of a belief in any possi-
48:1    ble material intelligence. The pangs of neglect and the
        staves of bigoted ignorance smote him sorely. His stu-
48:3    dents slept. He said unto them: "Could Ye
        not watch with me one hour?" Could they
        not watch with him who, waiting and struggling in voice-
48:6    less agony, held uncomplaining guard over a world?
        There was no response to that human yearning, and so
        Jesus turned forever away from earth to heaven, from
48:9    sense to Soul.

        Remembering the sweat of agony which fell in holy
        benediction on the grass of Gethsemane, shall the hum-
48:12   blest or mightiest disciple murmur when he drinks from the
        same cup, and think, or even wish, to escape the exalt-
        ing ordeal of sin's revenge on its destroyer? Truth and
48:15   Love bestow few palms until the consummation of a
        life-work.

                            Defensive weapons

        Judas had the world's weapons. Jesus had not one
48:18   of them, and chose not the world's means of defence.
        "He opened not his mouth." The great dem-
        onstrator of Truth and Love was silent before
48:21   envy and hate. Peter would have smitten the enemies of
        his Master, but Jesus forbade him, thus rebuking re-
        sentment or animal courage. He said: "Put up thy
48:24   sword."

                            Pilate's question

        Pale in the presence of his own momentous question,
        "What is Truth," Pilate was drawn into acquiescence
48:27   with the demands of Jesus' enemies. Pilate
        was ignorant of the consequences of his awful
        decision against human rights and divine Love, knowing
48:30   not that he was hastening the final demonstration of what
        life is and of what the true knowledge of God can do for
        man.

49:1    The women at the cross could have answered Pilate's
        question. They knew what had inspired their devotion,
49:3    winged their faith, opened the eyes of their understand-
        ing, healed the sick, cast out evil, and caused the disciples
        to say to their Master: "Even the devils are subject
49:6    unto us through thy name."

                          Students' ingratitude

        Where were the seventy whom Jesus sent forth? Were
        all conspirators save eleven? Had they forgotten the
49:9    great exponent of God? Had they so soon lost
        sight of his mighty works, his toils, privations,
        sacrifices, his divine patience, sublime courage, and unre-
49:12   quited affection? O, why did they not gratify his last
        human yearning with one sign of fidelity?

                            Heaven's sentinel

        The meek demonstrator of good, the highest instruc-
49:15   tor and friend of man, met his earthly fate alone with
        God. No human eye was there to pity, no
        arm to save. Forsaken by all whom he had
49:18   blessed, this faithful sentinel of God at the highest
        post of power, charged with the grandest trust of
        heaven, was ready to be transformed by the renewing
49:21   of the infinite Spirit. He was to prove that the Christ
        is not subject to material conditions, but is above the
        reach of human wrath, and is able, through Truth,
49:24   Life, and Love, to triumph over sin, sickness, death, and
        the grave.

                             Cruel contumely

        The priests and rabbis, before whom he had meekly
49:27   walked, and those to whom he had given the highest
        proofs of divine power, mocked him on the
        cross, saying derisively, "He saved others;
49:30   himself he cannot save." These scoffers, who turned
        "aside the right of a man before the face of the Most
        High," esteemed Jesus as "stricken, smitten of God."
50:1    "He is brought as a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep
        before her shearers is dumb, so he openeth not his mouth."
50:3    "Who shall declare his generation?" Who shall decide
        what truth and love are?

                            A cry of despair

        The last supreme moment of mockery, desertion, tor-
50:6    ture, added to an overwhelming sense of the magnitude
        of his work, wrung from Jesus' lips the awful
        cry, "My God, why hast Thou forsaken me?"
50:9    This despairing appeal, if made to a human parent, would
        impugn the justice and love of a father who could with-
        hold a clear token of his presence to sustain and bless so
50:12   faithful a son. The appeal of Jesus was made both to
        his divine Principle, the God who is Love, and to himself,
        Love's pure idea. Had Life, Truth, and Love forsaken
50:15   him in his highest demonstration? This was a startling
        question. No! They must abide in him and he in them,
        or that hour would be shorn of its mighty blessing for the
50:18   human race.

                      Divine Science misunderstood

        If his full recognition of eternal Life had for a mo-
        ment given way before the evidence of the bodily senses,
50:21   what would his accusers have said? Even
        what they did say, - that Jesus' teachings
        were false, and that all evidence of their cor-
50:24   rectness was destroyed by his death. But this saying
        could not make it so.

                            The real pillory

        The burden of that hour was terrible beyond human
50:27   conception. The distrust of mortal minds, disbelieving
        the purpose of his mission, was a million
        times sharper than the thorns which pierced
50:30   his flesh. The real cross, which Jesus bore up the hill
        of grief, was the world's hatred of Truth and Love. Not
        the spear nor the material cross wrung from his faithful
51:1    lips the plaintive cry, "/Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?/" It
        was the possible loss of something more important than
51:3    human life which moved him, - the possible misappre-
        hension of the sublimest influence of his career. This
        dread added the drop of gall to his cup.

                        Life-power indestructible

51:6    Jesus could have withdrawn himself from his enemies.
        He had power to lay down a human sense of life for his
        spiritual identity in the likeness of the divine;
51:9    but he allowed men to attempt the destruc-
        tion of the mortal body in order that he might furnish
        the proof of immortal life. Nothing could kill this Life
51:12   of man. Jesus could give his temporal life into his
        enemies' hands; but when his earth-mission was accom-
        plished, his spiritual life, indestructible and eternal,
51:15   was found forever the same. He knew that matter had
        no life and that real Life is God; therefore he could no
        more be separated from his spiritual Life than God could
51:18   be extinguished.

                        Example for our salvation

        His consummate example was for the salvation of us
        all, but only through doing the works which he did and
51:21   taught others to do. His purpose in healing
        was not alone to restore health, but to demon-
        strate his divine Principle. He was inspired by God, by
51:24   Truth and Love, in all that he said and did. The motives
        of his persecutors were pride, envy, cruelty, and vengeance,
        inflicted on the physical Jesus, but aimed at the divine Prin-
51:27   ciple, Love, which rebuked their sensuality.

        Jesus was unselfish. His spirituality separated him
        from sensuousness, and caused the selfish materialist
51:30   to hate him; but it was this spirituality which enabled
        Jesus to heal the sick, cast out evil, and raise the
        dead.

                            Master's business

52:1    From early boyhood he was about his "Father's busi-
        ness." His pursuits lay far apart from theirs. His mas-
52:3    ter was Spirit; their master was matter. He
        served God; they served mammon. His affec-
        tions were pure; theirs were carnal. His senses drank in
52:6    the spiritual evidence of health, holiness, and life; their
        senses testified oppositely, and absorbed the material evi-
        dence of sin, sickness, and death.

                             Purity's rebuke

52:9    Their imperfections and impurity felt the ever-present
        rebuke of his perfection and purity. Hence the world's
        hatred of the just and perfect Jesus, and the
52:12   prophet's foresight of the reception error would
        give him. "Despised and rejected of men," was Isaiah's
        graphic word concerning the coming Prince of Peace.
52:15   Herod and Pilate laid aside old feuds in order to unite
        in putting to shame and death the best man that ever
        trod the globe. To-day, as of old, error and evil again
52:18   make common cause against the exponents of truth.

                          Saviour's prediction

        The "man of sorrows" best understood the nothing-
        ness of material life and intelligence and the mighty ac-
52:21   tuality of all-inclusive God, good. These were
        the two cardinal points of Mind-healing, or
        Christian Science, which armed him with Love. The high-
52:24   est earthly representative of God, speaking of human
        ability to reflect divine power, prophetically said to his
        disciples, speaking not for their day only but for all time:
52:27   "He that believeth on me, the works that I do shall he do
        also;" and "These signs shall follow them that believe."

                         Defamatory accusations

        The accusations of the Pharisees were as self-contra-
52:30   dictory as their religion. The bigot, the deb-
        auchee, the hypocrite, called Jesus a glutton
        and a wine-bibber. They said: "He casteth out devils
53:1    through Beelzebub," and is the "friend of publicans and
        sinners." The latter accusation was true, but not in their
