"divine my fortune by the dream."  Thereupon Yang Shan fetched a
basin of water and a towel and gave them to the master, who washed
his face thereby.  By-and-by Hiang Yen (Kyo-gen) came in, to whom Wei
Shan said: "We displayed supernatural powers a moment ago.  It was
not such supernatural powers as are shown by Hinayanists."  "I know
it, Sir," replied the other, "though I was down below."  "Say, then,
what it was," demanded the master.  Then Hiang Yen made tea and gave
a cup to Wei Shan, who praised the two disciples, saying: "You
surpass Çariputra[FN#256] and Maudgalyayana[FN#257] in your wisdom and
supernatural powers."[FN#258]


[FN#256]  One of the prominent disciples of Shakya Muni, who became
famous for his wisdom.

[FN#257]  One of the eminent disciples of Shakya Muni, noted for his
supernatural powers.

[FN#258]  Zen-rin-rui-sku.


Again, ancient Zenists did not claim that there was any mysterious
element in their spiritual attainment, as Do-gen says[FN#259]
unequivocally respecting his Enlightenment: "I recognized only that
my eyes are placed crosswise above the nose that stands lengthwise,
and that I was not deceived by others.  I came home from China with
nothing in my hand.  There is nothing mysterious in Buddhism.  Time
passes as it is natural, the sun rising in the east, and the moon
setting into the west."

[FN#259]   Ei-hei-ko-roku.



10. True Dhyana.

To sit in Meditation is not the only method of practising Zazen.  "We
practise Dhyana in sitting, in standing, and in walking," says one of
the Japanese Zenists.  Lin Tsi (Rin-Zai) also says: "To concentrate
one's mind, or to dislike noisy places, and seek only for stillness,
is the characteristic of heterodox Dhyana."  It is easy to keep
self-possession in a place of tranquillity, yet it is by no means
easy to keep mind undisturbed amid the bivouac of actual life.  It is
true Dhyana that makes our mind sunny while the storms of strife rage
around us.  It is true Dhyana that secures the harmony of heart,
while the surges of struggle toss us violently.  It is true Dhyana
that makes us bloom and smile, while the winter of life covets us
with frost and snow.

"Idle thoughts come and go over unenlightened minds six hundred and
fifty times in a snap of one's fingers," writes an Indian
teacher,[FN#260] "and thirteen hundred million times every
twenty-four hours."  This might be an exaggeration, yet we cannot but
acknowledge that one idle thought after another ceaselessly bubbles
up in the stream of consciousness.  "Dhyana is the letting go,"
continues the writer--"that is to say, the letting go of the thirteen
hundred million of idle thoughts."  The very root of these thirteen
hundred million idle thoughts is an illusion about one's self.  He is
indeed the poorest creature, even if he be in heaven, who thinks
himself poor.  On the contrary, he is an angel who thinks himself
hopeful and happy, even though he be in hell.  "Pray deliver me,"
said a sinner to Sang Tsung (So-san).[FN#261]  "Who ties you up?" was
the reply.  You tie yourself up day and night with the fine thread of
idle thoughts, and build a cocoon of environment from which you have
no way of escape.  'There is no rope, yet you imagine yourself
bound.'  Who could put fetters on your mind but your mind itself?
Who could chain your will but your own will?  Who could blind your
spiritual eyes, unless you yourself shut them up?  Who could prevent
you from enjoying moral food, unless you yourself refuse to eat?
"There are many," said Sueh Fung (Sep-po) on one occasion, "who
starve in spite of their sitting in a large basket full of victuals.
There are many who thirst in spite of seating themselves on the shore
of a sea."  "Yes, Sir," replied Huen Sha (Gen-sha), "there are many
who starve in spite of putting their heads into the basket full of
victuals.  There are many who thirst in spite of putting their heads
into the waters of the sea."[FN#262]  Who could cheer him up who
abandons himself to self-created misery?  Who could save him who
denies his own salvation?


[FN#260]  The introduction to Anapana-sutra by Khin San Hwui, who
came to China A.D. 241.

[FN#261]  The Third Patriarch.

[FN#262]  Hwui Yuen (E-gen).



11. Let Go of your Idle Thoughts.[FN#263]


[FN#263]  A famous Zenist, Mu-go-koku-shi, is said to have replied to
every questioner, saying: "Let go of your idle thoughts."


A Brahmin, having troubled himself a long while with reference to the
problem of life and of the world, went out to call on Shakya Muni
that he might be instructed by the Master.  He got some beautiful
flowers to offer them as a present to the Muni, and proceeded to the
place where He was addressing his disciples and believers.  No sooner
had he come in sight of the Master than he read in his mien the
struggles going on within him.  "Let go of that," said the Muni to
the Brahmin, who was going to offer the flowers in both his hands.
He dropped on the ground the flowers in his right hand, but still
holding those in his left.  "Let go of that," demanded the Master,
and the Brahmin dropped the flowers in his left hand rather
reluctantly.  "Let go of that, I say," the Muni commanded again; but
the Brahmin, having nothing to let go of, asked: "What shall I let go
of, Reverend Sir?  I have nothing in my hands, you know."  "Let go of
that, you have neither in your right nor in your left band, but in
the middle."  Upon these words of the Muni a light came into the
sufferer's mind, and he went home satisfied and in joy.[FN#264]  "Not
to attach to all things is Dhyana," writes an ancient Zenist, "and if
you understand this, going out, staying in, sitting, and lying are in
Dhyana."  Therefore allow not your mind to be a receptacle for the
dust of society, or the ashes of life, or rags and waste paper of the
world.  You bear too much burden upon your shoulders with which you
have nothing to do.


[FN#264]  'Sutra on the Brahmacarin Black-family,' translated into
Chinese by K' Khien, of the Wu dynasty (A.D. 222-280).


Learn the lesson of forgetfulness, and forget all that troubles you,
deprives you of sound sleep, and writes wrinkles on your forehead.
Wang Yang Ming, at the age of seventeen or so, is said to have
forgotten the day 'on which he was to be married to a handsome young
lady, daughter of a man of high position.  It was the afternoon of
the very day on which their nuptials had to be held that he went out
to take a walk.  Without any definite purpose he went into a temple
in the neighbourhood, and there he found a recluse apparently very
old with white hair, but young in countenance like a child.  The man
was sitting absorbed in Meditation.  There was something extremely
calm and serene in that old man's look and bearing that attracted the
young scholar's attention.  Questioning him as to his name, age, and
birthplace, Wang found that the venerable man had enjoyed a life so
extraordinarily long that he forgot his name and age, but that he had
youthful energy so abundantly that be could talk with a voice
sounding as a large bell.  Being asked by Wang the secret of
longevity, the man replied: "There is no secret in it; I merely kept
my mind calm and peaceful."  Further, he explained the method of
Meditation according to Taoism and Buddhism.  Thereupon Wang sat face
to face with the old man and began to practise Meditation, utterly
forgetful of his bride and nuptial ceremony.  The sun began to cast
his slanting rays on the wall of the temple, and they sat motionless;
twilight came over them, and night wrapped them with her sable
shroud, and they sat as still as two marble statues; midnight, dawn,
at last the morning sun rose to find them still in their reverie.
The father of the bride, who had started a search during the night,
found to his surprise the bridegroom absorbed in Meditation on the
following day.[FN#265]


[FN#265]  O-yo-mei-shutsu-shin-sei-ran-roku.


It was at the age of forty-seven that Wang gained a great victory
over the rebel army, and wrote to a friend saying: "It is so easy to
gain a victory over the rebels fortifying themselves among the
mountains, yet it is not so with those rebels living in our
mind."[FN#266]  Tsai Kiun Mu (Sai-kun-bo) is said to have had an
exceedingly long and beautiful beard, and when asked by the Emperor,
who received him in audience, whether he should sleep with his beard
on the comforters or beneath them, be could not answer, since he had
never known how he did.  Being distracted by this question, he went
home and tried to find out how he had been used to manage his beard
in bed.  First he put his beard on the comforters and vainly tried to
sleep; then he put it beneath the comforters and thought it all
right.  Nevertheless, he was all the more disturbed by it.  So then,
putting on the comforters, now putting it beneath them, he tried to
sleep all night long, but in vain.  You must therefore forget your
mental beard that annoys you all the time.


[FN#266]  Ibid.


Men of longevity never carried troubles to their beds.  It is a
well-known fact that Zui-o (Shi-ga)[FN#267] enjoyed robust health at
the age of over one hundred years.  One day, being asked whether
there is any secret of longevity, he replied affirmatively, and said
to the questioner: "Keep your mind and body pure for two weeks,
abstaining from any sort of impurity, then I shall tell you of the
secret."  The man did as was prescribed, and came again to be
instructed in the secret.  Zui-o said: "Now I might tell you, but be
cautious to keep yourself pure another week so as to qualify yourself
to learn the secret."  When that week was over the old man said: "Now
I might tell you, but will you be so careful as to keep yourself pure
three days more in order to qualify yourself to receive the secret?"
The man did as he was ordered, and requested the instruction.
Thereupon Zui-o took the man to his private room and softly
whispered, with his mouth close to the ear of the man: "Keep the
secret I tell you now, even at the cost of your life.  It is
this-don't be passionate.  That is all."[FN#268]


[FN#267]  This famous old man died in A.D. 1730.

[FN#268]  Se-ji-hyaku-dan.



12. 'The Five Ranks of Merit.'

Thus far we have stated how to train our body and mind according to
the general rules and customs established by Zenists.  And here we
shall describe the different stages of mental uplifting through which
the student of Zen has to go.  They are technically called 'The Five
Ranks of Merit.'[FN#269]  The first stage is called the Rank of
Turning,[FN#270] in which the student 'turns' his mind from the
external objects of sense towards the inner Enlightened
Consciousness.  He gives up all mean desires and aspires to spiritual
elevation.  He becomes aware that he is not doomed to be the slave of
material things, and strives to conquer over them.  Enlightened
Consciousness is likened to the King, and it is called the Mind-King,
while the student who now turns towards the King is likened to common
people.  Therefore in this first stage the student is in the rank of
common people.


[FN#269]  Ko-kun-go-i. For further details, see So-to-ni-shi-roku.

[FN#268]  Ko in Japanese.



The second stage is called the Rank of Service,[FN#271] in which the
student distinguishes himself by his loyalty to the Mind-King, and
becomes a courtier to 'serve' him.  He is in constant 'service' to
the King, attending him with obedience and love, and always fearing
to offend him.  Thus the student in this stage is ever careful not to
neglect rules and precepts laid down by the sages, and endeavours to
uplift himself in spirituality by his fidelity.
The third stage is called the Rank of Merit,[FN#272] in which the
student distinguishes himself by his 'meritorious' acts of conquering
over the rebel army of passion which rises against the Mind-King.
Now, his rank is not the rank of a courtier, but the rank of a
general.  In other words, his duty is not only to keep rules and
instructions of the sages, but to subjugate his own passion and
establish moral order in the mental kingdom.


[FN#271]  Bu in Japanese.

[FN#272]  Ko in Japanese.


The fourth stage is called the Rank of Co-operative Merit,[FN#273] in
which the student 'co-operates' with other persons in order to
complete his merit. Now, he is not compared with a general who
conquers his foe, but with the prime-minister who co-operates with
other officials to the benefit of the people.  Thus the student in
this stage is not satisfied with his own conquest of passion, but
seeks after spiritual uplifting by means of extending his kindness
and sympathy to his fellow-men.


[FN#273]  Gu-ko in Japanese.


The fifth stage is called the Rank of Merit-over-Merit,[FN#274] which
means the rank of meritless-merit.  This is the rank of the King
himself.  The King does nothing meritorious, because all the
governmental works are done by his ministers and subjects.  All that
he has to do is to keep his inborn dignity and sit high on his
throne.  Therefore his conduct is meritless, but all the meritorious
acts of his subjects are done through his authority.  Doing nothing,
he does everything.  Without any merit, he gets all merits.  Thus the
student in this stage no more strives to keep precepts, but his
doings are naturally in accord with them.  No more he aspires for
spiritual elevation, but his, heart is naturally pure from material
desires.  No more he makes an effort to vanquish his passion, but no
passion disturbs him.  No more he feels it his duty to do good to
others, but he is naturally good and merciful.  No more he sits in
Dhyana, but he naturally lives in Dhyana at all times.  It is in this
fifth stage that the student is enabled to identify his Self with the
Mind-King or Enlightened Consciousness, and to abide in perfect bliss.


[FN#274]  Ko-ko in Japanese.


13. 'The Ten Pictures of the Cowherd.'[FN#275]


[FN#275]  The pictures were drawn by Kwoh Ngan (Kaku-an), a Chinese
Zenist. For the details, see Zen-gaku-ho-ten.


Besides these Five Ranks of Merit, Zenists make use of the Ten
Pictures of the Cowherd, in order to show the different stages of
mental training through which the student of Zen has to go.  Some
poems were written by Chinese and Japanese teachers on each of these
pictures by way of explanation, but they are too ambiguous to be
translated into English, and we rest content with the translation of
a single Japanese poem on each of the ten pictures, which are as
follows:

The first picture, called 'the Searching of the Cow,' represents the
cowherd wandering in the wilderness with a vague hope of finding his
lost cow that is running wild out of his sight.  The reader will
notice that the cow is likened to the mind of the student and the
cowherd to the student himself.

"I do not see my cow,
But trees and grass,
And hear the empty cries
Of cicadas."

The second picture, called 'the Finding of the Cow's Tracks,'
represents the cowherd tracing the cow with the sure hope of
restoring her, having found her tracks on the ground.

"The grove is deep, and so
Is my desire.
How glad I am, O lo!
I see her tracks."

The third picture, called 'the Finding out of the Cow,' represents
the cowherd slowly approaching the cow from a distance.

"Her loud and wild mooing
Has led me here;
I see her form afar,
Like a dark shadow."

The fourth 'picture, called 'the Catching of the Cow,' represents the
cowherd catching hold of the cow, who struggles to break loose from
him.

"Alas! it's hard to keep
The cow I caught.
She tries to run and leap
And snap the cord."

The fifth picture, called 'the Taming of the Cow,' represents the
cowherd pacifying the cow, giving her grass and water.

"I'm glad the cow so wild
Is tamed and mild.
She follows me, as if
She were my shadow."

The sixth picture, called 'the Going Home Riding on the Cow,'
represents the cowherd playing on a flute, riding on the cow.
