
[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.05/20/01*END*
[Portions of this header are copyright (C) 2001 by Michael S. Hart
and may be reprinted only when these Etexts are free of all fees.]
[Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be used in any sales
of Project Gutenberg Etexts or other materials be they hardware or
software or any other related product without express permission.]





This etext was produced by David Price, email ccx074@coventry.ac.uk,
from the "Works of the Puritan Divines (Bunyan)", 1845 Thomas Nelson
edition.





AN EXHORTATION TO PEACE AND UNITY.

Attributed (incorrectly) to John Bunyan




[We deem it proper to state, that, though the following Treatise of
Christian Union appears in nearly all the collected editions of
BUNYAN'S WORKS, yet its genuineness has been called in question by
the Rev Mr Philip in his admirable work, "The Life and Times of
Bunyan."  Without here entering into this question, we have
separately appended it to the works of Bunyan in this volume, and
trust that it will not prove unacceptable to our readers, especially
considering the efforts that are now being made to promote the
living union of all true Christians who hold the one Lord, the one
faith, and the one baptism.]

Endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace.--
Ephesians iv. 3.

Beloved, religion is the great bond of human society; and it were
well if itself were kept within the bond of unity; and that it may
so be, let us, according to the text, use our utmost endeavours "to
keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace."

These words contain a counsel and a caution:  the counsel is, That
we endeavour the unity of the Spirit; the caution is, That we do it
in the bond of peace; as if I should say, I would have you live in
unity, but yet I would have you to be careful that you do not
purchase unity with the breach of charity.

Let us therefore be cautious that we do not so press after unity in
practice and opinion as to break the bond of peace and affection.

In the handling of these words, I shall observe this method.

I.  I shall open the sense of the text.

II.  I shall shew wherein this unity and peace consist.

III.  I shall shew you the fruits and benefits of it, together with
nine inconveniences and mischiefs that attend those churches where
unity and peace is wanting.

IV.  And, lastly, I shall give you twelve directions and motives for
the obtaining of it.

1.  As touching the sense of the text, when ye are counselled to
keep the unity of the Spirit, we are not to understand the Spirit of
God, as personally so considered; because the Spirit of God, in that
sense, is not capable of being divided, and so there would be no
need for us to endeavour to keep the unity of it.

By the unity of the spirit then, we are to understand that unity of
mind which the Spirit of God calls for, and requires Christians to
endeavour after; hence it is that we are exhorted, by one spirit,
with one mind, to strive together for the faith of the gospel; Phil.
i. 27.

But farther, the apostle in these words alludes to the state and
composition of a natural body, and doth thereby inform us, that the
mystical body of Christ holds an analogy with the natural body of
man:  as, 1.  In the natural body there must be a spirit to animate
it; for the body without the spirit is dead; James ii. 26.  So it is
in the mystical body of Christ; the apostle no sooner tells of that
one body, but he minds us of that one Spirit; Eph. iv. 4.

2.  The body hath joints and hands to unite all the parts; so hath
the mystical body of Christ; Col. ii. 19.  This is that bond of
peace mentioned in the text, as also in the 16th verse of the same
chapter, where the whole body is said to be fitly joined together,
and compacted, by that which every joint supplieth.

3.  The natural body receives counsel and nourishment from the head;
