dear brethren! it is because the Christian Church as a whole, and we as
individual members of it, so imperfectly realise the A B C of our
faith, our absolute dependence on the inbreathed life of Jesus Christ,
to fit us for any of our work, that so much of our work is ploughing
the sands, and so often we labour for vanity and spend our strength for
nought. What is the use of a mill full of spindles and looms until the
fire-born impulse comes rushing through the pipes? Then they begin to
move.

Let me remind you, too, that the words which our Lord here employs
about these great gifts, when accurately examined, do lead us to the
thought that we, even we, are not altogether passive in the reception
of that gift. For the expression, 'Receive ye the Holy Ghost' might,
with more completeness of signification, be rendered, 'take ye the Holy
Ghost.' True, the outstretched hand is nothing, unless the giving hand
is stretched out too. True, the open palm and the clutching fingers
remain empty, unless the open palm above drops the gift. But also true,
things in the spiritual realm that are given have to be asked for,
because asking opens the heart for their entrance. True, that gift was
given once for all, and continuously, but the appropriation and the
continual possession of it largely depend upon ourselves. There must be
desire before there can be possession. If a man does not take his
pitcher to the fountain the pitcher remains empty, though the fountain
never ceases to spring. There must be taking by patient waiting. The
old Friends had a lovely phrase when they spoke about 'waiting for the
springing of the life.' If we hold out a tremulous hand, and our cup is
not kept steady, the falling water will not enter it, and much will be
spilt upon the ground. Wait on the Lord, and the life will rise like a
tide in the heart. There must be a taking by the faithful use of what
we possess. 'To him that hath shall be given.' There must be a taking
by careful avoidance of what would hinder. In the winter weather the
water supply sometimes fails in a house. Why? Because there is a plug
of ice in the service-pipe. Some of us have a plug of ice, and so the
water has not come,

'_Take_ the Holy Spirit!'

Now, lastly, we have here

III. The Christian power over sin.

I am not going to enter upon controversy. The words which close our
Lord's great charge here have been much misunderstood by being
restricted. It is eminently necessary to remember here that they were
spoken to the whole community of Christian souls. The harm that has
been done by their restriction to the so-called priestly function of
absolution has been, not only the monstrous claims which have been
thereon founded, but quite as much the obscuration of the large effects
that follow from the Christian discharge by all believers of the office
of representing Jesus Christ.

We must interpret these words in harmony with the two preceding points,
the Christian mission and the Christian equipment. So interpreted, they
lead us to a very plain thought which I may put thus. This same Apostle
tells us in his letter that 'Jesus Christ was manifested to take away
sin.' His work in this world, which we are to continue, was 'to put
away sin by the sacrifice of Himself.' We continue that work when,--as
we have all, if Christians, the right to do--we lift up our voices with
triumphant confidence, and call upon our brethren to 'behold the Lamb
of God which taketh away the sin of the world!' The proclamation has a
twofold effect, according as it is received or rejected; to him who
receives it his sins melt away, and the preacher of forgiveness through
Christ has the right to say to his brother, 'Thy sins are forgiven
because thou believest on Him.' The rejecter or the neglecter binds his
sin upon himself by his rejection or neglect. The same message is, as
the Apostle puts it, 'a savour of life unto life, or of death unto
death.' These words are the best commentary on this part of my text.
The same heat, as the old Fathers used to say, 'softens wax and hardens
clay.' The message of the word will either couch a blind eye, and let
in the light, or draw another film of obscuration over the visual orb.

And so, Christian men and women have to feel that to them is entrusted
a solemn message, that they walk in the world charged with a mighty
power, that by the preaching of the Word, and by their own utterance of
the forgiving mercy of the Lord Jesus, they may 'remit' or 'retain' not
only the punishment of sin, but sin itself. How tender, how diligent,
how reverent, how--not bowed down, but--erect under the weight of our
obligations, we should be, if we realised that solemn thought!



 THOMAS AND JESUS

'And after eight days, again His disciples were within, and Thomas with
them. Then came Jesus.'--JOHN xx. 26.

There is nothing more remarkable about the narrative of the
resurrection, taken as a whole, than the completeness with which our
Lord's appearances met all varieties of temperament, condition, and
spiritual standing. Mary, the lover; Peter, the penitent; the two
disciples on the way to Emmaus, the thinkers; Thomas, the stiff
unbeliever--the presence of the Christ is enough for them all; it cures
those that need cure, and gladdens those that need gladdening. I am not
going to do anything so foolish as to try to tell over again, less
vividly, this well-known story. We all remember its outlines, I
suppose: the absence of Thomas from Christ's first meeting with the
assembled disciples on Easter evening; the dogged disbelief with which
he met their testimony; his arrogant assumption of the right to lay
down the conditions on which he should believe, and Christ's gracious
acceptance of the conditions; the discovery when they were offered that
they were not needful; the burst of glad conviction which lifted him to
the loftiest height reached while Christ was on earth, and then the
summing up of all in our Lord's words--'Blessed are they that have not
seen and yet have believed!'--the last Beatitude, that links us and all
the generations yet to come with the story, and is like a finger
pointing to it, as containing very special lessons for them all.

I simply seek to try to bring out the force and instructiveness of the
story. The first point is--

I. The isolation that misses the sight of the Christ.

'Thomas, one of the Twelve, was not with them when Jesus came.' No
reason is assigned. The absence may have been purely accidental, but
the specification of Thomas as 'one of the Twelve,' seems to suggest
that his absence was regarded by the Evangelist as a dereliction of
apostolic duty; and the cause of it may be found, I think, with
reasonable probability, if we take into account the two other facts
that the same Evangelist records concerning this Apostle. One is his
exclamation, in which a constitutional tendency to accept the blackest
possibilities as certainties, blends very strangely and beautifully
with an intense and brave devotion to his Master. 'Let us also go,'
said Thomas, when Christ announced His intention, but a few days before
the Passion, of returning to the grave of Lazarus, 'that we may die
with Him.' 'He is going to His death, that I am sure of, and I am going
to be beside Him even in His death.' A constitutional pessimist! The
only other notice that we have of him is that he broke in--with
apparent irreverence which was not real,--with a brusque contradiction
of Christ's saying that they knew the way, and they knew His goal.
'Lord! we know not whither Thou goest'--there spoke pained love
fronting the black prospect of eternal separation,--'and how can we
know the way?'--there spoke almost impatient despair.

So is not that the kind of man who on the Resurrection day would have
been saying to himself, even more decidedly and more bitterly than the
two questioning thinkers on the road to Emmaus had said it, 'We trusted
that this had been He, but it is all over now'? The keystone was struck
out of the arch, and this brick tumbled away of itself. The hub was
taken out of the wheel, and the spokes fell apart. The divisive
tendency was begun, as I have had occasion to remark in other sermons.
Thomas did the very worst thing that a melancholy man can do, went away
to brood in a corner by himself, and so to exaggerate all his
idiosyncrasies, to distort the proportion of truth, to hug his despair,
by separating himself from his fellows. Therefore he lost what they
got, the sight of the Lord. He 'was not with them when Jesus came.'
Would he not have been better in the upper room than gloomily turning
over in his mind the dissolution of the fair company and the shipwreck
of all his hopes?

May we not learn a lesson? I venture to apply these words, dear
friends, to our gatherings for worship. The worst thing that a man can
do when disbelief, or doubt, or coldness shrouds his sky, and blots out
the stars, is to go away alone and shut himself up with his own,
perhaps morbid, or, at all events, disturbing thoughts. The best thing
that he can do is to go amongst his fellows. If the sermon does not do
him any good, the prayers and the praises and the sense of brotherhood
will help him. If a fire is going out, draw the dying coals close
together, and they will make each other break into a flame. One great
reason for some of the less favourable features that modern
Christianity presents, is that men are beginning to think less than
they ought to do, and less than they used to do, of the obligation and
the blessing, whatever their spiritual condition, of gathering together
for the worship of God. But, further, there is a far wider thought than
that here, which I have already referred to, and which I do not need to
dwell upon, namely, that, although, of course, there are very plain
limits to be put to the principle, yet it is a principle, that solitude
is not the best medicine for any disturbed or saddened soul. It is true
that 'solitude is the mother-country of the strong,' and that unless we
are accustomed to live very much alone, we shall not live very much
with God. But on the other hand, if you cut yourself off from the
limiting, and therefore developing, society of your fellows, you will
rust, you will become what they call eccentric. Your idiosyncrasies
will swell into monstrosities, your peculiarities will not be subjected
to the gracious process of pruning which society with your fellows, and
especially with Christian hearts, will bring to them. And in every way
you will be more likely to miss the Christ than if you were kindly with
your kind, and went up to the house of God in company.

Take the next point that is here:

II. The stiff incredulity that prescribed terms.

When Thomas came back to his brethren, they met him with the witness
that they had seen the Lord, and he met them as they had met the
witnesses that brought the same message to them. They had thought the
women's words 'idle tales.' Thomas gives them back their own
incredulity. I need not remind you of what I have already had occasion
to say, how much this frank acknowledgment that none of these, who were
afterwards to be witnesses of the Resurrection to the world, accepted
testimony to the Resurrection as enough to convince them, enhances the
worth of their testimony, and how entirely it shatters the conception
that the belief in the Resurrection was a mist that rose from the
undrained swamps of their own heated imaginations.

But notice how Thomas exaggerated their position, and took up a far
more defiant tone than any of them had done. He is called 'doubting
Thomas.' He was no doubter. Flat, frank, dogged disbelief, and not
hesitation or doubt, was his attitude. The very form in which he puts
his requirement shows how he was hugging his unbelief, and how he had
no idea that what he asked would ever be granted. 'Unless I have
so-and-so I will not,' indicates an altogether spiritual attitude from
what 'If I have so-and-so, I will,' would have indicated. The one is
the language of willingness to be persuaded, the other is a token of a
determination to be obstinate. What right had he--what right has any
man--to say, 'So-and-so must be made plain to me, or I will not accept
a certain truth'? You have a right to ask for satisfactory evidence;
you have no right to make up your minds beforehand what that must
necessarily be. Thomas showed his hand not only in the form of his
expression, not only in his going beyond his province and prescribing
the terms of surrender, but also in the terms which he prescribed.
True, he is only saying to the other Apostles, 'I will give in if I
have what you had,' for Jesus Christ had said to them, 'Handle Me and
see!' But although thus they could say nothing in opposition, it is
clear that he was asking more than was needful, and more than he had
any right to ask. And he shows his hand, too, in another way. 'I will
not believe!'--what business had he, what business have you, to bring
any question of will into the act of belief or credence? Thus, in all
these four points, the form of the demand, the fact of the demand, the
substance of the demand, and the implication in it that to give or
withhold assent was a matter to be determined by inclination, this man
stands not as an example of a doubter, but as an example, of which
there are too many copies amongst us always, of a determined
disbeliever and rejecter.

So I come to the third point, and that is:

III. The revelation that turned the denier into a rapturous confessor.

What a strange week that must have been between the two Sundays--that
of the Resurrection and the next! Surely it would have been kinder if
the Christ had not left the disciples, with their new-found, tremulous,
raw conviction. It would have been less kind if He had been with them,
for there is nothing that is worse for the solidity of a man's
spiritual development than that it should be precipitated, and new
thoughts must have time to take the shape of the mind into which they
come, and to mould the shape of the mind into which they come. So they
were left to quiet reflection, to meditation, to adjust their thoughts,
to get to understand the bearings of the transcendent fact. And as a
mother will go a little way off from her little child, in order to
encourage it to try to walk, they were left alone to make experiments
of that self-reliance which was also reliance on Him, and which was to
be their future and their permanent condition. So the week passed, and
they became steadier and quieter, and began to be familiar with the
thought, and to see some glimpses of what was involved in the mighty
fact, of a risen Saviour. Then He comes back again, and when He comes
He singles out the unbeliever, leaving the others alone for the moment,
and He gives him back, granted, his arrogant conditions. How much
ashamed of them Thomas must have been when he heard them quoted by the
Lord's own lips! How different they would sound from what they had
sounded when, in the self-sufficiency of his obstinate determination,
he had blurted them out in answer to his brethren's testimony! There is
no surer way of making a good man ashamed of his wild words than just
to say them over again to him when he is calm and cool. Christ's
granting the request was Christ's sharpest rebuke of the request. But
there was not only the gracious and yet chastising granting of the
foolish desire, but there was a penetrating warning: 'Be not faithless,
but believing.' What did that mean? Well, it meant this: 'It is not a
question of evidence, Thomas; it is a question of disposition. Your
incredulity is not due to your not having enough to warrant your
belief, but to your tendency and attitude of mind and heart.' There is
light enough in the sun; it is our eyes that are wrong, and deep below
most questions, even of intellectual credence, lies the disposition of
the man. The ultimate truths of religion cannot be matters of
demonstration any more than the fundamental truths of any science can
be proved; any more than Euclid's axioms can be demonstrated; any more
than the sense of beauty or the ear for music depend on the
understanding. 'Be not faithless, but believing.' The eye that is sound
will see the light.

And there is another lesson here. The words of our Lord, literally
rendered, are, 'become not faithless, but believing.' There are two
tendencies at work with us, and the one or the other will progressively
lay hold upon us, and we shall increasingly yield to it. You can
cultivate the habit of incredulity until you descend into the class of
the faithless; or you can cultivate the opposite habit and disposition
until you rise to the high level of a settled and sovereign belief.

It is clear that Thomas did not reach forth his hand and touch. The
rush of instantaneous conviction swept him along and bore him far away
from the state of mind which had asked for such evidence. Our Lord's
words must have pierced his heart, as he thought: 'Then He was here all
the while; He heard my wild words; He loves me still.' As Nathanael,
when he knew that Jesus had seen him under the fig-tree, broke out with
the exclamation, 'Rabbi! Thou art the Son of God,' so Thomas, smitten
as by a lightning flash with the sense of Jesus' all-embracing
knowledge and all-forgiving love, forgets his incredulity and breaks
into the rapturous confession, the highest ever spoken while He was on
earth: 'My Lord and my God!' So swiftly did his whole attitude change.
It was as when the eddying volumes of smoke in some great conflagration
break into sudden flame, the ruddier and hotter, the blacker they were.
Sight may have made Thomas believe that Jesus was risen, but it was
something other and more inward than sight that opened his lips to cry,
'My Lord and my God!' Finally, we note--

IV. A last Beatitude that extends to all generations.

'Blessed are they who have not seen and yet have believed.' I need not
do more than just in a sentence remind you that we shall very poorly
understand either this saying or this Gospel or the greater part of the
New Testament, if we do not make it very clear to our minds that
'believing' is not credence only but trust. The object of the
Christian's faith is not a proposition; it is not a dogma nor a truth,
but a Person. And the act of faith is not an acceptance of a given
fact, a Resurrection or any other, as true, but it is a reaching out of
the whole nature to Him and a resting upon Him. I have said that Thomas
had no right to bring his will to bear on the act of belief, considered
as the intellectual act of accepting a thing as true. But Christian
faith, being more than intellectual belief, does involve the activity
of the will. Credence is the starting-point, but it is no more. There
may be belief in the truth of the gospel and not a spark of faith in
the Christ revealed by the gospel.

Even in regard to that lower kind of belief, the assent which does not
rest on sense has its own blessing. We sometimes are ready to think
that it would have been easier to believe if 'we had seen with our
eyes, and our hands had handled the (incarnate) Word of Life' but that
is a mistake.

This generation, and all generations that have not seen Him, are not in
a less advantageous position in regard either to credence or to trust,
than were those that companied with Him on earth, and the blessing
Which He breathed out in that upper room comes floating down the ages
like a perfume diffused through the atmosphere, and is with us fragrant
as it was in the 'days of His flesh.' There is nothing in the world's
history comparable to the warmth and closeness of conscious contact
with that Christ, dead for nearly nineteen centuries now, which is the
experience today of thousands of Christian men and women. All other
names pass, and as they recede through the ages, thickening veils of
oblivion, mists of forgetfulness, gather round them. They melt away
into the fog and are forgotten. Why is it that one Person, and one
Person only, triumphs even in this respect over space and time, and is
the same close Friend with whom millions of hearts are in loving touch,
as He was to those that gathered around Him upon earth?

What is the blessing of this faith that does not rest on sense, and
only in a small measure on testimony or credence? Part of its blessing
is that it delivers us from the tyranny of sense, sets us free from the
crowding oppression of 'things seen and temporal'; draws back the veil
and lets us behold 'the things that are unseen and eternal.' Faith is
sight, the sight of the inward eye. It is the direct perception of the
unseen. It sees Him who is invisible. The vision which is given to the
eye of faith is more real in the true sense of that word, more
substantial in the true sense of that word, more reliable and more near
than that sight by which the bodily eye beholds external things. We
see, when we trust, greater things than when we look. The blessing of
blessings is that the faith which triumphs over the things seen and
temporal, brings into every life the presence of the unseen Lord.

Brethren! do not confound credence with trust. Remember that trust does
involve an element of will. Ask yourselves if the things seen and
temporal are great enough, lasting enough, real enough to satisfy you,
and then remember whose lips said, 'Become not faithless but
believing,' and breathed His last Beatitude upon those 'who have not
seen and yet have believed.' We may all have that blessing lying like
dew upon us, amidst the dust and scorching heat of the things seen and
temporal. We shall have it, if our heart's trust is set on Him, whom
one of the listeners on that Sunday spoke of long after, in words which
seem to echo that promise, as 'Jesus in whom though now ye see Him not,
yet believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory,
receiving the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.'



THE SILENCE OF SCRIPTURE

'And many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of His disciples,
which are not written in this book: But these are written, that ye
might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that
believing ye might have life through His name.'--JOHN XX. 30, 31.

It is evident that these words were originally the close of this
Gospel, the following chapter being an appendix, subsequently added by
the writer himself. In them we have the Evangelist's own acknowledgment
of the incompleteness of his Gospel, and his own statement of the
purpose which he had in view in composing it. That purpose was first of
all a doctrinal one, and he tells us that in carrying it out he omitted
many things that he could have put in if he had chosen. But that
doctrinal purpose was subordinate to a still further aim. His object
was not only to present the truth that Jesus was the Christ, the Son of
God, but to present it in such a way as to induce his readers to
believe in that Christ. And he desired that they might have faith in
order that they might have life.

Now, it is a very good old canon in judging of a book that 'in every
work' we are to 'regard the writer's end,' and if that simple principle
had been applied to this Gospel, a great many of the features in it
which have led to some difficulty would have been seen to be naturally
explained by the purpose which the Evangelist had in view.

But this text may be applied very much more widely than to John's
Gospel. We may use it to point our thoughts to the strange silences and
incompletenesses of the whole of Revelation, and to the explanation of
these incompletenesses by the consideration of the purpose which it all
had in view. In that sense I desire to look at these words before us.

I. First, then, we have here set forth the incompleteness of Scripture.

Take this Gospel first. Anybody who looks at it can see that it is a
fragment. It is not meant to be a biography; it is avowedly a
selection, and a selection under the influence, as I shall have to show
you presently, of a distinct dogmatic purpose. There is nothing in it
about Christ's birth, nothing in it about His baptism, nor about His
selection of His Apostles. There is scarcely anything about the facts
of His outward life at all. There is scarcely a word about the whole of
His ministry in Galilee. There is not one of His parables, there are
only seven of His miracles before the Resurrection, and two of these
occur also in the other Evangelists. There is scarcely any of His
ethical teaching; there is not a word about the Lord's Supper.
