darkness, behold, He has caused this sun to rise and to plague us with
burning heat.

10 But while he was thinking like this in his heart, the Word of God
came to him and said:--

11 "O Adam, get up on your feet.  This sun is not God; but it has been
created to give light by day, of which I spoke to you in the cave
saying, 'that the dawn would come, and there would be light by day.'

12 But I am God who comforted you in the night."

13 And God ceased to commune with Adam.




Chapter XVII - The Chapter of the Serpent.

1 The Adam and Eve came out at the mouth of the cave, and went towards
the garden.

2 But as they went near it, before the western gate, from which Satan
came when he deceived Adam and Eve, they found the serpent that became
Satan coming at the gate, and sorrowfully licking the dust, and
wiggling on its breast on the ground, by reason of the curse that fell
on it from God.

3 And whereas before the serpent was the most exalted of all beasts,
now it was changed and become slippery, and the meanest of them all,
and it crept on its breast and went on its belly.

4 And whereas it was the fairest of all beasts, it had been changed,
and was become the ugliest of them all.  Instead of feeding on the best
food, now it turned to eat the dust.  Instead of living, as before, in
the best places, now it lived in the dust.

5 And, whereas it had been the most beautiful of all beasts, all of
which stood dumb at its beauty, it was now abhorred of them.

6 And, again, whereas it lived in one beautiful home, to which all
other animals came from elsewhere; and where it drank, they drank also
of the same; now, after it had become venomous, by reason of God's
curse, all beasts fled from its home, and would not drink of the water
it drank; but fled from it.




Chapter XVIII - The mortal combat with the serpent.

1 When the accursed serpent saw Adam and Eve, it swelled its head,
stood on its tail, and with eyes blood-red, acted like it would kill
them.

2 It made straight for Eve, and ran after her; while Adam standing by,
cried because he had no stick in his hand with which to hit the
serpent, and did not know how to put it to death.

3 But with a heart burning for Eve, Adam approached the serpent, and
held it by the tail; when it turned towards him and said to him:--

4 "O Adam, because of you and of Eve, I am slippery, and go on my
belly."  Then with its great strength, it threw down Adam and Eve and
squeezed them, and tried to kill them.

5 But God sent an angel who threw the serpent away from them, and
raised them up.

6 Then the Word of God came to the serpent, and said to it, "The first
time I made you slick, and made you to go on your belly; but I did not
deprive you of speech.

7 This time, however, you will be mute, and you and your race will
speak no more; because, the first time My creatures were ruined because
of  you, and this time you tried to kill them."

8 Then the serpent was struck mute, and was no longer able to speak.

9 And a wind blew down from heaven by the command of God and carried
away the serpent from Adam and Eve, and threw it on the seashore where
it landed in India.




Chapter XIX - Beasts made subject to Adam.

1 But Adam and Eve cried before God.  And Adam said to Him:--

2 "O Lord, when I was in the cave, I said this to you, my Lord, the
beasts of the field would rise and devour me, and cut off my life from
the earth."

3 Then Adam, because of what had happened to him, beat his chest and
fell on the ground like a corpse.  Then the Word of God came to him,
who raised him, and said to him,

4 "O Adam, not one of these beasts will be able to hurt you; because I
have made the beasts and other moving things come to you in the cave.
I did not let the serpent come with them because it might have risen
against you and made you tremble; and the fear of it should fall into
your hearts.

5 For I knew that the accursed one is wicked; therefore I would not let
it come near you with the other beasts.

6 But now strengthen your heart and fear not.  I am with you to the end
of the days I have determined on you."




Chapter XX - Adam wishes to protect Eve.

1 Then Adam cried and said, "O God, take us away to some other place,
where the serpent can not come near us again, and rise against us.  For
fear that it might find Your handmaid Eve alone and kill her; for its
eyes are hideous and evil."

2 But God said to Adam and Eve, "From now on, don't be afraid, I will
not let it come near you; I have driven it away from you, from this
mountain; neither will I leave in it the ability to hurt you."

3 Then Adam and Eve worshipped before God and gave Him thanks, and
praised Him for having delivered them from death.




Chapter XXI - Adam and Eve attempt suicide.

1 Then Adam and Eve went in search of the garden.

2 And the heat beat like a flame on their faces; and they sweated from
the heat, and cried before the Lord.

3 But the place where they cried was close to a high mountain, facing
the western gate of the garden.

4 Then Adam threw himself down from the top of that mountain; his face
was torn and his flesh was ripped; he lost a lot of blood and was close
to death.

5 Meanwhile Eve remained standing on the mountain crying over him, thus
lying.

6 And she said, "I don't wish to live after him; for all that he did to
himself was through me."

7 Then she threw herself after him; and was torn and ripped by stones;
and remained lying as dead.

8 But the merciful God, who looks over His creatures, looked at Adam
and Eve as they lay dead, and He sent His Word to them, and raised them.

9 And said to Adam, "O Adam, all this misery which you have brought on
yourself, will have no affect against My rule, neither will it alter
the covenant of the 5, 500 years."




Chapter XXII - Adam in a gracious mood.

1 Then Adam said to God, "I dry up in the heat, I am faint from
walking, and I don't want to be in this world.  And I don't know when
You will take me out of it to rest."

2 Then the Lord God said to him, "O Adam, it cannot be now, not until
you have ended your days.  Then shall I bring you out of this miserable
land."

3 And Adam said to God, "While I was in the garden I knew neither heat,
nor languor, neither moving about, nor trembling, nor fear; but now
since I came to this land, all this affliction has come over me.

4 Then God said to Adam, "So long as you were keeping My commandment,
My light and My grace rested on you.  But when you transgressed My
commandment, sorrow and misery came to you in this land."

5 And Adam cried and said, "O Lord, do not cut me off for this, neither
punish me with heavy plagues, nor yet repay me according to my sin; for
we, of our own will, transgressed Your commandment, and ignored Your
law, and tried to become gods like you, when Satan the enemy deceived
us."

6 Then God said again to Adam, "Because you have endured fear and
trembling in this land, languor and suffering, treading and walking
about, going on this mountain, and dying from it, I will take all this
on Myself in order to save you."




Chapter XXIII - Adam and Eve strengthen themselves and make the first
altar ever built.

1 Then Adam cried more and said, "O God, have mercy on me, so far as to
take on yourself, that which I will do."

2 But God withdrew His Word from Adam and Eve.

3 Then Adam and Eve stood on their feet; and Adam said to Eve,
"Strengthen yourself, and I also will strengthen myself." And she
strengthened herself, as Adam told her.

4 Then Adam and Eve took stones and placed them in the shape of an
altar; and they took leaves from the trees outside the garden, with
which they wiped, from the face of the rock, the blood they had spilled.

5 But that which had dropped on the sand, they took together with the
dust with which it was mingled and offered it on the altar as an
offering to God.

6 Then Adam and Eve stood under the Altar and cried, thus praying to
God, "Forgive us our trespass* and our sin, and look at us with Thine
eye of mercy.  For when we were in the garden our praises and our hymns
went up before you without ceasing.

7 But when we came into this strange land, pure praise was not longer
ours, nor righteous prayer, nor understanding hearts, nor sweet
thoughts, nor just counsels, nor long discernment, nor upright
feelings, neither is our bright nature left us.  But our body is
changed from the likeness in which it was at first, when we were
created.

8 Yet now look at our blood which is offered on these stones, and
accept it at our hands, like the praise we used to sing to you at
first, when in the garden."

9 And Adam began to make more requests of God.


* ORIGINAL OF THE LORD'S PRAYER SAID TO BE USED ABOUT 150 YEARS BEFORE
OUR LORD: Our Father, Who art in Heaven, be gracious unto us, O Lord
our God, hallowed be Your Name, and let the remembrance of Thee be
glorified Heaven above and upon earth here below.

Let Your kingdom reign over us now and forever.  The Holy Men of old
said remit and forgive unto all men whatsoever they have done unto me.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from the evil thing;
for Thine is the kingdom and Thou shalt reign in glory forever and
forevermore, AMEN.




Chapter XXIV - A vivid prophecy of the life and death of Christ.

1 Then the merciful God, good and lover of men, looked at Adam and Eve,
and at their blood, which they had held up as an offering to Him;
without an order from Him for so doing.  But He wondered at them; and
accepted their offerings.

2 And God sent from His presence a bright fire, that consumed their
offering.

3 He smelled the sweet savor of their offering, and showed them mercy.

4 Then came the Word of God to Adam, and said to him, "O Adam, as you
have shed your blood, so will I shed My own blood when I become flesh
of your descendants; and as you died, O Adam, so also will I die.  And
as you built an altar, so also will I make for you an altar of the
earth; and as you offered your blood on it, so also will I offer My
blood on an altar on the earth.

5 And as you sued for forgiveness through that blood, so also will I
make My blood forgiveness of sins, and erase transgressions in it.

6 And now, behold, I have accepted your offering, O Adam, but the days
of the covenant in which I have bound you are not fulfilled.  When they
are fulfilled, then will I bring you back into the garden.

7 Now, therefore, strengthen your heart; and when sorrow comes over
you, make Me an offering, and I will be favorable to you."




Chapter XXV - God represented as merciful and loving.  The establishing
of worship.

1 But God knew that Adam believed he should frequently kill himself and
make an offering to Him of his blood.

2 Therefore He said to him, "O Adam, don't ever kill yourself like this
again, by throwing yourself down from that mountain."

3 But Adam said to God, "I was thinking to put an end to myself at
once, for having transgressed Your commandments, and for my having come
out of the beautiful garden; and for the bright light of which You have
deprived me; and for the praises which poured forth from my mouth
without ceasing, and for the light that covered me.

4 Yet of Your goodness, O God, do not get rid of me altogether; but be
favorable to me every time I die, and bring me to life.

5 And thereby it will be made known that You are a merciful God, who
does not want anyone to perish; who loves not that one should fall; and
who does not condemn any one cruelly, badly, and by whole destruction."

6 Then Adam remained silent.

7 And the Word of God came to him, and blessed him, and comforted him,
and covenanted with him, that He would save him at the end of the days
determined for him.

8 This, then, was the first offering Adam made to God; and so it became
his custom to do.




Chapter XXVI - A beautiful prophecy of eternal life and joy (v. 15).
The fall of night.

1 Then Adam took Eve, and they began to return to the Cave of Treasures
where they lived.  But when they got closer to it and saw it from a
distance, heavy sorrow fell on Adam and Eve when they looked at it.

2 Then Adam said to Eve, "When we were on the mountain we were
comforted by the Word of God that conversed with us; and the light that
came from the east shown over us.

3 But now the Word of God is hidden from us; and the light that shown
over us is so changed as to disappear, and let darkness and sorrow come
over us.

4 And we are forced to enter this cave which is like a prison, in which
darkness covers us, so that we are separated from each other; and you
can not see me, neither can I see you."

5 When Adam had said these words, they cried and spread their hands
before God; for they were full of sorrow.

6 And they prayed to God to bring the sun to them, to shine on them, so
that darkness would not return to them, and that they wouldn't have to
go under this covering of rock.  And they wished to die rather than see
the darkness.

7 Then God looked at Adam and Eve and at their great sorrow, and at all
they had done with a fervent heart, on account of all the trouble they
were in, instead of their former well-being, and on account of all the
misery that came over them in a strange land.

8 Therefore God was not angry with them; nor impatient with them; but
he was patient and forbearing towards them, as towards the children He
had created.

9 Then came the Word of God to Adam, and said to him, "Adam, as for the
sun, if I were to take it and bring it to you, days, hours, years and
months would all stop, and the covenant I have made with you, would
never be fulfilled.

10 But then you would be deserted and stuck in a perpetual plague, and
you would never be saved.

11 Yes, rather, bear long and calm your soul while you live night and
day; until the fulfillment of the days, and the time of My covenant is
come.

12 Then shall I come and save you, O Adam, for I do not wish that you
be afflicted.

13 And when I look at all the good things in which you lived, and why
you came out of them, then would I willingly show you mercy.

14 But I cannot alter the covenant that has gone out of My mouth;
otherwise I would have brought you back into the garden.

15 When, however, the covenant is fulfilled, then shall I show you and
your descendants mercy, and bring you into a land of gladness, where
there is neither sorrow nor suffering; but abiding joy and gladness,
and light that never fails, and praises that never cease; and a
beautiful garden that shall never pass away."

16 And God said again to Adam, "Be patient and enter the cave, for the
darkness, of which you were afraid, shall only be twelve hours long;
and when ended, light shall come up."

17 Then when Adam heard these words from God, he and Eve worshipped
before Him, and their hearts were comforted.  They returned into the
cave after their custom, while tears flowed from their eyes, sorrow and
wailing came from their hearts, and they wished their soul would leave
their body.

18 And Adam and Eve stood praying until the darkness of night came over
them, and Adam was hid from Eve, and she from him.

19 And they remained standing in prayer.




Chapter XXVII - The second tempting of Adam and Eve.  The devil takes
on the form of a beguiling light.

1 When Satan, the hater of all good, saw how they continued in prayer,
and how God communed with them, and comforted them, and how He had
accepted their offering--Satan made an apparition.

2 He began with transforming his hosts; in his hands was a flashing
fire, and they were in a great light.

3 He then placed his throne near the mouth of the cave because he could
not enter into it by reason of their prayers.  And he shed light into
the cave, until the cave glistened over Adam and Eve; while his hosts
began to sing praises.

4 And Satan did this, in order that when Adam saw the light, he should
think within himself that it was a heavenly light, and that Satan's
hosts were angels; and that God had sent them to watch at the cave, and
to give him light in the darkness.

5 So that when Adam came out of the cave and saw them, and Adam and Eve
bowed to Satan, then he would overcome Adam thereby, and a second time
humble him before God.

6 When, therefore, Adam and Eve saw the light, fancying it was real,
they strengthened their hearts; yet, as they were trembling, Adam said
to Eve:--

7 "Look at that great light, and at those many songs of praise, and at
that host standing outside who won't come into our cave.  Why don't
they tell us what they want, where they are from, what the meaning of
this light is, what those praises are, why they have been sent to this
place, and why they won't come in?

8 If they were from God, they would come into the cave with us, and
would tell us why they were sent."

9 Then Adam stood up and prayed to God with a burning heart, and said:--

10 "O Lord, is there in the world another god besides You, who created
angels and filled them with light, and sent them to keep us, who would
come with them?

11 But, look, we see these hosts that stand at the mouth of the cave;
they are in a great light; they sing loud praises.  If they are of some
other god than You, tell me; and if they are sent by you, inform me of
the reason for which You have sent them."

12 No sooner had Adam said this, than an angel from God appeared to him
in the cave, who said to him, "O Adam, fear not.  This is Satan and his
hosts; he wishes to deceive you as he deceived you at first.  For the
first time, he was hidden in the serpent; but this time he is come to
you in the likeness of an angel of light; in order that, when you
worshipped him, he might enslave you, in the very presence of God."

13 Then the angel went from Adam and seized Satan at the opening of the
cave, and stripped him of the pretense he had assumed, and brought him
in his own hideous form to Adam and Eve; who were afraid of him when
they saw him.

14 And the angel said to Adam, "This hideous form has been his ever
since God made him fall from heaven.  He could not have come near you
in it; he therefore transformed himself into an angel of light."

15 Then the angel drove away Satan and his hosts from Adam and Eve, and
said to them, "Fear not; God who created you, will strengthen you."

16 And the angel left them.

17 But Adam and Eve remained standing in the cave; no consolation came
to them; they divided in their thoughts.

18 And when it was morning they prayed; and then went out to seek the
garden.  For their hearts were towards it, and they could get no
consolation for having left it.




Chapter XXVIII - The Devil pretends to lead Adam and Eve to the water
to bathe.

