that whatever the world may think or say, that to be that, is not to be a 
lady.

For you know, I take for granted, what that word lady meant at first.  
That it meant she who gave out the loaves, the housewife who provided 
food and clothes; the stewardess of her household and dependants; the 
spinner among her maidens; the almsgiver to the poor; the worshipper in 
the chapel, praying for wild men away in battle.  The being from whom 
flowed forth all gracious influences of thought and order, of bounty and 
compassion, of purity and piety, civilizing and Christianizing a whole 
family, a whole domain.  This it was to be a lady, in the old days when 
too many men had little care save to make war.  And this it is to be a 
lady still, in the new days in which too many men have little care save 
to make money.  Show then that you can be ladies still.  That the spirit 
is the spirit of your ancestresses, though the form in which it must show 
itself is changed with the change of society.

To you I appeal; to as many in this church as are ladies, not in name 
only, but in spirit and in truth.  Say to your fathers, husbands, 
brothers, sons, and say too, and that boldly, to the tradesmen with whom 
you deal--Do you hear this?  Do you hear that there are savages and 
heathens, generations of them, within a rifle-shot of the house?  And you 
cannot exterminate them; cannot drive them out, much less kill them.  You 
must convert them, improve them, make them civilized and Christian, if 
not for their own sakes, at least for our sakes, and for our children.

And if they should answer:  My dears, it is too true.  But we did not 
make them or put them there, and they are not in our parish.  They are no 
concern of ours, and besides they will not hurt us.

Answer them:  Not made by our fault!  True, our hands are more or less 
clean:  but what of that?  There they are.  If you had a tribe of Red 
Indians on the frontier of your settlement, would you take the less guard 
against them, because you did not put them there?  Not in our parish, and 
what of that?  They are in our county; they are in England.  Has man the 
right, has man the power in the sight of God to draw any imaginary line 
of demarcation between Englishman and Englishman, especially when that 
line is drawn between rich and poor?  England knows no line of 
demarcation, save the shore of the great sea; and even that her 
generosity is overleaping at this moment at the call of mere humanity, in 
bounty to sufferers by the West Indian hurricane, and by the Chicago 
fire.  Will you send your help across the Atlantic; and deny it to the 
sufferers at your own doors?  At least, if the rich be confined by an 
imaginary line across, the poor on the other side will not--they will 
cross it freely enough; and what they will bring with them will be 
concern enough of ours.  Would it not be our concern if there was small-
pox, scarlet fever, cholera among them?  Should we not fear lest that 
might hurt us?  Would you not bestir yourselves then?  And do you not 
know that it is among such people as these that pestilence is always 
bred?  And if not, is not the pestilence of the soul more subtle and more 
contagious than any pestilence of the body?  What is the spreading power 
of fever to the spreading power of vice, which springs from tongue to 
tongue, from eye to eye, from heart to heart?  What matter whether they 
be one mile off or five?  Will not they corrupt our servants; and those 
servants again our children?

And say to them, if you be prudent and thrifty housewives, Do not tell us 
that their condition costs you nothing.  Even in pocket you are suffering 
now--as all England is suffering--from the existence of heathens and 
savages, reckless, profligate, pauperized.  For if you pay no poor-rates 
for their support, the shop-keepers with whom you deal pay poor-rates; 
and must and do repay themselves, out of your pockets, in the form of 
increased prices for their goods.

And when you have said all this, ladies, and more,--for more will suggest 
itself to your woman's wit,--say to them with St Paul--"And yet show we 
unto you a more excellent way,"--a nobler argument--and that is Charity.

Not almsgiving.  I had almost said, anything but that; making bad worse, 
the improvident more improvident, the liar more ready to lie, the idler 
more ready to idle.  But the Charity which is Humanity, which is the 
spirit of pure pity, the Spirit of Christ and of God.

Say then, Even if these poor creatures did us no harm, as they must and 
will do--civilize and christianize them for their own sakes, simply 
because they must be so very miserable--miserable too often with acute 
and conscious misery; too often with a worse misery, dull and 
unconscious, which knows not, stupified by ignorance and vice, that it is 
miserable, and ought to be more miserable still.  For who is so worthy of 
our pity, as he who knows not that he is pitiable?--who takes ignorance, 
dirt, vice, passion, and the wretchedness which vice and passion bring, 
as all in the day's work, as he takes the rain and hail, the frost and 
snow,--as unavoidable necessities of mortal life, for which the only 
temporary alleviation is--drink?

If the refined and pure-minded lady does not pity such beings as that, I 
know not of what her refinement is made.  If the religious lady will not 
bestir herself, and make sacrifices to teach such people that that is not 
what God meant them to be--to stir up in them a noble self-discontent, a 
noble self-abhorrence, which may be the beginning of repentance and 
amendment of life--I know not of what her religion is made.

One word more--I know that such thoughts as I have put before you to-day 
are painful.  I know that we all--I as much as anyone in this church--are 
tempted to put them by, and say, I will think of things beautiful, not of 
things ugly; of art, poetry, science--all that is orderly, graceful, 
ennobling; and not of dirt, ignorance, vice, misery, all that is 
disorderly, degrading.  Nay, even the most pious at times are tempted to 
say, I will think of heaven and not of earth.  I will lift up my heart, 
and try to behold the glory and the goodness of God, and not the disgrace 
and sin of man.

But only for a time may they thus think and speak.  Happy if they can, at 
moments, lift up their hearts unto the Lord, and catch one glimpse of Him 
enthroned in perfect serenity and perfect order, governing the worlds 
with that all-embracing justice, which is at the same time all-embracing 
love, and so, giving Him thanks for His great glory, gain heart and hope 
to--what?  To descend again, even were it from the beatific vision 
itself, to this disordered earth, to work a little--and, alas how little-
-at lessening the sum of human ignorance, human vice, human misery--even 
as their Lord and Saviour stooped from the throne of the universe, and 
from the bosom of the Father, to toil and die for such as curse about the 
streets outside.



SERMON XXXVII.  THE SURPRISE OF THE RIGHTEOUS



Preached at Southsea for the Mission of the Good Shepherd.  October 1871.

St Matt. xxv. 34-37.  "Then shall the King say unto them on his right 
hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you 
from the foundation of the world:  For I was an hungred, and ye gave me 
meat:  I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink:  I was a stranger, and ye 
took me in:  naked, and ye clothed me:  I was sick, and ye visited me:  I 
was in prison, and ye came unto me.  Then shall the righteous answer him, 
saying, Lord, when saw we Thee an hungred, and fed Thee? or thirsty, and 
gave Thee drink?"

Let us consider awhile this magnificent parable, and consider it 
carefully, lest we mistake its meaning.  And let us specially consider 
one point about it, which is at first sight puzzling, and which has 
caused, ere now, many to miss (as I believe, with some of the best 
commentators, ) the meaning of the whole--which is this:  that the 
righteous in the parable did not know that when they did good to their 
fellow-creatures, they did it to Christ the Lord.

Now there are two kinds of people who do know that, because they have 
been taught it by Holy Scripture, who would make two very different 
answers to the Lord, when He spoke in such words to them.  At least so we 
may suppose, for they are ready to make such answers here on earth; and 
therefore, we may suppose that if they dared, they would answer so at the 
day of judgment.  One party would--or at least might say, "Yes, Lord, I 
knew that whatever I did to the poor, I did to Thee; and therefore I did 
all I could for the poor.  I started charitable institutions, I spoke at 
missionary meetings, I put my name down for large sums in every 
subscription list, I built churches and chapels, schools and hospitals; I 
gained the reputation among men of being a leading philanthropist, 
foremost in every good work."

What answer the man who said that would receive from the Lord, I know 
not; for who am I that I should put words into the mouth of my Creator 
and my God?  But I think that the awful majesty of the Lord's very 
countenance might strike such a man dumb, ere he had time to say those 
vain proud words, and strike his conscience through with the thought, 
Yes, I have been charitable:  but have I been humane?  I have been a 
philanthropist:  but have I really loved my fellow-men?  Have I not made 
my interest in the heathen whom I have not seen, an excuse for despising 
and hating my countrymen whom I have seen, if they dared to differ from 
me in religion or in politics?  I have given large sums in charity:  but 
have I ever sacrificed anything for my fellow-men?  I have given Christ 
back a pound in every hundred--perhaps even out of every ten which He has 
given me:  but what did I do with the other nine pounds save spend them 
on myself?  Is there a luxury in which a respectable man could safely 
indulge, which I have denied myself?  What have I been after all, with 
all my philanthropy and charity, but a selfish, luxurious, pompous 
personage? an actor doing my alms to be seen of men?  I did my good works 
as unto Christ?--No; I did them as unto myself--to get honour from men 
while I lived, and to save my selfish soul when I died.  God be merciful 
to me a sinner!  That such thoughts ought to pass through too many 
persons' hearts in this generation, I fear is too certain.  God grant 
that they may do so before it is too late.  But it is plain, at least, 
that these are not the sheep of whom Christ speaks.

Again, there are another, and a very different kind of persons, who we 
have a right to fancy, would answer the Lord somewhat thus:  "Oh Lord, 
speak not of it.  It may be I have tried to do a little good to a poor 
suffering creature here and there; to feed a few hungry, clothe a few 
naked, visit a few sick and prisoners.  But Lord, how could I do less? 
after all that Thou hast done and suffered for me; and after Thy own 
gracious saying, that inasmuch as I did anything to the least of Thy 
brethren, I did it to Thee.  What less could I do, Lord?--and after all, 
what a pitifully small amount I have done!  Thou did'st hunger for me--
for whom have I ever hungered?  Thou did'st suffer for me--for whom have 
I ever suffered?  Thou did'st die for me--for whom have I ever died?  And 
I did not--I fear in the depth of my heart--do what I did really for 
Thee; but for the very pleasure of doing it.  I began to do good from a 
sense of duty to Thee; but after a while I did good, I fear, only because 
it was so pleasant--so pleasant to see human faces looking up into mine 
with gratitude; so pleasant to have little children, even though they 
were none of my own, clinging to me in trust; so pleasant when I went 
home at night to feel that I had made one human being a little happier, a 
little better, even only a little more comfortable; so pleasant to give 
up my own pleasure, in order to give pleasure to others, that I fear I 
forgot Thee in my own enjoyment.  If I sinned in that, Lord forgive.  But 
at least, I have had my reward.  My work among Thy poor was its own 
reward, a reward of inward happiness beyond all that earth can give--and 
now Thou speakest of rewarding me over and above, with I know not what of 
undeserved bliss.  Thou art too good, O Lord, as is Thy wont from all 
eternity.  Let me go and hide myself--a more than unprofitable servant, 
who has not done the hundredth part of that which it was my duty to do."

What answer the Lord would make to the modest misgivings of that sweet 
soul, I cannot say; for again, who am I, that I should put words into the 
mouth of my Creator and my God?  But this I know, that I had rather be--
what I am not, and never shall be--such a soul as that in the last day, 
than own all the kingdoms of the world and the glory thereof.  Still, it 
is plain that such persons, however holy, however loving, are not those 
of whom our Lord speaks in this parable.  For they, too, know, and must 
know, that inasmuch as they showed mercy unto one of the least of the 
Lord's brethren, they showed it unto Him.  But the special peculiarity of 
the persons of whom our Lord speaks, is that they did not know, that they 
had no suspicion, that in showing kindness to men, they were showing 
kindness to Christ.  "Lord," they answer, "when saw we Thee?"

It is a revelation to them, in the strictest and deepest sense of the 
word.  A revelation, that is an unveiling, a drawing away of a veil which 
was before their eyes and hiding from them a divine and most blessed 
fact, of which they had been unaware.  But who are they?  I think we must 
agree with some of the best commentators, among others with that 
excellent divine and excellent man, now lost to the Church on earth, the 
late Dean of Canterbury, that they are persons who, till the day of 
judgment, have never heard of Christ; but who then, for the first time, 
as Dean Alford says, "are overwhelmed with the sight of the grace which 
has been working in and for them, and the glory which is now their 
blessed portion."  Such persons, perhaps, as those two poor negresses--to 
remind you of a story which was famous in our fathers' time--those two 
poor negresses, I say, who found the African traveller, Mungo Park, dying 
of fever and starvation, and saved his life, simply from human love--as 
they sung to themselves by his bedside--


"Let us pity the poor white man;
He has no mother to make his bed,
No wife to grind his corn."


Perhaps it is such as those, who have succoured human beings they knew 
not why, simply from a divine instinct, from the voice of Christ within 
their hearts, which they felt they must obey, though they knew not whose 
voice it was.  Perhaps, I say, it is such as those, that Christ will 
astonish at the last day by the words, "Come ye blessed of my Father, 
inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world."

If this be the true meaning of our Lord's words, what comfort and hope 
they may give us, when we think, as we are bound to think, if we have a 
true humanity in us, of the hundreds of millions of heathen now alive, 
and of the thousands of millions of heathen who have lived and died.  
Sinful they are as a whole.  Sinning, it may be, without law, but 
perishing without law.  For the wages of sin are death, and can be 
nothing else.  But may not Christ have His elect among them?  May not His 
Spirit be working in some of them?  May He not have His sheep among them, 
who hear His voice though they know not that it is His voice?  They hear 
a voice within their hearts whispering to them, "Be loving, be merciful, 
be humane, in one word be just, and do to others as you would they should 
do to you."  And whose voice can that be but the voice of Christ, and the 
Spirit of God?  Those loving instincts come not from the fleshly fallen 
nature, or natural man.  That says to us, "Be selfish; do not be loving.  
Do to others not what you would they should do to you, but do to others 
whatever is pleasant and profitable to yourselves."  And alas! the 
heathen, and too many who call themselves Christians, listen to that 
carnal voice, and live the life of selfishness and pleasure, of anger and 
revenge, of tyranny and cruelty--the end of which is death.

But if any among those heathen--hearing within their hearts the other 
voice, the gracious voice which says, "Do unto others as you would they 
should do unto you,"--feel that that voice is a good voice and a right 
command, which must be obeyed, and which it is beautiful and delightful 
to obey, and so obey it; may we not hope then, that Christ, who has 
called them, will perfect His own work; and in His own good way, and His 
own good time, deliver them from their sin and ignorance, and vouchsafe 
to them at last that knowledge of the true and holy God, Father, Son, and 
Holy Spirit, whom truly to know is everlasting life?  They are Christ's 
lost sheep:  but they are still His sheep who hear His voice.  May He not 
fulfil His own words to them, and go forth and seek such souls, and lay 
them on His shoulder, and bring them home; saying to His Church on earth, 
and to His Church in heaven, "Rejoice with Me:  for I have found my sheep 
which was lost?"

Now if we can thus have hope for some among the heathen abroad, shall we 
not have hope, too, for some among the heathen at home? for some among 
that mass of human corruption which welters around the walls of so many 
of our cities?  I am not going to make vain excuses for them; and say 
they are but the victims of circumstance.  The great majority of them are 
the victims of their own low instincts.  They have chosen the broad and 
easy road of animalism, which leads to destruction.  They have sown to 
the flesh, and they will of the flesh reap corruption.  For the laws of 
God are inexorable; and the curse of the law is sure, namely, "The wages 
of sin are death."  Neither dare I encourage too vast hopes and say, If 
we had money enough, if we had machinery enough, if we had zeal enough, 
we might convert them all, and save them all.  I dare not believe it.  
The many, I fear, will always go the broad road; the few the narrow one.  
And all we dare say is, if we have faith enough, we can convert some.  We 
can at least fulfil our ordination vow.  We can seek out Christ's sheep 
scattered abroad about this naughty world, and tell them of His fold, and 
try to bring them home.

But how shall we know Christ's sheep when we see them?  How, but by the 
very test which Christ has laid down, it seems to me, in this very 
parable?  Is there in one of them the high instincts--even the desire to 
do a merciful act?  Let us watch for that:  and when in the most brutal 
man, and--alas that I should have to use the words--in the most brutal 
woman, we see any touch of nobleness, justice, benevolence, pity, 
tenderness--in one word, any touch, however momentary, of unselfishness,-
-let us spring at that, knowing that there is the soul we seek; there is 
a lost sheep of Christ; there is Christ Himself, working unknown upon a 
human soul; there is a soul ready for the gospel, and not far from the 
kingdom of God.  But what shall we say to that lost sheep?  Shall we 
terrify it by threats of hell?  Shall we even allure it by promises of 
heaven?  Not so--not so at least at first--for that would be to appeal to 
bodily fear and bodily pleasure, to the very selfishness from which 
Christ is trying to deliver it; and to neglect the very prevenient grace, 
the very hold on the soul which Christ Himself offers us.  Let us 
determine with St. Paul to know nothing among our fellow-men but Christ 
crucified.  Let us appeal just to that in the soul which is unselfish; 
not to the instincts of loss and gain, but to those nobler instincts of 
justice and mercy; just because they are not the man's or the woman's 
instincts; but Christ's within them, the light of Christ and the Spirit 
of Christ, the spirit of love and justice saying, "Do unto others as you 
would they should do unto you."  Do you doubt that?  I trust not.  For to 
doubt that is to doubt whether God be truly the Giver of all good things.  
To doubt that is to begin to disbelieve St. Paul's great saying, "In me, 
that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing."  To doubt that is to lay 
our hearts and minds open to the insidious poison of that Pelagian heresy 
which, received under new shapes and names, is becoming the cardinal 
heresy of modern disbelief.  No; we will have faith in Christ, faith in 
our creeds, faith in catholic doctrine; and will say to that man or that 
woman, even as they wallow still in the darkness and the mire, "Behold 
your God!  That cup of cold water which you gave, you knew not why,--
Christ told you to give it, and to Him you gave.  That night watch beside 
the bed of a woman as fallen as yourself,--Christ bade you watch, and you 
watched by Him.  For that drunken ruffian, whom you, a drunken ruffian 
yourself, leaped into the sea to save, Christ bade you leap, and like St. 
Christopher of old, you bore, though you knew it not, your Saviour and 
your God to land."  And if they shall make answer, "And who is He that I 
did not know Him? who is He that I should know Him now?"  Let us point 
them--and whither else should we point them in heaven or earth?--to 
Christ upon the cross, and say, "Behold your God!  This He did, this He 
condescended, this He dared, this He suffered for you, and such as you.  
This is what He, the Maker of the universe, is like.  This is what He has 
been trying to make you like, in your small degree, every time a noble, a 
generous, a pitiful, a merciful emotion crossed your heart; every time 
you forgot yourself, even for a moment, and thought of the welfare of a 
fellow-man."

If that tale, if that sight, if that revelation and unveiling of Christ 
to the poor sinful soul does not work in it an abhorrence of past sin, a 
craving after future holiness, an admiration and a reverence for Christ 
Himself, which is, ipso facto, saving faith; if that soul does not reply-
