and of the lord of riches, and of Indra, and of Vishnu, and of the lord
Creator and of Siva, and of the moon, and of the author of day, and of
the lord of waters, and of the host of Sadhyas, and of Brahma, and of
the forefathers, and of Rudra together with all his followers, and of
the goddess of learning, and of the host of Siddhas, and of many
immortal holy gods besides. And in those shrines the king observed
various fasts, and gave away large quantities of gems. He plunged his
body in all the holy spots, and then came again to Surparaka. And he by
the same landing-place of the sea again proceeded with his uterine
brothers and came over to the holy spot Prabhasa, whereof fame hath been
spread by mighty Brahmanas throughout the world. There he, possessed of
a pair of large red eyes, washed himself with all his younger brothers,
and offered libations to the forefathers and the celestial hosts; and so
did Krishna and all those Brahmanas together with Lomasa. For twelve
days he subsisted upon air and water. And he performed ablutions for
days and nights and surrounded himself with fires kindled on all sides.
Thus that greatest of all virtuous men engaged himself in asceticism.
While he was acting thus, information reached both Valarama and Krishna
that the king was practising penances of a most austere form and these
two leaders of the entire Vrishni tribe accompanied with troops came to
Yudhishthira of Ajamidha's race. And when the Vrishnis beheld that the
sons of Pandu lay down on the ground, their bodies besmeared all over
with dirt and when they beheld the daughter of Drupada in a sad state,
their grief was great and they could not refrain from breaking out in
loud lamentations. Then the king, whose courage was such that misfortune
never could cast him down, cordially met Rama and Krishna and Samva,
Krishna's son, and the grand-son of Sini and other Vrishnis, and paid
honour to them in a suitable form. And they also in return paid honour
to all the sons of Pritha, and were similarly honoured by Pandu's sons.
And they seated themselves round about Yudhishthira, as round Indra, O
king! are seated the celestial hosts. And highly pleased, he recounted
to them all the machinations of his adversaries, and how also he had
resided in the forest, and how Arjuna had gone to Indra's abode in order
to learn the science of arms--all this he related with a gladdened
heart. And they were happy to learn all this news from him; but when
they saw the Pandavas so exceedingly lean, the majestic and magnanimous
Vrishnis could not forbear shedding tears, which spontaneously gushed
from their eyes on account of the agony they felt."


SECTION CXIX

Janamejaya said, "O thou of ascetic wealth! when the sons of Pandu and
the Vrishnis reached the holy spot Prabhasa, what did they do and what
conversation was held there by them, for all of them were of mighty
souls, proficient in all the branches of science and both the Vrishnis
and the sons of Pandu held one another in friendly estimation."

Vaisampayana said, "When the Vrishnis reached the holy spot Prabhasa, the
sacred landing-place on the coast of the sea, they surrounded the sons
of Pandu and waited upon them. Then Valarama, resembling in hue the milk
of the cow and the Kunda flower and the moon and the silver and the
lotus root and who wore a wreath made of wild flowers and who had the
ploughshare for his arms, spake to the lotuseyed one, saying, 'O
Krishna, I do not see that the practice of virtue leads to any good or
that unrighteous practices can cause evil, since the magnanimous
Yudhishthira is in this miserable state, with matted hair, a resident of
the wood, and for his garment wearing the bark of trees. And Duryodhana
is now ruling the earth, and the ground doth not yet swallow him up.
From this, a person of limited sense would believe a vicious course of
life is preferable to a virtuous one. When Duryodhana is in a
flourishing state and Yudhishthira, robbed of his throne, is suffering
thus, what should people do in such a matter?--This is the doubt that is
now perplexing all men. Here is the lord of men sprung from the god of
virtue, holding fast to a righteous path, strictly truthful and of a
liberal heart. This son of Pritha would give up his kingdom and his
pleasure but would not swerve from the righteous path, in order to
thrive. How is it that Bhishma and Kripa and the Brahmana Drona and the
aged king, the senior member of the house, are living happily, after
having banished the sons of Pritha? Fie upon the vicious-minded leaders
of Bharata's race! What will that sinner, the chieftain of the earth,
say to the departed forefathers of his race, when the wretch will meet
them in the world to come? Having hurled from the throne his
in-offensive sons, will he be able to declare that he had treated them
in a blameless way? He doth not now see with his mind's eye how he hath
become so sightless, and on account of what act he hath grown blind
among the kings of this entire earth. Is it not because he hath banished
Kunti's son from his kingdom? I have no doubt that Vichitravirya's son,
when he with his sons perpetrated this inhuman act, beheld on the spot
where dead bodies are burnt, flowering trees of a golden hue. Verily he
must have asked them, when those stood before him with their shoulders
projected forward towards him, and with their large red eyes staring at
him, and he must have listened to their evil advice, since he fearlessly
sent away Yudhishthira to the forest, who had all his weapons of war
with him and was borne company by his younger brothers. This Bhima here,
whose voracious appetite is like that of a wolf, is able to destroy with
the sole strength of his powerful arms, and without the help of any
weapons of war, a formidable array of hostile troops. The forces in the
field of battle were utterly unmanned on hearing his war-cry. And now
the strong one is suffering from hunger and thirst, and is emaciated
with toilsome journeys. But when he will take up in his hand arrows and
diverse other weapons of war, and meet his foes in the field of battle,
he will then remember the sufferings of his exceedingly miserable
forest-life, and kill his enemies to a man: of a certainty do I
anticipate this. There is not throughout the whole world a single soul
who can boast of strength and prowess equal to his. And his body, alas!
is emaciated with cold, and heat and winds. But when he will stand up
for fight, he will not leave a single man out of his foes. This powerful
hero, who is a very great warrior when mounted on a car--this Bhima, of
appetite rivalling a wolf's conquered single-handed all the rulers of
men in the east, together with, those who followed them in battle; and
he returned from those wars safe and uninjured. And that same Bhima,
miserably dressed in the bark of trees, is now leading a wretched life
in the woods. This powerful Sahadeva vanquished all the kings in the
south; those lords of men who had gathered on the coast of the
sea,--look at him now in an anchorite's dress. Valiant in battle Nakula
vanquished single-handed the kings who ruled the regions towards the
west,--and he now walks about the wood, subsisting on fruit and roots,
with a matted mass of hair on the head, and his body besmeared all over
with dirt. This daughter of a king, who is a great soldier when mounted
on a car, took her rise from beneath the altar, during the pomp of
sacrificial rites. She hath been always accustomed to a life of
happiness; how is she now enduring this exceedingly miserable life in
this wood! And the son of the god of virtue,--virtue which stands at the
head of all the three pursuits of life--and the son of the wind-god and
also the son of the lord of celestials, and those two sons of the
celestial physicians,--being the sons of all those gods and always
accustomed to a life of happiness, how are they living in this wood,
deprived of all comforts? When the son of Virtue met with defeat and
when his wife, his brothers, his followers, and himself were all driven
forth, and Duryodhana began to flourish, why did not the earth subside
with all its hills?'"


SECTION CXX

"Satyaki said, 'O Rama! this is not the time of lamentation; let us do
that which is proper and suited to the present occasion, although
Yudhishthira doth not speak a single word. Those who have persons to
look after their welfare do not undertake anything of themselves; they
have others to do their work, as Saivya and others did for Yayati.
Likewise, O Rama! those who have appointed functionaries to undertake
their work on their own responsibility, as the leaders of men, they may
be said to have real patrons, and they meet with no difficulty, like
helpless beings. How is it that when the sons of Pritha have for their
patrons these two men, Rama and Krishna, and the two others, Pradyumna
and Samva, together with myself,--these patrons being able to protect
all the three worlds,--how is it that the son of Pritha is living in the
wood with his brothers? It is fit that this very day the army of the
Dasarhas should march out, variously armed and with checkered mails. Let
Dhritarashtra's sons be overwhelmed with the forces of the Vrishnis and
let them go with their friends to the abode of the god of death. Let him
alone who wields the bow made of the horn (Krishna), thou alone, if
roused, wouldst be able to surround even the whole of this earth. I ask
thee to kill Dhritarashtra's son with all his men, as the great Indra,
the lord of the gods killed Vritra. Arjuna, the son of Pritha, is my
brother, and also my friend, and also my preceptor, and is like the
second self of Krishna. It is for this that men desire for a worthy son,
and that preceptor seeks a pupil who would contradict him not. It is for
this that the time is come for that excellent work, which is the best of
all tasks and difficult to perform. I shall baffle Duryodhana's volleys
of arms by my own excellent weapons. I shall overpower all in the field
of battle. I shall in my wrath cut off his head with my excellent
shafts, little inferior to snakes and poison and fire. And with the keen
edge of my sword, I shall forcibly sever his head from the trunk, in the
field of battle; then I shall kill his followers, and Duryodhana, and
all of Kuru's race. O son of Rohini! let the followers of Bhima look at
me with joy at their heart, when I shall keep up the weapons of war in
the field of battle, and when I shall go on slaying all the best
fighting men on the side of the Kurus, as at the end of time fire will
burn vast heaps of straw. Kripa and Drona and Vikarna and Karna are not
able to bear the keen arrows shot by Pradyumna. I know the power of
Arjuna's son--he conducts himself like the son of Krishna in the field
of battle. Let Samva chastise by the force of his arms Dussasana; let
him destroy by force Dussasana and his charioteer and his car. In the
field of battle when the son of Jamvavati becomes irresistible in fight,
there is nothing which can withstand his force. The army of the demon
Samvara was speedily routed by him when only a boy. By him was killed in
fight Asvachakra, whose thighs were round, and whose muscular arms were
of exceeding length. Who is there that would be able to go forward to
the car of Samva, who is great in fight, when mounted on a car? As a
mortal coming under the clutches of death can never escape; so who is
there that once coming under his clutches in the field of battle, is
able to return with his life? The son of Vasudeva will burn down by the
volleys of his fiery shafts all the hostile troops, and those two
warriors, Bhishma and Drona,--who are great on a car, and Somadatta
surrounded by all his sons. What is there in all the world including the
gods, which Krishna cannot encounter on an equal footing, when he takes
up the weapons of war, wields in his hands excellent arrows, arms
himself with his mace, and thus becomes unrivalled in fight? Then let
Aniruddha also take up in his hand his buckler and sword, and let him
cover the surface of the earth with Dhritarashtra's sons, their heads
separated from their trunks, their bodies devoid of all consciousness as
in a sacrificial rite the altar is overspread with sacred grass placed
upon the same. And Gada and Uluka, and Vahuka and Bhanu and Nitha and
the young Nishatha valiant in battle and Sarana, and Charudeshna,
irresistible in war, let them perform feats befitting their race. Let
the united army of the Satwatas and Suras, together with the best
soldiers of the Vrishnis, the Bhojas, and the Andhakas, kill those sons
of Dhritarashtra in the field of battle and let them swell their
expanded fame throughout the world. Then let Abhimanyu rule the world so
long as this most excellent of virtuous men, the magnanimous
Yudhishthira, may be engaged in fulfilling his vow,--the vow that was
accepted and declared by him, the most righteous of Kuru's race, on the
occasion of the famous play at dice. Afterwards the virtuous king will
protect the earth, all his foes defeated in battle by shafts which will
be discharged by us. Then there will remain no sons of Dhritarashtra on
earth,--nor the son of the charioteer (Karna). This is the most
important work for us to do, and this will surely lead to fame.'

"Krishna said, 'O scion of the race of Madhu! no doubt what thou sayest
is true; we accept thy words, O thou of courage that is never weak! But
this bull of the Kuru race (Yudhishthira) would never accept the
sovereignty of the earth, unless it were won by the prowess of his own
arms. Neither for the sake of pleasure, nor from fear, nor from
covetousness, would Yudhishthira ever renounce the rules of the caste;
nor would these two heroes, who are mighty, when mounted on a car--Bhima
and Arjuna; nor the twin brothers, nor Krishna, the daughter of Drupada.
He possessing the appetite of a wolf (Bhima), and the winner of riches
(Arjuna), are both unrivalled in fight throughout the world. And why
should not this king rule over the entire world when he hath the two
sons of Madri to espouse his cause? The high-souled ruler of Panchala
together with the Kekaya king, and we also should put forth our united
strength, and then would the enemies of Yudhishthira be annihilated.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'It is not strange that thou shouldst speak thus, O
scion of Madhu's race! but to me truth seems to be the first
consideration, above that of my sovereign power itself. But it is
Krishna alone who precisely knoweth what I am; and it is I alone who
precisely know what Krishna (really) is. O thou endued with valour! O
scion of Madhu's race! as soon as he will perceive that the time is come
for feats of bravery, then, O most valiant of Sini's race, he also of
beautiful hair (Krishna) will defeat Suyodhana. Let the brave men of the
Dasarha race go back today. They are my patrons; and the foremost of
human beings, they have visited me here. O ye of immeasurable strength!
never fall off from the path of virtue. I shall see you again, when ye
will be happily gathered together.'

"Then after mutual greeting and obeisance to seniors, and having
embraced the youthful, those valiant men of the Yadu race and the sons
of Pandu separated. And the Yadus reunited to their home; and the
Pandavas continued their journey to the sacred spots. Then having parted
with Krishna, the virtuous king, accompanied by his brothers and
servants, and also by Lomasa, went to the sacred river Payosini. Its
fine landing place was constructed by the king of Vidarbha. And he began
to dwell on the banks of the Payosini, whose waters were mingled with
the distilled Soma juice. There the high-souled Yudhishthira was greeted
with excellent laudatory terms by numerous leaders of the twice-born
class, who were delighted to see him there."


SECTION CXXI

"Lomasa said, 'O king! when the Nriga performed a sacrifice here, he
gratified Indra, the demolisher of hostile cities, by offering the Soma
juice. And Indra was refreshed and was very much pleased. Here the gods
together with Indra, and the protectors of all born beings, celebrated
sacrifices of various kinds on a large scale, and paid abundant
gratuities to the ministering priests. Here king Amurtarayasa, the lord
of the world, satisfied Indra, the holder of the thunderbolt, by the
offer of the Soma juice, when seven horse-sacrifices were performed by
that king. The articles which in other sacrificial rites are uniformly
made of the timber, wood and of earth, were all made of gold in the
seven sacrifices performed by him. And it is said that in all those
rites, seven sets of stakes, rings for the sacrificial stakes, spots,
ladles, utensils, spoons were prepared by him. On each sacrificial
stake, seven rings were fastened at the top. And, O Yudhishthira! the
celestials together with Indra, themselves erected the sacrificial
stakes of shining gold which had been prepared for his sacred rites. In
all those magnificent sacrifices instituted by Gaya, the protector of
the earth, Indra, was delighted by drinking the _Soma_ juice, and the
ministering priests were gratified with the gratuities paid to them. And
the priests obtained untold wealth counted out to them. And as the
sand-grains of the earth, or as the stars in the sky, or as the
rain-drops when it raineth, cannot be counted by anyone, so the wealth
Gaya gave away was incapable of being counted by figures. So untold was
the wealth, O great king! that was given to the ministering priests in
all those seven sacrifices that even the above-mentioned objects might
be counted by figures, but the gratuities bestowed by him whose
largeness exceeded all that was known before were not capable of being
counted by figures. And images of the goddess of speech were made of
gold by the sculptor of the gods;--and the king gratified the members of
the sacerdotal caste, who had arrived from all the cardinal points, by
making presents to them of those images, of gold. O protector of men!
when the high-souled Gaya performed his sacrificial rites, he erected
sacrificial piles at so many different spots that but little space was
left on the surface of the earth. And, O scion of Bharata's race! he by
that sacred act attained the regions of Indra. Whoever should bathe in
the river, Payosini, would go to the regions attained by Gaya.
Therefore, O lord of kings! O unswerving prince! thou and thy brothers
should bathe in this river; then, O protector of the earth, thou wilt be
freed from all these sins.'"

Vaisampayana said, "O most praiseworthy of men! Yudhishthira with his
brothers performed ablutions in the Payosini river. Then, O sinless
prince! the powerful monarch together with his brothers, journeyed to
the hill of sapphires and the great river Narmada. The blessed saint
Lomasa there named to him all the delightful holy spots and all the
sacred shrines of the celestials. Then he with his brothers visited
those places, according to his desire and convenience. And at various
places Brahmanas by thousands received gifts from him.

"Lomasa said, 'O son of Kunti! one who visits the sapphire Hill and
plunges his body in the river Narmada attains the regions inhabited by
the celestials and kings. O most praiseworthy of men! this period is the
junction between the Treta and the Kali age, O Kunti's son! This is the
period when a person gets rid of all his sins. O respected sir! this is
the spot where Saryati performed sacrificial rites, wherein Indra
appeared in a visible form and drank the Soma juice, with the two
celestial physicians. And Bhrigu's son of severe austerities conceived
anger towards the great Indra; and the mighty Chyavana paralysed Indra,
and for his wife obtained the princess, Sukanya.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'How was the chastiser of the demon Paka, the god
possessed of the six attributes, paralysed by Chyavana? And for what
reason did the mighty saint conceive wrath towards Indra? And how, O
Brahmana! did he raise the celestial physicians to the rank of the
drinkers of Soma? All this, precisely as it happened, thy venerable self
will be pleased to recount to me.'"


SECTION CXXII

"Lomasa said, 'A son was born to the great saint Bhrigu, Chyavana by
name. And he, of an exceedingly resplendent form, began to practise
austerities by the side of yonder lake. And, O Pandu's son! O protector
of men! he of mighty energy assumed the posture called _Vira_, quiet and
still like an inanimate post, and for a long period, remained at the
same spot of ground. And he was turned into an anthill covered over with
creepers. And after the lapse of a long period, swarms of ants enveloped
him. And covered all over with ants, the sagacious saint looked exactly
like a heap of earth. And he went on practising austerities, enveloped
on all sides with that ant-hill. Now after the lapse of a long space of
time, that ruler of earth, Saryati by name, for amusement visited this
pleasant and excellent lake. With him were four thousand females,
espoused by him, O son of Bharata's race! there was also his only
daughter endued with beautiful brows, named Sukanya. She surrounded by
her maids, and decked out with jewels fit for the celestials, while
walking about, approached the anthill where Bhrigu's son was seated. And
surrounded by her maids, she began to amuse herself there, viewing the
beautiful scenery, and looking at the lofty trees of the wood. And she
was handsome and in the prime of her youth; and she was amorous and bent
on frolicking. And she began to break the twigs of the forest trees
bearing blossoms. And Bhrigu's son endued with intelligence beheld her
wandering like lightning, without her maids, and wearing a single piece
of cloth and decked with ornaments. And seeing her in the lone forest,
that ascetic of exceeding effulgence was inspired with desire. And that
regenerate _Rishi_ possessing ascetic energy, who had a low voice,
called the auspicious one,--but she heard him not. Then seeing the eyes
of Bhrigu's son from the ant-hill, Sukanya from curiosity and losing her
sense, said, "_What is this?_"--and with thorns pierced the eyes (of the
Rishi). And as his eyes being pierced by her, he felt exceeding pain and
became wroth. And (from anger) he obstructed the calls of nature of
Saryati's forces. And on their calls of nature being obstructed, the men
were greatly afflicted. And seeing this state of things, the king asked.
"Who is it that hath done wrong to the illustrious son of Bhrigu, old
and ever engaged in austerities and of wrathful temper? Tell me quick if
ye know it." The soldiers (thereupon) answered him saying, "We do not
know whether any one hath done wrong to the _Rishi_. Do thou, as thou
list, make a searching enquiry into the matter." Thereupon that ruler of
earth, using (as he saw occasion) both menace and conciliation, asked
his friends (about the circumstance). But they too did not know
anything. Seeing that the army was distressed owing to the obstruction
of the calls of nature, and also finding her father aggrieved, Sukanya
said, "Roving in the forest, I lighted in the ant-hill here upon some
brilliant substance. Thereupon taking it for a glow-worm I neared it,
and pierced it (with thorns)." Hearing this Saryati immediately came to
the ant-hill, and there saw Bhrigu's son, old both in years and
austerities. Then the lord of earth with joined hands, besought (the
ascetic) saying, "It behoveth thee to forgive what my daughter through
ignorance and greenness, hath done unto thee." Chyavana the son of
Bhrigu, addressed the monarch saying, "Disregarding me, this one, filled
with pride hath pierced my eyes. Even her, O king, endued with beauty
and who was bereft of her senses by ignorance and temptation--even thy
daughter would I have for my bride, I tell thee truly, on this condition
alone will I forgive thee."'

"Lomasa said, 'Hearing the words of the sage, Saryati, without pausing,
bestowed his daughter on the high-souled Chyavana. Having received the
hand of that girl, the holy one was pleased with the king. And having
won the _Rishi's_ grace, the king went to his city, accompanied by his
troops. And the faultless Sukanya also having obtained that ascetic for
her husband, began to tend him, practising penances, and observing the
ordinance. And that one of a graceful countenance, and void of guile
worshipped Chyavana, and also ministered unto guests, and the sacred
fire.'"


SECTION CXXIII

"Lomasa said, 'Once on a time, O king, those celestials, namely the twin
Aswins, happened to behold Sukanya, when she had (just) bathed, and when
her person was bare. And seeing that one of excellent limbs, and like
unto the daughter of the lord of celestials, the nose-born Aswins neared
her, and addressed her, saying, "O thou of shapely thighs, whose
daughter art thou? And what doest thou in this wood? O auspicious one, O
thou of excellent grace, we desire to know this, do thou therefore tell
us." Thereupon she replied bashfully unto those foremost of celestials,
"Know me as Saryati's daughter, and Chyavana's wife." Thereat the
Aswins again spake unto her, smiling. "What for, O fortunate one, hath
thy father bestowed thee on a person who is verging on death? Surely, O
timid girl, thou shinest in this wood like lightning. Not in the regions
of the celestials themselves, O girl, have our eyes lighted on thy like.
O damsel, unadorned and without gay robes as thou art, thou beautifiest
this wood exceedingly. Still, O thou of faultless limbs, thou canst not
look so beautiful, when (as at present) thou art soiled with mud and
dirt, as thou couldst, if decked with every ornament and wearing
gorgeous apparel. Why, O excellent girl in such plight servest thou a
decrepit old husband, and one that hath become incapable of realising
pleasure and also of maintaining thee, O thou of luminous smiles? O
divinely beautiful damsel, do thou, forsaking Chyavana accept one of us
for husband. It behoveth thee not to spend thy youth fruitlessly."

"'Thus addressed Sukanya answered the celestials saying, "I am devoted
to my husband, Chyavana: do ye not entertain any doubts (regarding my
fidelity)." Thereupon they again spake unto her, "We two are the
celestial physicians of note. We will make thy lord young and graceful.
Do thou then select one of us, _viz._, ourselves and thy husband,--for
thy partner. Promising this do thou, O auspicious one, bring hither thy
husband." O king, agreeably to their words she went to Bhrigu's son and
communicated to him what the two celestials had said. Hearing her
message, Chyavana said unto his wife, "Do thou so." Having received the
permission of her lord, (she returned to the celestials) and said, "Do
ye so." Then hearing her words, _viz_., "Do ye so," they spoke unto the
king's daughter. "Let thy husband enter into water." Thereat Chyavana
desirous of obtaining beauty, quickly entered into water. The twin
Aswins also, O king, sank into the sheet of water. And the next moment
they all came out of the tank in surpassingly beautiful forms, and young
and wearing burnished earrings. And all, possessed of the same
appearance pleasing to behold, addressed her saying, "O fortunate one,
do thou choose one of us for spouse. And O beauteous one, do thou select
him for lord who may please thy fancy." Finding, however, all of them of
the same appearance she deliberated; and at last ascertaining the
identity of her husband, even selected him.

"'Having obtained coveted beauty and also his wife, Chyavana, of
exceeding energy, well pleased, spake these words unto the nose-born
celestials: "Since at your hands, an old man, I have obtained youth, and
beauty, and also this wife of mine, I will, well pleased, make you
quaffers of the Soma juice in the presence of the lord of celestials
himself. This I tell you truly." Hearing this, highly delighted, the
twins ascended to heaven; and Chyavana and Sukanya too passed their
days happily even like celestials.'"


SECTION CXXIV

"Lomasa said, 'Now the news came to Saryati that Chyavana had been
turned into a youth. And well pleased he came, accompanied by his
troops, to the hermitage of the son of Bhrigu. And he saw Chyavana and
Sukanya, like two children sprung from celestials, and his joy and that
of his wife were as great as if the king had conquered the entire world.
And the ruler of earth together with his wife was received honourably by
that saint. And the king seated himself near the ascetic, and entered
into a delightful conversation of an auspicious kind. Then, O king, the
son of Bhrigu spake to the king these words of a soothing nature: "I
shall, O king, officiate at a religious ceremony to be performed by
thee: let the requisite articles, therefore, be procured." Thereat, that
protector of earth Saryati, experienced the very height of joy, and O
great king, he expressed his approbation of the proposal made by
Chyavana. And on an auspicious day, suitable for the commencement of a
sacrificial ceremony, Saryati ordered the erection of a sacrificial
shrine of an excellent description and splendidly furnished with all
desirable things. There Chyavana, the son of Bhrigu, officiated for the
king as his priest. Now listen to me relating the wonderful events which
happened at that spot. Chyavana took up a quantity of the Soma juice, in
order that he might offer the same to the Aswins, who were physicians to
the celestials. And while the saint was taking up the intended offering
for those celestial twins, Indra pronounced his interdiction, saying,
"These Aswins both of them in my opinion have no right to receive an
offering of the Soma juice. They are the physicians of the celestials in
heaven,--this vocation of theirs hath disentitled them (in the matter of
Soma)." Thereupon Chyavana said, "These two are of mighty enterprise,
possessed of mighty souls, and uncommonly endued with beauty and grace.
And they, O Indra, have converted me into an eternally youthful person,
even like unto a celestial. Why shouldst thou and the other celestials
have a right to the distilled Soma juice, and not they? O lord of the
celestials, O demolisher of hostile towns! be it known to thee that the
Aswins also rank as gods." At this, Indra spake saying, "These two
practise the healing art,--so they are but servants. And assuming forms
