fruits of them that slept.'

Part of the ceremonial of the Passover was the presentation in the
Temple of a barley sheaf, the first of the harvest, waved before the
Lord in dedication to Him, and in sign of thankful confidence that
all the fields would be reaped and their blessing gathered.
There may be some allusion to that ceremony, which coincided in time
with the Resurrection of our Lord, in the words here, which regard
that one solitary Resurrection as the early ripe and early reaped
sheaf, the pledge and the prophecy of the whole ingathering.

Now there seem to me, in these words, to ring out mainly two
things--an expression of absolute certainty in the fact, and an
expression of unbounded triumph in the certainty of the fact.

And if we look at these two things, I think we shall get the main
thoughts that the Apostle would impress upon our minds.

I. The certainty of Christ's Resurrection.

'Now _is_ Christ risen,' says he, defying, as it were, doubt and
negation, and basing himself upon the firm assurance which he
possesses of that historical fact. 'Ah!' you say, 'seeing is
believing; and he had evidence such as we can never have.' Well! let
us see. Is it possible for us, nineteen centuries nearly after that
day, to catch some echo of this assured confidence, and in the face
of modern doubts and disbeliefs, to reiterate with as unfaltering
assurance as that with which they came from his glowing lips, the
great words of my text? Can we, logically and reasonably, as men who
are guided by evidence and not by feeling, stand up before the world,
and take for ours the ancient confession: 'I believe in Jesus Christ,
His only Son, our Lord, who suffered under Pontius Pilate, was
crucified, dead, and buried. The third day He rose again from the
dead'? I think we can.

The way to prove a fact is by the evidence of witnesses. You cannot
argue that it would be very convenient, if such and such a thing
should be true; that great moral effects would follow if we believed
it was true, and so on. The way to do is to put people who have seen
it into the witness-box, and to make sure that their evidence is
worth accepting.

And at the beginning of my remarks I wish to protest, in a sentence,
against confusing the issues about this question of the Resurrection
of Jesus Christ in that fashion which is popular nowadays, when we
are told that miracle is impossible, and _therefore_ there has
been no Resurrection, or that death is the end of human existence,
and that _therefore_ there has been no Resurrection. That is not
the way to go about ascertaining the truth as to asserted facts. Let
us hear the evidence. The men who brush aside the testimony of the
New Testament writers, in obedience to a theory, either about the
impossibility of the supernatural, or about the fatal and final
issues of human death, are victims of prejudice, in the strictest
meaning of the word; and are no more logical than the well-known and
proverbial reasoner who, when told that facts were against him, with
sublime confidence in his own infallibility, is reported to have
said, 'So much the worse for the facts.' Let us deal with evidence,
and not with theory, when we are talking about alleged facts of
history.

So then, let me remind you that, in this chapter from which my text
is taken, we have a record of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, older
than, and altogether independent of, the records contained in
the gospels, which are all subsequent in date to it; that this Epistle
to the Corinthians is one of the four undisputed Epistles of the
Apostle, which not the most advanced school of modern criticism has a
word to say against; that, therefore, this chapter, written, at the
latest, some seven and twenty years after the date of the
Crucifixion, carries us up very close to that event; that it shows
that the Resurrection was _universally_ believed all over the Church,
and therefore must have then been long believed; that it enables us
to trace the same belief as universal, and in undisputed possession
of the field among the churches, at the time of Paul's conversion,
which cannot be put down at much more than five or six years after
the Crucifixion, and that so we are standing in the presence of
absolutely contemporaneous testimony. This is not a case in which a
belief slowly and gradually grew up. Whether we accept the evidence
or not, we are bound to admit that it is strictly contemporaneous
testimony to the fact of Christ's Resurrection.

And the witnesses are reliable and competent, as well as
contemporaneous. The old belief that their testimony was imposture is
dead long ago; as, indeed, how could it live? It would be an anomaly,
far greater than the Resurrection, to believe that these people,
Mary, Peter, John, Paul, and all the rest of them, were conspirators
in a lie, and that the fairest system of morality and the noblest
consecration that the world has ever seen, grew up out of a fraud,
like flowers upon a dunghill. That theory will not hold water; and
even those who will not accept the testimony have long since
confessed that it will not. But the Apostle, in my context, seems to
think that that is the only tenable alternative to the other theory
that the witnesses were veracious, and I am disposed to believe that
he is right. He says, 'If Christ be not risen, then, are we' the
utterly impossible thing of 'false witnesses to God,' devout
perjurers, as the phrase might be paraphrased: men who are lying to
please God. If Christ be not risen, they have sworn to a thing that
they know to be untrue, in order to advance His cause and His
kingdom. If that theory be not accepted, there is no other about
these men and their message that will hold water for a minute, except
the admission of its truth.

The fashionable modern one, that it was hallucination, is
preposterous. Hallucinations that five hundred people at once shared!
Hallucinations that lasted all through long talks, spread at
intervals over more than a month! Hallucinations that included eating
and drinking, speech and answer; the clasp of the hand and the
feeling of the breath! Hallucinations that brought instruction!
Hallucinations that culminated in the fancy that a gathered multitude
of them saw Him going up into heaven! The hallucination is on the
other side, I think. They have got the saddle on the wrong horse when
they talk about the Apostolic witnesses being the victims of
hallucination. It is the people who believe it possible that they
should be who are so. The old argument against miracles used to say
that it is more consonant with experience that testimony should be
false, than that a miracle should be true. I venture to say it is a
much greater strain on a man's credulity, to believe that _such_
evidence is false than that _such_ a miracle, _so_ attested, is true.
And I, for my part, venture to think that the reasonable men are the
men who listen to these eye-witnesses when they say, 'We saw Him
rise'; and echo back in answer the triumphant certitude, 'Christ is
risen indeed!'

There is another consideration that I might put briefly. A very
valuable way of establishing facts is to point to the existence of
other facts, which indispensably require the previous ones for their
explanation. Let me give you an illustration of what I mean. I
believe in the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, amongst other reasons,
because I do not understand how it was possible for the Church to
exist for a week after the Crucifixion, unless Jesus Christ rose
again. Why was it that they did not all scatter? Why was it that the
spirit of despondency and the tendency to separation, which were
beginning to creep over them when they were saying: 'Ah! it is all
up! We _trusted_ that this had been He,' did not go on to their
natural issue? How came it that these people, with their Master taken
away from the midst of them, and the bond of union between them
removed, and all their hopes crushed did not say: 'We have made a
mistake, let us go back to Gennesareth and take to our fishing again,
and try and forget our bright illusions'? That is what John the
Baptist's followers did when he died. Why did not Christ's do the
same? Because Christ rose again and re-knit them together. When the
Shepherd was smitten, the flock would have been scattered, and never
drawn together any more, unless there had been just such a thing as
the Resurrection asserts there was, to reunite the dispersed and to
encourage the depressed. And so I say, Christianity with a _dead_
Christ, and a Church gathered round a grave from which the stone has
_not_ been rolled away, is more unbelievable than the miracle, for it
is an absurdity.

Then there is another thing that I would say in a word. Let me put an
illustration to explain what I mean. Suppose, after the execution of
King Charles I., in some corner of the country a Pretender had sprung
up and said, 'I am the King!' the way to end that would have been for
the Puritan leaders to have taken people to St. George's Chapel, and
said, 'Look! there is the coffin, there is the body, is that the
king, or is it not?' Jesus Christ was said to have risen again,
within a week of the time of His death. The rulers of the nation had
the grave, the watch, the stone, the seal. They could have put an end
to the pestilent nonsense in two minutes, if it had been nonsense, by
the simple process of saying, 'Go and look at the tomb, and you will
see Him there.' But this question has never been answered, and never
will be--What became of that sacred corpse if Jesus Christ did not
rise again from the dead? The clumsy lie that the rulers told, that
the disciples had stolen away the body, was only their acknowledgment
that the grave was empty. If the grave were empty, either His
servants were impostors, which we have seen it is incredible that
they were, or the Christ was risen again.

And so, dear brethren, for many other reasons besides this handful
that I have ventured to gather and put before you, and in spite of
the prejudices of modern theories, I lift up here once more, with
unfaltering certitude, the glad message which I beseech you to
accept: 'Christ is risen, the first fruits of them that slept.'

II. So much, then, for the first point in this passage. A word or two
about the second--the triumph in the certitude of that Resurrection.

As I remarked at a previous point of this discourse, the Apostle has
been speaking about the consequences which would follow from the fact
that Christ was not raised. If we take all these consequences and
reverse them, we get the glad issues of His Resurrection, and
understand why it was that this great burst of triumph comes from the
Apostle's lips. And though I must necessarily treat this part of my
subject very inadequately, let me try to gather together the various
points on which, as I think, our Easter gladness ought to be built.

First, then, I say, the risen Christ gives us a complete Gospel. A
dead Christ annihilates the Gospel. 'If Christ be not risen,' says
the Apostle, 'our preaching,' by which he means not the act but the
substance of his preaching, 'is vain.' Or, as the word might be more
accurately rendered, 'empty.' There is nothing in it; no contents. It
is a blown bladder; nothing in it but wind.

What was Paul's 'preaching'? It all turned upon these points--that
Jesus Christ was the Son of God; that He was Incarnate in the flesh
for us men; that He died on the Cross for our offences; that He was
raised again, and had ascended into Heaven, ruling the world and
breathing His presence into believing hearts; and that He would come
again to be our Judge. These were the elements of what Paul called
'his Gospel.' He faces the supposition of a dead Christ, and he says,
'It is all gone! It is all vanished into thin air. I have nothing to
preach if I have not a Cross to preach which is man's deliverance
from sin, because on it the Son of God hath died, and I only know
that Jesus Christ's sacrifice is accepted and sufficient, because I
have it attested to me in His rising again from the dead.'

Dear brethren, on the fact of the Resurrection of Jesus Christ is
suspended everything which makes the Gospel a gospel. Strike that
out, and what have you left? Some beautiful bits of moral teaching, a
lovely life, marred by tremendous mistakes about Himself and His own
importance and His relation to men and to God; but you have got
nothing left that is worth calling a gospel. You have the cross
rising there, gaunt, black, solitary; but, unless on the other side
of the river you have the Resurrection, no bridge will ever be thrown
across the black gulf, and the Cross remains 'dead, being alone.' You
must have a Resurrection to explain the Cross, and then the Life and
the Death tower up into the manifestation of God in the flesh and the
propitiation for our sins. Without it we have nothing to preach which
is worth calling a gospel.

Again, a living Christ gives faith something to lay hold of. The
Apostle here in the context twice says, according to the Authorised
Version, that a dead Christ makes our faith 'vain.' But he really
uses two different words, the former of which is applied to
'preaching,' and means literally 'empty,' while the latter means 'of
none effect' or 'powerless.' So there are two ideas suggested here
which I can only touch with the lightest hand.

The risen Christ puts some contents, so to speak, into my faith; He
gives me something for it to lay hold of.

Who can trust a _dead_ Christ, or who can trust a _human_ Christ?
That would be as much a blasphemy as trusting any other man. It is
only when we recognise Him as declared to be the Son of God, and that
by the Resurrection from the dead, that our faith has anything round
which it can twine, and to which it can cleave. That living Saviour
will stretch out His hand to us if we look to Him, and if I put my
poor, trembling little hand up towards Him, He will bend to me and
clasp it. You cannot exercise faith unless you have a risen Saviour,
and unless you exercise faith in Him your lives are marred and sad.

Again, if Christ be dead, our faith, if it could exist, would be as
devoid of effect as it would be empty of substance. For such a faith
would be like an infant seeking nourishment at a dead mother's
breast, or men trying to kindle their torches at an extinguished
lamp. And chiefly would it fail to bring the first blessing which the
believing soul receives through and from a risen Christ, namely,
deliverance from sin. If He whom we believed to be our sacrifice by
His death and our sanctification by His life has not risen, then, as
we have seen, all which makes His death other than a martyr's
vanishes, and with it vanish forgiveness and purifying. Only when we
recognise that in His Cross explained by His Resurrection, we have
redemption through His blood, even the forgiveness of sins, and by
the communication of the risen life from the risen Lord possess that
new nature which sets us free from the dominion of our evil, is faith
operative in setting us free from our sins.

So, dear friends, the risen Christ gives us something for faith to
lay hold of, and will make it the hand by which we grasp His strong
hand, which lifts us 'out of the horrible pit and the miry clay, and
sets our feet upon a rock.' But if He lie dead in the grave your
faith is vain, because it grasps nothing but a shadow; and it is vain
as being purposeless; you are yet in your sins.

The last thought is that the risen Christ gives us the certitude of
our Resurrection. I do not for a moment mean to say that, apart from
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, the thought, be it a wish or a
dread, of immortality, has not been found in men, but there is all
the difference in the world between forebodings, aspirations, wishes
it were so, fears that it might be so, and the calm certitude that it
is so. Many men talked about a western continent, but Columbus went
there and came back again, and that ended doubt. Many men before, and
apart from Jesus, have cherished thoughts of an immortal life beyond
the grave, but He has been there and returned. And that, and, as I
believe, that only puts the doctrine of immortality upon an
irrefragable foundation; and we can say, 'Now, I know that there is
that land beyond.' They tell us that death ends everything. Modern
materialism, in all its forms, asserts that it is the extinction of
the personality. Jesus Christ died, and went through it, and came out
of it the same, and I will trust Him. Brethren, the set of opinion
amongst the educated and cultured classes in England, and all over
Europe, at this moment, proves to anybody who has eyes to see, that
for this generation, rejection of immortality will follow certainly
on the rejection of Jesus Christ. And for England to-day, as for
Greece when Paul sent his letter to Corinth, the one light of
certitude in the great darkness is the fact that Jesus Christ hath
died, and is risen again.

If you will let Him, He will make you partakers of His own immortal
life. 'The first fruits of them that slept' is the pledge and the
prophecy of all the waving abundance of golden grain that shall be
gathered into the great husbandman's barns. The Apostle goes on to
represent the resurrection of 'them that are Christ's' as a
consequence of their union to Jesus. He has conquered for us all. He
has entered the prison-house and come forth bearing its iron gates on
His shoulders, and henceforth it is not possible that we should be
holden of it. There are two resurrections--one, that of Christ's
servants, one that of others. They are not the same in
principle--and, alas, they are awfully different in issue. 'Some
shall wake to everlasting life, and some to shame and everlasting
contempt.'

Let me beseech you to make Jesus Christ the life of your dead souls,
by humble, penitent trust in Him. And then, in due time, He will be
the life of your transformed bodies, changing these into the likeness
of the body of His glory, 'according to the working whereby He is
able even to subdue all things unto Himself.'




THE DEATH OF DEATH

   'But now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the
   first-fruits of them that slept. 21. For since by man
   came death, by man came also the resurrection of the
   dead.... 50. Now this I say, brethren, that flesh and
   blood cannot inherit the kingdom of God; neither doth
   corruption inherit incorruption. 51. Behold, I shew
   you a mystery; We shall not all sleep, but we shall
   all be changed, 52. In a moment, in the twinkling of
   an eye, at the last trump, (for the trumpet shall
   sound;) and the dead shall be raised incorruptible,
   and we shall be changed. 53. For this corruptible
   must put on incorruption, and this mortal must put
   on immortality. 54. So when this corruptible shall
   have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have
   put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the
   saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in
   victory. 55. O death, where is thy sting? O grave,
   where is thy victory? 56. The sting of death is sin;
   and the strength of sin is the law. 57. But thanks be
   to God, which giveth us the victory, through our Lord
   Jesus Christ. 58. Therefore, my beloved brethren,
   be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in
   the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your
   labour is not in vain in the Lord.'--1 COR. xv. 20, 21; 50-58.


This passage begins with the triumphant ringing out of the great fact
which changes all the darkness of an earthly life without a heavenly
hope into a blaze of light. All the dreariness for humanity, and all
the vanity for Christian faith and preaching, vanish, like ghosts at
cock-crow, when the Resurrection of Jesus rises sun-like on the
world's night. It is a historical fact, established by the evidence
proper for such,--namely, the credible testimony of eye-witnesses.
They could attest His rising, but the knowledge of the worldwide
significance of it comes, not from testimony, but from revelation.
Those who saw Him risen join to declare: 'Now is Christ risen from
the dead,' but it is a higher Voice that goes on to say, 'and become
the first-fruits of them that slept.'

That one Man risen from the grave was like the solitary sheaf of
paschal first-fruits, prophesying of many more, a gathered harvest
that will fill the great Husbandman's barns. The Resurrection of
Jesus is not only a prophecy, showing, as it and it alone does, that
death is not the end of man, but that life persists through death and
emerges from it, like a buried river coming again flashing into the
light of day, but it is the source or cause of the Christian's
resurrection. The oneness of the race necessitated the diffusion
through all its members of sin and of its consequence--physical
death. If the fountain is poisoned, all the stream will be tainted.
If men are to be redeemed from the power of the grave, there must be
a new personal centre of life; and union with Him, which can only be
effected by faith, is the condition of receiving life from Him, which
gradually conquers the death of sin now, and will triumph over bodily
death in the final resurrection. It is the resurrection of Christians
that Paul is dealing with. Others are to be raised, but on a
different principle, and to sadly different issues. Since Christ's
Resurrection assures us of the future waking, it changes death into
'sleep,' and that sleep does not mean unconsciousness any more than
natural sleep does, but only rest from toil, and cessation of
intercourse with the external world.

In the part of the passage, verses 50 to 58, the Apostle becomes, not
the witness or the reasoner, as in the earlier parts of the chapter,
but the revealer of a 'mystery.' That word, so tragically
misunderstood, has here its uniform scriptural sense of truth,
otherwise unknown, made known by revelation. But before he unveils
the mystery, Paul states with the utmost force a difficulty which
might seem to crush all hope,--namely, that corporeity, as we know
it, is clearly incapable of living in such a world as that future one
must be. To use modern terms, organism and environment must be
adapted to each other. A fish must have the water, the creatures that
flourish at the poles would not survive at the equator. A man with
his gross earthly body, so thoroughly adapted to his earthly abode,
would be all out of harmony with his surroundings in that higher
world, and its rarified air would be too thin and pure for his lungs.
Can there be any possibility of making him fit to live in a spiritual
world? Apart from revelation, the dreary answer must be 'No.' But the
'mystery' answers with 'Yes.' The change from physical to spiritual
is clearly necessary, if there is to be a blessed life hereafter.

That necessary change is assured to all Christians, whether they die
or 'remain till the coming of the Lord.' Paul varies in his
anticipations as to whether he and his contemporaries will belong to
the one class or the other; but he is quite sure that in either case
the indwelling Spirit of Jesus will effect on living and dead the
needful change. The grand description in verse 52, like the parallel
in 1 Thessalonians iv. 16, is modelled on the account of the
theophany on Sinai. The trumpet was the signal of the Divine
Presence. That last manifestation will be sudden, and its startling
breaking in on daily commonplace is intensified by the reduplication:
'In a moment, in the twinkling of an eye.' With sudden crash that
awful blare of 'loud, uplifted angel trumpet' will silence all
other sounds, and hush the world. The stages of what follows are
distinctly marked. First, the rising of the dead changed in passing
through death, so as to rise in incorruptible bodies, and then the
change of the bodies of the living into like incorruption. The former
will not be found naked, but will be clothed with their white
garments; the latter will, as it were, put on the glorious robes
above the 'muddy vesture of decay,' or, more truly, will see the
miracle of these being transfigured till they shine 'so as no fuller
on earth could white them.' The living will witness the resurrection
of the dead; the risen dead will witness the transformation of the
living. Then both hosts will be united, and, through all eternity,
'live together,' and that 'with Him.' Paul evidently expects that he
and the Corinthians will be in the latter class, as appears by the
'we' in verse 52. He, as it were, points to his own body when he
says, recurring to his former thought of the necessity of harmony
between organism and environment, '_this_ corruptible must put on
incorruption.' Here 'corruption' is used in its physical application,
though the ethical meaning may be in the background.

The Apostle closes his long argument and revelation with a burst,
almost a shout, of triumph. Glowing words of old prophets rush into
his mind, and he breathes a new, grander meaning into them. Isaiah
had sung of a time when the veil over all nations should be destroyed
'in this mountain,' and when death should be swallowed up for ever;
and Paul grasps the words and says that the prophet's loftiest
anticipations will be fulfilled when that monster, whose insatiable
maw swallows down youth, beauty, strength, wisdom, will himself be
swallowed up. Hosea had prophesied of Israel's restoration under
figure of a resurrection, and Paul grasps _his_ words and fills them
with a larger meaning. He modifies them, in a manner on which we need
not enlarge, to express the great Christian thought that death has
conquered man but that man in Christ will conquer the conqueror. With
swift change of metaphor he represents death as a serpent, armed with
a poisoned sting, and that suggests to him the thought, never far
away in his view of man, that death's power to slay is derived
from--or, so to say, concentrated in--sin; and that at once raises
the other equally characteristic and familiar thought that law
stimulates sin, since to know a thing to be forbidden creates in
perverse humanity an itching to do it, and law reveals sin by setting
up the ideal from which sin is the departure. But just as the tracks
in Paul's mind were well worn, by which the thought of death brought
in that of sin, and that of sin drew after it that of law, so with
equal closeness of established association, that of law condemnatory
and slaying, brought up that of Christ the all-sufficient refuge from
that gloomy triad--Death Sin, Law. Through union with Him each of us
may possess His immortal risen life, in which Death, the engulfer, is
himself engulfed; Death, the conqueror, is conquered utterly and for
ever; Death, the serpent, has his sting drawn, and is harmless. That
participation in Christ's life is begun even here, and God 'giveth us
the victory' now, even while we live outward lives that must end in
death, and will give it perfectly in the resurrection, when 'they
cannot die any more,' and death itself is dead.

The loftiest Christian hopes have close relation to the lowliest
Christian duties, and Paul's triumphant song ends with plain,
practical, prose exhortations to steadfastness, unmovable tenacity,
and abundant fruitfulness, the motive and power of which will be
found in the assurance that, since there is a life beyond, all labour
here, however it may fail in the eyes of men, will not be in vain,
but will tell on character and therefore on condition through
eternity. If our peace does not rest where we would fain see it
settle, it will not be wasted, but will return to us again, like the
dove to the ark, and we shall 'self-enfold the large results of'
labour that seemed to have been thrown away.




STRONG AND LOVING

   'Watch ye, stand fast in the faith, quit you like
   men, be strong. 14. Let all your things be done
   with charity.'--1 COR. xvi. 13, 14.


There is a singular contrast between the first four of these
exhortations and the last. The former ring sharp and short like
pistol-shots; the last is of gentler mould. The former sound like the
word of command shouted from an officer along the ranks; and there is
a military metaphor running all through them. The foe threatens to
advance; let the guards keep their eyes open. He comes nearer;
prepare for the charge, stand firm in your ranks. The battle is
joined; 'quit you like men'--strike a man's stroke--'be strong.'

And then all the apparatus of warfare is put away out of sight, and
the captain's word of command is softened into the Christian
teacher's exhortation: 'Let all your deeds be done in charity.' For
love is better than fighting, and is stronger than swords. And yet,
although there is a contrast here, there is also a sequence and
connection. No doubt these exhortations, which are Paul's last word
to that Corinthian Church on whom he had lavished in turn the
treasures of his manifold eloquence, indignation, argumentation, and
tenderness, reflected the deficiencies of the people to whom he was
speaking. They were schismatic and factious to the very core, and so
they needed the exhortation to be left last in their ears, as it
were, that everything should be done in love. They were ill-grounded
in regard to the very fundamental doctrines of the faith, as all
Paul's argumentation about the resurrection proves, and so they
needed to be bidden to 'stand fast in the faith.' Their slothful
carelessness as to the discipline of the Christian life, and their
consequent feebleness of grasp of the Christian verities, made them
loose-braced and weak in all respects, and incapacitated them for
vigorous warfare. Thus, we see a picture in these injunctions of the
sort of community that Paul had to deal with in Corinth, which yet he
called a Church of saints, and for which he loved and laboured. Let
me then run over and try to bring out the importance and mutual
connection of what I may call this drill-book for the Christian
warfare, which is the Christian life.

'Watch ye.' That means one of two things certainly, probably
both--Keep awake, and keep your eyes open. Our Lord used the same
metaphor, you remember, very frequently, but with a special
significance. On His lips it generally referred to the attitude of
expectation of His coming in judgment. Paul uses sometimes the figure
with the same application, but here, distinctly, it has another. As I
said, there is the military idea underlying it. What will become of
an army if the sentries go to sleep? And what chance will a Christian
man have of doing his _devoir_ against his enemy, unless he
keeps himself awake, and keeps himself alert? Watchfulness, in the
sense of always having eyes open for the possible rush down upon us
of temptation and evil, is no small part of the discipline and the
duty of the Christian life. One part of that watchfulness consists in
exercising a very rigid and a very constant and comprehensive
scrutiny of our motives. For there is no way by which evil creeps
upon us so unobserved, as when it slips in at the back door of a
specious motive. Many a man contents himself with the avoidance of
actual evil actions, and lets any kind of motives come in and out of
his mind unexamined. It is all right to look after our _doings_, but
'as a man _thinketh_ in his heart, so is he.' The good or the evil of
anything that I do is determined wholly by the motive with which I do
it. And we are a great deal too apt to palm off deceptions on
ourselves to make sure that our motives are right, unless we give
them a very careful and minute scrutiny. One side of this
watchfulness, then, is a habitual inspection of our motives and
reasons for action. 'What am I doing this for?' is a question that
would stop dead an enormous proportion of our activity, as if you had
turned the steam off from an engine. If you will use a very fine
sieve through which to strain your motives, you will go a long way to
keeping your actions right. We should establish a rigid examination
for applicants for entrance, and make quite sure that each that
presents itself is not a wolf in sheep's clothing. Make them all
bring out their passports. Let every vessel that comes into your
harbour remain isolated from all communication with the shore, until
the health officer has been on board and given a clean bill. 'Watch
ye,' for yonder, away in the dark, in the shadow of the trees, the
black masses of the enemy are gathered, and a midnight attack is but
too likely to bring a bloody awakening to a camp full of sleepers.

My text goes on to bring the enemy nearer and nearer and nearer.
'Watch ye'--and if, not unnoticed, they come down on you, 'stand fast
in the faith.' There will be no keeping our ranks, or keeping our
feet--or at least, it is not nearly so likely that there will
be--unless there has been the preceding watchfulness. If the first
command has not been obeyed, there is small chance of the second's
being so. If there has not been any watchfulness, it is not at all
likely that there will be much steadfastness. Just as with a man
going along a crowded pavement, a little touch from a passer-by will
throw him off his balance, whereas if he had known it was coming, and
had adjusted his poise rightly, he would have stood against thrice as
violent a shock, so, in order that we may stand fast, we must watch.
A sudden assault will be a great deal less formidable when it is a
foreseen assault.

'Stand fast _in the faith_.' I take it that this does not mean
'the thing that we believe,' which use of the word 'faith' is the
ecclesiastical, but not the New Testament meaning. In Scripture,
faith means not the body of truths that we believe, but the act of
believing them. This further command tells us that, in addition to
our watchfulness, and as the basis of our steadfastness, confidence
in the revelation of God in Jesus Christ will enable us to keep our
feet whatever comes against us, and to hold our ground, whoever may
assault us.

But remember that it is not because I have faith that I stand fast,
but because of that in which I have faith. My feet may be well
shod--and it used to be said that a soldier's shoes were of as much
importance in the battle as his musket--my feet may be well shod, but
if they are not well planted upon firm ground I never shall be able
to stand the collision of the foe. So then, it is not my grasp of the
blessed truth, God in Christ my Friend and Helper, but it is that
truth which I grasp at, that makes me strong. Or, to put it into
other words, it is the foothold, and not the foot that holds it, that
ensures our standing firm. Only there is no steadfastness
communicated to us from the source of all stability, except by way of
our faith, which brings Christ into us. 'Watch ye; stand fast in the
faith.'

The next two words of command are very closely connected, though not
quite identical. 'Quit you like men.' Play a man's part in the
battle; strike with all the force of your muscles. But the Apostle
adds, 'be strong.' You cannot play a man's part unless you are. 'Be
strong'--the original would rather bear 'become strong.' What is the
use of telling men to '_be_ strong'? It is a waste of words, in
nine cases out of ten, to say to a weak man, 'Pluck up your courage,
and show strength.' But the Apostle uses a very uncommon word here,
at least uncommon in the New Testament, and another place where he
uses it will throw light upon what he means: 'Strengthened with might
by His Spirit in the inner man.' Then is it so vain a mockery to tell
a poor, weak creature like me to become strong, when you can point me
to the source of all strength, in that 'Spirit of power and of love
and of a sound mind'? We have only to take our weakness there to have
it stiffened into strength; as people put bits of wood into what are
called 'petrifying wells' which infiltrate into them mineral
particles, that do not turn the wood into stone, but make the wood as
strong as stone. So my manhood, with all its weakness, may have
filtered into it divine strength, which will brace me for all needful
duty, and make me 'more than conqueror through Him that loved us.'
Then, it is not mockery and cruelty, vanity and surplusage to preach
'Quit you like men; be strong, and be a man'; because if we will
observe the plain and not hard conditions, strength will come to us
according to our day, in fulfilment of the great promises: 'My grace
is sufficient for thee; and My strength is made perfect in weakness.'

And now we have done with the fighting words of command, and come to
the gentler exhortation: 'Let all your things be done in charity.'

That was a hard lesson for these Corinthians who were splitting
themselves into factions and sects, and tearing each other's eyes out
in their partisanship for various Christian teachers. But the advice
has a much wider application than to the suppression of squabbles in
Christian communities. It is the sum of all commandments of the
Christian life, if you will take love in its widest sense, in the
sense, that is, in which it is always used in Paul's writings. We cut
it into two halves, and think of it as sometimes meaning love to God,
and sometimes love to man. The two are inseparably inter-penetrated
in the New Testament writings; and so we have to interpret this
supreme commandment in the whole breadth and meaning of that great
word _Love_. And then it just comes to this, that love is the
victor in all the Christian warfare. If we love God, at any given
moment, consciously having our affection engaged with Him, and our
heart going out to Him, do you think that any evil or temptation
would have power over us? Should we not see them as they are, to be
devils in disguise? In the proportion in which I love God I conquer
all sin. And at the moment in which that great, sweet, all-satisfying
light floods into my soul, I see through the hollowness and the
shams, and detect the ugliness and the filth of the things that
otherwise would be temptations. If you desire to be conquerors in the
Christian fight, remember that the true way of conquest is, as
another Apostle says, 'Keep yourselves in the love of God.' 'Let all
your things be done in charity.'

And, further, how beautifully the Apostle here puts the great truth
that we are all apt to forget, that the strongest type of human
character is the gentlest and most loving, and that the mighty man is
not the man of intellectual or material force, such as the world
idolises, but the man who is much because he loves much. If we would
come to supreme beauty of Christian character, there must be
inseparably manifested in our lives, and lived in our hearts,
strength and love, might and gentleness. That is the perfect man,
and that was the union which was set before us, in the highest form,
in the 'Strong Son of God, Immortal Love,' whom we call our Saviour,
and whom we are bound to follow. His soldiers conquer as the Captain
of their salvation has conquered, when watchfulness and steadfastness
and courage and strength are all baptized in love and perfected
thereby.




ANATHEMA AND GRACE

   'The salutation of me Paul with mine own hand. 22. If
   any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
   Anathema Maran-atha. 23. The grace of our Lord Jesus
   Christ be with you. 24. My love be with you all
   in Christ Jesus.'--1 COR. xvi. 21-24.


Terror and tenderness are strangely mingled in this parting
salutation, which was added in the great characters shaped by Paul's
own hand, to the letter written by an amanuensis. He has been
obliged, throughout the whole epistle, to assume a tone of
remonstrance abundantly mingled with irony and sarcasm and
indignation. He has had to rebuke the Corinthians for many faults,
party spirit, lax morality, toleration of foul sins, grave abuses in
their worship even at the Lord's Supper, gross errors in opinion in
the denial of the Resurrection. And in this last solemn warning he
traces all these vices to their fountainhead--the defect of love to
Jesus Christ--and warns of their fatal issue. 'Let him be Anathema.'

But he will not leave these terrible words for his last. The thunder
is followed by gentle rain, and the sun glistens on the drops; 'The
grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all.' Nor for himself will
he let the last impression be one of rebuke or even of warning. He
desires to show that his heart yearns over them all; so he gathers
them all--the partisans; the poor brother that has fallen into sin;
the lax ones who, in their misplaced tenderness, had left him in his
sin; the misguided reasoners who had struck the Resurrection out of
the articles of the Christian creed--he gathers them all into his
final salutation, and he says, 'Take and share my love--though I have
had to rebuke--amongst the whole of you.'

Is not that beautiful? And does not the juxtaposition of such
messages in this farewell go deeper than the revelation of Paul's
character? May we not see, in these terrible and tender thoughts thus
inextricably intertwined and braided together, a revelation of the
true nature both of the terror and the tenderness of the Gospel which
Paul preached? It is from that point of view that I wish to look at
them now.

I. I take first that thought--the terror of the fate of the unloving.

Now, I must ask you for a moment's attention in regard to these two
untranslated words. _Anathema Maran-atha_. The first thing to be
noticed is that the latter of them stands independently of the
former, and forms a sentence by itself, as I shall have to show you
presently. 'Anathema' means an offering, or a thing devoted; and its
use in the New Testament arises from its use in the Greek translation
of the Old Testament, where it is employed for persons and things
that, in a peculiar sense, were set apart and devoted to God. In the
story of the conquest of Canaan, for instance, we read of Jericho and
other places, persons, or things that were, as our version somewhat
unfortunately renders it, 'accursed,' or as it ought rather to be
rendered, 'devoted,' or 'put under a ban.' And this 'devotion' was of
such a sort as that the things or persons devoted were doomed to
destruction. All the dreadful things that were done in the Conquest
were the consequences of the persons that endured them being thus
'consecrated,' in a very dreadful sense, or set apart for God. The
underlying idea was that evil things brought into contact with Him
were necessarily destroyed with a swift destruction. That being the
meaning of the word, it is clear that its use in my text is
distinctly metaphorical, and that it suggests to us that the
unloving, like those cities full of uncleanness, when they are
brought into contact with the infinite love of the coming Judge,
shrivel up and are destroyed.

The other word 'Maran-atha,' as I said, is to be taken as a separate
sentence. It belongs to the dialect, which was probably the
vernacular of Palestine in the time of Paul, and to which belong, for
the most part, the other untranslated words that are scattered up and
down the Gospels, such as 'Aceldama,' 'Ephphatha,' and the like. It
means 'our Lord comes.' Why Paul chose to use that untranslated scrap
of another tongue in a letter to a Gentile Church we cannot tell.
Perhaps it had come to be a kind of watchword amongst the early
Jewish Christians, which came naturally to his lips. But, at any
rate, the use of it here is distinctly to confirm the warning of the
previous clause, by pointing to the time at which that warning shall
be fulfilled. 'If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
devoted and destroyed. Our Lord comes.' The only other thing to be
noticed by way of introduction is that this first clause is not an
imprecation, nor any wish on the part of the Apostle, but is a solemn
prophetic warning (acquiesced in by every righteous heart) of that
which will certainly come. The significance of the whole may be
gathered into one simple sentence--The coming of the Lord of Love is
the destruction of the unloving.

'Our Lord comes.' Paul's Christianity gathered round two facts and
moments--one in the past, Christ has come; one in the future, Christ
will come. For memory, the coming by the cradle and the Cross; for
hope, the coming on His throne in glory; and between these two
moments, like the solid piers of a suspension bridge, the frail
structure of the Present hangs swinging. In this day men have lost
their expectation of the one, and to a large extent their faith in
the other. But we shall not understand Scripture unless we seek to
make as prominent in our thoughts as on its pages that second coming
as the complement and necessary issue of the first. It stands stamped
on every line. It colours all the New Testament views of life. It is
used as a motive for every duty, and as a magnet to draw men to Jesus
Christ by salutary dread. There is no hint in my text about the time
of the Lord's coming, no disturbing of the solemnity of the thought
by non-essential details of chronology, so we may dismiss these from
our minds. The fact is the same, and has the same force as a motive
for life, whether it is to be fulfilled in the next moment or
thousands of years hence, provided only that you and I are to be
there when He comes.

There have been many comings in the past, besides the comings in the
flesh. The days of the Lord that have already appeared in the history
of the world are not few. One characteristic is stamped upon them
all, and that is the swift annihilation of what is opposed to Him.
The Bible has a set of standing metaphors by which to illustrate this
thought of the Coming of the Lord--a flood, a harvest when the ears
are ripe for the sickle, the waking of God from slumber, and the
like; all suggesting similar thoughts. _The_ day of the Lord,
_the_ coming of the Lord, will include and surpass all the
characteristics which these lesser and premonitory judgment days
presented in miniature. I do not enlarge on this theme. I would not
play the orator about it if I could; but I appeal to your
consciences, which, in the case of most of us, not only testify of
right and wrong, but of responsibility, and suggest a judge to whom
we are responsible. And I urge on each, and on myself, this simple
question: Have I allowed its due weight on my life and character to
that watchword of the ancient church--_Maran-atha_, 'our Lord
cometh'?

Now, the coming of the Lord of Love is the annihilation of the
unloving. The destruction implied in Anathema does not mean the
cessation of Being, but a death which is worse than death, because it
is a death in life. Suppose a man with all his past annihilated,
with all its effort foiled and crushed, with all its possessions
evaporated and disappeared, and with his memory and his conscience
stung into clear-sighted activity, so that he looks back upon his
former self and into his present self, and feels that it is all waste
and chaos, would not that fulfil the word of my text--'Let him be
Anathema'? And suppose that such a man, in addition to these
thoughts, and as the root and the source of them, had ever the
quivering consciousness that he was and must be in the presence of an
unloved Judge; have you not there the naked bones of a very dreadful
thing, which does not need any tawdry eloquence of man to make it
more solemn and more real? The unloving heart is always ill at ease
in the presence of Him whom it does not love. The unloving heart does
not love, because it does not trust, nor see the love. Therefore, the
unloving heart is a heart that is only capable of apprehending the
wrathful side of Christ's character. It is a heart devoid of the
fruits of love which are likeness and righteousness, 'without which
no man shall see the Lord,' nor stand the flash of the brightness of
