in this particular age you want unbounded faith in the triumph of the
truth and the overthrow of wickedness. How dare the Christian Church
ever get discouraged? Have we not the Lord Almighty on our side? How
long did it take God to slay the hosts of Sennacherib or burn Sodom or
shake down Jericho? How long will it take God, when He once arises in
His strength, to overthrow all the forces of iniquity? Between this
time and that there may be long seasons of darkness--the
chariot-wheels of God's Gospel may seem to drag heavily; but here is
the promise, and yonder is the throne; and when Omniscience has lost
its eyesight, and Omnipotence falls back impotent, and Jehovah is
driven from His throne, then the Church of Jesus Christ can afford to
be despondent, but never until then. Despots may plan and armies may
march, and the congresses of the nations may seem to think they are
adjusting all the affairs of the world, but the mighty men of the
earth are only the dust of the chariot-wheels of God's providence.

I think that before the sun of this century shall set the last tyranny
will fall, and with a splendor of demonstration that shall be the
astonishment of the universe God will set forth the brightness and
pomp and glory and perpetuity of His eternal government. Out of the
starry flags and the emblazoned insignia of this world God will make a
path for His own triumph, and, returning from universal conquest, He
will sit down, the grandest, strongest, highest throne of earth His
footstool.

    "Then shall all nations' song ascend
    To Thee, our Ruler, Father, Friend,
    Till heaven's high arch resounds again
    With 'Peace on earth, good will to men.'"

I preach this sermon because I want to encourage all Christian workers
in every possible department. Hosts of the living God, march on! march
on! His Spirit will bless you. His shield will defend you. His sword
will strike for you. March on! march on! The despotism will fall, and
paganism will burn its idols, and Mohammedanism will give up its false
prophet, and Judaism will confess the true Messiah, and the great
walls of superstition will come down in thunder and wreck at the long,
loud blast of the Gospel trumpet. March on! march on! The besiegement
will soon be ended. Only a few more steps on the long way; only a few
more sturdy blows; only a few more battle cries, then God will put the
laurel upon your brow, and from the living fountains of heaven will
bathe off the sweat and the heat and the dust of the conflict. March
on! march on! For you the time for work will soon be passed, and amid
the outflashings of the judgment throne, and the trumpeting of
resurrection angels, and the upheaving of a world of graves, and the
hosanna and the groaning of the saved and the lost, we shall be
rewarded for our faithfulness or punished for our stupidity. Blessed
be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting, and let the
whole earth be filled with His glory. Amen and Amen.




CAPITAL AND LABOR.

    "Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so
    to them."--MATT. vii: 12.


The greatest war the world has ever seen is between capital and labor.
The strife is not like that which in history is called the Thirty
Years' War, for it is a war of centuries, it is a war of the five
continents, it is a war hemispheric. The middle classes in this
country, upon whom the nation has depended for holding the balance of
power and for acting as mediators between the two extremes, are
diminishing; and if things go on at the same ratio as they are now
going, it will not be very long before there will be no middle class
in this country, but all will be very rich or very poor, princes or
paupers, and the country will be given up to palaces and hovels.

The antagonistic forces are closing in upon each other. The
telegraphic operators' strikes, the railroad employes' strikes, the
Pennsylvania miners' strikes, the movements of the Boycotters and the
dynamiters are only skirmishes before a general engagement, or, if you
prefer it, escapes through the safety-valves of an imprisoned force
which promises the explosion of society. You may pooh-pooh it; you may
say that this trouble, like an angry child, will cry itself to sleep;
you may belittle it by calling it Fourierism, or Socialism, or St.
Simonism, or Nihilism, or Communism; but that will not hinder the fact
that it is the mightiest, the darkest, the most terrific threat of
this century. All attempts at pacification have been dead failures,
and monopoly is more arrogant, and the trades unions more bitter.
"Give us more wages," cry the employes. "You shall have less," say the
capitalists. "Compel us to do fewer hours of toil in a day." "You
shall toil more hours," say the others. "Then, under certain
conditions, we will not work at all," say these. "Then you shall
starve," say those, and the workmen gradually using up that which they
accumulated in better times, unless there be some radical change, we
shall have soon in this country three million hungry men and women.
Now, three million hungry people can not be kept quiet. All the
enactments of legislatures and all the constabularies of the cities,
and all the army and navy of the United States can not keep three
million hungry people quiet. What then? Will this war between capital
and labor be settled by human wisdom? Never. The brow of the one
becomes more rigid, the fist of the other more clinched.

But that which human wisdom can not achieve will be accomplished by
Christianity if it be given full sway. You have heard of medicines so
powerful that one drop would stop a disease and restore a patient; and
I have to tell you that one drop of my text properly administered will
stop all those woes of society and give convalescence and complete
health to all classes. "Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you,
do ye even so to them."

I shall first show you this morning how this quarrel between monopoly
and hard work can not be stopped, and then I will show you how this
controversy will be settled.

Futile remedies. In the first place, there will come no pacification
to this trouble through an outcry against rich men merely because they
are rich. There is no member of a trades-union on earth that would not
be rich if he could be. Sometimes through a fortunate invention, or
through some accident of prosperity, a man who had nothing comes to
large estate, and we see him arrogant and supercilious, and taking
people by the throat just as other people took him by the throat.
There is something very mean about human nature when it comes to the
top. But it is no more a sin to be rich than it is a sin to be poor.
There are those who have gathered a great estate through fraud, and
then there are millionaires who have gathered their fortune through
foresight in regard to changes in the markets, and through brilliant
business faculty, and every dollar of their estate is as honest as the
dollar which the plumber gets for mending a pipe, or the mason gets
for building a wall. There are those who keep in poverty because of
their own fault. They might have been well-off, but they smoked or
chewed up their earnings, or they lived beyond their means, while
others on the same wages and on the same salaries went on to
competency. I know a man who is all the time complaining of his
poverty and crying out against rich men, while he himself keeps two
dogs, and chews and smokes, and is filled to the chin with whisky and
beer!

Micawber said to David Copperfield: "Copperfield, my boy, one pound
income, twenty shillings and sixpence expenses: result misery. But,
Copperfield, my boy, one pound income, expenses nineteen shillings and
sixpence; result, happiness." And there are vast multitudes of people
who are kept poor because they are the victims of their own
improvidence. It is no sin to be rich, and it is no sin to be poor. I
protest against this outcry which I hear against those who, through
economy and self-denial and assiduity, have come to large fortune.
This bombardment of commercial success will never stop this quarrel
between capital and labor.

Neither will the contest be settled by cynical and unsympathetic
treatment of the laboring classes. There are those who speak of them
as though they were only cattle or draught horses. Their nerves are
nothing, their domestic comfort is nothing, their happiness is
nothing. They have no more sympathy for them than a hound has for a
hare, or a hawk for a hen, or a tiger for a calf. When Jean Valjean,
the greatest hero of Victor Hugo's writings, after a life of suffering
and brave endurance, goes into incarceration and death, they clap the
book shut and say, "Good for him!" They stamp their feet with
indignation and say just the opposite of "Save the working-classes."
They have all their sympathies with Shylock, and not with Antonio and
Portia. They are plutocrats, and their feelings are infernal. They are
filled with irritation and irascibility on this subject. To stop this
awful imbroglio between capital and labor they will lift not so much
as the tip end of the little finger.

Neither will there be any pacification of this angry controversy
through violence. God never blessed murder.

The poorest use you can put a man to is to kill him. Blow up to-morrow
all the country-seats on the banks of the Hudson, and all the fine
houses on Madison Square, and Brooklyn Heights, and Bunker Hill, and
Rittenhouse Square, and Beacon Street, and all the bricks and timber
and stone will just fall back on the bare head of American labor. The
worst enemies of the working-classes in the United States and Ireland
are their demented coadjutors. Assassination--the assassination of
Lord Frederick Cavendish and Mr. Burke in Phoenix Park, Dublin,
Ireland, in the attempt to avenge the wrongs of Ireland, only turned
away from that afflicted people millions of sympathizers. The recent
attempt to blow up the House of Commons, in London, had only this
effect: to throw out of employment tens of thousands of innocent Irish
people in England.

In this country the torch put to the factories that have discharged
hands for good or bad reason; obstructions on the rail-track in front
of midnight express trains because the offenders do not like the
president of the company; strikes on shipboard the hour they were
going to sail, or in printing-offices the hour the paper was to go to
press, or in mines the day the coal was to be delivered, or on house
scaffoldings so the builder fails in keeping his contract--all these
are only a hard blow on the head of American labor, and cripple its
arms, and lame its feet, and pierce its heart. Take the last great
strike in America--the telegraph operators' strike--and you have to
find that the operators lost four hundred thousand dollars' worth of
wages, and have had poorer wages ever since. Traps sprung suddenly
upon employers, and violence, never took one knot out of the knuckle
of toil, or put one farthing of wages into a callous palm. Barbarism
will never cure the wrongs of civilization. Mark that!

Frederick the Great admired some land near his palace at Potsdam, and
he resolved to get it. It was owned by a miller. He offered the miller
three times the value of the property. The miller would not take it,
because it was the old homestead, and he felt about as Naboth felt
about his vineyard when Ahab wanted it. Frederick the Great was a
rough and terrible man, and he ordered the miller into his presence;
and the king, with a stick, in his hand--a stick with which he
sometimes struck his officers of state--said to this miller: "Now, I
have offered you three times the value of that property, and if you
won't sell it I'll take it anyhow." The miller said, "Your majesty,
you won't." "Yes," said the king, "I will take it." "Then," said the
miller, "if your majesty does take it, I will sue you in the Chancery
Court." At that threat Frederick the Great yielded his infamous
demand. And the most imperious outrage against the working-classes
will yet cower before the law. Violence and contrary to the law will
never accomplish anything, but righteousness and according to law will
accomplish it.

Well, if this controversy between Capital and Labor can not be settled
by human wisdom, if to-day Capital and Labor stand with their thumbs
on each other's throat--as they do--it is time for us to look
somewhere else for relief, and it points from my text roseate and
jubilant, and puts one hand on the broadcloth shoulder of Capital, and
puts the other hand on the homespun-covered shoulder of Toil, and
says, with a voice that will grandly and gloriously settle this, and
settle everything, "Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do
ye even so to them." That is, the lady of the household will say: "I
must treat the maid in the kitchen just as I would like to be treated
if I were down-stairs, and it were my work to wash, and cook, and
sweep, and it were the duty of the maid in the kitchen to preside in
this parlor." The maid in the kitchen must say: "If my employer seems
to be more prosperous than I, that is no fault of hers; I shall not
treat her as an enemy. I will have the same industry and fidelity
down-stairs as I would expect from my subordinates, if I happened to
be the wife of a silk importer."

The owner of an iron mill, having taken a dose of my text before
leaving home in the morning, will go into his foundry, and, passing
into what is called the puddling-room, he will see a man there
stripped to the waist, and besweated and exhausted with the labor and
the toil, and he will say to him: "Why, it seems to be very hot in
here. You look very much exhausted. I hear your child is sick with
scarlet fever. If you want your wages a little earlier this week, so
as to pay the nurse and get the medicines, just come into my office
any time."

After awhile, crash goes the money market, and there is no more demand
for the articles manufactured in that iron mill, and the owner does
not know what to do. He says, "Shall I stop the mill, or shall I run
it on half time, or shall I cut down the men's wages?" He walks the
floor of his counting-room all day, hardly knowing what to do. Toward
evening he calls all the laborers together. They stand all around,
some with arms akimbo, some with folded arms, wondering what the boss
is going to do now. The manufacturer says: "Men, times are very hard;
I don't make twenty dollars where I used to make one hundred. Somehow,
there is no demand now for what we manufacture, or but very little
demand. You see I am at vast expense, and I have called you together
this afternoon to see what you would advise. I don't want to shut up
the mill, because that would force you out of work, and you have
always been very faithful, and I like you, and you seem to like me,
and the bairns must be looked after, and your wife will after awhile
want a new dress. I don't know what to do."

There is a dead halt for a minute or two, and then one of the workmen
steps out from the ranks of his fellows, and says: "Boss, you have
been very good to us, and when you prospered we prospered, and now you
are in a tight place and I am sorry, and we have got to sympathize
with you. I don't know how the others feel, but I propose that we take
off twenty per cent. from our wages, and that when the times get good
you will remember us and raise them again." The workman looks around
to his comrades, and says: "Boys, what do you say to this? all in
favor of my proposition will say ay." "Ay! ay! ay!" shout two hundred
voices.

But the mill-owner, getting in some new machinery, exposes himself
very much, and takes cold, and it settles into pneumonia, and he dies.
In the procession to the tomb are all the workmen, tears rolling down
their cheeks, and off upon the ground; but an hour before the
procession gets to the cemetery the wives and the children of those
workmen are at the grave waiting for the arrival of the funeral
pageant. The minister of religion may have delivered an eloquent
eulogium before they started from the house, but the most impressive
things are said that day by the working-classes standing around the
tomb.

That night in all the cabins of the working-people where they have
family prayers the widowhood and the orphanage in the mansion are
remembered. No glaring populations look over the iron fence of the
cemetery; but, hovering over the scene, the benediction of God and man
is coming for the fulfillment of the Christlike injunction,
"Whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even so to
them."

"Oh," says some man here, "that is all Utopian, that is apocryphal,
that is impossible." No. Yesterday, I cut out of a paper this: "One of
the pleasantest incidents recorded in a long time is reported from
Sheffield, England. The wages of the men in the iron works at
Sheffield are regulated by a board of arbitration, by whose decision
both masters and men are bound. For some time past the iron and steel
trade has been extremely unprofitable, and the employers can not,
without much loss, pay the wages fixed by the board, which neither
employers nor employed have the power to change. To avoid this
difficulty, the workmen in one of the largest steel works in Sheffield
hit upon a device as rare as it was generous. They offered to work for
their employers one week without any pay whatever. How much better
that plan is than a strike would be."

But you go with me and I will show you--not so far off as Sheffield,
England--factories, banking-houses, storehouses, and costly
enterprises where this Christ-like injunction of my text is fully
kept, and you could no more get the employer to practice an injustice
upon his men, or the men to conspire against the employer, than you
could get your right hand and your left hand, your right eye and your
left eye, your right ear and your left ear, into physiological
antagonism. Now, where is this to begin? In our homes, in our stores,
on our farms--not waiting for other people to do their duty. Is there
a divergence now between the parlor and the kitchen? Then there is
something wrong, either in the parlor or the kitchen, perhaps in both.
Are the clerks in your store irate against the firm? Then there is
something wrong, either behind the counter, or in the private office,
or perhaps in both.

The great want of the world to-day is the fulfillment of this
Christ-like injunction, that which He promulgated in His sermon
Olivetic. All the political economists under the arch or vault of the
heavens in convention for a thousand years can not settle this
