and Phebe Brown's--

    I love to steal awhile away;

--have already been noticed. Bishop Doane's gentle and spiritual lines
express nearly everything that a worshipping soul would include in a
moment of evening thought. The first and last stanzas are the ones most
commonly sung.

    Softly now the light of day
    Fades upon my sight away:
    Free from care, from labor free,
    Lord I would commune with Thee.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Soon for me the light of day
    Shall forever pass away;
    Then, from sin and sorrow free,
    Take me, Lord, to dwell with Thee.


_THE TUNE._

Both Kozeluck and J.E. Gould, besides Louis M. Gottschalk and Dr. Henry
John Gauntlett, have tried their skill in fitting music to this hymn,
but only Gottschalk and Kozeluck approach the mood into which its quiet
words charm a pious and reflective mind. Possibly its frequent
association with "Holley," composed by George Hews, may influence a
hearer's judgement of other melodies but there is something in that tune
that makes it cling to the hymn as if by instinctive kinship.

Others may have as much or more artistic music but "Holley" in its soft
modulations seems to breathe the spirit of every word.

It was this tune to which a stranger recently heard a group of
mill-girls singing Bishop Doane's verses. The lady, a well-known
Christian worker, visited a certain factory, and the superintendent,
after showing her through the building, opened a door into a long
work-room, where the singing of the girls delighted and surprised her.
It was sunset, and their hymn was--

    Softly now the light of day.

Several of the girls were Sunday-school teachers, who had encouraged
others to sing at that hour, and it had become a habit.

"Has it made a difference?" the lady inquired.

"There is seldom any quarrelling or coarse joking among them now," said
the superintendent with a smile.

Dr. S.F. Smith's hymn of much the same tone and tenor--

    Softly fades the twilight ray
    Of the holy Sabbath day,

--is commonly sung to the tune of "Holley."

George Hews, an American composer and piano-maker, was born in
Massachusetts 1800, and died July 6, 1873. No intelligence of him or his
work or former locality is at hand, beyond this brief note in Baptie,
"He is believed to have followed his trade in Boston, and written music
for some of Mason's earlier books."


_DEDICATION._


"CHRIST IS OUR CORNER-STONE."

This reproduces in Chandler's translation a song-service in an ancient
Latin liturgy (_angulare fundamentum_).

    Christ is our Corner-Stone;
      On Him alone we build,
    With His true saints alone
      The courts of heaven are filled,
        On His great love
        Our hopes we place
        Of present grace
          And joys above.

    O then with hymns of praise
      These hallowed courts shall ring;
    Our voices we will raise
      The Three-in-One to sing.
        And thus proclaim
        In joyful song
        But loud and long
          That glorious Name.

The Rev. John Chandler was born at Witley, Surrey, Eng. June 16, 1806.
He took his A.M. degree at Oxford, and entered the ministry of the
Church of England, was Vicar of Witley many years, and became well-known
for his translations of hymns of the primitive church. Died at Putney,
July 1, 1876.


_THE TUNE._

Sebastian Wesley's "Harewood" is plainer and of less compass, but
Zundel's "Brooklyn" is more than its rival, both in melody and vivacity.


"OH LORD OF HOSTS WHOSE GLORY FILLS THE BOUNDS OF THE ETERNAL HILLS."

A hymn of Dr. John Mason Neale--

    Endue the creatures with Thy grace
    That shall adorn Thy dwelling-place
    The beauty of the oak and pine,
    The gold and silver, make them Thine.

    The heads that guide endue with skill,
    The hands that work preserve from ill,
    That we who these foundations lay
    May raise the top-stone in its day.


_THE TUNE._

"Welton," by Rev. Caesar Malan--author of "Hendon," once familiar to
American singers.

Henri Abraham Caesar Malan was born at Geneva, Switzerland, 1787, and
educated at Geneva College. Ordained to the ministry of the State
church, (Reformed,) he was dismissed for preaching against its formalism
and spiritual apathy; but he built a chapel of his own, and became a
leader with D'Aubigne, Monod, and others in reviving the purity of the
Evangelical faith and laboring for the conversion of souls.

Malan wrote many hymns, and published a large collection, the "_Chants
de Sion_," for the Evangelical Society and the French Reformed Church.
He composed the music of his own hymns. Died at Vandosurre, 1864.


"DAUGHTER OF ZION, FROM THE DUST."

Cases may occur where an _exhortation_ hymn earns a place with
dedication hymns.

The charred fragment of a hymn-book leaf hangs in a frame on the
auditorium wall of the "New England Church," Chicago. The former edifice
of that church, all the homes of its resident members, and all their
business offices except one, were destroyed in the great fire. In the
ruins of their sanctuary the only scrap of paper found on which there
was a legible word was this bit of a hymn-book leaf with the two first
stanzas of Montgomery's hymn,

    Daughter of Zion, from the dust,
      Exalt thy fallen head;
    Again in thy Redeemer trust,
      He calls thee from the dead.

    Awake, awake! put on thy strength,
      Thy beautiful array;
    The day of freedom dawns at length,
      The Lord's appointed day.

The third verse was not long in coming to every mind--

    Rebuild thy walls! thy bounds enlarge!

--and even without that added word the impoverished congregation
evidently enough had received a message from heaven. They took heart of
grace, overcame all difficulties, and in good time replaced their ruined
Sabbath-home with the noble house in which they worship today.[46]

[Footnote 46: The story is told by Rev. William E. Barton D.D. of Oak
Park, Ill.]

If the "New England Church" of Chicago did not sing this hymn at the
dedication of their new temple it was for some other reason than lack of
gratitude--not to say reverence.


_THE SABBATH_.


The very essence of all song-worship pitched on this key-note is the
ringing hymn of Watts--

    Sweet is the day of sacred rest,
    No mortal cares disturb my breast, etc.

--but it has vanished from the hymnals with its tune. Is it because
profane people or thoughtless youth made a travesty of the two next
lines--

    O may my heart in tune be found
    Like David's harp of solemn sound?


_THE TUNE._

Old "Portland" by Abraham Maxim, a fugue tune in F major of the canon
style, expressed all the joy that a choir could put into music, though
with more sound than skill. The choral is a relic among relics now, but
it is a favorite one.

"Sweet is the Light of Sabbath Eve" by Edmeston; Stennett's "Another Six
Days' Work is Done," sung to "Spohr," the joint tune of Louis Spohr and
J.E. Gould; and Doddridge's "Thine Earthly Sabbath, Lord, We Love"
retain a feeble hold among some congregations. And Hayward's "Welcome
Delightful Morn," to the impossible tune of "Lischer," survived
unaccountably long in spite of its handicap. But special Sabbath hymns
are out of fashion, those classed under that title taking an incidental
place under the general head of "Worship."


_COMMUNION._


"BREAD OF HEAVEN, ON THEE WE FEED."

This hymn of Josiah Conder, copying the physical metaphors of the 6th of
John, is still occasionally used at the Lord's Supper.

    Vine of Heaven, Thy blood supplies
    This blest cup of sacrifice,
    Lord, Thy wounds our healing give,
    To Thy Cross we look and live.

The hymn is notable for the felicity with which it combines imagery and
reality. Figure and fact are always in sight of each other.

Josiah Conder was born in London, September 17, 1789. He edited the
_Eclectic Review_, and was the author of numerous prose works on
historic and religious subjects. Rev. Garrett Horder says that more of
his hymns are in common use now than those of any other except Watts and
Doddridge. More _in proportion to the relative number_ may be nearer the
truth. In his lifetime Conder wrote about sixty hymns. He died Dec. 27,
1855.


_THE TUNE._

The tune "Corsica" sometimes sung to the words, though written by the
famous Von Gluck, shows no sign of the genius of its author. Born at
Weissenwang, near New Markt, Prussia, July 2, 1714, he spent his life in
the service of operatic art, and is called "the father of the lyric
drama," but he paid little attention to sacred music. Queen Marie
Antoinette was for a while his pupil. Died Nov. 25, 1787.

"Wilmot," (from Von Weber) one of Mason's popular hymn-tune
arrangements, is a melody with which the hymn is well acquainted. It has
a fireside rhythm which old and young of the same circles take up
naturally in song.


"HERE, O MY LORD, I SEE THEE FACE TO FACE."

Written in October, 1855, by Dr. Horatius Bonar. James Bonar, brother of
the poet-preacher, just after the communion for that month, asked him to
furnish a hymn for the communion record. It was the church custom to
print a memorandum of each service at the Lord's table, with an
appropriate hymn attached, and an original one would be thrice welcome.
Horatius in a day or two sent this hymn:

    Here, O my Lord, I see Thee face to face,
    Here would I touch and handle things unseen
    Here grasp with firmer hand th' eternal grace
    And all my weariness upon Thee lean.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Too soon we rise; the symbols disappear;
    The feast, though not the love, is past and gone;
    The bread and wine remove, but Thou art here
    Nearer than ever--still my Shield and Sun.


_THE TUNE._

"Morecambe" is an anonymous composition printed with the words by the
_Plymouth Hymnal_ editors. "Berlin" by Mendelssohn is better. The metre
of Bonar's hymn is unusual, and melodies to fit it are not numerous, but
for a meditative service it is worth a tune of its own.


"O THOU MY SOUL, FORGET NO MORE."

The author of this hymn found in the Baptist hymnals, and often sung at
the sacramental seasons of that denomination, was the first Hindoo
convert to Christianity.

Krishna Pal, a native carpenter, in consequence of an accident, came
under the care of Mr. Thomas, a missionary who had been a surgeon in the
East Indies and was now an associate worker with William Carey. Mr.
Thomas set the man's broken arm, and talked of Jesus to him and the
surrounding crowd with so much tact and loving kindness that Krishna Pal
was touched. He became a pupil of the missionaries; embraced Christ, and
influenced his wife and daughter and his brother to accept his new
faith.

He alone, however, dared the bitter persecution of his caste, and
presented himself for church-membership. He and Carey's son were
baptized in the Ganges by Dr. Carey, Dec. 28, 1800, in the presence of
the English Governor and an immense concourse of people representing
four or five different religions.

Krishna Pal wrote several hymns. The one here noted was translated from
the Bengalee by Dr. Marshman.

    O thou, my soul, forget no more
    The Friend who all thy sorrows bore;
    Let every idol be forgot;
    But, O my soul, forget him not.

    Renounce thy works and ways, with grief,
    And fly to this divine relief;
    Nor Him forget, who left His throne,
    And for thy life gave up His own.

    Eternal truth and mercy shine
    In Him, and He Himself is thine:
    And canst thou then, with sin beset,
    Such charms, such matchless charms forget?

    Oh, no; till life itself depart,
    His name shall cheer and warm my heart;
    And lisping this, from earth I'll rise,
    And join the chorus of the skies.


_THE TUNE._

There is no scarcity of good long-metre tunes to suit the sentiment of
this hymn. More commonly in the Baptist manuals its vocal mate is
Bradbury's "Rolland" or the sweet and serious Scotch melody of "Ward,"
arranged by Mason. Best of all is "Hursley," the beautiful Ritter-Monk
choral set to "Sun of My Soul."


_NEW YEAR._


Two representative hymns of this class are John Newton's--

    While with ceaseless course the sun,

--and Charles Wesley's--

    Come let us anew our journey pursue;

the one a voice at the next year's threshold, the other a song at the
open door.

    While with ceaseless course the sun
    Hasted thro' the former year
    Many souls their race have run
    Nevermore to meet us here.

       *       *       *       *       *

    As the winged arrow flies
    Speedily the mark to find,
    As the lightening from the skies
    Darts and leaves no trace behind,
    Swiftly thus our fleeting days
    Bear we down life's rapid stream,
    Upward, Lord, our spirits raise;
    All below is but a dream.

A grave occasion, whether unexpected or periodical, will force
reflection, and so will a grave truth; and when both present themselves
at once, the truth needs only commonplace statement. If the statement is
in rhyme and measure more attention is secured. Add a _tune_ to it, and
the most frivolous will take notice. Newton's hymn sung on the last
evening of the year has its opportunity--and never fails to produce a
solemn effect; but it is to the immortal music given to it in Samuel
Webbe's "Benevento" that it owes its unique and permanent place. Dykes'
"St. Edmund" may be sung in England, but in America it will never
replace Webbe's simple and wonderfully impressive choral.

Charles Wesley's hymn is the antipode of Newton's in metre and movement.

    Come, let us anew our journey pursue,
      Roll round with the year
    And never stand still till the Master appear.
    His adorable will let us gladly fulfil
      And our talents improve
    By the patience of hope and the labor of love.

    Our life is a dream, our time as a stream
      Glides swiftly away,
    And the fugitive moment refuses to stay.
    The arrow is flown, the moment is gone,
      The millennial year,
    Rushes on to our view, and eternity's near.

[Illustration: Carl von Weber]

One could scarcely imagine a greater contrast than between this hymn and
Newton's. In spite of its eccentric metre one cannot dismiss it as
rhythmical jingle, for it is really a sermon shaped into a popular
canticle, and the surmise is not a difficult one that he had in mind a
secular air that was familiar to the crowd. But the hymn is not one of
Wesley's _poems_. Compilers who object to its lilting measure omit it
from their books, but it holds its place in public use, for it carries
weighty thoughts in swift sentences.

    O that each in the Day of His coming may say,
     "I have fought my way through,
    I have finished the work Thou didst give me to do."
    O that each from the Lord may receive the glad word,
     "Well and faithfully done,
    Enter into my joy, and sit down on my throne."

For a hundred and fifty years this has been sung in the Methodist
watch-meetings, and it will be long before it ceases to be sung--and
reprinted in Methodist, and some Baptist hymnals.

The tune of "Lucas," named after James Lucas, its composer, is the
favorite vehicle of song for the "Watch-hymn." Like the tune to "O How
Happy Are They," it has the movement of the words and the emphasis of
their meaning.

No knowledge of James Lucas is at hand except that he lived in England,
where one brief reference gives his birth-date as 1762 and "about 1805"
as the birth-date of the tune.


"GREAT GOD, WE SING THAT MIGHTY HAND."

The admirable hymn of Dr. Doddridge may be noted in this division with
its equally admirable tune of "Melancthon," one of the old Lutheran
chorals of Germany.

    Great God, we sing that mighty hand
    By which supported still we stand.
    The opening year Thy mercy shows;
    Thy mercy crown it till its close!

    By day, by night, at home, abroad,
    Still we are guarded by our God.

As this last couplet stood--and ought now to stand--pious parents
teaching the hymn to their children heard them repeat--

    By day, by night, at home, abroad,
   _We are surrounded still with God_.

Many are now living whose first impressive sense of the Divine
Omnipresence came with that line.


_PARTING._


"GOD BE WITH YOU TILL WE MEET AGAIN."

A lyric of benediction, born, apparently, at the divine moment for the
need of the great "Society of Christian Endeavor," and now adopted into
the Christian song-service of all lands. The author, Rev. Jeremiah Eames
Rankin, D.D., LL.D., was born in Thornton, N.H., Jan. 2, 1828. He was
graduated at Middlebury College, Vt., in 1848, and labored as a
Congregational pastor more than thirty years. For thirteen years he was
President of Howard University, Washington, D.C. Besides the "Parting
Hymn" he wrote _The Auld Scotch Mither_, _Ingleside Rhymes_, _Hymns pro
Patria_, and various practical works and religious essays. Died 1904.


_THE TUNE._

As in a thousand other partnerships of hymnist and musician, Dr. Rankin
was fortunate in his composer. The tune is a symphony of hearts--subdued
at first, but breaking into a chorus strong with the uplift of hope. It
is a farewell with a spiritual thrill in it.

Its author, William Gould Tomer, was born in Finesville, Warren Co.,
N.J., October 5, 1832; died in Phillipsburg, N.J., Sept. 26, 1896. He
was a soldier in the Civil War and a writer of good ability as well as a
composer. For some time he was editor of the _High Bridge Gazette_, and
music with him was an avocation rather than a profession. He wrote the
melody to Dr. Rankin's hymn in 1880, Prof. J.W. Bischoff supplying the
harmony, and the tune was first published in _Gospel Bells_ the same
year.


_FUNERALS._


The style of singing at funerals, as well as the character of the hymns,
has greatly changed--if, indeed, music continues to be a part of the
service, as frequently, in ordinary cases, it is not. "China" with its
comforting words--and terrifying chords--is forever obsolete, and not
only that, but Dr. Muhlenberg's, "I Would Not Live Alway," with its
sadly sentimental tune of "Frederick," has passed out of common use.
Anna Steele's "So Fades the Lovely, Blooming Flower," on the death of a
child, is occasionally heard, and now and then Dr. S.F. Smith's,
"Sister, Thou Wast Mild and Lovely," (with its gentle air of "Mt.
Vernon,") on the death of a young lady. Standard hymns like Watts',
"Unveil Thy Bosom, Faithful Tomb," to the slow, tender melody of the
"Dead March," (from Handel's oratorio of "Saul") and Montgomery's
"Servant of God, Well Done," to "Olmutz," or Woodbury's "Forever with
the Lord," still retain their prestige, the music of the former being
played on steeple-chimes on some burial occasions in cities, during the
procession--

    Nor pain nor grief nor anxious fear
      Invade thy bounds; no mortal woes
    Can reach the peaceful sleeper here
      While angels watch the soft repose.

The latter hymn (Montgomery's) is biographical--as described on page
301--

    Servant of God, well done;
      Rest from thy loved employ;
    The battle fought, the victory won,
      Enter thy Master's joy.

Only five stanzas of this long poem are now in use.

The exquisite elegy of Montgomery, entitled "The Grave,"--

    There is a calm for those who weep,
      A rest for weary mortals found
    They softly lie and sweetly sleep
      Low in the ground.

--is by no means discontinued on funeral occasions, nor Margaret
Mackay's beloved hymn,--

    Asleep in Jesus, blessed sleep,

--melodized in Bradbury's "Rest."

Mrs. Margaret Mackay was born in 1801, the daughter of Capt. Robert
Mackay of Hedgefield, Inverness, and wife of a major of the same name.
She was the author of several prose works and _Lays of Leisure Hours_,
containing seventy-two original hymns and poems, of which "Asleep in
Jesus" is one. She died in 1887.


"MY JESUS, AS THOU WILT."

(_Mein Jesu, wie du willst._)

This sweet hymn for mourners, known to us here in Jane Borthwick's
translation, was written by Benjamin Schmolke (or Schmolk) late in the
17th century. He was born at Brauchitzchdorf, in Silesia, Dec. 21, 1672,
and received his education at the Labau Gymnasium and Leipsic
University. A sermon preached while a youth, for his father, a Lutheran
pastor, showed such remarkable promise that a wealthy man paid the
expenses of his education for the ministry. He was ordained and settled
as pastor of the Free Church at Schweidnitz, Silesia, in which charge he
continued from 1701 till his death.

Schmolke was the most popular hymn-writer of his time, author of some
nine hundred church pieces, besides many for special occasions. Withal
he was a man of exalted piety and a pastor of rare wisdom and influence.

His death, of paralysis, occurred on the anniversary of his wedding,
Feb. 12, 1737.

    My Jesus, as Thou wilt,
      Oh may Thy will be mine!
    Into Thy hand of love
      I would my all resign.
    Thro' sorrow or thro' joy
      Conduct me as Thine own,
    And help me still to say,
      My Lord, Thy will be done.

The last line is the refrain of the hymn of four eight-line stanzas.


_THE TUNE._

"Sussex," by Joseph Barnby, a plain-song with a fine harmony, is good
congregational music for the hymn.

But "Jewett," one of Carl Maria Von Weber's exquisite flights of song,
is like no other in its intimate interpretation of the prayerful words.
We hear Luther's "bird in the heart" singing softly in every inflection
of the tender melody as it glides on. The tune, arranged by Joseph
Holbrook, is from an opera--the overture to Weber's Der Freischutz--but
one feels that the gentle musician when he wrote it must have caught an
inspiration of divine trust and peace. The wish among the last words he
uttered when dying in London of slow disease was, "Let me go back to my
own (home), and then God's will be done." That wish and the sentiment of
Schmolke's hymn belong to each other, for they end in the same way.

    My Jesus, as Thou wilt:
      All shall be well for me;
    Each changing future scene
      I gladly trust with Thee.
    Straight to my home above
      I travel calmly on,
    And sing in life or death
      My Lord, Thy will be done.


"I CANNOT ALWAYS TRACE THE WAY."

In later years, when funeral music is desired, the employment of a male
quartette has become a favorite custom. Of the selections sung in this
manner few are more suitable or more generally welcomed than the tender
and trustful hymn of Sir John Bowring, rendered sometimes in Dr. Dykes'
"Almsgiving," but better in the less-known but more flexible tune
composed by Howard M. Dow--

    I cannot always trace the way
      Where Thou, Almighty One, dost move,
    But I can always, always say
      That God is love.

    When fear her chilling mantle flings
      O'er earth, my soul to heaven above
    As to her native home upsprings,
      For God is love.

    When mystery clouds my darkened path,
      I'll check my dread, my doubts reprove;
    In this my soul sweet comfort hath
      That God is love.

    Yes, God is love. A thought like this
      Can every gloomy thought remove,
    And turn all tears, all woes to bliss
      For God is love.

The first line of the hymn was originally, "'Tis seldom I can trace the
way."

Howard M. Dow has been many years a resident of Boston, and organist of
the Grand Lodge of Freemasons at the Tremont St. (Masonic) Temple.

