students and expounders of the Bible, and, with hearts warm with
love to Christ, proved themselves wise and efficient in winning
souls to Him.[1] This institution has had several valuable teachers
from the United States, prominent among whom was Miss Maria A. West.

[1] _Ten Years on the Euphrates_, p. 189.

The Female Boarding-school at Aintab was commenced under the care of
Miss Proctor in 1861, with eight pupils. The number was increased to
fourteen in 1864, and to twenty-five in 1867, of whom ten gave
evidence of piety. It is one of the best schools in Turkey.

Mrs. Coffing's labors among the women of Marash, in 1867, and in the
four schools of which she had the oversight, were of great value. In
1868, she had charge of a girls' high school, which was an
institution of much promise. The pupils were thirty-eight, six of
whom were wives of students in the Theological Seminary. Of the
hundred girls who had been in this school from the beginning,
twenty-one were hopefully converted while in the school. In 1872, a
boarding department was added for the benefit of girls from the
out-stations.


THE ROBERT COLLEGE.


This college has no direct connection with the American Board, nor
with the mission as such; yet our history would be incomplete
without some account of it.

The college may be said to have grown out of the efforts of Dr.
Hamlin to furnish employment to Protestant Armenians, whose
evangelical principles had thrown them out of business. For this end
a flour mill and bakery were established with unlooked for success;
and when the Crimean war broke out, very large quantities of bread
were furnished by this Protestant bakery to the English troops and
hospitals at Constantinople.

Christopher R. Robert, Esq., of New York, was then travelling in the
East, and his attention was attracted to a large boat load of
excellent bread _en route_ from the bakery to the English camp. This
led to further inquiries, and to an acquaintance and permanent
friendship between himself and Dr. Hamlin.

The project of a college was first suggested by the sons of Dr.
Dwight, one of the most honored founders of the Armenian mission;
and a meeting for consultation, called by them, was held at the
house of Mr. Robert in New York, in October, 1857. Several such
meetings were held, but no agreement was reached as to the
principles which should govern the College.

Mr. Robert, finding that nothing was to be done, then proposed to
Dr. Hamlin to take up the work in cooeperation with himself; which,
after consulting his brethren and the officers of the American
Board, he decided to do. I now quote from a statement kindly
furnished me by Dr. Hamlin.

"While all agreed in the necessity of a higher education, there were
various views in regard to the proposed College. Some regarded these
three obstacles as insuperable. (1) The variety of races,--Turkish,
Armenian, Greek, and Slavic,--which have no common sympathies, and
would not unite in one institution. (2) Variety of religious
faith,--Islamism, Romanism, the Oriental Orthodox, and Armenian
Churches,--which could never agree in one institution. (3) Variety
of language,--Greek, Armenian, Turkish, and Slavonic,--each of which
would seek preeminence.

"It was decided, however, to make the experiment. The College was to
be a Christian institution. The Bible was to be read, and prayer
offered, morning and evening, at which all should be present. There
would be Christian worship and Bible teaching on the Sabbath, but
freedom of conscience would be sacredly regarded.

"The American civil war, breaking out in 1861 prevented any attempt
to obtain an endowment in the United States, and Mr. Robert, who had
already advanced $10,000 for the purchase of a site, then deposited
$30,000 in the hands of trustees, in order to commence the work.

"The Turkish Government, at the instigation of Jesuit and French
diplomacy, prevented the College from using the beautiful site it
had purchased, although official leave to build there had been
obtained from the department of Public Instruction. After much
delay, expense, and fruitless effort, the College was opened in the
building belonging to the American Board, and formerly known as the
Bebek Seminary. It was called 'Robert College;' though without Mr.
Robert's knowledge, because the name, having no special significance
to the people there, would excite no local prejudice.

"The College, thus founded in 1863, slowly but steadily gained the
confidence of the communities around it. During the fourth year of
its existence, the building was filled with students, and was
considerably enlarged. On the fourth of July, 1869, the corner-stone
of a new and large building was laid on the purchased site, leave
having been obtained after seven years' effort. The new building,
capable of receiving two hundred and fifty students, was entered,
and the college opened publicly, September 15th, 1871. It has so
rapidly filled with students, that the Trustees have resolved to
raise an endowment, and erect another still larger building,
confident that it also will soon be filled.

ROBERT COLLEGE. [image]

"All the supposed obstacles have disappeared. There are seventeen
nationalities and six religions represented in the College, and
there are no peculiar difficulties of government. Two forces
contribute mainly to unify the whole. (1) All are subject to the
daily influence of Christian instruction. (2) All study the English
language in the preparatory department, and the College course is
wholly in that language.

"Another feature of the college should be noticed. It is
self-supporting. It was designed to offer a sound Christian
education to those who would pay for it. Two hundred dollars in gold
are paid by every student for board and tuition forty weeks in the
year. This is more for Turkey, than twice that sum would be in the
United States.

"Mr. Robert has given nearly $175,000 for this institution, or more
than fivefold what he originally contemplated.

"Nothing but the very highest education that can be attained, will
now satisfy the Turkish community. Jesuit colleges have fallen into
disrepute. They cannot meet this demand fairly, and satisfy it. New
ideas of religious freedom pervade these communities; the old bonds
are broken, and the college that gives the best culture, moral and
mental, will be the most patronized by all. Missionary Societies
cannot properly prosecute the work in this highest department of
education. And yet foreign missions would be a failure if their work
should stop in those classes where it usually begins. It must
pervade and control the intelligence and enterprise of the land, and
it cannot culminate in this result without the Christian College,
and ultimately the Christian University."


PROPOSED COLLEGE IN THE INTERIOR.


As one result of the establishment of "Robert College" at
Constantinople, a desire was awakened among the Protestants of
Central Turkey for a similar institution, though on a less extended
scale, and somewhat differently constituted; to be established
either at Aintab, or Marash. Both places were anxious for the
location, and set forth their claims with much ability, but the
decision inclined in favor of Aintab. The subscriptions pledged by
the people of that city, on condition of securing the college, were
regarded by Dr. Schneider as equivalent to $60,000 of American
money, or more than twenty dollars for each church-member, Nor were
the offerings at Marash less liberal, in proportion to their means.

The idea appears to have had its origin with the people of Marash;
who state that their own condition, the number and power of their
enemies, and the baneful influences of infidelity among them, made
them feel that the standard of education in the Theological Seminary
ought to be so raised as to meet the exigency. The failure of this
proposal suggested the college; and the plan of one, elaborated by a
committee, was brought before the "Union." By that time, however,
the Protestants of Aintab had become fully awake to the importance
of the measure, and the claims of the two cities were so earnestly
pressed, that the Union declined deciding between them, and referred
the decision to the Prudential Committee of the American Board.

The very able pleas by the Protestants of the two cities drawn up in
the spring of 1872, are before me, in the English language. The
Aintab document opens with an interesting statement of their past
progress in the matter of education. "We well remember," they say,
"what our condition was, twenty-five or thirty years ago. We had
then not even a thought about the necessity or advantages of
education. A population of ten thousand Armenians was content with a
single common school, where only reading and writing were taught.
When, however, through the agency of the American Board, the Bible
was translated into our modern language, it soon changed our
opinions as to the importance of education, we can hardly explain
how. Soon, the evangelical Armenians, not to speak of members of the
Old Church, were not content with even three or four schools, nor
were they satisfied with educating their sons, but began to plan for
the education of their daughters. We discovered that mere reading
and writing were not enough, and saw plainly the necessity of a
higher grade of studies. Whereas once, we were hardly willing to
send our children to schools where all the expense was borne by the
missionaries, we were now anxious to open schools of a still higher
character, and support them ourselves. We now realized, under the
light of God's Word, that if men are to be good Christians, good
fathers and mothers, and useful members of society, they must be
educated. In this respect, our desires have been greatly
strengthened by watching in our churches the constantly increasing
demand for a stronger class of preachers and teachers. All the
churches within the bounds of the Union are convinced of the
necessity of a more thoroughly educated ministry. Hence the desire
for a college in this section of the country."

The decision was in favor of Aintab in view of its greater financial
ability, its centrality, its comparative healthfulness, the
abundance of good building materials, the lower price of skilled
labor, the prospective railway communication between the coast and
the interior, the proper distribution of educational advantages (the
Theological Seminary being already at Marash), and the interest felt
by all classes at Aintab, including the Old Armenians and the
Moslems.






CHAPTER XLV.

THE ARMENIANS. THE PRESENT CONDITION.

1872.


It seems often to be required of missions, though not properly, that
they shall exert a vastly greater reforming influence on
unevangelized countries, than the Gospel has yet done in Christian
lands. When we speak of "the conversion of the world," we are
generally understood as meaning the introduction of the
"Millennium." But what we refer to is not the millennial state, but
such a diffusion of gospel agencies and influences through the
unevangelized world, as we see in the most favored Christian
communities.

This is all that can reasonably be expected from missionary efforts.
The Millenium, whether it be near or remote, doubtless implies such
a previous extension of gospel agencies as we are now attempting,
but will be the actual result of a universal outpouring of the
Spirit, such as we are taught to expect when the time comes for the
ultimate triumphs of the Christian dispensation.

The question naturally arises, in closing this History, how far
progress has been made in evangelizing Turkey, or in preparing the
way for its future evangelization. From the nature of the case,
there can be only an approximation towards an exact reply; and
perhaps none can be given more satisfactory, than is furnished by
the narrative already recorded in these pages. Yet a brief notice of
some of the more important facts, may reasonably be expected here.

It must not be supposed, that some of the first facts that will be
mentioned are regarded as direct results of missionary effort, or as
indications of evangelizing progress; but even these mark a progress
in the condition of society, which is very cheering, and full of
promise with reference to future efforts for the introduction and
establishment of a true and pure religion; white others noticed have
a more direct and full connection with the missionary work.

Where there has been intellectual and social progress on a large
scale, we naturally look for material improvements. Turning, first
of all, to the great metropolis, Dr. Wood testifies to such
improvements as these: "The streets are named, and doors designated
by numbers. Scavenger carts are supplanting the dogs. The terrible
conflagrations have secured broad avenues, and handsome stone and
brick structures, in place of mean wooden buildings, on streets so
narrow that the sun could hardly enter them. Spacious flag-stone
sidewalks are taking the place of the rough pavements of horrible
memory, and macadamized roadbeds help one to climb the steep
hill-sides of Constantinople. 'Tramways' are built or building, a
boon of inexpressible value to the aged and feeble, and a thousand
dwellings have been demolished for the track of the Belgrade and
Vienna Railroad, entering at the Seven Towers, and carried along the
Marmora, and around the Seraglio Point, to its terminus on the
Golden Horn. The demolition of much of the sea-wall to make way for
it and furnish materials for embankments, is a suggestive symbol of
the social and religious reconstruction, which is tearing up old
foundations, and using the labors of ages past for that which is to
be."

Dr. Wood next instances the significant telegraph lines, running to
all points of the compass, of which he counted twelve on one side of
a street, and four on the other. "The spectacle of small craft on
the waters, sea-going steamers of the largest class, smaller
passenger-boats for the Bosphorus and ports on the Marmora, and the
magnificent iron-clads anchored in front of the Sultan's palaces,
impresses both residents and strangers with a vivid sense of the
greatness, wealth, and power, which, in spite of mismanagement,
corruption, misrule, and all the elements of weakness and decline in
the country, are here concentrated."

"Costumes," he says, "are changing, and customs and ideas change
with them. Even Turkish women are adopting Frank articles of dress,
worn beneath the external covering, and go about tottering on
high-heeled shoes of latest Parisian style; and Armenian women
appear in public with unveiled faces, attired like ladies of Europe.
Thirteen newspapers--three of them dailies, three tri-weeklies, and
seven weeklies (one of which issues a daily bulletin), for Armenians
alone, at the capital--attest a new intellectual life, by the fact
of their existence, and by the freedom of their discussions.

"Schools for girls are multiplying; even a normal school for Turkish
girls has been established under government patronage; but a still
greater zeal is displayed for the education of boys. The notions of
the people concerning education are, indeed, very faulty, and much
of the instruction given is poor enough in quality; but the waking
up on the subject heralds a brighter day in the future. That this is
far greater among the Christian populations, than in the Mohammedan
and Jewish, and that the former are gaining more and more upon the
latter in the possession of wealth, is suggestive of coming events,
of the highest interest and importance."

Dr. Clarke, Foreign Secretary of the Board, writing in the same year
(1871), after his visit to the East, mentions the following
indications of progress: "Hundreds of miles of railway, begun and
under contract; telegraphic communication between the principal
towns; postal arrangements for the conveyance of money, as well as
letters, established within a few years between many places; police
regulations, securing protection to life and property as never
before; the suppression of robber-hordes, which had infested
different sections; and the beginning of a newspaper press. The
public mind in the great centres is waking up to what is going on in
the outside world. The war in our own country, by its derangement of
commerce, led to much inquiry; and the later conflicts in Europe
have excited a lively interest in many minds. And not the least
significant matter is the change of sentiment in reference to France
and French influence. Already is it said by native merchants, that
their children must learn English, or German, instead of French; and
the power of Romanism, upheld so long by French consuls, is sensibly
weakened. And Protestantism is quietly doing its work of
enlightenment,--directly, in thousands of minds, and indirectly, in
thousands more."

Mr. Adams, of Adana, writing a year earlier, affirms that the
Christian populations are far more ready to hear and read the Gospel
than is commonly supposed, and that the Protestant faith has found
its way into the remotest corners of the land. He says, we should
not measure the success of missions by "tabular views" alone, for it
often happens that a missionary's strongest grounds of hope are
quite outside of the largest array of figures. "As I write this," he
adds, "a statement of Hagop Effendi occurs to me. He said: "I have
travelled a great deal among the Protestants of Syria and Turkey,
and the strongest impression I have does not arise from the schools,
books, or churches, as pledges that Protestantism is to be a success
in Turkey, but from the prodigious extent to which the country at
large is leavened by Protestant truth. The grandest results of your
labors are not apparent."

Another testimony is by Mr. Leonard, of Marsovan, under date of
January, 1871. "Evidence," he says, "of a gradual reform in the
Oriental churches, especially the Armenian Church, chiefly as the
result of evangelical labors, crops out in almost every city.
Consecrated pictures leave church walls for the garret; silver
crosses go into the refining pot; auricular confession is neglected;
many superstitious ceremonies and foolish restrictions, imposed by
the priesthood, are regarded only as a curious relic of the past. We
note, also, a growing friendliness towards Protestants, and
occasionally very sensible efforts, in emulation of them, to educate
the people."

Mr. Leonard doubtless had a special reference to the Armenian Bishop
of Amasia, who, having secured a majority of the people in his
favor, swept two churches of their gold and silver images, crosses,
and vestments, and appropriated the avails to the erection of
school-houses and the support of teachers. The minority appealed to
the Patriarch at Constantinople; but he is known to have been in
sympathy with the reforming party in the church before his election,
while at Van and Moosh, and is said to have sanctioned the whole
proceeding, and to have followed his sanction with an exhortation to
preach the Gospel.[1]

[1] _Report of the Board_ for 1871, p. 27.

Another testimony is from Mr. Wheeler, of Harpoot, written in April
of the same year: "Henceforth we shall need less money, and more
prayer; for this finishing of the work is, in some respects, even
more perilous than was its beginning. The people expect and demand a
thousand things, which they cannot _now_ have; and sometimes the
more earnest ones are inclined to take the missionaries by the
throat, with a 'Pay us that ye owe!' We are encouraged by the
reflection that such experiences necessarily enter into such a work
of awakening and reform, as is here going on."

The testimony of Hagop Effendi, the Civil Head of the Protestants of
Turkey, should also be adduced. He says: "The fact that eighty-five
per cent. of the adults in the Protestant community can read, speaks
greatly in favor of its members. Any one acquainted with the social
condition and religious ideas of the Orient, who will take pains to
compare them with the liberal institutions now introduced, can
readily imagine the state of society that must necessarily follow
such a change. As yet, the people do not possess the intellectual
and moral elements necessary for the maintenance of the liberal
institutions of Protestantism independent of foreign aid." "Those,"
he adds, "who have become Protestant in principle, far exceed in
number the registered Protestants. The indirect influence of
Protestantism has been greater and healthier than is apparent." He
then instances the strictly sober habits of the Protestants, among
whom the use of strong drink is very rare, and habitual drunkenness
is hardly known. And he was everywhere gratified to find, throughout
the empire, a great improvement in domestic relations, as compared
with the condition of families before they became Protestants.

The districts of Harpoot, Aintab, and Marash are probably more
advanced in the matter of self-governing, self-supporting,
evangelical churches, than any other considerable portions of the
field in Western Asia. The Rev. Herman N. Barnum, of the Harpoot
station, while in the United States, drew up, at my request, a
statement of some of the more important results of missionary labor
in his own district, which may be regarded as illustrative of the
results of missionary labor in other districts.

He states these as rules,--that no church is to be organized without
a native pastor; that no church is to receive aid from the mission
for more than one half the salary of the pastor, and none for more
than five years. Eighteen churches have been formed in the district,
with six hundred and fifty members, and most of them on this plan.
The church at Harpoot was self-supporting from the outset. Wherever
a fully organized and self-supporting church existed, the peculiar
work of the missionaries was regarded as completed in that place;
the church and pastor, rather than the missionaries, being
henceforth held responsible for the evangelization of the
surrounding community. The missionaries aid, if necessary, by their
counsel and in other ways, but what they do is through the church.
His response as to the character of the churches, which I
necessarily abridge, is deemed applicable, substantially, to the
seventy-four churches among the Armenians. He says:--

"1. They are becoming intelligent. Making the Bible a study, they
become established in Christian doctrine.

"2. Church discipline is better maintained than it is in American
churches. Their 'watch and care' are delightful to witness. Many of
these Christians came out of the grossest corruption, but the
fellowship of the church is a shield and a support.

"3. They are self-denying. The support of their own institutions,
including the building of their school-houses and houses of worship,
with very little missionary aid, necessitates the sacrifice of
comforts which they cheerfully forego. Experience in Turkey has
abundantly proved, that dependent churches are nearly worthless for
evangelizing agencies. When the institutions of the Gospel are
supported for them, they regard the work of extending it as
belonging especially to the missionaries; and hence, however lavish
the expenditure, they often complain that money is not more freely
spent, and the work prosecuted on a grander scale. Complaints
against missionaries come chiefly from churches doing little for
themselves. On the other hand, self-supporting churches regard the
work of propagating the Gospel as their own, and whatever is given
them, they gratefully receive as aid in doing their own work.

"4. These churches resemble the primitive churches in their
disposition to work for others. They are imbued with a spirit of
labor. They go from house to house, reading and preaching the word.
This is the theme in the shop, the field, and by the way-side.

"The chief source of discomfort is in the Armenian character itself,
in which there is a lack of stability, and a want of perseverance.
But there is ground for hope, that even this national trait may be
overcome by the power of the Gospel.

"In Harpoot and its seventy out-station is a Protestant community of
about five thousand souls, characterized by a remarkable reformation
in the outward life. Many of them are doubtless Christians, who, in
the great care which the churches use in receiving members to their
fellowship, are in a certain sense on probation. The Protestant name
has become a synonym for integrity and uprightness.

"The extent, to which the Gospel has affected the communities not
Protestant, cannot be appreciated by one not in actual contact with
them. It manifests itself partly in the weakened power of
superstition, the multiplication of schools, the number of adults
who have learned to read, the increase in general intelligence and
knowledge of the truth, the decrease of intemperance and vice, the
promotion of enterprise and good order; and, in short, the
beginnings of a civilization, that has a Christian aspect. There
have been sold at Harpoot about four thousand copies of the Bible,
and twenty thousand portions of the same, with nearly fifty-five
thousand volumes of other books, religious and educational, from the
mission press. Large numbers of these have gone into the hands of
the unevangelized, and are silently exerting an influence. This
class of persons is always represented in our congregations. They
hear the truth discussed everywhere, and thousands of them have
