person and authority, and to hazard life, and all that they have, in
defending him.

I shall not take the question in its full latitude, taking in what a
people are bound to in pursuing of a king's right in another nation,
which is not our present question. Our question is, what a people should
do when a kingdom is unjustly invaded by a foreign enemy, who seeketh
the overthrow of religion, king and kingdom. Surely, if men be tied to
any duty to a king and kingdom, they are tied in this case. I have two
sorts of men to meet with here, who are deficient in doing this
covenanted duty: 1. These who do not act against the enemy. 2. These who
do act for the enemy. 1. The first I meet with, are they who act not,
but lie by, to behold what will become of all: three sorts of men act
not for the defence of an invaded kingdom; 1. Those who withdraw
themselves from public councils, as from parliament or committee of
estates: this withdrawing is not to act. 2. These act not who, upon an
apprehension of the desperate state of things, do think that all is in
such a condition, by the prevailing of the enemy, that there is no
remedy: and therefore that it is best to sit still; and see how things
go.

They who do not act upon scruple of conscience. I shall ever respect
tenderness of conscience; and I wish there be no more but tenderness. If
there be no more, men will strive to have their consciences well
informed.

They may be supposed to scruple upon one of these grounds: 1. To act in
such a cause, for the king's interest; sure I am, this was not a doubt
before, but all seemed to agree to act for the king's interest, in
subordination to Christ's, and this day there is no more sought. We own
the king's interest only in a subordination to Christ's. Or, 2. To join
with such instruments as are enemies to the work of God. Our answer to
the estates' query resolves that such should not be entrusted: but we do
not count these enemies who profess repentance, and declare themselves
solemnly to be for the cause and the covenant, and evidence their
willingness to fight for them. If it be said their repentance is but
counterfeit, we are bound to think otherwise in charity, till the
contrary be seen: no man can judge of the reality of hearts: for we have
now found by experience, that men who have been accounted above all
exception have betrayed their trust. If any who have not yet repented of
their former course shall be intrusted, we shall be sorry for it; and
plainly say, that it ought not to be.

But I think there must be more in this, that men say they cannot act.
For myself, I love not that word in our case; it is too frequent, he
cannot act, and he cannot act. I fear there be three sorts of persons
lurking under this covert. 1. Such as are pusillanimous, who have no
courage to act against the enemy; the word is true of them, they cannot
act because they dare not act. 2. Such as are selfish men, serving their
idol credit: he hath been a man of honour, and now he feareth there will
be no credit to fight against this prevailing enemy: therefore he cannot
act, and save his credit. Be who thou wilt that hast this before thee,
God shall blast thy reputation. Thou shalt neither have honour nor
credit, to do a right turn in God's cause. 3. Such as are compilers, who
cannot act, because they have a purpose to comply. There are that cannot
act in an army, but they can betray an army by not acting; there are
that cannot act for safety of a kingdom, but they betray it by not
acting. In a word, there are who cannot join to act with those whom they
account malignants (I speak not of declared and known malignants; but of
such as have been, and are, fighting for the cause; yet by them esteemed
malignants), but they can join with sectaries, open and declared enemies
to kirk and kingdom. I wish subjects, who are bound to fight for the
kingdom, would lay by that phrase of not acting, which is so frequent in
the mouth of compliers, and offensive to them, who would approve
themselves in doing duty for endangered religion, king and kingdom.

That men may be the more clear to act, I shall offer to your
consideration some passages of Scriptures, about those who do not act
against a common enemy.

1. There are many reproved for lying still while an enemy had invaded
the land: as Reuben, with his divisions: Gilead, Dan, and Asher seeking
themselves, are all reproved for not joining with the people of God, who
were willing to jeopard their lives against "a mighty oppressing enemy."
But there is one passage concerning Meroz, which fitteth our purpose,
"The angel of the Lord said, Curse ye Meroz, curse ye bitterly the
inhabitants thereof; they came not to the help of the Lord, to the help
of the Lord against the mighty." What this Meroz was, is not clear: yet
all interpreters agree that they had opportunity and power to have
joined with, and helped the people of the Lord, and it is probable they
were near the place of the fight. They are cursed for not coming to the
help of the Lord's people. This may be applied to those in the land, who
will not help the Lord against the mighty.

2. Another passage you have. Reuben and Gad having a multitude of
cattle, and having seen the land of Gilead, that it was a place for
cattle, they desire of Moses and the princes, that the land may be given
them, and they may not pass over Jordan. Moses reproveth them in these
words, "Shall your brethren go to war; and shall ye sit still? Wherefore
discourage ye the heart of the children of Israel?" Reuben and Gad make
their apology, showing that they have no such intention to sit still,
only they desire their wives and little ones may stay there: they
themselves promise to go over Jordan, armed before Israel, and not to
return before they were possessed in the land. Then Moses said unto
them, "If you do so, then this shall be your possession. But, if ye do
not so, behold, ye have sinned against the Lord, and be sure your sins
will find you out."

I may apply this to them that cannot act; will ye sit still, when the
rest of your brethren are to hazard their lives against the enemy? We
have reason to reprove you. If Moses, that faithful servant of God, was
still jealous of Reuben and Gad, even after their apology and promise to
act--for he saith, "If ye do not so"--have not honest and faithful
servants of God, ground to be jealous of their brethren who refuse to
act? Let them apologize what they will; for their not acting, I say,
they sin against the Lord, and their sins shall find them out. It will
be clearly seen, upon what intention they do not act.

3. A third passage. Saul hath David enclosed, that he can hardly escape.
In that very instant there cometh a messenger to Saul, saying, "Haste
thee, and come; for the Philistines have invaded the land." At the
hearing of this message, "Saul returned from pursuing after David, and
went against the Philistines." It is true, the Lord did provide for his
servant David's escape, by this means: but, if ye consider Saul, he took
it not so. Nothing moved him to leave this pursuit but the condition of
the land, by the invading of an enemy. Three things might have moved
Saul to stay and pursue David. 1. He hath him now in a strait, and hath
such advantage, that he might have thought not to come readily by the
like. 2. That altho' the Philistines be enemies, yet David is the most
dangerous enemy; for he aimeth at no less than the crown. It were better
to take conditions off the enemy, than to suffer David to live, and take
the crown. 3. He might have said, if I leave David at this time and
fight with the Philistines, and be beaten, he will get a power in his
hand to undo me and my posterity. These may seem strong motives; but
Saul is not moved with any of them. The present danger is the
Philistines invading the land, and this danger is to be opposed, come of
the danger from David what will. As if Saul had said, I will let David
alone, I will meet with him another time, and reckon with him: now
there is no time for it, the Philistines are in the land, let us make
haste against them. I wish that many of our countrymen had as great a
love to their country, and as public a spirit for it, as this profane
king had, then there would not be so many questions for acting, as men
make this day.

The objections I have been touching are in men's thoughts and heads.
First, some say, now the malignants are under, for this enemy is their
rod. It is best to put them out of having any power: yea, there are some
who would more willingly go to undo these, whom they account malignants,
than against the common enemy, who are wasting the land. If they had
Saul's resolution, they would say, the Philistines are in the land, let
them alone, we will reckon with them at another time; we will now go
against the common enemy.

They have also the second objection, the malignants are more dangerous
enemies than the sectaries. I shall not now compare them to equal
distance, and abstract from the present danger: but I shall compare them
to the present posture of affairs. I am sure the sectaries having power
in their hands, and a great part of the land in their possession, are
far more dangerous than malignants, who have no power for the present:
and therefore, the resolution should be, the sectaries have invaded the
land, and are destroying it, let us go against them.

3. The third observation weigheth much with many. The malignants, being
employed to fight for their country, may get such power in their hands
as may hurt the cause. For answer: 1. The resolution given the query of
the estates provideth against that, for therein is a desire that no such
power should be put in their hand. 2. This fear goeth upon a
supposition, that they do not repent their former course. This is an
uncharitable judgment. We are bound to be more charitable of men
professing repentance, for with such we have to do only. And, to speak
a word by the way to you who have been in a malignant course. Little
good is expected from you, I pray you be honest, and disappoint them. I
wish you true repentance, which will both disappoint them, and be
profitable to yourselves. 3. I desire it may be considered, whether or
not, fear of a danger to come from men, if they prevail against the
common enemy, being only clothed with a capacity to fight for their
country, be an argument against rising to oppose a seen and certain
danger, coming from an enemy, clothed with power, and still prevailing.
I conceive, it ought to be far from any, to hinder men to defend their
country in such a case. I confess, indeed, the cause which we maintain
hath met with many enemies, who have been against it, which requireth
much tenderness; therefore men are to be admitted to trust, with such
exceptions as may keep them out who are still enemies to the cause of
God, have not professed repentance, renounced their former courses, and
declared themselves for cause and covenant. I doubt not, but it shall be
found, that the admitting such to fight in our case as it standeth, is
agreeable to the word of God, and is not against the former public
resolutions of kirk and state.

The second sort of persons we are to meet with, are such as act for the
enemy, against the kingdom. If they be cursed who will not come out to
help the Lord against the mighty; what a curse shall be upon them, who
help the mighty against the Lord, as they do who act for the enemy?
Three ways is the enemy helped against the cause and people of God.

1. By keeping correspondence with them, and giving them intelligence;
there is nothing done against kirk or state, but they have intelligence
of it. A baser way hath never been used in any nation. Your counsels and
purposes are made known to them. If there be any such here (as I fear
they be), let them take this to them, they are of these who help the
mighty against the Lord, and the curse shall stick to them.

2. By strengthening the enemies' hands with questions, debates and
determinations, in papers tending to the justifying of their unjust
invasion. Whatever have been men's intentions in taking that way, yet
the thing done by them, hath tended to the advantage of the enemy, and
hath divided these who should have been joined in the cause, to the
great weakening of the power of the kingdom, and this, interpretatively,
is to act for the mighty against the Lord.

3. By gross compliance with the enemy, and going into them, doing all
the evil offices they can, against their native kingdom. If Meroz was
cursed for not helping, shall not these perfidious covenant-breakers and
treacherous dealers against a distressed land be much more accursed, for
helping and assisting a destroying enemy, so far as lieth in their
power? These words may be truly applied to them who are helping
strangers, enemies to God, His kirk, and religion, "Both he that
helpeth, shall fall; and he that is holpen shall fall down, and they all
shall fall together."

III. The third particular about this covenant remains to be spoken of;
_to wit_, Some directions to the king, for the right performing of his
duty, whereof I shall give seven.

1. A king, meeting with many difficulties in doing of duty, by reason of
strong corruption within and many temptations without: he should be
careful to seek God by prayer, for grace to overcome these impediments,
and for an understanding heart to govern his people. Solomon, having in
his option to ask what he would, he asked an understanding heart, to go
out and in before his people; knowing that the government of a people
was a very difficult work, and needed more than ordinary understanding.
A king hath also many enemies (as our king hath this day), and a praying
king is a prevailing king. Asa, when he had to do with a mighty enemy,
prayed fervently and prevailed. Jehoshaphat was invaded by a mighty
enemy, He prayed and did prevail. Hezekiah prayed against Sennacherib's
huge army and prevailed. Sir, you have many difficulties and oppositions
to meet; acquaint yourself with prayer, be instant with God, and He will
fight for you. Prayers are not in much request at court; but a
covenanted king must bring them in request. I know a king is burthened
with multiplicity of affairs, and will meet with many diversions; but,
sir, you must not be diverted. Take hours, and set them apart for that
exercise: men being once acquainted with your way, will not dare to
divert you. Prayer to God will make your affairs easy all the day. I
read of a king, of whom his courtiers said, "He spoke oftener with God,
than with men." If you be frequent in prayer, you may expect the
blessing of the Most High upon yourself, and upon your government.

2. A king must be careful of the kingdom which he hath sworn to
maintain. We have had many of too private a spirit, by whom
self-interest hath been preferred to the public; it becometh a king well
to be of a public spirit, to care more for the public than his own
interest. Senates and states have had mottoes written over the doors of
their meeting-places. Over the senate house of Rome was written, _Ne
quid respublica detrimenti capiat_. I shall wish this may be written
over your assembly-houses; but there is another which I would have
written with it, _Ne quid ecclesia detrimenti capiat_. Be careful of
both; let neither kirk nor state suffer hurt; let them go together. The
best way for the standing of a kingdom is a well constitute kirk. They
deceive kings who make them believe that the government of the kirk--I
mean presbyterial government--cannot suit with monarchy. They suit well,
it being the ordinance of Christ, rendering unto God what is God's, and
unto Caesar what is Caesar's.

3. Kings who have a tender care of the kirk are called nursing fathers.
You should be careful that the gospel may have a free passage through
the kingdom; and that the government of the kirk may be preserved entire
according to your solemn engagement. The kirk hath met with many
enemies, as papists, prelates, malignants, which I pass as known
enemies: but there are two sorts more, who at this time should be
carefully looked on. 1. Sectaries, great enemies to the kirk, and to all
the ordinances of Christ, and more particularly to presbyterial
government, which they have, and would have, altogether destroyed. A
king should set himself against these, because they are enemies, as well
to the king as to the kirk, and strive to make both fall together. 2.
Erastians, more dangerous snares to kings than sectaries; because kings
can look well enough to these, who are against themselves, and their
power, as sectaries, who will have no king. But erastians give more
power to kings than they should have, and are great enemies to
presbyterial government; for they would make kings believe that there is
no government but the civil, and derived from thence, which is a great
wrong to the Son of God, who hath the government of the kirk distinct
from the civil, yet no ways prejudicial to it, being spiritual, and of
another nature. Christ did put the magistrate out of suspicion, that His
kingdom was not prejudicial to civil government, affirming, "My kingdom
is not of this world." This government, Christ hath not committed to
kings, but to the office-bearers of His house, who, in regard of civil
subjection, are under the civil power as well as others; but, in their
spiritual administration, they are under Christ, who hath not given unto
any king upon earth the dispensation of spiritual things to His people.

Sir, you are in covenant with God and His people, and are obliged to
maintain presbyterial government, as well against erastians as
sectaries. I know this erastian humour aboundeth at court. It may be,
some endeavour to make you encroach upon that for which God hath
punished your predecessors. Be who he will that meddleth with this
government to overturn it, it shall be as heavy to him as the
burthensome stone to the enemies of the kirk. "They are cut in pieces,
who burden themselves with it." 3. A king in covenant with the people of
God, should make much of these who are in covenant with him, having in
high estimation the faithful ministers of Christ, and the godly people
of the land. It is rare to find kings lovers of faithful ministers and
pious people. It hath been the fault of our own kings to persecute the
godly. 1. Let the king love the servants of Christ, who speak the truth.
Evil kings are branded with this, that they contemned the prophets. When
Amaziah had taken the gods of Seir, and set them up for his gods, a
prophet came to him and reproved him; unto whom the king said, "Who made
thee of the king's council? Forbear, lest thou be smitten." This
contempt of the prophet's warning is a forerunner of following
destruction. Be a careful hearer of God's word; take with reproof;
esteem of it, as David did, "It shall be an excellent oil, which shall
not break my head." To make much of the faithful servants of Christ,
will be an evidence of reality. 2. Let the king esteem well of godly
professors. Let piety be in account. It is a fault very common, that
pious men, because of their conscientious and strict walking, are hated
by the profane, who love to live loosely: it is usual with profane men
to labour to bring kings to a distaste of the godly; especially when men
who have professed piety have become scandalous, whereupon they are
ready to judge all pious men to be like them; and take occasion to speak
evil of piety. I fear at this time, when men who have been commended for
piety, have fallen foully and betrayed their trust, that men will take
advantage to speak against the godly of the land; beware of this, for it
is Satan's policy to put piety out of request: let not this move any;
fall who will, piety is still the same, and pious men will make
conscience both of their ways and trust; remember, they are precious in
God's eyes who will not suffer men to despise them, without their
reward. Sir, let not your heart be from the godly in the land, whatever
hath fallen out at this time: I dare affirm, there are very many really
godly men who, by their prayers, are supporting your throne.

4. A king should be careful whom he putteth in places of trust, as a
main thing for the good of the kingdom. It is a maxim, that trust should
not be put in their hands who have oppressed the people, or have
betrayed their trust. There is a passage in a story meet for this
purpose: one Septimus Arabinus, a man famous, or rather infamous, for
oppression, was put out of the Senate, but re-admitted about this time;
Alexander Severus being chosen to the empire, the Senators did entertain
him with public salutations and congratulations. Severus, espying
Arabinus amongst the senators, cried out, _O numina! Arabinus non solum
vivit, sed in senatum venit_. Ah! Arabinus not only liveth, but he is in
the senate. Out of just indignation, he could not endure to see him. As
all are not meet for places of trust in judicatures, so all are not meet
for places of trust in armies. Men should be chosen who are godly, and
able for the charge.

But there are some who are not meet for trust. 1. They who are godly,
but have no skill or ability for the places. A man may be a truly godly
man who is not fit for such place; and no wrong is done to him nor to
godliness, when the place is denied to him. I wonder how a godly man can
take upon him a place, whereof he hath no skill. 2. They who have
neither skill nor courage, are very unmeet; for, if it be a place of
never so great moment, faint-heartedness will make them quit it. 3. They
who are both skilful and stout, yet are not honest, but perfidious and
treacherous, should have no trust at all. Of all these we have sad
experience, experience which should not move you to make choice of
profane and godless men, by whom a blessing is not to be expected, but
it should move you to be wary in your choice; I am confident such may
be had, who will be faithful for religion, king and kingdom.

5. There hath been much debate about the exercise of the king's power;
yet he is put in the exercise of his power, and this day put in a better
capacity to exercise it by his coronation. Many are afraid that the
exercise of his power shall prove dangerous to the cause, and indeed I
confess there is ground of fear, when we consider how this power hath
been abused by former kings: therefore, Sir, make good use of this
power, and see that you rather keep within bounds, than exceed in the
exercise of it. I may very well give such a counsel as an old counsellor
gave to a king of France; he, having spent many years at court, desired
to retire into the country for enjoying privacy fit for his age; and,
having obtained leave, the king his master required him to sit down, and
write some advice of government, to leave behind him, which he out of
modesty declined: the king would not be denied, but left with him pen
and ink and a sheet of paper; he, being alone, after some thoughts,
wrote with fair and legible characters in the head of the sheet,
_modus_; in the middle of the sheet, _modus_; and in the foot of the
sheet, _modus_; and wrote no more in all the paper, which he wrapped up
and delivered to the king; meaning that the best counsel he could give
him, was, that he should keep temper in all things. Nothing more fit for
a young king than to keep temper in all things. Take this counsel, Sir,
and be moderate in the use of your power. The best way to keep power, is
moderation in the use of it.

6. The king hath many enemies, even such as are enemies to his family
and to all kingly government; and are now in the bowels of this kingdom,
wasting and destroying; bestir yourself, according to vows and oaths
that are upon you, to be active for the relief of Christ's kingdom,
borne down by them, in all the three kingdoms; and for the relief of
this kingdom grievously oppressed by them. We shall earnestly desire
that God would put that spirit upon our king, now entered upon public
government, which He hath put upon the deliverers of His people from
their cruel oppressors.

In speaking of the king's behaviour to enemies, one thing I cannot pass.
There is much spoken of a treaty with this enemy: I am not of the
judgment of some, who distinguish a treaty before invasion and after
invasion, and say, treatying is very lawful before invasion; because it
is supposed that there is a little wrong done; but after invasion, when
a kingdom is wronged and put to infinite losses, then they say a treaty
is to be shunned; but in my judgment, a treaty may be lawful after
invasion and wrongs sustained; the end of war is peace, neither should
desire of revenge obstruct it, providing it be such a treaty and peace
as is not prejudicial to religion, nor to the safety of the kingdom, nor
to the undoubted right of the king, nor to the league and covenant,
whereunto we are so solemnly engaged.

But, I must break off this treaty with a story related in Plutarch. The
city of Athens was in a great strait, wherein they knew not what to do.
Themistocles in this strait said he had something wherein to give his
opinion, for the behoof of the state, but he thought it not fit to
deliver himself publicly. Aristides, a man of great trust, is appointed
to hear him privately, and to make an account as he thought meet. When
Aristides came to make his report to the senate, he told them that
Themistocles' advice was indeed profitable, but not honest, whereupon
the people would not so much as hear it. There is much whispering of a
treaty, they are not willing to speak publicly of it: hear them in
private, and it may be the best advice shall be profitable, but not
honest. If a treaty should be, let it be both profitable and honest, and
no lover of peace will be against it.

7. Seeing the king is now upon the renewing of the covenants, it should
be remembered that we enter into covenant, according to our profession
therein, with reality, sincerity, and constancy, which are the
qualifications of good covenanters. Many doubt of your reality in the
covenant, let your sincerity and reality be evidenced by your
stedfastness and constancy; for many have begun well, but have not been
constant. In the sacred history of kings, we find a note upon kings
according to their carriages: one of three sentences is written upon
them. 1. Some kings have this written on them, "He did evil in the sight
of the Lord." They neither begin well, nor end well; such an one was
Ahaz, king of Judah, and divers others in that history. 2. Others have
this written on them, "He did that which was right in the sight of the
Lord, but not with a perfect heart." Such an one was Amaziah king of
Judah. He was neither sincere nor constant: when God blessed him with
victory against the Edomites, he fell foully from the true worship of
God, and set up the gods of Edom. 3. A third sentence is written upon
the godly kings of Judah, "He did right in the sight of the Lord, with a
perfect heart." As Asa, Hezekiah, Jehoshaphat, and Josiah, they were
both sincere and constant. Let us neither have the first nor the second,
but the third written upon our king, "He did right in the sight of the
Lord, with a perfect heart." Begin well, and continue constant.

Before I close, I shall seek leave to lay before our young king, two
examples to beware of, and one to follow. The two warning examples, one
of them is in the text, another in our own history.

The first example is of Joash. He began well, and went on in a godly
reformation all the days of Jehoiada; but, it is observed, "That after
the days of Jehoiada, the princes of Judah came, and did obeisance to
the king, and he hearkened unto them." It appeareth, they had been lying
in wait till the death of Jehoiada; and took the opportunity to destroy
the true worship of God, and set up false worship, flattering the king
for that effect: for it is said, "They left the house of the Lord, and
served groves and idols;" and were so far from being reclaimed by the
prophet of the Lord that was sent unto them, that they conspired against
Zechariah, the son of Jehoiada, who reproved them mildly for their
idolatry, and stoned him with stones, and slew him at the king's
commandment. And it is said, "Joash remembered not the kindness that
Jehoiada his father had done to him, but slew his son." Sir, take this
example for a warning. You are obliged by the covenant to go on in the
work of reformation. It may be, some great ones are waiting their time,
not having opportunity to work for the present, till afterward they may
make obeisance, and persuade you to destroy all that hath been done in
the work of God, these divers years. Beware of it; let no allurement or
persuasion prevail with you, to fall from that which this day you bind
yourself to maintain.
