mythology and polytheism, the Oriental doctrine plainly exhibits Satan
as the creator and ruler of this world, and, on that ground, as exacting
the homage of its population. This primary arrogation on his part is the
ground of all idolatry, and of the great heresies of Gnostic and Popish
origin. Accordingly, the great antagonism which, since the fall, has
been in progress in the view of the whole universe, and of which the
termination is to fill the hosts of heaven with adoring and rapturous
ecstacy, and the ransomed Church with ceaseless exultation and praise,
exhibits the great Adversary as chief of a rebel faction of his own
species, instigating the original revolt, and ruling as his vassals the
race of man, arrogating the titles and prerogatives of the Creator and
Sovereign of the world, and persisting in his rebellion, usurpation, and
rivalship, till finally vanquished and imprisoned, his purposes
defeated, and his works destroyed; and at length displays, on the other
hand, the majesty and power, the titles, prerogatives, and rights, the
supremacy, rectitude and glory of the self-existent Creator, Proprietor
and rightful Sovereign, effectually reaesserted, vindicated, and
universally acknowledged.

In these earliest and most prevalent systems of heresy are contained the
perversions and false doctrines against which the contemporaries and the
immediate and later orthodox successors of the apostles were called to
contend; and they present in bold relief the points brought into
controversy, as they are indicated in the creeds and decrees of Councils
specially convened to condemn and suppress them.

To meet the doctrine advanced by the earliest and adopted by the later
heretics, that the creation and government of the world was the work of
a creature, supposed by some to be the Evil One; by others, a being
originally good, but afterwards degenerate; by some, to be one of two
rival creatures; by others, to have derived his birth from the Supreme
God; they, rejecting with abhorrence such ideas of the Creator, and all
the notions associated with them, and impelled by their philosophy, as
well as by their knowledge and regard for the Scriptures, to assert in
the plainest manner that the Creator of all things is himself
uncreated--God, in distinction from creatures--planted themselves upon
that as an impregnable position.

But they had at the same time to maintain the doctrines of the Trinity
and the Divinity of Christ. They were to assert the Deity of Christ,
whom the heretics held to be a creature, and yet ascribed to him the
works of creation. It is at least natural to suppose that, to avoid
giving the heretics any advantage in popular argument, and to use
expressions importing the broadest contrast to theirs, they at first
ascribed the creation to God, without any reference to the distinction
of Persons in the Godhead; or, to maintain that doctrine at the same
time, and to meet the point in question as to the Deity of the Creator,
they ascribed the works of creation and providence to God the Father.
Whatever may have been the process, this was the result. It is not
unlikely that, at the date of the Apostles' and the Nicene Creeds, there
were many who at length joined in adopting them, who from ignorance, or
from the sway of heretical influences, were greatly confused upon these
subjects; many, more or less perverted by Gnostic and Judaizing dogmas;
many who saw no possibility of maintaining the doctrines which they held
concerning the Father, as the Father of Christ the Son by _eternal
generation_, and as the fountain of all authority and power, without
specifically ascribing to him the works of creation and providence; many
who, relying on the doctrine of the _eternal_ generation of the Son, as
the most conclusive and unanswerable proof of his Divinity, confined
their attention to that, and saw no possibility of meeting and
counteracting the dogmas of Cerinthus, or of other heretics, if they
ascribed the creation to the Son.

It must be considered that the terms which they employed were adopted
expressly to meet the growing and fatal errors which infested the
Church; and that they had, at the date of the Nicene Creed, a most
powerful motive to concession and accommodation for the sake of unity,
in the notion already prevalent concerning schism--defection from the
faith of the dominant or Catholic Church, or separation from that body
on that account--as a mortal sin.

It was pointedly to their purpose to maintain, in opposition to
Cerinthus, that the Christ was the Son of God, and the only being
designated by that title; and equally to their purpose, in opposition to
Arius, to maintain that he was not created. They were to meet these
points somehow, or accomplish nothing against the most formidable
heresies. They hit upon a phraseology which, if it be not wholly
unintelligible to mortals, was probably then deemed to be unanswerable,
in the assertion that he was the Son by _eternal generation_; begotten,
not made, &c.

The language of the creeds, hereafter more particularly referred to, is
presumed to have become gradually familiar to the opposers of heresy
before it was embodied in those formularies. They express in a condensed
form the sentiments and terms by which the leading controvertists
repelled the dominant heresies of the time.

It is worthy of a passing notice, that from the origin of the Assyrian
empire down to the Christian era, the sway, over the whole Pagan world,
of the Oriental doctrines, embodied in the Sabian, Magian, Brahminical,
Lamaist, Boodhist, and other systems, laid the foundation and prepared
the way for the rise and spread of the Mohammedan imposture, after those
doctrines had, by the propagation of Christianity, been in some degree
intercepted and modified within, and in some directions beyond, the
limits of the Roman empire. The theory of the system of Mohammed, like
that ascribed to Zoroaster, which aimed to unite the Sabians, who
worshipped images, and the Magians, who refused them, with the Jews of
Babylon and its provinces after they had renounced idolatry and the
doctrine of mediation, involved a union of the same school of Jews in
the seventh century, with the nominal but already apostate churches
(churches characterized by Gnostic heresies and Pagan corruptions) of
Babylonia, Syria, Asia Minor, Egypt, Northern Africa, Spain, &c.

Hence the first and, with respect to the Divine Being, the only article
of the Mohammedan faith is that of THE UNITY. For this, the Jews, the
judaizing professors of Christianity, the Cerinthians, Arians, &c., were
prepared; and in like manner for the exclusion of the doctrine of
mediation and the consequent proscription of images and sacrificial
offerings.

Who that considers the character and mission of Mohammed, as depicted
Rev. ix. 1-12, and illustrated by the histories of his time, can fail to
regard him as, in the hands of the great Adversary, one of the most
extraordinary visible agents of his antagonism. With no preliminary
indications, like a meteor fallen to the earth, he suddenly appears on
the scene. He receives the key and opens the abyss of darkness. The
blinding smoke of the pit ascends, and generates a locust army with the
power of scorpions, led on by Satan as their king, "whose name in Hebrew
is Abaddon, and in Greek, the Destroyer." As visible head of the
apostate faction, he subdues, and with enduring chains of mental
darkness manacles and holds fast the Eastern empire: while, in the
Western, essentially the like results, under the same leadership, are
accomplished by the head of the Papal hierarchy.

These great systems of influence and control, by which, in the Eastern
world, the Arch-deceiver held the human mind in bondage, required and
depended on implicit, unquestioning faith. Thus, throughout the Roman
empire prior to the Advent, and subsequently in the eastern division,
under the Mohammedan, and in the western, under the Popish faith.

The shock of the Reformation awaked and roused up the mind of western
Europe, and brought new antagonist influences into operation, which, by
recalling attention to the Scriptures as the only rule of faith, by
giving prominence to the cardinal doctrines of redemption, and by a
revival of learning, threatened wholly to subvert the dominion of Popish
superstition and imposture.

This aspect of his affairs required a new course of tactics on the part
of the great Adversary, by which the tendencies, intellectual,
speculative, philosophical, scientific, which were rising and spreading,
might be so perverted as to counteract the objects of the Reformation,
and, in place of the former outward and vulgar superstition, to give
sway to infidelity; a course of tactics adapted to the intellects of
men, stimulated to inquiry and earnest in the pursuit of knowledge; a
course by which the peculiar doctrines of the Scriptures and of the
Reformation, and the reality of inspiration and of miracles, might be
explained away, and by which, in effect, the arrogations of the
Arch-deceiver and the Pope, of lordship over men's minds, and over the
province of theological dogma, together with an ascendency of influence
in the seats of intellectual and physical science, might be imputed and
transferred to HUMAN REASON.

REASON, thus deified and installed as in a pontifical chair,
_progressively developed_ its hierarchs and suffragans in the seats of
learning, secular and sacred, in every part of the Protestant world.
Witness the rise, progress and results of this course of tactics in
Germany itself. Witness the infidel and atheistic fruits of this homage
of reason, in the departments of German metaphysics, theology,
criticism, physical science, &c. Witness the stealthy, insidious,
infectious inculcation and progress of this infidelity, in the same
departments, on this side of the Atlantic,--in some universities and
colleges under cover of the principles and discoveries of natural
science; in some theological schools, in the name of the science of
criticism, interpretation, &c. in lyceums and halls of popular resort,
by scientific lectures; and at the doors and in the face of all, by the
ceaseless issues of the press.

Can any observer within the precincts of Protestantism account, upon any
other view of the subject, for the progress and effects of this
infection, with its intuitional, conceptional, subjective and
transcendental cant; for its fascinating and transforming power over men
previously trained in schools of an opposite character; for its
leavenous working in scientific and ecclesiastical fraternities, or its
popular effects as administered orally and by the press? Must we not
suppose a subtle and powerful agency behind the scenes, as truly as in
the case of Gnosticism, Mohammedanism, Romanism, Mormonism? Has not
experience shown that a teacher from the pulpit or from a theological or
literary chair, who, notwithstanding his knowledge of the Scriptures
and of their peculiar doctrines, begins to exhibit signs of his
conversion to German rationalism in any respect; to pantheism, idealism,
neology, infidelity under any of its designations; soon becomes
confident, pertinacious, progressive, and at length is recognized as
having ceased to be restrained either by his former principles and
professions, or by the authority of the sacred oracles? In short, if the
Evil One is still abroad, seeking whom he may devour; if he is what the
Scriptures represent him to be; and if, through the great organisms and
mediums of domination above referred to, he still carries on his
warfare, we must needs conclude, from its nature and results, that he is
equally the prime mover and the actuating power of this rationalistic
system, deceiver of the educated through their idolatry of reason; as of
the ignorant through the imposing forms of superstition and the arts of
priestcraft.




CHAPTER XXIV.

    Subject of the last Chapter continued--Results of the earliest
    and most prevalent Heresies.


During the first age after the apostles, the Scripture doctrines
respecting the Trinity, and the Person and work of the Mediator, appear
to have prevailed in the Church generally; afterwards a change of
phraseology among the leaders and teachers of the Church took place, and
the work of creation came to be ascribed, not to the Son, but to the
Father.

Tertullian, about the close of the second century, in his answer to
Praxeas, who founded the sect of Monarchians, expressed himself in
scriptural terms respecting the Trinity and the Person of Christ; and
describes the faith which he held in that respect, as that which had
obtained from the beginning of the gospel; _i. e._, among those admitted
to be orthodox. He soon after separated from the Catholic Church. About
fifty years later, the Bishop of Carthage procured the excommunication
of the Reformer Novatian, founder of the Cathari, or Puritans of that
day, who, following his example, formed numerous seceding churches all
over the empire, which flourished during the two succeeding centuries,
and a succession of them down to the Reformation. "He was," says
Mosheim, "a man of uncommon learning and eloquence." He wrote a work
upon the subject of the Trinity, of which the first eight sections
relate to the Father; the next twenty to Christ: the Old Testament
prophecies concerning him--their actual accomplishment--his nature--how
the Scriptures prove his divinity--confutes the Sabellians--shows that
it was Christ who appeared to the patriarchs, Abraham, Jacob, Moses, &c.

From the character ascribed to Novatian by ecclesiastical historians;
from the censures cast upon him by the Popish writers, who represent him
as the first antipope, author of the heresy of Puritanism, and parent of
an innumerable multitude of seceding Puritan congregations all over the
empire; from his work above alluded to, written in 257, six years after
his separation from the dominant Church; and from the known character of
the Cathari, he is doubtless to be regarded as an eminent example of
primitive scriptural faith, and a distinguished leader of those who,
driven into the wilderness by persecution, perpetuated that faith
essentially and in most particulars down to the era of Luther.

The Paulicians, whose rise is dated in the seventh century, appear to
have been of similar character. To these succeeded the Waldenses,
Albigenses, and other true worshippers in the valleys of Piedmont.

The Waldenses, in their creed of 1120, adopt all the articles of the
so-called Apostles' Creed. They distinctly express their faith in the
Trinity and in the canonical books of Scripture, which, they say, "teach
us that there is one God, almighty, unbounded in wisdom and infinite in
goodness, and who in his goodness has made all things." In another
Confession, dated 1544, they say: "We believe that there is but one God,
who is a spirit--the Creator of all things--the Father of all, who is
above all," &c.

The Confessions of the Waldenses were approved by Luther and the other
Reformers. Luther published them in 1533, with a preface.

But the Creed called the Apostles', which the Waldenses in their first
article adopt, expressly ascribes the work of creation to the Father: "I
believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of heaven and earth, and in
Jesus Christ his only Son our Lord." Probably this formula should not be
dated so early as the first, or even the second century. The Creed
called the Nicene, which was in 325 adopted by the Council of Nice in
opposition to the Gnostics, the Judaizers, and the heresy of Arius,
comprises various terms explanatory of the views then held concerning
the Son, while it speaks of the Father as the maker of all things. "We
believe in one God, _the Father Almighty, maker of all things visible
and invisible_. And in one Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the only
begotten: begotten of the Father, that is, of the substance of the
Father. God of God; Light of Light; true God of true God; begotten, not
made; consubstantial with the Father," &c.

The Second General Council, which was held at Constantinople in 383,
determined that the Nicene Creed should be the standard of orthodoxy.

This creed continued to be held by the Roman Catholic Church, and was
adopted and still continues in use by the Protestant Episcopal Churches
both of Great Britain and this country.

Probably the phraseology both of the Nicene and the Apostles' Creed, in
respect to the ascription of the works of creation _to God the Father_,
having been adopted and followed by all succeeding writers of authority,
was received and acquiesced in by all the Reformers and the different
Protestant denominations, and thus, coinciding essentially with the
Talmudists and Rabbinical Doctors, was in every way sanctioned and
commended as an example to our translators.

In the Confession of Faith and Catechism of the Presbyterian Church of
Scotland and that of this country, there is indeed, in respect to the
subject under consideration, a less exact copy than in earlier
Confessions of the phraseology of the Nicene formula. The work of
creation is, however, in no respect ascribed to the Mediator personally.
The doctrine of the eternal generation of the Son is very distinctly
avowed; and the works of creation are ascribed to God, though not with
any restricted reference to the Father, as distinguished from the other
Persons.

These brief references may serve to show that the ascription of the work
of creation by some to the Father, in such a manner as to indicate that
it is his personally, and by others to the Deity, in distinction from
the delegated official Person and work of the Mediator, owed its origin
primarily to the nature of the heresies and controversies by which the
Church was agitated, and the methods of the orthodox in defending the
doctrines of the Trinity and the Divinity of Christ, against the
Judaizers, the Gnostics, the Arians, and others; and was handed down in
their treatises and creeds from one age to another. In the same way the
doctrine of _eternal_ generation, and all the phraseology in the Nicene
Creed, for example, respecting the Son, which is not to be found in like
terms in the Holy Scriptures, appears to have arisen. And it is to be
observed that, in close connection with these opinions as adopted by
Protestants, is the doctrine that the personal and official work of the
Mediator had respect only to the redemption of man, and commenced in
personal acts not till his appearance incarnate.

In view of the origin, nature, and tendency of the heresies above
referred to, their extended influence, and the manner in which they
were controverted, one can hardly avoid the conclusion, that the order
of Divine instruction in the most essential particulars was inverted, by
the assumption of some and the acquiescence therein of others, that the
Old Testament revealed only the one invisible Deity absolutely
considered, as the Creator and Governor of the world, whose oneness or
unity was so regarded by one class as to preclude the idea of any
personal distinction in the Godhead; and so regarded by many others, who
