adequate sphere for the capacities in that great future, and in the
God that fills it. You go into the quarries left by reason of some
great convulsion or disaster, by forgotten races, and you will find
there half excavated and rounded pillars still adhering to the matrix
of the rock from which they were being hewn. Such unfinished abortions
are all human lives if, when Death drops its curtain, there is an end.

But, brethren, God does not so clumsily disproportion His creatures
and their place. God does not so cruelly put into men longings that
have no satisfaction, and desires which never can be filled, as that
there should not be, beyond the gulf, the fair land of the hereafter.
Every human life obviously has in it, up to the very end, the capacity
for progress. Every human life, up to the very end, has been educated
and trained, and that, surely, for something. There may be masters in
workshops who take apprentices, and teach them their trade during the
years that are needed, and then turn round and say, 'I have no work
for you, so you must go and look for it somewhere else.' That is not
how God does. When He has trained His apprentices He gives them work
to do. Surely there is a hereafter,

But that is only part of what is involved in this thought. It is not
only a state subsequent to the present, but it is a state consequent
on the present, and the outcome of it. The analogy of our earthly life
avails here. To-day is the child of all the yesterdays, and the
yesterdays and to-day are the parent of tomorrow. The past, our past,
has made us what we are in the present, and what we are in the present
is making us what we shall be in the future. And when we pass out of
this life we pass out, notwithstanding all changes, the same men as we
were. There may be much on the surface changed, there will be much
taken away, thank God! dropped, necessarily, by the cessation of the
corporeal frame, and the connection into which it brings us with
things of sense. There will be much added, God only knows how much,
but the core of the man will remain untouched. 'We all are changed by
still degrees,' and suddenly at last 'All but the basis of the evil.'
And so we carry ourselves with us into that future life, and, 'what a
man soweth, that shall he also reap.' Oh that they were wise, that
they understood this, that they would consider their afterward!

II. Now, secondly, my text suggests the immortality of hope. 'Thine
expectation'--or rather, as I said, 'thy hope'--'shall not be cut
off.' This is a characteristic of that hereafter. What a wonderful
saying that is which also occurs in this Book of Proverbs, 'The
righteous hath hope in his death.' Ah! we all know how swiftly, as
years increase, the things to hope for diminish, and how, as we
approach the end, less and less do our imaginations go out into the
possibilities of the sorrowing future. And when the end comes, if
there is no afterwards, the dying man's hopes must necessarily die
before he does. If when we pass into the darkness we are going into a
cave with no outlet at the other end, then there is no hope, and you
may write over it Dante's grim word: 'All hope abandon, ye who enter
here.' But let in that thought, 'surely there is an afterwards,' and
the enclosed cave becomes a rock-passage, in which one can see the
arch of light at the far end of the tunnel; and as one passes through
the gloom, the eye can travel on to the pale radiance beyond, and
anticipate the ampler ether, the diviner air, 'the brighter
constellations burning, mellow moons and happy stars,' that await us
there. 'The righteous hath hope in his death.' 'Thine expectation
shall not be cut off.'

But, further, that conviction of the afterward opens up for us a
condition in which imagination is surpassed by the wondrous reality.
Here, I suppose, nobody ever had all the satisfaction out of a
fulfilled hope that he expected. The fish is always a great deal
larger and heavier when we see it in the water than when it is lifted
out and scaled. And I suppose that, on the whole, perhaps as much pain
as pleasure comes from the hopes which are illusions far more often
than they are realities. They serve their purpose in whirling us along
the path of life and in stimulating effort, but they do not do much
more.

But there does come a time, if you believe that there is an
afterwards, when all we desired and painted to ourselves of possible
good for our craving spirits shall be felt to be but a pale reflex of
the reality, like the light of some unrisen sun on the snowfields, and
we shall have to say 'the half was not told to us.'

And, further, if that afterwards is of the sort that we, through Jesus
Christ and His resurrection and glory, know to be, then all through
the timeless eternity hope will be our guide. For after each fresh
influx of blessedness and knowledge we shall have to say 'it doth not
yet appear what we shall be.' 'Thus now abideth'--and not only now,
but then and eternally--'these three--faith, hope, and charity,' and
hope will never be cut off through all the stretch of that great
afterwards.

III. And now, finally, notice the bearing of all this on the daily
present.

'Be thou in the fear of the Lord all the day long.' The conviction of
the hereafter, and the blessed vision of hopes fulfilled, are not the
only reasons for that exhortation. A great deal of harm has been done,
I am afraid, by well-meaning preachers who have drawn the bulk of
their strongest arguments to persuade men to Christian faith from the
thought of a future life. Why, if there were no future, it would be
just as wise, just as blessed, just as incumbent upon us to 'be in the
fear of the Lord all the day long.' But seeing that there is that
future, and seeing that only in it will hope rise to fruition, and yet
subsist as longing, surely there comes to us a solemn appeal to 'be in
the fear of the Lord all the day long,' which being turned into
Christian language, is to live by habitual faith, in communion with,
and love and obedience to, our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.

Surely, surely the very climax and bad eminence of folly is shutting
the eyes to that future that we all have to face; and to live here, as
some of you are doing, ignoring it and God, and cribbing, cabining,
and confining all our thoughts within the narrow limits of the things
present and visible. For to live so, as our text enjoins, is the sure
way, and the only way, to make these great hopes realities for
ourselves.

Brethren, that afterwards has two sides to it. The prophet Malachi, in
almost his last words, has a magnificent apocalypse of what he calls
'the day of the Lord,' which he sets forth as having a double aspect.
On the one hand, it is lurid as a furnace, and burns up the wicked
root and branch. I saw a forest fire this last autumn, and the great
pine-trees stood there for a moment pyramids of flame, and then came
down with a crash. So that hereafter will be to godless men. And on
the other side, that 'day of the Lord' in the prophet's vision was
radiant with the freshness and dew and beauty of morning, and the Sun
of Righteousness arose with healing in his wings. Which of the two is
it going to be to us? We have all to face it. We cannot alter that
fact, but we can settle how we shall face it. It will be to either the
fulfilment of blessed hope, the 'appearance of the glory of the great
God and our Saviour,' or else, as is said in this same Book of
Proverbs: 'The hope of the godless' shall be like one of those water
plants, the papyrus or the flag, which, when the water is taken away,
'withereth up before any other herb.' It is for us to determine
whether the afterwards that we must enter upon shall be the land in
which our hopes shall blossom and fruit, and blossom again immortally,
or whether we shall leave behind us, with all the rest that we would
fain keep, the possibility of anticipating any good. 'Surely there is
an afterwards,' and if thou wilt 'be in the fear of the Lord all the
day long,' then for evermore 'thy hope shall not be cut off.'



THE PORTRAIT OF A DRUNKYARD

'Who hath woe? who hath sorrow? who hath contentions? who hath
babbling? who hath wounds without cause? who hath redness of eyes? 30.
They that tarry long at the wine; they that go to seek mixed wine. 31.
Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it giveth his colour
in the cup, when it moveth itself aright. 32. At the last it biteth
like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder. 33. Thine eyes shall
behold strange women, and thine heart shall utter perverse things. 34.
Yea, thou shalt be as he that lieth down in the midst of the sea, or
as he that lieth upon the top of a mast. 35. They have stricken me,
shalt thou say, and I was not sick; they have beaten me, and I felt it
not: when shall I awake! I will seek it yet again.'--PROVERBS xxiii.
29-35.


This vivid picture of the effects of drunkenness leaves its sinfulness
and its wider consequences out of sight, and fixes attention on the
sorry spectacle which a man makes of himself in body and mind when he
'puts an enemy into his mouth to steal away his brains.' Disgust and
ridicule are both expressed. The writer would warn his 'son' by
impressing the ugliness and ludicrousness of drunkenness. The argument
is legitimate, though not the highest.

The vehement questions poured out on each other's heels in verse 29
are hot with both loathing and grim laughter. The two words rendered
'woe' and 'sorrow' are unmeaning exclamations, very like each other in
sound, and imitating the senseless noises of the drunkard. They
express discomfort as a dog might express it. They are howls rather
than words. That is one of the prerogatives won by drunkenness,--to
come down to the beasts' level, and to lose the power of articulate
speech. The quarrelsomeness which goes along with certain stages of
intoxication, and the unmeaning maudlin misery and whimpering into
which it generally passes, are next coupled together.

Then come a pair of effects on the body. The tipsy man cannot take
care of himself, and reeling against obstacles, or falling over them,
wounds himself, and does not know where the scratches and blood came
from. 'Redness of eyes' is, perhaps, rather 'darkness,' meaning
thereby dim sight, or possibly 'black eyes,' as we say,--a frequent
accompaniment of drunkenness, and corresponding to the wounds in the
previous clause. It is a hideous picture, and one that should be
burned in on the imagination of every young man and woman. The
liquor-sodden, miserable wrecks that are found in thousands in our
great cities, of whom this is a picture, were, most of them, in
Sunday-schools in their day. The next generation of such poor
creatures are, many of them, in Sunday-schools now, and may be reading
this passage to-day.

The answer to these questions has a touch of irony in it. The people
who win as their possessions these six precious things have to sit up
late to earn them. What a noble cause in which to sacrifice sleep, and
turn night into day! And they pride themselves on being connoisseurs
in the several vintages; they 'know a good glass of wine when they see
it.' What a noble field for investigation! What a worthy use of the
faculties of comparison and judgment! And how desirable the prizes won
by such trained taste and delicate discrimination!

In verses 31 and 32 weighty warning and dehortation follow, based in
part on the preceding picture. The writer thinks that the only way of
sure escape from the danger is to turn away even the eyes from the
temptation. He is not contented with saying 'taste not,' but he goes
the whole length of 'look not'; and that because the very sparkle and
colour may attract. 'When it is red' might perhaps better be rendered
'when it reddens itself,' suggesting the play of colour, as if put
forth by the wine itself. The word rendered in the Authorised Version
and Revised Version 'colour' is literally 'eye,' and probably means
the beaded bubbles winking on the surface. 'Moveth itself aright'
(Authorised Version) is not so near the meaning as 'goeth down
smoothly' (Revised Version). The whole paints the attractiveness to
sense of the wine-cup in colour, effervescence, and taste.

And then comes in, with startling abruptness, the end of all this
fascination,--a serpent's bite and a basilisk's sting. The kind of
poisonous snake meant in the last clause of verse 32 is doubtful, but
certainly is one much more formidable than an adder. The serpent's
lithe gracefulness and painted skin hide a fatal poison; and so the
attractive wine-cup is sure to ruin those who look on it. The evil
consequences are pursued in more detail in what follows.

But here we must note two points. The advice given is to keep entirely
away from the temptation. 'Look not' is safe policy in regard of many
of the snares for young lives that abound in our modern society. It is
not at all needful to 'see life,' or to know the secrets of
wickedness, in order to be wise and good. 'Simple concerning evil' is
a happier state than to have eaten the fruit of the tree of knowledge.
Many a young man has been ruined, body and soul, by a prurient
curiosity to know what sort of life dissipated men and women led, or
what sort of books they were against which he was warned, or what kind
of a place a theatre was, and so on. Eyes are greedy, and there is a
very quick telephone from them to the desires. 'The lust of the eye'
soon fans the 'lust of the flesh' into a glow. There are plenty of
depths of Satan gaping for young feet; and on the whole, it is safer
and happier not to know them, and so not to have defiling memories,
nor run the risk of falling into fatal sins. Whether the writer of
this stern picture of a drunkard was a total abstainer or not, the
spirit of his counsel not to 'look on the wine' is in full accord with
that practice. It is very clear that if a man is a total abstainer, he
can never be a drunkard. As much cannot be said of the moderate man.

Note too, how in all regions of life, the ultimate results of any
conduct are the important ones. Consequences are hard to calculate,
and they do not afford a good guidance for action. But there are many
lines of conduct of which the consequences are not hard to calculate,
but absolutely certain. It is childish to take a course because of a
moment's gratification at the beginning, to be followed by protracted
discomfort afterwards. To live for present satisfaction of desires,
and to shut one's eyes tight against known and assured results of an
opposite sort, cannot be the part of a sensible man, to say nothing of
a religious one. So moralists have been preaching ever since there was
such a thing as temptation in the world; and men have assented to the
common sense of the teaching, and then have gone straight away and
done the exact opposite.

'What shall the end be?' ought to be the question at every beginning.
If we would cultivate the habit of holding present satisfactions in
suspense, and of giving no weight to present advantages until we saw
right along the road to the end of the journey, there would be fewer
failures, and fewer weary, disenchanted old men and women, to lament
that the harvest they had to reap and feed on was so bitter. There are
other and higher reasons against any kind of fleshly indulgence than
that at the last it bites like a serpent, and with a worse poison than
serpent's sting ever darted; but that is a reason, and young hearts,
which are by their very youth blessedly unused to look forward, will
be all the happier to-day, and all the surer of to-morrow's good, if
they will learn to say, 'And afterwards--what?'

The passage passes to a renewed description of the effects of
intoxication, in which the disgusting and the ludicrous aspects of it
are both made prominent. Verse 33 seems to describe the excited
imagination of the drunkard, whose senses are no longer under his
control, but play him tricks that make him a laughingstock to sober
people. One might almost take the verse to be a description of
delirium tremens. 'Strange things' are seen, and perverse things (that
is, unreal, or ridiculous) are stammered out. The writer has a keen
sense of the humiliation to a man of being thus the fool of his own
bewildered senses, and as keen a one of the absurd spectacle he
presents; and he warns his 'son' against coming down to such a depth
of degradation.

It may be questioned whether the boasted quickening and brightening
effects of alcohol are not always, in a less degree, that same
beguiling of sense and exciting of imagination which, in their extreme
form, make a man such a pitiable and ridiculous sight. It is better to
be dull and see things as they are, than to be brilliant and see
things larger, brighter, or any way other than they are, because we
see them through a mist. Imagination set agoing by such stimulus, will
not work to as much purpose as if aroused by truth. God's world, seen
by sober eyes, is better than rosy dreams of it. If we need to draw
our inspiration from alcohol, we had better remain uninspired. If we
desire to know the naked truth of things, the less we have to do with
strong drink the better. Clear eyesight and self-command are in some
degree impaired by it always. The earlier stages are supposed to be
exhilaration, increased brilliancy of fancy and imagination, expanded
good-fellowship, and so on. The latter stages are these in our
passage, when strange things dance before cheated eyes, and strange
words speak themselves out of lips which their owner no longer
controls. Is that a condition to be sought after? If not, do not get
on to the road that leads to it.

Verse 34 adds another disgusting and ridiculous trait. A man who
should try to lie down and go to sleep in the heart of the sea or on
the masthead of a ship would be a manifest fool, and would not keep
life in him for long. One has seen drunken men laying themselves down
to sleep in places as exposed and as ridiculous as these; and one
knows the look of the heavy lump of insensibility lying helpless on
public roads, or on railway tracks, or anywhere where the fancy took
him. The point of the verse seems to be the drunken man's utter loss
of sense of fitness, and complete incapacity to take care of himself.
He cannot estimate dangers. The very instinct of self-preservation has
forsaken him. There he lies, though as sure to be drowned as if he
were in the depth of the sea, though on as uncomfortable a bed as if
he were rocking on a masthead, where he could not balance himself.

The torpor of verse 34 follows on the unnatural excitement of verse
33, as, in fact, the bursts of uncontrolled energy in which the man
sees and says strange things, are succeeded by a collapse. One moment
raging in excitement caused by imaginary sights, the next huddled
together in sleep like death,--what a sight the man is! The teacher
here would have his 'son' consider that he may come to that, if he
looks on the wine-cup. '_Thou_ shalt be' so and so. It is very
impolite, but very necessary, to press home the individual application
of pictures like this, and to bid bright young men and women look at
the wretched creatures they may see hanging about liquor shops, and
remember that they may come to be such as these.

Verse 35 finishes the picture. The tipsy man's soliloquy puts the
copestone on his degradation. He has been beaten, and never felt it.
Apparently he is beginning to stir in his sleep, though not fully
awake; and the first thing he discovers when he begins to feel himself
over is that he has been beaten and wounded, and remembers nothing
about it. A degrading anaesthetic is drink. Better to bear all ills
than to drown them by drowning consciousness. There is no blow which a
man cannot bear better if he holds fast by God's hand and keeps
himself fully exposed to the stroke, than if he sought a cowardly
alleviation of it, softer the drunkard's fashion.

But the pains of his beating and the discomforts of his waking do not
deter the drunkard. 'When shall I awake?' He is not fully awake yet,
so as to be able to get up and go for another drink. He is in the
stage of feeling sorry for himself, and examining his bruises, but he
wishes he were able to shake off the remaining drowsiness, that he
might 'seek yet again' for his curse. The tyranny of desire, which
wakes into full activity before the rest of the man does, and the
enfeebled will, which, in spite of all bruises and discomforts, yields
at once to the overmastering desire, make the tragedy of a drunkard's
life. There comes a point in lives of fleshly indulgence in which the
craving seems to escape from the control of the will altogether.
Doctors tell us that the necessity for drink becomes a physical
disease. Yes; but it is a disease manufactured by the patient, and he
is responsible for getting himself into such a state.

This tragic picture proves that there were many originals of it in the
days when it was painted. Probably there are far more, in proportion
to population, in our times. The warning it peals out was never more
needed than now. Would that all preachers, parents, and children laid
it to heart and took the advice not even to 'look upon the wine'!


THE CRIME OF NEGLIGENCE

'If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto death, and those
that are ready to be slain; 12. If thou sayest, Behold, we knew it
not; doth not he that pondereth the heart consider it? and he that
keepeth thy soul, doth not he render to every man according to his
works?'--PROVERBS xxiv. 11, 12.


What is called the missionary spirit is nothing else than the
Christian church working in a particular direction. If a man has a
conviction, the health of his own soul, his reverence for the truth he
has learnt to love, his necessary connection with other men, make it a
duty, a necessity, and a joy to tell what he has heard, and to speak
what he believes. On these common grounds rests the whole obligation
of Christ's followers to speak the Gospel which they have received;
only the obligation presses on them with greater force because of the
higher worth of the word and the deeper misery of men without it. The
text contains nothing specially bearing on Christian missions, but it
deals with the fault which besets us all in our relations and in life:
and the wholesome truths which it utters apply to our duties in regard
to Christian missions because they apply to our duties in regard to
every misery within our reach. They speak of the murderous cruelty and
black sin of negligence to save any whom we can help from any sort of
misery which threatens them. They appear to me to suggest four
thoughts which I would now deal with:--

I. The crime of negligence.

Not to use any power is a sin; to omit to do anything that we can do
is a crime: to withhold a help that we can render is to participate in
the authorship of all the misery that we have failed to relieve. He
who neglects to save a life, kills. There are more murderers than
those who lift violent hands with malice aforethought against a hated
life. Rulers or communities who leave people uncared for to die, who
suffer swarming millions to live where the air is poison and the light
is murky, and first the soul and then the body, are dwarfed and die;
the incompetent men in high places, and the indolent ones in low,
whose selfishness brings, and whose blundering blindness allows to
continue, the conditions that are fatal to life--on these the guilt of
blood lies. Violence slays its thousands, but supine negligence slays
its tens of thousands.

And when we pass from these merely physical conditions to think of the
world and of the Church in the world, where shall we find words
weighty and burning enough to tell what fatal cruelty lies in the
unthinking negligence so characteristic of large portions of Christ's
professed followers? There is nothing which the ordinary type of
Christian, so called, more needs than to be aroused to a living sense
of personal responsibility for all the unalleviated misery of the
world. For every one who has laid the sorrows of humanity on his
heart, and has felt them in any measure as his own, there are a
hundred to whom these make no appeal and give no pang. Within ear-shot
of our churches and chapels there are squalid aggregations of stunted
and festering manhood, of whom it is only too true that they are
'drawn unto death' and 'ready to be slain,' and yet it would be an
exaggeration to say that the bulk of our congregations cast even a
languid eye of compassion upon those, to say nothing of stretching out
a hand to help. It needs to be dinned, far more than it is at present,
into every professing Christian that each of us has an obligation
which cannot be ignored or shuffled off, to acquaint ourselves with
the glaring facts that force themselves upon all thoughtful men, and
that the measure of our power is the measure of our obligation. The
question, Has the church done its best to deliver these? needs to be
sharpened to the point of 'Have I done my best?' And the vision of
multitudes perishing in the slums of a great city needs to be expanded
into the vision of dim millions perishing in the wide world.

II. The excuse of negligence.

The shuffling plea, 'Behold we knew it not,' is a cowardly lie. It
admits the responsibility to knowledge and pretends an ignorance which
it knows to be partly a false excuse, and in so far as it is true, to
be our own fault. We are bound to know, and the most ignorant of us
does know, and cannot help knowing, enough to condemn our negligence.
How many of us have ever tried to find out how the pariahs of
civilisation live who live beside us? Our ignorance so far as it is
real is the result of a sinful indolence. And there is a sadder form
of it in an ignorance which is the result of familiarity. We all know
how custom dulls our impressions. It is well that it should be so, for
a surgeon would be fit for little if he trembled and was shaken at the
sight of the tumour he had to work to remove, as we should be; but his
familiarity with misery does not harden him, because he seeks to
remove the suffering with which he has become familiar. But that same
familiarity does harden and injure the whole nature of the onlooker
who does nothing to alleviate it. Then there is an ignorance of other
suffering which is the result of selfish absorption in one's own
concerns. The man who is caring for himself only, and whose thoughts
and feelings all flow in the direction of his own success, may see
spread before him the most poignant sorrows without feeling one throb
of brotherly compassion and without even being aware of what his eyes
see. So, in so far as the excuse 'we knew it not' is true, it is no
excuse, but an indictment. It lays bare the true reason of the
criminal negligence as being a yet more criminal callousness as to the
woe and loss in which such crowds of men whom we ought to recognise as
brethren are sunken.

III. The condemnation of negligence.

The great example of God is put forward in the text as the contrast to
all this selfish negligence. Note the twofold description of Him given
here, 'He that pondereth the heart,' and 'He that keepeth thy soul.'
The former of these presents to us God's sedulous watching of the
hearts of men, in contrast to our indolent and superficial looks; and
in this divine attitude we find the awful condemnation of our
disregard of our fellows. God 'takes pain,' so to speak, to see after
His children. Are they not bound to look lovingly on each other? God
seeks to know them. Are they not bound to know one another? Lofty
disregard of human suffering is not _God's_ way. Is it ours? He
'looks down from the height of His sanctuary to hear the crying of the
prisoner.' Should not we stoop from our mole-hill to see it? God has
not too many concerns on His hands to mark the obscurest sorrow and be
ready to help it. And shall we plead that we are too busy with petty
personal concerns to take interest in helping the sorrows and fighting
against the sins of the world?

No less eloquently does the other name which is here applied to God
rebuke our negligence. 'He preserveth thy soul.' By His divine care
and communication of life, we live; and surely the soul thus preserved
is thereby bound to be a minister of preservation to all that are
'ready to be slain.' The strongest motive for seeking to save others
is that God has saved us. Thus this name for God touches closely upon
the great Christian thought, 'Christ has given Himself for me.' And in
that thought we find the true condemnation of a Christianity which has
not caught from Him the enthusiasm for self-surrender, and the passion
for saving the outcast and forlorn. If to be a Christian is to imitate
Christ, then the name has little application to those who see 'them
that are drawn to death,' and turn from them unconcerned and
unconscious of responsibility.

IV. The judgment of negligence.

'Doth not He render to every man according to his works?' There is
such a judgment both in the present and in the future for Christian
men as for others. And not only what they do, but what they
inconsistently fail to do, comes into the category of their works, and
influences their position. It does so in the present, for no man can
cherish such a maimed Christian life as makes such negligence possible
without robbing himself of much that would tend to his own growth in
grace and likeness to Jesus Christ. The unfaithful servant is poorer
by the pound hidden in the napkin which might all the while have been
laid out at interest with the money-changers, which would have
increased the income whilst the lord was absent. We rob ourselves of
blessed sympathies and of the still more blessed joy of service, and
of the yet more blessed joy of successful effort, by our indolence and
our negligence. Let us not forget that our works do follow us in this
life as in the life to come, and that it is here as well as hereafter,
that he that goeth forth with a full basket and scatters the precious
seed with weeping, and yet with joy, shall doubtless come again
bringing his sheaves with him. And if we stretch our view to take in
the life beyond, what gladness can match that of the man who shall
enter there with some who will be his joy and crown of rejoicing in
that day, and of whom he shall be able to say, 'Behold I and the
children whom Thou hast given me!'

I venture earnestly to appeal to all my hearers for more faithful
discharge of this duty. I pray you to open your ears to hear, and your
eyes to see, and your hearts to feel, and last of all, your hands to
help, the miseries of the world. Solemn duties wait upon great
privileges. It is an awful trust to have Christ and His gospel
committed to our care. We get it because from One who lived no life of
luxurious ease, but felt all the woes of humanity which He redeemed,
and forbore not to deliver us from death, though at the cost of His
own. We get it for no life of silken indolence or selfish disregard of
the sorrows of our brethren. If there is one tear we could have dried
and didn't, or one wound we could have healed and didn't, that is a
sin; if we could have lightened the great heap of sorrow by one grain
and didn't, that is a sin; and if there be one soul that perishes
which we might have saved and didn't, the negligence is not merely the
omission of a duty, but the doing of a deed which will be 'rendered to
us according to our works.'



THE SLUGGARD'S GARDEN

'I went by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard of the man
void of understanding; 31. And, lo, it was all grown over with thorns,
and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall thereof
was broken down.'--PROVERBS xxiv. 30, 31.


This picture of the sluggard's garden seems to be intended as a
parable. No doubt its direct simple meaning is full of homely wisdom
in full accord with the whole tone of the Book of Proverbs; but we
shall scarcely do justice to this saying of the wise if we do not see
in 'the ground grown over with thorns,' and 'the stone wall thereof
broken down,' an apologue of the condition of a soul whose owner has
neglected to cultivate and tend it.

I. Note first who the slothful man is.

The first plain meaning of the word is to be kept in view. The whole
Book of Proverbs brands laziness as the most prolific source of
poverty. Honest toil is to it the law of life. It is never weary of
reiterating 'In the sweat of thy brow thou shalt eat bread'; and it
condemns all swift modes of getting riches without labour. No doubt
the primitive simplicity of life as set forth in this book seems far
behind the many ingenuities by which in our days the law is evaded.
How much of Stock Exchange speculation and 'Company promoters'
gambling would survive the application of the homely old law?

But it is truer in the inward life than in the outward that 'the hand
of the diligent maketh rich.' After all, the differences between men
who truly 'succeed' and the human failures, which are so frequent, are
more moral than intellectual. It has been said that genius is, after
all, 'the capacity for taking infinite pains'; and although that is an
exaggerated statement, and an incomplete analysis, there is a great
truth in it, and it is the homely virtue of hard work which tells in
the long run, and without which the most brilliant talents effect but
little. However gifted a man may be, he will be a failure if he has
not learned the great secret of dogged persistence in often unwelcomed
toil. No character worth building up is built without continuous
effort. If a man does not labour to be good, he will surely become
bad. It is an old axiom that no man attains superlative wickedness all
at once, and most certainly no man leaps to the height of the goodness
possible to his nature by one spring. He has laboriously, and step by
step, to climb the hill. Progress in moral character is secured by
long-continued walking upwards, not by a jump.

We note that in our text 'the slothful' is paralleled by 'the man void
of understanding'; and the parallel suggests the stupidity in such a
world as this of letting ourselves develop according to whims, or
inclinations, or passions; and also teaches that 'understanding' is
meant to be rigidly and continuously brought to bear on actions as
director and restrainer. If the ship is not to be wrecked on the rocks
or to founder at sea, Wisdom's hand must hold the helm. Diligence
alone is not enough unless directed by 'understanding.'

II. What comes of sloth.

The description of the sluggard's garden brings into view two things,
the abundant, because unchecked, growth of profitless weeds, and the
broken down stone wall. Both of these results are but too sadly and
evidently true in regard to every life where rigid and continuous
control has not been exercised. It is a familiar experience known,
alas! to too many of us, that evil things, of which the seeds are in
us all, grow up unchecked if there be not constant supervision and
self-command. If we do not carefully cultivate our little plot of
garden ground, it will soon be overgrown by weeds. 'Ill weeds grow
apace' as the homely wisdom of common experience crystallises into a
significant proverb. And Jesus has taught the sadder truth that
'thorns spring up and choke the word and it becometh unfruitful.' In
the slothful man's soul evil will drive out good as surely as in the
struggle for existence the thorns and nettles will cover the face of
the slothful man's garden. In country places we sometimes come across
a ruined house with what was a garden round it, and here and there
still springs up a flower seeking for air and light in the midst of a
smothering mass of weeds. _They_ needed no kindly gardener's hand
to make them grow luxuriantly; can barely put out a pale petal unless
cared for and guarded.

But not only is there this unchecked growth, but 'the stone wall
thereof was broken down.' The soul was unfenced. The solemn imperative
of duty ceases to restrain or to impel in proportion as a man yields
slothfully to the baser impulses of his nature. Nothing is hindered
from going out of, nor for coming into, an unfenced soul, and he that
'hath no rule over his own spirit,' but is like a 'city broken down
without walls,' is certain sooner or later to let much go forth from
that spirit that should have bean rigidly shut up, and to let many an
enemy come in that will capture the city. It is not yet safe to let
any of the fortifications fall into disrepair, and they can only be
kept in their massive strength by continuous vigilance.

III. How sloth excuses itself.

Our text is followed at the distance of one verse with what seemed to
be the words of the sluggard in answer to the attempt to awake him:
'Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the hands
to sleep.' They are a quotation from an earlier chapter (ch. vi.)
where 'His Laziness' is sent to 'consider the ways of the ant and be
wise.' They are a drowsy petition which does not dispute the wisdom of
the call to awake, but simply craves for a little more luxurious
laziness from which he has unwillingly been aroused. And is it not
true that we admit too late the force of the summons and yet shrink
from answering it? Do we not cheat ourselves and try to deceive God
with the promise that we will set about amendment soon? This indolent
sleeper asks only for a _little_: 'A little sleep, a little
slumber, a little folding of the hands to sleep.' Do we not all know
that mood of mind which confesses our slothfulness and promises to be
wide awake tomorrow but would fain bargain to be left undisturbed
today? The call 'Awake thou that sleepest and arise from the dead!'
rings from Christ's lips in the ears of every man, and he who answers,
'I will presently, but must sleep a little longer,' may seem to
himself to have complied with the call, but has really refused it. The
'little more' generally becomes _much_ more; and the answer
'presently' alas! too often becomes the answer 'never.' When a man is
roused so as to be half awake, the only safety for him is
_immediately_ to rise and clothe himself; the head that drowsily
droops back on the pillow after he has heard the morning's call, is
likely to lie there long. Now, not 'by-and-by' is the time to shake
off the bonds of sloth to cultivate our garden.

IV. How sloth ends.

The sleeper's slumber is dramatically represented as being awakened by
armed robbers who bring a grim awakening. 'Poverty' and 'want' break
in on his 'folding hands to sleep.' That is true as regards the
outward life, where indulgence in literal slothfulness brings want,
and the whole drift of things executes on the sluggard the sentence
that if 'any man will not work, neither shall he eat.'

But the picture is more sadly and fatally true concerning the man who
has made his earthly life 'a little sleep' as concerns heavenly
things, and in spite of his beseechings, is roused to life and
consciousness of himself and of God by death. That man's 'poverty' in
his lack of all that is counted as wealth in the world of realities to
which he goes will indeed come as a robber. I would press upon you all
the plain question, Is this fatal slothfulness characteristic of me?
It may co-exist with, and indeed is often the consequence of vehement
energy and continuous work to secure wealth, or wisdom, or material
good; and the contrast between a man who is all eagerness in regard to
the things that don't matter, and all carelessness in regard to the
things that do, is the tragedy of life amongst us. My friend! if
_your_ garden has been suffered by you to be overgrown with
weeds, be sure of this, that one day you will be awakened from the
slumber that you would fain continue, and will find yourself in a life
where your 'poverty' will come as a robber and your want of all which
_there_ is counted treasure 'as an armed man.'

One word more. Christ's parable of the sower may be brought into
relationship with this parable. He sows the true seed in our hearts,
but when sown, it, too, has to be cared for and tended. If it is sown
in the sluggard's garden, it will bring forth few ears, and the tares
will choke the wheat.



AN UNWALLED CITY

'He that hath no rule over his own spirit is like a city that is
broken down, and without walls.'--PROVERBS xxv. 28.


The text gives us a picture of a state of society when an unwalled
city is no place for men to dwell in. In the Europe of today there are
still fortified places, but for the most part, battlements are turned
into promenades; the gateways are gateless; the sweet flowers blooming
where armed feet used to tread; and men live securely without bolts
and bars. But their spirits cannot yet afford to raise their defences
and fling themselves open to all comers.

We may see here three points: the city defenceless, or human nature as
it is; the city defended, human nature as it may be in Christ; the
city needing no defence, human nature as it will be in heaven.

I. The city defenceless, or human nature as it is.

Here we are in a state of warfare which calls for constant shutting
out of enemies. Temptations are everywhere; our foes compass us like
bees; evils of many sorts seduce. We can picture to ourselves some
little garrison holding a lonely outpost against lurking savages ready
to attack if ever the defenders slacken their vigilance for a moment.
And that is the truer picture of human nature as it is than the one by
which most men are deluded. Life is not a playground, but an arena of
grim, earnest fighting. No man does right in his sleep; no man does
right without a struggle.

The need for continual vigilance and self-control comes from the very
make of our souls, for our nature is not a democracy, but a kingdom.
In us all there are passions, desires, affections, all of which may
lead to vice or to virtue: and all of which evidently call out for
direction, for cultivation, and often for repression. Then there are
peculiarities of individual character which need watching lest they
become excessive and sinful. Further, there are qualities which need
careful cultivation and stimulus to bring them into due proportion. We
each of us receive, as it were, an undeveloped self, and have
entrusted to us potential germs which come to nothing, or shoot up
with a luxuriance that stifles unless we exercise a controlling power.
Besides all this, we all carry in us tendencies which are positively,
and only, sinful. There would be no temptation if there were no such.

But the slightest inspection of our own selves clearly points out, not
only what in us needs to be controlled, but that in us which is
_meant_ to control. The will is regal; conscience is meant to
govern the will, and its voice is but the echo of God's law.

But, while all this is true, it is too sadly true that the
accomplishment of this ideal is impossible in our own strength. Our
own sad experience tells us that we cannot govern ourselves; and our
observations of our brethren but too surely indicate that they too are
the prey of rebellious, anarchical powers within, and of temptations,
against the rush of which they and we are as powerless as a voyager in
a bark-canoe, caught in the fatal drift of Niagara. Conscience has a
voice, but no hands; it can speak, but if its voice fails, it cannot
hold us back. From its chair it can bid the waves breaking at our feet
roll back, as the Saxon king did, but their tossing surges are deaf.
As helpless as the mud walls of some Indian hill-fort against modern
artillery, is the defence, in one's own strength, of one's own self
against the world. We would gladly admit that the feeblest may do much
to 'keep himself unspotted from the world'; but we must, if we
recognise facts, confess that the strongest cannot do all. No man can
alone completely control his own nature; no man, unenlightened by God,
has a clear, full view of duty, nor a clear view of himself. Always
there is some unguarded place:

  'Unless above himself he can
  Erect himself, how mean a thing is man!'

but no man can so lift himself so as that self will not drag him down.
The walls are broken down and the troops of the spoilers sack the
city.

II. The defended city, or human nature as it may be in Christ.

If our previous remarks are true, they give us material for judging
how far the counsels of some very popular moral teachers should be
followed. It is a very old advice, 'know thyself; and it is a very
modern one that

  'Self-reverence, self-knowledge, self-control
  Lead life to sovereign power.'

But if these counsels are taken absolutely and without reference to
Christ and His work, they are 'counsels of despair,' demanding what we
cannot give, and promising what they cannot bestow. When we know
Christ, we shall know ourselves; when He is the self of ourselves,
then, and only then, shall we reverence and can we control the inner
man. The city of Mansoul will then be defended when 'the peace of God
keeps our hearts and minds in Jesus.'

He who submits himself to Christ is lord of himself as none else are.
He has a light within which teaches him what is sin. He has a love
within which puts out the flame of temptation, as the sun does a coal
fire. He has a motive to resist; he has power for resistance; he has
hope in resisting. Only thus are the walls broken down rebuilded. And
as Christ builds our city on firmer foundations, He will appear in His
glory, and will 'lay the windows in agates, and all thy borders in
precious stones.' The sure way to bring our ruined earth, 'without
form and void,' into a cosmos of light and beauty, is to open our
spirit for the Spirit of God to 'brood upon the face of the waters.'
Otherwise the attempts to rule over our own spirit will surely fail;
but if we let Christ rule over our spirit, then it will rule itself.

But let us ever remember that he who thus submits to Christ, and can
truly say, 'I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in _me_,' still
needs defence. The strife does not thereby cease; the enemies still
swarm; sin is not removed. There will be war to the end, and war for
ever; but He will 'keep our heads in the day of battle'; and though
often we may be driven from the walls, and outposts may be lost, and
gaping breaches made, yet the citadel shall be safe. If only we see to
it that '_He_ is the glory in the midst of us,' He will be 'a
wall of fire round about us.' Our nature as it may be in Christ is a
walled city as needing defence, and as possessing the defence which it
needs.

III. The city defenceless, and needing no defence; that is, human
nature as it will be hereafter.

'The gates shall not be shut day nor night,' for 'every thing that
defileth' is without. We know but little of that future, what we know
will, surely, be theirs who here have been 'guarded by the power of
God, through faith, unto salvation.' That salvation will bring with it
the end for the need of guardianship; though it leaves untouched the
blessed dependence, we shall stand secure when it is impossible to
fall. And that impossibility will be realised, partly, as we know,
from change in surroundings, partly from the dropping away of flesh,
partly from the entire harmony of our souls with the will of God. Our
ignorance of that future is great, but our knowledge of it is greater,
and our certainty of it is greatest of all.

This is what we may become. Dear friends! toil no longer at the
endless, hopeless task of ruling those turbulent souls of yours; you
can never rebuild the walls already fallen. Give up toiling to attain
calmness, peace, self-command. Let Christ do all for you, and let Him
in to dwell in you and be all to you. Builded on the true Rock, we
shall stand stately and safe amid the din of war. He will watch over
us and dwell in us, and we shall be as 'a city set on a hill,'
impregnable, a virgin city. So may it be with each of us while strife
shall last, and hereafter we may quietly hope to be as a city without
walls, and needing none; for they that hated us shall be far away, for
between us and them is 'a great gulf fixed,' so that they cannot cross
it to disturb us any more; and we shall dwell in the city of God, of
which the name is Salem, the city of peace, whose King is Himself, its
Defender and its Rock, its Fortress and its high Tower.



THE WEIGHT OF SAND

'The sand is weighty.'--PROVERBS, xxvii. 3.
