'mission'? Was it any _person_ at all? or have you any consciousness
that any will but your own has anything to say about your life? These
prophets had found One whom it was worth while to obey, whatever came
of it, and whoever stood in the way. May it be so with you and me, my
friend! Let us try always to feel that in the commonest things we may
hear the command of God; that the trifles of each day--trifles though
they be--vibrate and sound with the reverberation of His great voice;
that in all the outward circumstances of our lives, as in all the deep
recesses of our hearts, we may trace the indications and rudiments of
His will concerning us, which He has perfectly given us in that Gospel
which is 'the law of liberty,' and in Him who is the Gospel and the
perfect Law. Then quietly, without bluster or mock-heroics, or making a
fuss about our independence, we can put all other commands and
commanders in their right place, with the old words, 'With me it is a
very small matter to be judged of you, or of man's judgment; He that
judgeth me,' and He that commandeth me, 'is the Lord,' In answer to all
the noise about us we can face round like Elijah, and say, 'As the Lord
liveth, before whom I stand.' He is my 'Imperator,' the Autocrat and
Commander of my life; and Him, and Him only, must I serve. What
calmness, what dignity that would put into our lives! The never-ceasing
boom of the great ocean, as it breaks on the beach, drowns all smaller
sounds. Those lives are noble and great in which that deep voice is
ever dominant, sounding on through all lesser voices, and day and night
filling the soul with command and awe.

Then, still further, we may take another view of these words. They are
the utterance of a man to whom his life was not only bright with the
radiance of a divine presence, and musical with the voice of a divine
command, but was also, on his part, full of conscious obedience. No man
could say such a thing of himself who did not feel that he was
rendering a real, earnest, though imperfect obedience to God. So,
though in one view the words express a very lowly sense of absolute
submission before God, in another view they make a lofty claim for the
utterer. He professes that he stands before the Lord, girt for His
service, watching to be guided by His eye, and ready to run when He
bids. It is the same lofty sense of communion and consecration, issuing
in authority over others, which Elijah's true brother in later days,
Paul the Apostle, put forth when he made known to his companions in
shipwreck the will of 'the God, whose I am, and whom I serve.' We may
well shrink from making that claim for ourselves, when we think of the
poor, perfunctory service and partial consecration which our lives
show. But let us rejoice that even we may venture to say, 'Truly I am
Thy servant'; if only we, like the Psalmist, rest the confession on the
perfectness of what He has done for us, rather than on the imperfection
of what we have done for Him; and lay, as its foundation, 'Thou hast
loosed my bonds.' Then, though we must ever feel how poor our service,
and how unprofitable ourselves, how little we deserve the honour, and
how impossible that we should ever earn the least mite of wages; yet we
may, in all lowliness, think of ourselves as set free that we may
serve, and lift our eyes, as the eyes of a servant turn towards his
master, to 'the living Lord, before whom we stand.

Such a life is necessarily a happy life. The one misery of man is
self-will, the one secret of blessedness is the conquest over our own
wills. To yield them up to God is rest and peace. If we 'stand before
God,' then that means that our wills are brought into harmony with His.
And that means that the one poison drop is squeezed out of our lives,
and that sweetness and joy are infused into them. For what disturbs us
in this world is not 'trouble' but our opposition to trouble. The true
source of all that frets and irritates, and wears away our lives, is
not in external things, but in the resistance of our wills to the will
of God expressed by external things. I suppose that we shall never here
bring these wills of ours into perfect correspondence with His, any
more than we shall ever, with our shaking hands and blunt pencils, draw
a perfectly straight line. But if will and heart are brought even to a
rude approach to parallelism with His, if we accept His voice when He
takes away, and obey it when He commands, we shall be quiet and
peaceful. We shall be strong and unwearied, freed from corroding cares
and exhausting rebellions, which take far more out of a man than any
work does. 'Thy word was found, and I did eat it.' When we thus take
God's command into our spirits, and feed upon it with will and
understanding, it becomes, as the Psalmist found it, the 'joy and
rejoicing of our hearts.' Elijah-like, we shall 'go in the strength of
that meat many days.' The secret of power and of calm is--yield your
will to the loving Lord, and stand ever before Him with, 'Here am I,
send me!'

We may add one more remark to these various views of the significance
of this expression, to which the last instance of its use may help us.
Here it is: 'And Naaman said, I pray thee, take a blessing of thy
servant. But he said, As the Lord liveth, before whom I stand, I will
receive none.'

The thought, which made all Elisha's life bright with the light of
God's presence, which filled his ear with the unremitting voice of a
Divine Law, which swayed and bowed his will to joyful obedience,
chilled and deadened his desires for all earthly rewards. 'I am not thy
servant. I am God's servant. It is not your business to pay my wages. I
cannot dishonour my Master by taking payment from thee for doing His
work. I look for everything from Him, for nothing from thee.'

And is there not a broad general truth involved there, namely, that
such a life as we have been describing will find its sole reward where
it finds its inspiration and its law? The Master's approval is the
servant's best wages. If we truly feel that 'the Lord _liveth_, before
whom we stand, 'we shall want nothing else for our work but His smile,
and we shall feel that the light of His face is all that we need. That
thought should deaden our love for outward things. How little we need
to care about any payment that the world can give for anything we do!
If we feel, as we ought, that we are God's servants, that will lift us
clear above the low aims and desires which meet us. How little we shall
care for money, for men's praise, for getting on in the world! How the
things that we fever our souls by pursuing, and fret our hearts when we
lose, will cease to attract! How small and vulgar the 'prizes' of life,
as people call them, will appear! 'The Lord liveth, before whom I
stand,' should be enough for us, and instead of all these motives to
action drawn from the rewards of this world, we ought to 'labour that,
whether present or absent, we may be well-pleasing to Him.'

Not the fading leaves of the victor's wreath, laurel though they be,
nor the corruptible things as silver and gold, whereof earth's diadems
and rewards are fashioned, but the incorruptible crown that fadeth not
away, which His hand will give, should fire our hope, and shine before
our faith. Not Naaman's gifts but God's approval is Elisha's reward.
Not the praise from lips that will perish, or the 'hollow wraith of
dying fame,' but Christ's 'Well done! good and faithful servant,'
should be a Christian's aim.

May we, brethren, possess the 'spirit and the power of Elias';--the
spirit, in that we know ourselves to be the servants of the living God;
and then we shall have some measure of his dauntless power and heroic
unworldliness!

Still better, may we have the Spirit of Him who was '_the_ Servant of
the Lord,' diviner in His gentle meekness than the fiery prophet in his
lonely strength! Make yours the mind that was in Christ, that you too
may say, 'Lo, I come! in the volume of the book it is written of me, I
delight to do Thy will, yea, Thy law is within my heart.'




OBADIAH

_To the Young_

'... I thy servant fear the Lord from my youth.--1 KINGS xviii.12.


This Obadiah is one of the obscurer figures in the Old Testament. We
never hear of him again, for there is no reason to accept the Jewish
tradition which alleges that he was Obadiah the prophet. And yet how
distinctly he stands out from the canvas, though he is only sketched
with a few bold outlines! He is the 'governor over Ahab's house,' a
kind of mayor of the palace, and probably the second man in the
kingdom. But though thus high in that idolatrous and self-willed court,
he has bravely kept true to the ancient faith. Neither Jezebel's
flatteries nor her frowns have moved him. But there, amid apostasy and
idolatry he stands, probably all alone in the court, a worshipper of
Jehovah. His name is his character, for it means 'servant of Jehovah.'
It was not a light thing to be a worshipper of the God of Israel in
Ahab's court. The feminine rage of the fierce Sidonian woman, whom Ahab
obeyed in most things, burned hot against the enemies of her father's
gods, and hotter, perhaps, against any one who thwarted her imperious
will. Obadiah did both, in that audacious piece of benevolence when he
sheltered the Lord's prophets--one hundred of them--and saved them from
her cruel search. The writer of the book very rightly marks this brave
antagonism to the outburst of the queen's wrath as a signal proof of a
more than ordinary devotion to the worship and fear of Jehovah. His
firmness and his religion did not prevent his retaining his place of
honour and dignity. That says something for Ahab, and more perhaps for
Obadiah.

Most of you believe that you ought to 'fear the Lord': but you are apt
to put off, and so I wish to urge on you that you should give your
hearts to Jesus Christ at once.

I. The blessedness of youthful religion.

(a) It guards from many temptations, and keeps a character innocent of
much transgression.

Think of the dangers that lie thick in the streets of every great city,
and of a lad coming up from a country home of godliness, where he was
surrounded by a mother's love and an atmosphere of purity, and launched
into some lonely lodging, or some factory or warehouse with many
tempters. Nothing will be such a help to resistance and victory as to
be able to say, 'So did not I because of the fear of the Lord.'

(_b_) It will save from remorse. Even if a man 'sobers down' after
'sowing his wild oats,' which is a very problematical 'if,' what bitter
memories of wasted days, what polluting memories of filthy ones, will
haunt him! And if he does not sober down, what then?

It is folly to begin life on a wrong tack, in regard to which the best
that you can say is that you do not mean to continue it. If you do not,
then the wise thing is to get at once on to the road on which you do
mean to continue, and to save the weary work of retracing steps and the
painful consciousness of having made a false start. Are you so sure
that you will wish, or that it will be possible, to face right about
and get on to a new line? Fishermen catch lobsters and the like by
means of baskets with one opening, the withes of which are so set that
the entrance is easy, but that a ring of sharp points oppose all
attempts at turning back and getting out. The world lays 'pots' of that
sort, and many a young man and woman glides smoothly in, and finds it
impossible to get out.

(_c_) It usually leads to a deeper and more peaceful and harmonious
religion than is attained by those who have given the world the better
part of their days, and have only the last fragment of them to give to
God. Obadiah had feared God from his youth, and that had a good deal to
do with his brave stand against Jezebel. It is a grand thing to enlist
habit on the side of godliness.

II. The foes of youthful religion.

There are foes within .... the strong self-reliance and bounding life
proper to youth, without which at the opening of the flower, the bloom
would be poor and the fruit little, ... the power of appeals to the
unjaded and physically strong senses, ... the difficulty at such a
stage of life of looking forward and soberly regarding the end.

There are foes without ....the crowds of tempters of both sexes, men
and women who take a devilish pleasure in polluting innocent minds, ...
the companions whose jeers are worse to face than a battery, ... the
inconsistencies of so-called Christians, the anti-Christian literature
which is peculiarly fascinating to the young, with its brave show of
breaking with mouldy tradition and enthroning reason and emancipating
from rusty fetters.

III. The too probable alternative to youthful religion.

It is but too likely that, if a man does not 'fear the Lord' from 'his
youth,' he will never fear Him. Thank God, there is no time nor
condition of life in which the wicked man cannot 'forsake his way,' or
'the unrighteous man his thoughts,' and 'turn to the Lord' with the
assurance that 'He will abundantly pardon.' But it is sadly too plain
to observation, and to the experience of some of us, that obstacles
grow with years, that habits and associations grip with increasing
power, that in all things our natures become less flexible, the supple
sapling becoming gnarled and tough, that a middle-aged or old man is
more inextricably 'tied and bound by the cords of his sins,' than a
young one is.

Sin lies to us by first saying, 'It is too soon to be religious,' and
then it lies to us by saying, 'It is too late.'

The inclination diminishes.

The Gospel long heard and long put aside, loses power.

Contrast the beauty of a course of life, begun on the same lines as
those on which it ends, and being like 'the shining light, that shineth
more and more unto the meridian of the day,' with one which gave the
greater part of its years to 'the world, the flesh, and the devil,' or
at least to one's godless self, and the dregs of it only to God.




THE TRIAL BY FIRE

'And Elijah said unto the prophets of Baal, Choose yon one bullock for
yourselves, and dress it first; for ye are many; and call on the name
of your gods, but put no fire under. 26. And they took the bullock
which was given them, and they dressed it, and called on the name of
Baal from morning even until noon, saying, O Baal, hear us. But there
was no voice, nor any that answered. And they leaped upon the altar
which was made. 27. And it came to pass at noon, that Elijah mocked
them, and said, Cry aloud: for he is a god; either he Is talking, or he
is pursuing, or he is in a journey, or peradventure he sleepeth, and
must be awaked. 28. And they cried aloud, and cut themselves after
their manner with knives and lancets, till the blood gushed out upon
them. 29. And it came to pass, when midday was passed, and they
prophesied until the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice,
that there was neither voice, nor any to answer, nor any that regarded.
30. And Elijah said unto all the people, Come near unto me. And all the
people came near unto him. And he repaired the altar of the Lord that
was broken down. 31. And Elijah took twelve stones, according to the
number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, unto whom the word of the
Lord came, saying, Israel shall be thy name: 32. And with the stones he
built an altar in the name of the Lord: and he made a trench about the
altar, as great as would contain two measures of seed. 33. And he put
the wood in order, and cut the bullock in nieces, and laid him on the
wood, and said, Fill four barrels with water, and pour it on the burnt
sacrifice, and on the wood. 34. And he said, Do it the second time. And
they did it the second time. And he said, Do it the third time. And
they did it the third time. 35. And the water ran round about the
altar; and he filled the trench also with water. 36. And it came to
pass at the time of the offering of the evening sacrifice, that Elijah
the prophet came near, and said, Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of
Israel, let it be known this day that Thou art God in Israel, and that
I am Thy servant, and that I have done all these things at Thy word.
37. Hear me, O Lord, hear me: that this people may know that Thou art
the Lord God, and that Thou hast turned their heart back again. 38.
Then the fire of the Lord fell, and consumed the burnt sacrifice, and
the wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that
was in the trench. 39. And when all the people saw it, they fell on
their faces: and they said, The Lord, he is the God; the Lord, he is
the God.--1 KINGS xviii. 25-39.

The place, the purpose, and the actors in this scene, make it among the
grandest in history. A nation, with its king, has come together, at the
bidding of one man, to settle no less a question than whom they shall
worship. There, on the slope of Carmel, with the brassy heaven gleaming
hard and dry above them, and the yellow, burnt-up plain of Jezreel at
their feet, the expectant people stand. The assembly was a singular
proof of Elijah's ascendency; for Ahab's bluster had sunk, cowed in his
presence, and he had meekly done the prophet's bidding in summoning
'all Israel' and the eight hundred and fifty Baal and Asherah prophets,
for an unexplained purpose. The false priests would come unwillingly;
but they came.

Then Elijah takes the command, and, though utterly alone, towers above
the crowd in the courage of his undaunted confidence in his message.
His words have the ring of authority as he rebukes indecision, and
calls for a clear adhesion to Baal or Jehovah. If the people had
answered, the trial by fire would have been needless. But their silence
shows that they waver, and therefore he makes his proposal to them.

Note that the priests are not consulted, nor is Ahab. The former would
have had some excuse for shirking the sharp issue; but the people's
assent forced them to accept the ordeal,--reluctantly enough, no doubt.

I. The vain cries to a deaf God. It is strange that one of the parties
to the test has power to determine its conditions, especially as
Elijah's prophetic authority was one of the things in dispute; but it
is a sign of the magnetic power which one bold man with absolute
confidence in his own convictions exercises over men. The Baal prophets
are given every advantage in priority of action. Error is best unmasked
by being allowed free opportunity to do its best; for the more
favourable the circumstances of trial, the more signal the defeat.
God's servants must never be suspected of unfair tricks in their
controversy with error. They can afford to let it try first. Notice the
substitution of 'your god,' in the Revised Version, for 'your gods' in
the Authorised Version. That is obviously right; for the only question
was about one god,--namely, Baal.

So, in the early morning, with all the people gazing at them, the Baal
priests or prophets begin their attempt. It was easy to prepare the
sacrifice, and lay it on the altar,--though, no doubt, it was done
sullenly, with foreboding of the coming exposure. The whole account of
the wild invocations of the priests may suggest some of the
characteristics of idolatry, and touch our hearts with pity, as well as
with the sense of its absurdity, which animated Elijah's mockery.

Note, then, the vivid picture, in verse 27, of the long hours of vain
crying. On the one hand, we hear the wild chorus echoing among the
rocks; on the other, we feel the dead silence in the heavens.

The monotonous and almost mechanical repetition of the invocation,
prolonged till the syllables have no meaning to the yelling crowd, is
characteristic of the frenzied excitement so common in idolatry. To
call such howlings prayer, degrades the name. They are the very
opposite of that sacred communion of a believing soul with the God whom
it knows, trusts, and beseeches with submission. Neither knowledge nor
trust is in these shrieks, which seek to propitiate the stern god by
repeating his name as a kind of charm. Heathenism has no true prayer.
Wild cries and passionate desires, flung upwards to an unloved god, are
not prayer; and that solace and anchor of the troubled soul is wanting
in all the dreary lands given up to idolatry.

The melancholy persistence of the unanswered cries may stand as a
symbol of the tragic obstinacy with which their devotees cling to their
vain gods,--a rebuke to us with a more enlightened faith. The silence,
which was the only answer, is put in strong contrast with the
continuous roar of the four hundred and fifty,--so long and loud the
hoarse cries here, so unmoved the stillness in the careless heaven.
That, too, is typical of heathenism, which is sad with unavailing cries
and ignorant of answers to any. As the day wore on, and the voices grew
hoarse, and hope declined, more violent bodily exercise was resorted
to, and the shouting crowd danced (or, perhaps, as the margin says,
'limped,'--a picturesque and contemptuous word for the grotesque
contortions around the altar), as if that might bring the answer. That
again is a feature common to all heathenism. No wonder that Elijah's
scorn broke forth vehemently at such a sight. Noon was the hour of the
sun's greatest power, and, since Baal was probably a solar deity, it
was the hour when, if ever, he would spare one of his abundant fiery
beams to light the pyre. So Elijah's taunts came just when they were
most biting, and none can say that they were undeserved. His fiery zeal
and his naturally stern character broke out in the bitter irony with
which he imagines a variety of undignified positions for Baal.

Sarcasm is not the highest weapon, and the 'spirit of Elijah' is not
the spirit of Jesus; but the exposure of the absurdity of idolatry is
legitimate, and even ridicule may have its place in pricking
wind-distended bladders. A man throttling a serpent may be excused
using anything that comes handy for the purpose. But, at the same time,
the right attitude for us as Christians in the presence of that awful
fact of idolatry, is neither contempt nor scientific curiosity, but
pity deep as Christ's, and earnest resolve to help our darkened
brethren. The taunts stirred to fiercer excitement and more extravagant
acts, as ridicule is wont to do, and therein proves itself an
unreliable instrument of controversy. Laughing at a man generally makes
him more obstinate. The priests answered Elijah by savagely gashing
their half-naked bodies with knives and lances,--a ready way to make
blood come, but not to bring fire. The frenzy became wilder as the day
declined, and at last, covered with blood, hoarse with shouting,
panting with their gymnastics, they 'prophesied,' having wrought
themselves into that state of excitement in which incoherent rhapsodies
burst from their lips. What a scene to call worship! That is what
millions of men are ready to practise to-day. And all the while there
is no voice, no answer, no care for them, in the pitiless sky. The very
genius of idolatry is set before us in that tumultuous crowd on Carmel.

II. The sacrifice of faith and the answer by fire. We pass from a scene
of wild commotion into an atmosphere of sacred calm in verse 30. The
contrast is striking. The fiery fervours of the day are past, and the
sun is sinking behind the top of Carmel, and there is much to do before
it sets. Elijah with his own hands, as would appear, repairs a ruined
altar among the woods. Probably it had been erected for secret worship
of Jehovah by some faithful amid the national apostasy, when access to
Jerusalem was forbidden them, and had been destroyed by Ahab in his
crusade against Jehovah worshippers. The selection of the twelve stones
was symbolical of the unbroken unity of the nation, and was Elijah's
protest against the very existence of the Northern kingdom, and its
assumption of the name of 'Israel' The writer explains what was meant,
when he reminds us that Israel was the name given to Jacob, and
therefore, as he would have us infer, was the common property of all
his descendants. Judah was a part of Israel, and Israel should be an
undivided whole, uniting in all its tribes in bringing offerings to
Jehovah.

It was a daring thing to do before Ahab's face; but the weak king was,
for the time, subjugated by the imperious will and courage of Elijah.
The building of the altar, with its mute witness to God's purpose,
would touch some hearts in the gazing, silent crowd. The next step was,
of course, meant to make the miracle more conspicuous by drenching
everything with water, probably brought, even in that drought, from the
perennial fountain near at hand. Perhaps, too, the number of barrels
was intended, again, as symbolical of the twelve tribes.

One can fancy the wonder and eagerness of the people, and the dark
frowns of the baffled and exhausted Baal priests, as they gradually
came out of their frenzy, and knew that they had lost their
opportunity. The tranquil though earnest prayer of the prophet is in
sharpest contrast with the meaningless bellowings to Baal. Note in it
the solemn invocation. The great Name, which all listening to him had
deposed from rule over them, is set in the front; and the ancestral
worship, as well as the divine gifts and dealings with the patriarchs,
is pleaded with God as the reason for His answer now. The name of
'Israel' instead of the more common 'Jacob,' has the same force as in
verse 31.

Note the substance of the petitions. The deepest desire of a truly
devout soul is that God would make His name known. Zeal for God's
honour and love for men who have gone astray from Him, conspire to make
that the head and front of His true servant's prayers. It is God, not
his own credit, about which Elijah thinks first. For himself, all that
he desires is to be known as an obedient servant, and as not having
done anything at the bidding of his own will or judgment, but in
accordance with the all-commanding Voice.

Clearly we must suppose that in all the ordering of this sublime trial
by fire, Elijah had been acting 'at Thy word,' even though we have no
other record of the fact. He had no right to expect an answer unless he
had been bidden to propose the test. God will honour the drafts which
He bids us draw on Him; but to suspend our own or other people's faith
in Him, on the issue of some experiment whether He will answer prayers,
is not faith, but rash presumption, unless it is in obedience to a
distinct command. Elijah had such a command, and therefore he could ask
God to vindicate his action, and to prove that he was God's servant.
His last petition is beautiful, both in its consciousness of power with
God and recognition of his place as a prophet, and in its lowly
subordination of all personal aims to the restoration of Israel to the
true worship. He asks, with reiteration which is earnestness and faith,
and therefore the sharpest contrast to the mechanical repetition by
Baal's priests, that God would hear him; but his sole object in that
prayer is, not that his name may be exalted as a prophet, or that any
good may come to him, but that the blinded eyes may be opened, and the
hearts, that have been so sadly led astray, be brought back to the
worship of their fathers' God.

The whole brief prayer, in its calm confidence; its adoring recognition
of the name and past dealings of Jehovah as the ground of trust; its
throbbing of earnest desire for the manifestation of His character
before men; its consciousness of personal relation to God, which
humbles rather than puffs up; its beseeching for an answer, and its
closing petition, which comes round again to its first, that men may
know God, and fasten their hearts on Him,--may well stand as a pattern
of prayer for us.

The short prayer of faith does in a moment what all the long day of
crying could not do. The language in which the answer is described
emulates the rapidity of the swift tongues of fire which licked up
sacrifice, altar, and water. They were the tokens of acceptance,
reminding of the consuming of the first sacrifices in the Tabernacle,
and, like them, inaugurating a new beginning of the worship of God. The
burning of the altar, as well as of the sacrifice, expressed the
acceptance of the people whom it, by its twelve stones, symbolised. And
the people, on their part, were--for the time, at all events--swept
away by the miracle, and by the force of the prophet's example and
authority. Short-lived their faith may have been, as certainly it was
superficial; but the fire had for the time melted their hearts, and set
them flowing in the ancient channels of devotion. The faith that is
founded on miracle may be deepened into something better; but unless it
is, it speedily dies away. The faith that is due to the influence of
some strong personality may lead on to an independent faith, based on
personal experience; but, unless it does, it too will perish.

We may find a modern reproduction of the test of Carmel in the
impotence of all other schemes and methods of social and spiritual
reformation and the power of the Gospel. In it and its effects God
answers by fire. Let the opposers, who are so glib in demonstrating the
failure of Christianity, do the same with their enchantments, if they
can.




ELIJAH'S WEAKNESS, AND ITS CUBE

'And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done, and withal how he had
slain all the prophets with the sword. 2. Then Jezebel sent a messenger
unto Elijah, saying, So let the gods do to me, and more also, if I make
not thy life as the life of one of them by to-morrow about this time.
3. And when he saw that, he arose, and went for his life, and came to
Beersheba, which belongeth to Judah, and left his servant there. 4. But
he himself went a day's journey into the wilderness, and came and sat
down under a juniper tree: and he requested for himself that he might
die; and said, It is enough: now, O Lord, take away my life; for I am
not better than my fathers. 5. And as he lay and slept under a juniper
tree, behold, then, an angel touched him, and said unto him, Arise and
eat. 6. And he looked, and, behold, there was a cake baken on the
coals, and a cruse of water at his head. And he did eat and drink, and
laid him down again. 7. And the angel of the Lord came again the second
time, and touched him, and said, Arise and eat; because the journey is
too great for thee. 8. And he arose, and did eat and drink, and went in
the strength of that meat forty days and forty nights unto Horeb the
mount of God. 9. And he came thither unto a cave, and lodged there,
and, behold, the word of the Lord came to him, and He said unto him,
What doest thou here, Elijah? 10. And he said, I have been very jealous
for the Lord God of hosts: for the children of Israel have forsaken Thy
covenant, thrown down Thine altars, and slain Thy prophets with the
sword; and I, even I only, am left: and they seek my life, to take it
away. 11. And He said, Go forth, and stand upon the mount before the
Lord. And, behold, the Lord passed by, and a great and strong wind rent
the mountains, and brake in pieces the rocks before the Lord; but the
Lord was not In the wind: and after the wind an earthquake; but the
Lord was not in the earthquake: 12. And after the earthquake a fire,
but the Lord was not in the fire: and after the fire a still small
voice. 13. And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his
face in his mantle, and went out, and stood in the entering in of the
cave. And, behold, there came a voice unto him and said, What doest
then here, Elijah! 14. And he said, I have been very jealous for the
Lord God of hosts: because the children of Israel have forsaken Thy
covenant, thrown down Thine altars, and slain Thy prophets with the
sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life, to take it
away. 15. And the Lord said unto him, Go, return on thy way to the
wilderness of Damascus: and when thou comest, anoint Hazael to be king
over Syria: 16. And Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint to be king
over Israel: and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah shalt thou
anoint to be prophet in thy room. 17. And it shall come to pass, that
him that escapeth the sword of Hazael shall Jehu slay: and him that
escapeth from the sword of Jehu shall Elisha slay. 18. Yet I have left
me seven thousand in Israel, all the knees which have not bowed unto
Baal, and every mouth which hath not kissed him.'--1 KINGS xix. 1-18.


The miracle on Carmel cowed, if it did not convince, Ahab, so that he
did not oppose the slaughter of the Baal prophets; but Jezebel was made
of sterner stuff, and her passionate idolatry was proof against even a
sign from heaven. Obstinacy in error is often a rebuke to tremulous
faith in God. She fiercely puts her back to the wall, and defies Elijah
and his God. Her threat to the prophet has a certain audacity of
frankness almost approaching generosity. She will give her victim fair
play. This woman is 'magnificent in sin.' The Septuagint prefixes to
her oath, 'As surely as thou art Elijah and I Jezebel,' which adds
force to it. It also reads, by a very slight change in the Hebrew, in
verse 3, 'he was afraid,' for 'he saw,'--which is possibly right, as
giving his motive for escape more distinctly.

I. We may note, first, the prophet's flight (verses 3-8). Beersheba, on
the southern border of the kingdom of Judah, was eloquent of memories
of the patriarchs, but though it was nearly a hundred miles from
Jezreel, Jezebel's arm was long enough to reach the fugitive there, and
therefore he plunged deeper into the dreary southern desert. He left
behind him his servant, his 'young man,' as the original has it, whom
Rabbinical tradition identified with the miraculously resuscitated son
of the widow of Zarephath, and supposed to become afterwards the
prophet Jonah. Thus alone but for the company of his own gloomy
thoughts, and wearied with toilsome travel in the sun-smitten waste, he
took shelter under the shadow of a solitary shrub (the Hebrew
emphatically calls it '_one_ juniper,' or rather 'broom-plant'), and
there the waves of depression went over him.

His complaint is not to be wondered at, though it was wrong. The very
overstrain of the scene on Carmel brought reaction. The height of the
crest of one wave measures the depth of the trough of the next, and no
mortal spirit can keep itself at the sublime elevation reached by
Elijah when alone he fronted and converted a nation. The supposed
necessity for flight, coming so immediately after apparent victory,
showed him how hollow the change in the people was. What had become of
all the fervency of their shout, 'The Lord, He is the God!' if they
could leave Jezebel the power to carry out her threat? Solitude and the
awful desert increased his gloom. The strong man had become weak, and
it was ebb-tide with him. His prayer was petulant, impatient,
presumptuous. What right had he to settle what was 'enough'? If he
really wished to die, he could have found death at Jezreel, and had no
need to travel a hundred miles to seek a grave. He was weary of his
work, and profoundly disappointed by what he hastily concluded was its
failure, and in a fit of faithless despondency he forgot reverence,
submission, and obedience.

If Elijah can become weak, and his courage die out, and his zeal become
torpid apathy and cowardly wish to shuffle off responsibility and shirk
work, who shall stand? The lessons of self-distrust, of the nearness to
one another of the most opposite emotions in our weak natures, of the
depth of gloom into which the boldest and brightest servant of God may
fall as soon as he loses hold of God's hand, never had a more striking
instance to point them than that mighty prophet, sitting huddled
together in utter despondency below the solitary retem bush, praying
his foolish prayer for death.

The meal to which an angel twice waked him was God's answer to his
prayer, telling him both that his life was still needful and that God
cared for him. Perhaps one of Elijah's reasons for taking to the desert
was the thought that he might starve there, and so find death. At all
events, God for the third time miraculously provides his food. The
ravens, the widow of Zarephath, an angel, were his caterers; and,
instead of taking away his life, God Himself sends the bread and water
to preserve it. The revelation of a watchful, tender Providence often
rebukes gloomy unbelief and shames us back to faith. We are not told
whether the journey to Horeb was commanded, or, like the flight from
Jezreel, was Elijah's own doing; but, in any case, he must have
wandered in the desert, to have taken forty days to reach it.

II. The second stage is the vision at Horeb (verses 9-14). The history
of Israel has never touched Horeb since Moses left it, and it is not
without significance that we are once more on that sacred ground. The
parallel between Moses and Elijah is very real. These two names stand
out above all others in the history of the theocracy, the one as its
founder, the other as its restorer; both distinguished by special
revelations, both endowed with exceptional force of character and power
of the Spirit; the one the lawgiver, the other the head of the
prophetic order; both having something peculiar in their departure, and
both standing together, in witness of their supremacy in the past, and
of their inferiority in the future, by Jesus on the Mount of
Transfiguration. The associations of the place are marked by the use of
the definite article, which is missed in the Authorised Version,--'the
cave,' that same cleft in the rock where Moses had stood. Note, too,
that the word rendered 'lodged' is literally 'passed the night,' and
that therefore we may suppose that the vision came to Elijah in the
darkness.

That question, 'What doest thou here?' can scarcely be freed from a
tone of rebuke; but, like Christ's to the travellers to Emmaus, and
many another interrogation from God, it is also put in order to allow
of the loaded heart's relieving itself by pouring out all its griefs.
God's questions are the assurance of His listening ear and sympathising
heart. This one is like a little key which opens a great sluice. Out
gushes a full stream. His forty days' solitude have done little for
him. A true answer would have been, 'I was afraid of Jezebel.' He takes
credit for zeal, and seems to insinuate that he had been more zealous
for God than God had been for Himself. He forgets the national
acknowledgment of Jehovah at Carmel, and the hundred prophets protected
by good Obadiah. Despondency has the knack of picking its facts. It is
colour-blind, and can only see dark tints. He accuses his countrymen,
as if he would stir up God to take vengeance.

How different this weak and sinful wail over his solitude from the
heroic mention of it on Carmel, when it only nerved his courage I
(verse 22). The divine manifestation which followed is evidently meant
to recall that granted to Moses on the same spot. 'The Lord passed by'
is all but verbally quoted from Exodus xxxiv. 6, and the truth that had
been proclaimed in words to Moses was enforced by symbol to Elijah. If
the vision was in the night, as verse 9 suggests, it becomes still more
impressive. The fierce wind that roared among the savage peaks, the
shock that made the mountains reel, and the flashing flames that
lighted up the wild landscape, were all phenomena of one kind, and at
once expressed God's lordship over all destructive agencies of nature,
and symbolised the more vehement and disturbing forms of energy, used
by Him for the furtherance of His purposes in the field of history or
of revelation. Elijah's ministry was of such a sort, and he had now to
learn the limitations of his work, and the superiority of another type,
represented by the 'sound of gentle stillness.'

It is the same lesson which Moses learned there, when he heard that the
Lord is 'a God full of compassion and gracious, slow to anger, and
plenteous in mercy and truth.' It was exemplified in the gentle Elisha,
the successor of Elijah. It reached far beyond the time then present,
and was indeed a Messianic prophecy, declaring the inmost character of
Him in whom 'the Lord is,' in an altogether special sense. Elijah as a
prophet brought no new knowledge, and uttered no far-reaching
predictions; but he received one of the deepest and clearest prophecies
of the gentleness of God's highest Messenger, and on Horeb saw afar off
what he saw fulfilled on the Mountain of Transfiguration. Nor is his
vision exhausted by its Messianic reference. It contains an eternal
truth for all God's servants. Storm, earthquake, and fire may be God's
precursors, and needed sometimes to prepare His way; but gentleness is
'the habitation of His throne,' and they serve Him best, and are
nearest Him whom they serve, who are meek in heart and gentle among
enemies, 'as a nurse cherisheth her children.' Love is the victor, and
the sharpest weapons of the Christian are love and lowliness.

The lesson was not at first grasped by Elijah, as his repetition of his
complaint, word for word, with almost dogged obstinacy, shows. The best
of us are slow to learn God's lessons, and a habit of faithless gloom
is not soon overcome. It is much easier to get down into the pit than
to struggle out of it.

III. The commission for further service, which closes the scene, is a
further rebuke to the prophet. He is bidden to retrace his way and to
take refuge in the desert lying to the south and east of Damascus,
where he would be safe from Jezebel, and still not far from the scene
of his activity. The instructions given to anoint a king of Syria and
one of Israel were not fulfilled by Elijah, but by his successor; and
we have to suppose that further commands were given to him on that
subject. The third injunction, to anoint his successor, was obeyed at
once on his journey, though Ahelmeholah, on Gilboa, was dangerously
near Jezreel. The designation of these future instruments of God's
purpose was at once a sign to Elijah that his own task was drawing to a
close (having reached its climax on Carmel), and that God had great
designs beyond him and his service. The true conception of our work is
that we sire only links in a chain, and that we can be done without.
'God removes the workers and carries on the work.' To anoint our
successor is often a bitter pill; but self-importance needs to be taken
down, and it is blessed to lose ourselves in gazing into the future of
God's work, when we are gone from the field.

Further, the commissions met Elijah's despondency in another way; for
they assured him of the divine judgments on the house of Ahab, and of
the use of the Syrian king as a rod to chastise Israel. He had thought
God too slow in avenging His dishonoured name, and had been taught the
might of gentleness; but now he also learns the certainty of
punishment, while the enigmatical promise that Elisha should 'slay'
those who escaped the swords of Hazael and Jehu dimly points to the
merciful energy of that prophet's word, his only sword, which shall
slay but to revive, and wound to heal. 'I have hewed them by the ...
words of my mouth.'

Finally, the revelation of the seven thousand--a round number, which
expresses the sacredness as well as the numerousness of the elect,
hidden ones--rebukes the hasty assumption of his being left alone,
'faithful among the faithless.' God has more servants than we know of.
Let us beware of feeding either our self-righteousness or our
narrowness or our faint-heartedness with the fancy that we have a
monopoly of faithfulness, or are left alone to witness for God.




PUTTING ON THE ARMOUR

And the king of Israel answered and said. Tell him. Let not him that
girdeth on his harness boast himself as he that putteth it off.'--1
KINGS xx. 11.


_For the Young_.


Ahab, King of Israel, was but a poor creature, and, like most weak
characters, he turned out a wicked one, because he found that there
were more temptations to do wrong than inducements to do right. Like
other weak people, too, he was torn asunder by the influence of
stronger wills. On the one side he had a termagant of a wife, stirring
him up to idolatry and all evil, and on the other side Elijah
thundering and lightning at him; so the poor man was often reduced to
perplexity. Once in his lifetime he did behave like a king, with some
flash of dignity. My text comes from that incident. His next neighbour,
and, consequently, his continual enemy, was the king of Damascus. He
had made a raid across the border and was dictating terms so severe as
to invite even Ahab to courageous opposition. His back was at the wall,
and he mustered up courage to say 'No!' That provoked a bit of
blustering bravado from the enemy, who sent back a message, 'The gods
do also unto me and more also, if the dust of Samaria shall suffice for
handfuls for all the people that follow me.' And then Ahab replied in
the words of our text. They have a dash of contempt and sarcasm, all
the more galling because of their unanswerable common-sense. 'The time
to crow and clap your wings is _after_ you have fought. Samaria is not
a heap of dust just yet. Threatened men live long.' The battle began,
and the bully was beaten; and for once Ahab tasted the sweets of
success.

Now, I have nothing more to do with Ahab and the immediate application
of his message, but I wish to apply it to my young friends, whom I have
taken it upon me to ask now to listen to two or three homely words to
them in this sermon.

You are beginning the fight; some of us old people are getting very
near the end of it. And I would fain, if I could, see successors coming
to take the places which we shall soon have to vacate. So my message to
you, dear friends, young men and young women, is this, 'Let not him
that putteth on the harness boast himself as he that putteth it off.'

I. Now, look for a moment at the general view of life that is implied
in this saying thus understood.

There is nothing that the bulk of people are more unwilling to do than
steadily to think about what life as a whole, and in its deepest
aspects, is. And that disinclination is strong, as I suppose, in the
average young man or young woman. That comes, plainly enough, from the
very blessings of your stage of life. Unworn health, a blessed
inexperience of failures and limitations, the sense of undeveloped
power within you, the natural buoyancy of early days, all tend to make
you rather live by impulse than by reflection. And I should be the last
man in the world to try to damp the noble, buoyant, beautiful
enthusiasms with which Nature has provided that we should all begin our
course. The world will do that soon enough; and there is no sadder
sight than that of a bitter old man, who has outlived, and smiles
sardonically at, his youthful dreams. But I do wish to press upon you
all this question, Have you ever tried to think to yourself, 'Now what,
after all, is this life that is budding within me and dawning before
me--what is it, in its deepest reality, and what am I to do with it?'

There are some of us to whom, so far as we have thought at all, life
presents itself mainly as a shop, a place where we are to 'buy and
sell, and get gain,' and use our evenings, after the day's work is
over, for such recreation as suits us. And there are young men among my
hearers who, with the flush of their physical manhood upon them, and
perhaps away from the restraints of home, and living in gloomy town
lodgings, with no one to look after them, are beginning to think that
life after all is a kind of pigs' trough, with plenty of foul wash in
it for whoso chooses to suck it up--a garden of not altogether pure
delights, a place where a man may gratify the 'lusts of the flesh.'

But, dear brethren, whilst there are many other noble metaphors under
which we can set forth the essential character of this mysterious,
tremendous life of ours, I do not know that there is one that ought to
appeal more to the slumbering heroism which lies in every human soul,
and to the enthusiasms which, unless you in your youth cherish, you
will in your manhood be beggared indeed, than that which this picture
of my text suggests. After all, life is meant to be one long conflict.
We are like the fellahin that one sometimes sees in Eastern lands, who
cannot go out to plough in their fields, or reap their harvests,
without a gun slung on their backs; for the condition under which we
work in this world is that everything worth doing has to be done at the
cost of opposition and antagonism, and that no noble service or
building is possible without brave, continuous conflict. Even upon the
lower levels of life that is so. No man learns a science or a trade
without having to fight for it. But high above these lower levels,
there is the one on which we all are called to walk, the high level of
duty, and no man does what his conscience tells him, or refrains from
that which his conscience sternly forbids, without having to fight for
it. We are in the lists and compelled to draw the sword. And if we do
not realise this, that all nobility all greatness, all wisdom, all
success, even of the lowest and most vulpine kind, are won by conflict,
we shall never do anything in the world worth doing. You are a soldier,
whether you will or no, and life is a fight, whether you recognise the
fact or not.

So, standing at the beginning, do not fancy that there is opening
before you a scene of enjoyment, or that you are stepping into a world
in which you can take your ease, and come out successfully at the other
