Isaiah, or a Paul, and in them recognise the eradiation of the
divinity that imparted itself through them, but the medium was
forgotten in proportion as that which it revealed was beheld. You
cannot forget Christ in order to see God more clearly, but to behold
Him is to behold God.

And if that be true, these two things follow. One is that all
imperfect revelation of God is prophetic of, and leads up towards, the
perfect revelation in Jesus Christ. The writer of the Epistle to the
Hebrews gives that truth in a very striking fashion. He compares all
other means of knowing God to fragmentary syllables of a great word,
of which one was given to one man and another to another. God 'spoke
at sundry times and in manifold portions to the fathers by the
prophets'; but the whole word is articulately uttered by the Son, in
whom He has 'spoken unto us in these last times.' The imperfect
revelation, by means of those who were merely mediums for the
revelation leads up to Him who is Himself the Revelation, the
Revealer, and the Revealed.

And in like manner, all the imperfect faith that, laying hold of other
fragmentary means of knowing God, has tremulously tried to trust Him,
finds its climax and consummate flower in the full-blossomed faith
that lays hold upon Jesus Christ. The unconscious prophecies of
heathendom; the trust that select souls up and down the world have put
in One whom they dimly apprehended; the faith of the Old Testament
saints; the rudimentary beginnings of a knowledge of God and of a
trust in Him which are found in men to-day, and amongst us, outside of
the circle of Christianity--all these things are as manifestly
incomplete as a building reared half its height, and waiting for the
corner-stone to be brought forth, the full revelation of God in Jesus
Christ, and the intelligent and full acceptance of Him and faith in
Him.

And another thing is true, that without faith in Christ such faith in
God as is possible is feeble, incomplete, and will not long last.
Historically a pure theism is all but impotent. There is only one
example of it on a large scale in the world, and that is a kind of
bastard Christianity--Mohammedanism; and we all know what good that is
as a religion. There are plenty of people amongst us nowadays who
claim to be very advanced thinkers, and who call themselves Theists,
and not Christians. Well, I venture to say that that is a phase that
will not last. There is little substance in it. The God whom men know
outside of Jesus Christ is a poor, nebulous thing; an idea, not a
reality. He, or rather It, is a film of cloud shaped into a vague
form, through which you can see the stars. It has little power to
restrain. It has less to inspire and impel. It has still less to
comfort; it has least of all to satisfy the heart. You will have to
get something more substantial than the far-off god of an unchristian
Theism if you mean to sway the world and to satisfy men's hearts.

And so, dear brethren, I come to this--perhaps the word may be fitting
for some that listen to me--'Believe in God,' and that you may,
'believe also in Christ.' For sure I am that when the stress comes,
and you _want_ a god, unless your god is the God revealed in Jesus
Christ, he will be a powerless deity. If you have not faith in Christ,
you will not long have faith in God that is vital and worth anything.

III. Lastly, this trust in Christ is the secret of a quiet heart.

It is of no use to say to men, 'Let not your hearts be troubled,'
unless you finish the verse and say, 'Believe in God, believe also in
Christ.' For unless we trust we shall certainly be troubled. The state
of man in this world is like that of some of those sunny islands in
southern seas, around which there often rave the wildest cyclones, and
which carry in their bosoms, beneath all their riotous luxuriance of
verdant beauty, hidden fires, which ever and anon shake the solid
earth and spread destruction. Storms without and earthquakes
within--that is the condition of humanity. And where is the 'rest' to
come from? All other defences are weak and poor. We have heard about
'pills against earthquakes.' That is what the comforts and
tranquillising which the world supplies may fairly be likened to.
Unless we trust we are, and we shall be, and should be, 'troubled.'

If we trust we may be quiet. Trust is always tranquillity. To cast a
burden off myself on others' shoulders is always a rest. But trust in
Jesus Christ brings infinitude on my side. Submission is repose. When
we cease to kick against the pricks they cease to prick and wound us.
Trust opens the heart, like the windows of the Ark tossing upon the
black and fatal flood, for the entrance of the peaceful dove with the
olive branch in its mouth. Trust brings Christ to my side in all His
tenderness and greatness and sweetness. If I trust, 'all is right that
seems most wrong.' If I trust, conscience is quiet. If I trust, life
becomes 'a solemn scorn of ills.' If I trust, inward unrest is changed
into tranquillity, and mad passions are cast out from him that sits
'clothed and in his right mind' at the feet of Jesus.

'The wicked is like the troubled sea which cannot rest.' But if I
trust, my soul will become like the glassy ocean when all the storms
sleep, and 'birds of peace sit brooding on the charmed wave.' 'Peace I
leave with you.' 'Let not your hearts be troubled. Trust in God; trust
also in Me.'

Help us, O Lord! to yield our hearts to Thy dear Son, and in Him to
find Thyself and eternal rest.




'MANY MANSIONS'

'In My Father's house are many mansions: if it were not so, I would
have told you.'--JOHN xiv. 2.

Sorrow needs simple words for its consolation; and simple words are
the best clothing for the largest truths. These eleven poor men were
crushed and desolate at the thought of Christ's going; they fancied
that if He left them they lost Him. And so, in simple, childlike
words, which the weakest could grasp, and in which the most troubled
could find peace, He said to them, after having encouraged their trust
in Him, 'There is plenty of room for you as well as for Me where I am
going; and the frankness of our intercourse in the past might make you
sure that if I were going to leave you I would have told you all about
it. Did I ever hide from you anything that was painful? Did I ever
allure you to follow Me by false promises? Should I have kept silence
about it if our separation was to be eternal?' So, simply, as a mother
might hush her babe upon her breast, He soothes their sorrow. And yet,
in the quiet words, so level to the lowest apprehension, there lie
great truths, far deeper than we yet have appreciated, and which will
enfold themselves in their majesty and their greatness through
eternity. 'In My Father's house are many mansions; if it were not so,
I would have told you.'

I. Now note in these words, first, the 'Father's house,' and its ample
room.

There is only one other occasion recorded in which our Lord used this
expression, and it occurs in this same Gospel near the beginning;
where in the narrative of the first cleansing of the Temple we read
that He said, 'Make not My Father's house a house of merchandise.' The
earlier use of the words may help to throw light upon one aspect of
this latter employment of it, for there blend in the image the two
ideas of what I may call domestic familiarity, and of that great
future as being the reality of which the earthly Temple was intended
to be the dim prophecy and shadow. Its courts, its many chambers, its
ample porches with room for thronging worshippers, represented in some
poor way the wide sweep and space of that higher house; and the sense
of Sonship, which drew the Boy to His Father's house in the earliest
hours of conscious childhood, speaks here.

Think for a moment of how sweet and familiar the conception of heaven
as the Father's house makes it to us. There is something awful, even
to the best and holiest souls, in the thought of even the glories
beyond. The circumstances of death, which is its portal, our utter
unacquaintance with all that lies behind the veil, the terrible
silence and distance which falls upon our dearest ones as they are
sucked into the cloud, all tend to make us feel that there is much
that is solemn and awful even in the thought of eternal future
blessedness. But how it is all softened when we say, 'My Father's
house.' Most of us have long since left behind us the sweet security,
the sense of the absence of all responsibility, the assurance of
defence and provision, which used to be ours when we lived as children
in a father's house here. But we may all look forward to the renewal,
in far nobler form, of these early days, when the father's house meant
the inexpugnable fortress where no evil could befall us, the abundant
home where all wants were supplied, and where the shyest and timidest
child could feel at ease and secure. It is all coming again, brother,
and amidst the august and unimaginable glories of that future the old
feeling of being little children, nestling safe in the Father's house,
will fill our quiet hearts once more.

And then consider how the conception of that Future as the Father's
house suggests answers to so many of our questions about the
relationship of the inmates to one another. Are they to dwell isolated
in their several mansions? Is that the way in which children in a home
dwell with each other? Surely if He be the Father, and heaven be His
house, the relation of the redeemed to one another must have in it
more than all the sweet familiarity and unrestrained frankness which
subsists in the families of earth. A solitary heaven would be but half
a heaven, and would ill correspond with the hopes that inevitably
spring from the representation of it as 'my Father's house.'

But consider further that this great and tender name for heaven has
its deepest meaning in the conception of it as a spiritual state of
which the essential elements are the loving manifestation and presence
of God as Father, the perfect consciousness of sonship, the happy
union of all the children in one great family, and the derivation of
all their blessedness from their Elder Brother.

The earthly Temple, to which there is some allusion in this great
metaphor, was the place in which the divine glory was manifested to
seeking souls, though in symbol, yet also in reality, and the
representation of our text blends the two ideas of the free, frank
intercourse of the home and of the magnificent revelations of the Holy
of holies. Under either aspect of the phrase, whether we think of 'my
Father's house' as temple or as home, it sets before us, as the main
blessedness and glory of heaven, the vision of the Father, the
consciousness of sonship, and the complete union with Him. There are
many subsidiary and more outward blessednesses and glories which shine
dimly through the haze of metaphors and negations, by which alone a
state of which we have no experience can be revealed to us; but these
are secondary. The heaven of heaven is the possession of God the
Father through the Son in the expanding spirits of His sons. The
sovereign and filial position which Jesus Christ in His manhood
occupies in that higher house, and which He shares with all those who
by Him have received the adoption of sons, is the very heart and nerve
of this great metaphor.

But I think we must go a step further than that, and recognise that in
the image there is inherent the teaching that that glorious future is
not merely a state, but also a place. Local associations are not to be
divorced from the words; and although we can say but little about such
a matter, yet everything in the teaching of Scripture points to the
thought that howsoever true it may be that the essence of heaven is
condition, yet that also heaven has a local habitation, and is a place
in the great universe of God. Jesus Christ has at this moment a human
body, glorified. That body, as Scripture teaches us, is somewhere, and
where He is there shall also His servant be. In the context He goes on
to tell us that 'He goes to prepare a place for us,' and though I
would not insist upon the literal interpretation of such words, yet
distinctly the drift of the representation is in the direction of
localising, though not of materialising, the abode of the blessed. So
I think we can say, not merely that _what_ He is that shall also His
servants be, but that _where_ He is there shall also His servants be.
And from the representation of my text, though we cannot fathom all
its depths, we can at least grasp this, which gives solidity and
reality to our contemplations of the future, that heaven is a place,
full of all sweet security and homelike repose, where God is made
known in every heart and to every consciousness as a loving Father,
and of which all the inhabitants are knit together in the frankest
fraternal intercourse, conscious of the Father's love, and rejoicing
in the abundant provisions of His royal House.

And then there is a second thought to be suggested from these words,
and that is of the ample room in this great house. The original
purpose of the words of my text, as I have already reminded you, was
simply to soothe the fears of a handful of disciples.

There was room where Christ went for eleven poor men. Yes, room enough
for them! but Christ's prescient eye looked down the ages, and saw all
the unborn millions that would yet be drawn to Him uplifted on the
Cross, and some glow of satisfaction flitted across His sorrow, as He
saw from afar the result of the impending travail of His soul in the
multitudes by whom God's heavenly house should yet be filled. 'Many
mansions!' the thought widens out far beyond our grasp. Perhaps that
upper room, like most of the roof-chambers in Jewish houses, was open
to the skies, and whilst He spoke, the innumerable lights that blaze
in that clear heaven shone down upon them, and He may have pointed to
these. The better Abraham perhaps looked forth, like His prototype, on
the starry heavens, and saw in the vision of the future those who
through Him should receive the 'adoption of sons' and dwell for ever
in the house of the Lord, 'so many as the stars of the sky in
multitude, and as the sand which is by the seashore innumerable.'

Ah! brethren, if we could only widen our measurement of the walls of
the New Jerusalem to the measurement of that 'golden rod which the
man, that is the angel,' as John says, applied to it, we should
understand how much bigger it is than any of these poor sects and
communities of ours here on earth. If we would lay to heart, as we
ought to do, the deep meaning of that indefinite 'many' in my text, it
would rebuke our narrowness. There will be a great many occupants of
the mansions in heaven that Christian men here on earth--the most
Catholic of them--will be very much surprised to see there, and
thousands will find their entrance there that never found their
entrance into any communities of so-called Christians here on earth.

That one word 'many' should deepen our confidence in the triumphs of
Christ's Cross, and it may be used to heighten our own confidence as
to our own poor selves. A chamber in the great Temple waits for each
of us, and the question is, Shall we occupy it, or shall we not? The
old Rabbis had a tradition which, like a great many of their
apparently foolish sayings, covers in picturesque guise a very deep
truth. They said that, however many the throngs of worshippers who
came up to Jerusalem at the passover, the streets of the city and the
courts of the sanctuary were never crowded. And so it is with that
great city. There is room for all. There are throngs, but no crowds.
Each finds a place in the ample sweep of the Father's house, like some
of the great palaces that barbaric Eastern kings used to build, in
whose courts armies might encamp, and the chambers of which were
counted by the thousand. And surely in all that ample accommodation,
you and I may find some corner where we, if we will, may lodge for
evermore.

I do not dwell upon subsidiary ideas that may be drawn from the
expressions. 'Mansions' means places of permanent abode, and suggests
the two thoughts, so sweet to travellers and toilers in this fleeting,
labouring life, of unchangeableness and of repose. Some have supposed
that the variety in the attainments of the redeemed, which is
reasonable and scriptural, might be deduced from our text, but that
does not seem to be relevant to our Lord's purpose.

One other suggestion may be made without enlarging upon it. There is
only one other occasion in this Gospel in which the word here
translated 'mansions' is employed, and it is this: 'We will come and
make our abode with him.' Our mansion is in God; God's dwelling-place
is in us. So ask yourselves, Have you a place in that heavenly home?
When prodigal children go away from the father's house, sometimes a
broken-hearted parent will keep the boy's room just as it used to be
when he was young and pure, and will hope and weary through long days
for him to come back and occupy it again. God is keeping a room for
you in His house; do you see that you fill it.

II. In the next place, note here the sufficiency of Christ's
revelation for our needs.

'If it were not so I would have told you.' He sets Himself forward in
very august fashion as being the Revealer and Opener of that house for
us. There is a singular tone about all our Lord's few references to
the future--a tone of decisiveness; not as if He were speaking, as a
man might do, that which he had thought out, or which had come to him,
but as if He was speaking of what he had Himself beheld, 'We speak
that we do know, and testify that we have seen.' He stands like one on
a mountain top, looking down into the valleys beyond, and telling His
comrades in the plain behind Him what He sees. He speaks of that
unseen world always as One who had been in it, and who was reporting
experiences, and not giving forth opinions. His knowledge was the
knowledge of One who dwelt with the Father, and left the house in
order to find and bring back His wandering brethren. It was 'His own
calm home, His habitation from eternity,' and therefore He could tell
us with decisiveness, with simplicity, with assurance, all which we
need to know about the geography of that unknown land--the plan of
that, by us unvisited, house. Very remarkable, therefore, is it, that
with this tone there should be such reticence in Christ's references
to the future. The text implies the _rationale_ of such reticence. 'If
it were not so I would have told you.' I tell you all that you need,
though I tell you a great deal less than you sometimes wish.

The gaps in our knowledge of the future, seeing that we have such a
Revealer as we have in Christ, are remarkable. But my text suggests
this to us--we have as much as we need. _I_ know, and many of _you_
know, by bitter experience, how many questions, the answers to which
would seem to us to be such a lightening of our burdens, our desolated
and troubled hearts suggest about that future, and how vainly we ply
heaven with questions and interrogate the unreplying Oracle. But we
know as much as we need. We know that God is there. We know that it is
the Father's house. We know that Christ is in it. We know that the
dwellers there are a family. We know that sweet security and ample
provision are there; and, for the rest, if we I needed to have heard
more, He would have told us.

    'My knowledge of that life is small,
    The eye of faith is dim;
    But 'tis enough that Christ knows all;
    And I shall be with Him.'

Let the gaps remain. The gaps are part of the revelation, and we know
enough for faith and hope.

May we not widen the application of that thought to other matters than
to our bounded and fragmentary conceptions of a future life? In times
like the present, of doubt and unrest, it is a great piece of
Christian wisdom to recognise the limitations of our knowledge and the
sufficiency of the fragments that we have. What do we get a revelation
for? To solve theological puzzles and dogmatic difficulties? to
inflate us with the pride of _quasi_-omniscience? or to present to us
God in Christ for faith, for love, for obedience, for imitation?
Surely the latter, and for such purposes we have enough.

So let us recognise that our knowledge is very partial. A great
stretch of wall is blank, and there is not a window in it. If there
had been need for one, it would have been struck out. He has been
pleased to leave many things obscure, not arbitrarily, so as to try
our faith--for the implication of the words before us is that the
relation between Him and us binds Him to the utmost possible
frankness, and that all which we need and He can tell us He does
tell--but for high reasons, and because of the very conditions of our
present environment, which forbid the more complete and all-round
knowledge.

So let us recognise our limitations. We know in part, and we are wise
if we affirm in part. Hold by the Central Light, which is Jesus
Christ. 'Many things did Jesus which are not written in this book,'
and many gaps and deficiencies from a human point of view exist in the
contexture of revelation. 'But these are written that ye may believe
that Jesus is the Christ,' for which enough has been told us, 'and
that, believing, ye may have life in His name.' If that purpose be
accomplished in us, God will not have spoken, nor we have heard, in
vain. Let us hold by the Central Light, and then the circumference of
darkness will gradually retreat, and a wider sphere of illumination be
ours, until the day when we enter our mansion in the Father's house,
and then 'in Thy Light shall we see light'; and we shall 'know even as
we are known.'

Let your Elder Brother lead you back, dear friend, to the Father's
bosom, and be sure that if you trust Him and listen to Him, you will
know enough on earth to turn earth into a foretaste of Heaven, and
will find at last your place in the Father's house beside the Brother
who has prepared it for you.




THE FORERUNNER

'... I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place
for you, I will come again, and receive you unto Myself; that where I
am, there ye may be also.'--JOHN xiv. 2, 3.

What divine simplicity and depth are in these words! They carry us up
into the unseen world, and beyond time; and yet a little child can lay
hold on them, and mourning hearts and dying men find peace and
sweetness in them. A very familiar image underlies them. It was
customary for travellers in those old days to send some of their party
on in advance, to find lodging and make arrangements for them in some
great city. Many a time one or other of the disciples had been 'sent
before His face into every place where He Himself should come.' On
that very morning two of them had gone in, at His bidding, from
Bethany to make ready the table at which they were sitting. Christ
here takes that office upon Himself. The emblem is homely, the thing
meant is transcendent.

Not less wonderful is the blending of majesty and lowliness. The
office which He takes upon Himself is that of an inferior and a
servant. And yet the discharge of it, in the present case, implies His
authority over every corner of the universe, His immortal life, and
the sufficiency of His presence to make a heaven. Nor can we fail to
notice the blending of another pair of opposites: His certainty of His
impending death, and His certainty, notwithstanding and thereby, of
His continual work and His final return, are inseparably interlaced
here. How comes it that, in all His premonitions of His death, Jesus
Christ never spoke about it as failure or as the interruption or end
of His activity, but always as the transition to, and the condition
of, His wider work? 'I go, and if I go I return, and take you to
Myself.'

So, then, there are three things here, the departure with its purpose,
the return, and the perfected union.

I. The Departure.

Our Lord's going away from that little group was a journey in two
stages. Calvary was the first; Olivet was the second. He means by the
phrase the whole continuous process which begins with His death and
ends in His ascension. Both are embraced in His words, and each
co-operates to the attainment of the great purpose.

He prepares a place for us by His death. The High Priest, in the
ancient ritual, once a year was privileged to lift the heavy veil and
pass into the darkened chamber, where only the light between the
cherubim was visible, because he bore in his hand the blood of the
sacrifice. But in our New Testament system the path into 'the holiest
of all,' the realisation of the most intimate fellowship with heavenly
things and communion with God Himself, are made possible, and the way
patent for every foot, because Jesus has died. And as the communion
upon earth, so the perfecting of the communion in the heavens. Who of
us could step within those awful sanctities, or stand serene amidst
the region of eternal light and stainless purity, unless, in His
death, He had borne the sins of the world, and, having 'overcome' its
'sharpness' by enduring its blow, had 'opened the Kingdom of Heaven to
all believers'?

Old legends tell us of magic gates that resisted all attempts to force
them, but upon which, if one drop of a certain blood fell, they flew
open. And so, by His death, Christ has opened the gates and made the
heaven of perfect purity a dwelling-place for sinful men.

But the second stage of His departure is that which more eminently is
in Christ's mind here. He prepares a place for us by His entrance into
and His dwelling in the heavenly places. The words are obscure because
we have but few others with which to compare them, and no experience
by which to interpret them. We know so little about the matter that it
is not wise to say much; but though there be vast tracts of darkness
round the little spot of light, this should only make the spot of
light more vivid and more precious. We know little, but we know enough
for mind and heart to rest upon. Our ignorance of the ways in which
Christ by His ascension prepares a heaven for His followers should
neither breed doubt nor disregard of His assurance that He does.

If Christ had not ascended, would there have been 'a place' at all? He
has gone with a human body, which, glorified as it is, still has
relations to space, and must be somewhere. And we may even say that
His ascending up on high has made a place where His servants are. But
apart from that suggestion, which, perhaps, is going beyond our
limits, we may see that Christ's presence in heaven is needful to make
it a heaven for poor human souls. There, as here (Scripture assures
us), and throughout eternity as to-day, Jesus Christ is the Mediator
of all human knowledge and possession of God. It is from Him and
through Him that there come to men, whether they be men on earth or
men in the heavens, all that they know, all that they hope, all that
they enjoy, of the wisdom, love, beauty, peace, power, which flow from
God. Take away from the heaven of the Christian expectation that which
comes to the spirit through Jesus Christ, and you have nothing left.
He and His mediation and ministration alone make the brightness and
the blessedness of that high state. The very glories of all that lies
beyond the veil would have an aspect appalling and bewildering to us,
unless our Brother were there. Like some poor savages brought into a
great city, or rustics into the presence of a king and his court, we
should be ill at ease amidst the glories and solemnities of that
future life unless we saw standing there our Kinsman, to whom we can
turn, and who makes it possible for us to feel that it is home.
Christ's presence makes heaven the home of our hearts.

Not only did He go to prepare a place, but He is continuously
preparing it for us all through the ages. We have to think of a double
form of the work of Christ, His past work in His earthly life, and His
present in His exaltation. We have to think of a double form of His
present activity--His work with and in us here on earth, and His work
for us there in the heavens. We have to think of a double form of His
work in the heavens--that which the Scripture represents in a
metaphor, the full comprehension of which surpasses our present powers
and experiences, as being His priestly intercession; and that which my
text represents in a metaphor, perhaps a little more level to our
apprehension, as being His preparing a place for us. Behind the veil
there is a working Christ, who, in the heavens, is preparing a place
for all that love Him.

II. In the next place, note the Return.

The purpose of our Lord's departure, as set forth by Himself here,
guarantees for us His coming back again. That is the force of the
simple argumentation of my text, and of the pathetic and soothing
repetition of the sweet words, 'I go to prepare a place for you; and
if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive you
unto Myself.' Because the departure had for its purpose the preparing
of the place, therefore it is necessarily followed by a return. He who
went away as the Forerunner has not done His work until He comes back,
and, as Guide, leads those for whom He had prepared the place to the
place which He had prepared for them.

Now that return of our Lord, like His departure, may be considered as
having two stages. Unquestionably the main meaning and application of
the words is to that final and personal coming which stands at the end
of history, and to which the hopes of every Christian soul ought to be
steadfastly directed. He will 'so come in like manner as' He has gone.
We are not to water down such words as these into anything short of a
return precisely corresponding in its method to the departure; and as
the departure was visible, corporeal, literal, personal, and local, so
the return is to be visible, corporeal, literal, personal, local too.
He is to come as He went, a visible Manhood, only throned amongst the
clouds of heaven with power and great glory. This is the aim that He
sets before Him in His departure. He leaves in order that He may come
back again.

And, oh, dear friends! remember--and let us live in the strength of
the remembrance--that this return ought to be the prominent subject of
Christian aspiration and desire. There is much about the conception of
that solemn return, with all the convulsions that attend it, and the
judgment of which it is preliminary, that may well make men's hearts
chill within them. But for you and me, if we have any love in our
hearts and loyalty in our spirits to that King, 'His coming' should be
'prepared as the _morning_,' and we should join in the great burst of
rapture of many a psalm, which calls upon rocks and hills to break
forth into singing, and trees of the field to clap their hands,
because He cometh as the King to judge the earth. His own parable
tells us how we ought to regard His coming. When the fig-tree's branch
begins to supple, and the little leaves to push their way through the
polished stem, then we know that summer is at hand. His coming should
be as the approach of that glorious, fervid time, in which the
sunshine has tenfold brilliancy and power, the time of ripened
harvests and matured fruits, the time of joy for all creatures that
love the sun. It should be the glad hope of all His servants.

We have a double witness to bear in the midst of this as of every
generation. One half of the witness stretches backwards to the Cross,
and proclaims 'Christ has come'; the other reaches onwards to the
Throne, and proclaims 'Christ will come.' Between these two high
uplifted piers swings the chain of the world's history, which closes
with the return, to judge and to save, of the Lord who came to die and
has gone to prepare a place for us.

But do not let us forget that we may well take another point of view
than this. Scripture knows of many comings of the Lord preliminary to,
and in principle one with, His last coming. For nations all great
crises of their history are 'comings of the Lord,' the Judge, and we
are strictly in the line of Scripture analogy when, in reference to
individuals, we see in each single death a true coming of the Lord.

That is the point of view in which we ought to look upon a Christian's
death-bed. 'The Master _is come_, and calleth for thee.' Beyond all
secondary causes, deeper than disease or accident, lies the loving
will of Him who is the Lord of life and of death. Death is Christ's
minister, 'mighty and beauteous, though his face be dark,' and he,
too, stands amidst the ranks of the 'ministering spirits sent forth to
minister to them that shall be heirs of salvation.' It is Christ that
says of one, 'I will that this man tarry,' and to another, 'Go!' and
he goeth. But whensoever a Christian man lies down to die, Christ
says, 'Come!' and he comes. How that thought should hallow the
death-chamber as with the print of the Master's feet! How it should
quiet our hearts and dry our tears! How it should change the whole
aspect of that 'shadow feared of man'! With Him for our companion, the
lonely road will not be dreary; and though in its anticipation, our
timid hearts may often be ready to say, 'Surely the darkness shall
cover me,' if we have Him by our sides, 'even the night shall be light
about us.' The dying martyr beneath the city wall lifted up his face
to the heavens, and said, 'Lord Jesus, receive my spirit!' It was the
echo of the Master's promise, 'I will come again, and receive you to
Myself.'

III. Lastly, notice the Perfected Union.

The departure for such a purpose necessarily involved the return
again. Both are stages in the process, which is perfected by complete
union--'That where I am there ye may be also.'

Christ, as I have been saying, is Heaven. His presence is all that we
need for peace, for joy, for purity, for rest, for love, for growth.
To be 'with Him,' as He tells us in another part of these wonderful
last words in the upper chamber, is to 'behold His glory.' And to
behold His glory, as John tells us in his Epistle, is to be like Him.
So Christ's presence means the communication to us of all the lustre
of His radiance, of all the whiteness of His purity, of all the depth
of His blessedness, and of a share in His wondrous dominion. His
glorified manhood will pass into ours, and they that are with Him
where He is will rest as in the centre and home of their spirits, and
find Him all-sufficient. His presence is my Heaven.

That is almost all we know. Oh! it is more than all we need to know.
The curtain is the picture. It is because what is there transcends in
glory all our present experience that Scripture can only hint at it
and describe it by negations--such as 'no night,' 'no sorrow,' 'no
tears,' 'former things passed away'; and by symbols of glory and
lustre gathered from all that is loftiest and noblest in human
buildings and society. But all these are but secondary and poor. The
living heart of the hope, and the lambent centre of the brightness,
is, 'So shall we ever be with the Lord.'

And it is enough. It is enough to make the bond of union between us in
the outer court and them in the holy place. Parted friends will fix to
look at the same star at the same moment of the night and feel some
union; and if we from amidst the clouds of earth, and they from amidst
the pure radiance of their heaven, turn our eyes to the same Christ,
we are not far apart. If He be the companion of each of us, He reaches
a hand to each, and, clasping it, the parted ones are united; and
'whether we wake or sleep we live _together_,' because we both live
with Him.

Brother! Is Jesus Christ so much to you that a heaven which consists
in nearness and likeness to Him has any attraction for you? Let Him be
your Saviour, your Sacrifice, your Helper, your Companion. Obey Him as
your King, love Him as your Friend, trust Him as your All. And be sure
that then the darkness will be but the shadow of His hand, and instead
of dreading death as that which separates you from life and love and
action and joy, you will be able to meet it peacefully, as that which
rends the thin veil, and unites you with Him who is the Heaven of
heavens.

He has gone to prepare a place for us. And if we will let Him, He will
prepare us for the place, and then come and lead us thither. 'Thou
wilt show me the path of life' which leads through death. 'In Thy
presence is fullness of joy, and at Thy right hand there are pleasures
for evermore.'




THE WAY

'And whither I go ye know, and the way ye know. Thomas saith unto Him,
Lord, we know not whither Thou goest; and how can we know the way?
Jesus saith unto him, I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life: no man
cometh unto the Father, but by Me. If ye had known Me, ye should have
known My Father also: and from henceforth ye know Him, and have seen
Him.'--JOHN xiv. 4-7.

Our Lord has been speaking of His departure, of its purpose, of His
return as guaranteed by that purpose, and of His servants' eternal and
perfect reunion with Him. But even these cheering and calming thoughts
do not exhaust His consolations, as they did not satisfy all the
disciples' needs. They might still have said, 'Yes; we believe that
You will come back again, and we believe that we shall be together;
but what about the parenthesis of absence?' And here is the answer, or
at least part of it: 'Whither I go ye know, and the way ye know'; or,
if we adopt the shortened form which the Revised Version gives us,
'Whither I go ye know the way.'

When you say to a man, 'You know the way,' you mean 'Come.' And in
these words there lie, as it seems to me, a veiled invitation to the
disciples to come to Him before He came back for them, and the
assurance that they, though separated, might still find and tread the
road to the Father's house, and so be with Him still. They are not
left desolate. The Christ who is absent is present as the path to
Himself. And so the parenthesis is bridged across. Now in these verses
we have several large and important lessons which I think may best be
drawn by simply seeking to follow their course.

I. Observe the disciples' unconscious knowledge.

Jesus Christ says: 'Ye know the way and ye know the goal.' One of them
ventures flatly to contradict Him, and to traverse both assertions
with a brusque and thorough-going negative. 'We do _not_ know whither
Thou goest,' says Thomas; 'how can we know the way?' He is the same
man in this conversation that we find him in the interview before our
Lord's journey to raise Lazarus, and in the interview after our Lord's
resurrection. In all three cases he appears as mainly under the
dominion of sense, as slow to apprehend anything beyond its limits, as
morbidly melancholy and disposed to take the blackest possible view of
things--a practical pessimist--and yet with a certain kind of frank
outspokenness which half redeems the other characteristics from blame.
He could not understand all the Lord's deep words just spoken. His
mind was befogged and dimmed, and he blurts out his ignorance, knowing
that the best place to carry it to is to the Illuminator who can make
it light.

'We know not whither Thou goest, and how can we know the way?' Was
Jesus right? was Thomas right? or were they both right? The fact is
that Thomas and all his fellows knew, after a fashion, but they did
not know that they knew. They had heard much in the past as to where
Christ was going. Plainly enough it had been rung in their ears over
and over again. It had made some kind of lodgment in their heads, and,
in that sense, they did know. It is this unused and unconscious
knowledge of theirs to which Christ appeals, and which He tries to
draw out into consciousness and power when He says, 'You know whither
I am going, and you know the road.' Is not that exactly what a patient
teacher will do with some flustered child when he says to it: 'Take
time! You know it well enough if you will only think'? So the Master
says here: 'Do not be agitated and troubled in heart. Reflect,
remember, overhaul your stores, and think what I have told you over
and over again, and you will find that you _do_ know whither I am
going, and that you _do_ know the way.'

The patient gentleness of the Master with the slowness of the scholars
is beautifully exemplified here, as is also the method, which He
lovingly and patiently adopts, of sending men back to consult their
own consciousness as illuminated by His teaching, and to see whether
there is not lying somewhere, unrecked of and unemployed in some dusty
corner of their mind, a truth that only needs to be dragged out and
cleaned in order to show itself for what it is, the all-sufficient
light and strength for the moment's need.

The dialogue is an instance of what is true about us all, that we have
in our possession truths given to us by Jesus Christ, the whole sweep
and bearing of which, the whole majesty and power and illuminating
capacity of which, we do not dream of yet. How much in our creeds lies
dim and undeveloped! Time and circumstances and some sore agony of
spirit are needed in order to make us realise the riches that we
possess, and the certitudes to which our troubled spirits may cling;
and the practice of far more patient, honest, profound meditation and
reflection than finds favour with the average Christian man is needed,
too, in order that the truths possessed may be possessed, and that we
may know what we know, and understand 'the things that are given to us
of God.'

In all your creeds, there are large tracts that you, in some kind of a
fashion, do believe; and yet they have no vitality in your
consciousness nor power in your lives. And the Master here does with
these disciples exactly what He is trying to do day by day with us,
namely, fling us back on ourselves, or rather upon His revelation in
us, and get us to fathom its depths and to walk round about its
magnitudes, and so to understand the things that we say we believe.

All our knowledge is ignorance. Ignorance that confesses itself to Him
is in the way of becoming knowledge. His light will touch the smoke
and change it into red spires of flame. If you do not know, go to Him
and say, 'Lord! I do not.' An accurate understanding of where the
darkness lies is the first step to the light. We are meant to carry
all our inadequate and superficial realisations of His truth into His
presence, that, from Him, we may gain deeper knowledge, a firmer
faith, and a more joyous certitude in His inexhaustible lessons. In
every article and item of the Christian faith there is a transcendent
element which surpasses our present comprehension. Let us be confident
that the light will break; and let us welcome the new illumination
when it comes, sure that it comes from God. Be not puffed up with the
conceit that you know all. Be sure of this, that, according to the
good old metaphor, we are but as children on the shore of the great
ocean, gathering a few of the shells that it has washed to our feet,
itself stretching boundless, and, thank God, sunlit, before us. 'Ye
know the way.' 'Master, we know not the way.'

II. Observe here, in the second place, our Lord's great
self-revelation which meets this unconscious knowledge.

'Jesus saith unto him: I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life; no man
cometh unto the Father but by Me.' Now it is quite plain, I think,
from the whole strain of the context and the purpose of these words
