himself had so shamefully succumbed, and when he referred them for
all their strength to the source of it all, even God in Christ.




GETHSEMANE


    'And He came out, and went, as He was wont, to the
    mount of Olives; and His disciples also followed Him.
    40. And when He was at the place, He said unto them,
    Pray that ye enter not into temptation.  41. And He
    was withdrawn from them about a stone's cast, and
    kneeled down, and prayed, 42. Saying, Father, If Thou
    be willing, remove this cup from Me; nevertheless, not
    My will, but Thine, be done. 43. And there appeared an
    angel unto Him from heaven, strengthening Him. 44. And,
    being in an agony, He prayed more earnestly: and His
    sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down
    to the ground. 45. And when He rose up from prayer,
    and was come to His disciples, He found them sleeping
    for sorrow. 46. And said unto them, Why sleep ye? rise
    and pray, lest ye enter into temptation. 47. And while
    He yet spake, beheld a multitude, and he that was
    called Judas, one of the twelve, went before them, and
    drew near unto Jesus to kiss Him. 48. But Jesus said
    unto him, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man with a
    kiss? 49. When they which were about Him saw what would
    follow, they said unto Him, Lord, shall we smite with
    the sword? 50. And one of them smote a servant of the
    high priest, and cut off his right ear. 51. And Jesus
    answered and said, Suffer ye thus far. And He touched
    his ear, and healed him. 52. Then Jesus said unto the
    chief priests, and captains of the temple, and the
    elders, which were come to Him, Be ye come out, as
    against a thief, with swords and staves? 53. When I
    was daily with you in the temple, ye stretched forth
    no hands against Me; but this is your hour, and the
    power of darkness.'--Luke xxii. 39-53.

'Put off thy shoes from off thy feet.' Cold analysis is out of place
here, where the deepest depth of a Saviour's sorrows is partly
disclosed, and we see Him bowing His head to the waves and billows
that went over Him, for our sakes. Luke's account is much condensed,
but contains some points peculiar to itself. It falls into two
parts--the solemn scene of the agony, and the circumstances of the
arrest.

I. We look with reverent awe and thankfulness at that soul-subduing
picture of the agonising and submissive Christ which Luke briefly
draws. Think of the contrast between the joyous revelry of the
festival-keeping city and the sadness of the little company which
crossed the Kedron and passed beneath the shadow of the olive-trees
into the moonlit garden. Jesus needed companions there; but He needed
solitude still more. So He is 'parted from them'; but Luke alone
tells us how short the distance was--'as it were a stone's throw,'
and near enough for the disciples to see and hear something before
they slept.

That clinging to and separation from His humble friends gives a
wonderful glimpse into Christ's desolation then. And how beautiful
is His care for them, even at that supreme hour, which leads to the
injunction twice spoken, at the beginning and end of His own
prayers, that they should pray, not for Him, but for themselves. He
never asks for men's prayers, but He does for their love. He thinks
of His sufferings as temptation for the disciples, and for the
moment forgets His own burden, in pointing them the way to bear
theirs. Did self-oblivious love ever shine more gloriously in the
darkness of sorrow?

Luke omits the threefold withdrawal and return, but notes three
things--the prayer, the angel appearance, and the physical effects
of the agony. The essentials are all preserved in his account. The
prayer is truly 'the Lord's prayer,' and the perfect pattern for
ours. Mark the grasp of God's fatherhood, which is at once appeal
and submission. So should all prayer begin, with the thought, at all
events, whether with the word 'Father' or no. Mark the desire that
'this cup' should pass. The expression shows how vividly the
impending sufferings were pictured before Christ's eye. The keenest
pains of anticipation, which make so large a part of so many
sorrows, were felt by Him. He shrank from His sufferings. Did He
therefore falter in His desire and resolve to endure the Cross? A
thousand times, no! His will never wavered, but maintained itself
supreme over the natural recoil of His human nature from pain and
death. If He had not felt the Cross to be a dread, it had been no
sacrifice. If He had allowed the dread to penetrate to His will, He
had been no Saviour. But now He goes before us in the path which all
have, in their degree, to travel, and accepts pain that He may do
His work.

That acceptance of the divine will is no mere 'If it must be so, let
it be so,' much as that would have been. But He receives in His
prayer the true answer--for His will completely coincides with the
Father's, and 'mine' is 'thine.' Such conformity of our wills with
God's is the highest blessing of prayer and the true deliverance.
The cup accepted is sweet; and though flesh may shrink, the inner
self consents, and in consenting to the pain, conquers it.

Luke alone tells of the ministering angel; and, according to some
authorities, the forty-third and forty-fourth verses are spurious.
But, accepting them as genuine, what does the angelic appearance
teach us? It suggests pathetically the utter physical prostration
of Jesus. Sensuous religion has dwelt on that offensively, but let
us not rush to the opposite extreme, and ignore it. It teaches us
that the manhood of Jesus needed the communication of divine help as
truly as we do. The difficulty of harmonising that truth with His
divine nature was probably the reason for the omission of this verse
in some manuscripts. It teaches the true answer to His prayer, as so
often to ours; namely, the strength to bear the load, not the
removal of it. It is remarkable that the renewal of the solemn
'agony' and the intenser earnestness of prayer follow the
strengthening by the angel.

Increased strength increased the conflict of feeling, and the
renewed and intensified conflict increased the earnestness of the
prayer. The calmness won was again disturbed, and a new recourse to
the source of it was needed. We stand reverently afar off, and ask,
not too curiously, what it is that falls so heavily to the ground,
and shines red and wet in the moonlight. But the question
irresistibly rises, Why all this agony of apprehension? If Jesus
Christ was but facing death as it presents itself to all men, His
shrinking is far beneath the temper in which many a man has fronted
the scaffold and the fire. We can scarcely save His character for
admiration, unless we see in the agony of Gethsemane something much
more than the shrinking from a violent death, and understand how
there the Lord made to meet on Him the iniquity of us all. If the
burden that crushed Him thus was but the common load laid on all
men's shoulders, He shows unmanly terror. If it were the black mass
of the world's sins, we can understand the agony, and rejoice to
think that our sins were there.

II. The arrest. Three points are made prominent--the betrayer's
token, the disciples' resistance, the reproof of the foes, and in
each the centre of interest is our Lord's words. The sudden bursting
in of the multitude is graphically represented. The tumult broke the
stillness of the garden, but it brought deeper peace to Christ's
heart; for while the anticipation agitated, the reality was met with
calmness. Blessed they who can unmoved front evil, the foresight of
which shook their souls! Only they who pray as Jesus did beneath
the olives, can go out from their shadow, as He did, to meet the
foe.

The first of the three incidents of the arrest brings into strong
prominence Christ's meek patience, dignity, calmness, and effort,
even at that supreme moment, to rouse dormant conscience, and save
the traitor from himself. Judas probably had no intention by his
kiss of anything but showing the mob their prisoner; but he must
have been far gone in insensibility before he could fix on such a
sign. It was the token of friendship and discipleship, and no doubt
was customary among the disciples, though we never hear of any lips
touching Jesus but the penitent woman's, which were laid on His
feet, and the traitor's. The worst hypocrisy is that which is
unconscious of its own baseness.

Every word of Christ's answer to the shameful kiss is a sharp spear,
struck with a calm and not resentful hand right into the hardened
conscience. There is wistful tenderness and a remembrance of former
confidences in calling Him by name. The order of words in the
original emphasises the kiss, as if Jesus had said, 'Is that the
sign you have chosen? Could nothing else serve you? Are you so dead
to all feeling that you can kiss and betray?' The Son of man flashes
on Judas, for the last time, the majesty and sacredness against
which he was lifting his hand. 'Betrayest thou?' which comes last in
the Greek, seeks to startle by putting into plain words the guilt,
and so to rend the veil of sophistications in which the traitor was
hiding his deed from himself. Thus to the end Christ seeks to keep
him from ruin, and with meek patience resents not indignity, but
with majestic calmness sets before the miserable man the hideousness
of his act. The patient Christ is the same now as then, and meets
all our treason with pleading, which would fain teach us how black
it is, not because He is angry, but because He would win us to turn
from it. Alas that so often His remonstrances fall on hearts as
wedded to their sin as was Judas's!

The rash resistance of the disciple is recorded chiefly for the sake
of Christ's words and acts. The anonymous swordsman was Peter, and
the anonymous victim was Malchus, as John tells us. No doubt he had
brought one of the two swords from the upper room, and, in a sudden
burst of anger and rashness, struck at the man nearest him, not
considering the fatal consequences for them all that might follow.
Peter could manage nets better than swords, and missed the head, in
his flurry and in the darkness, only managing to shear off a poor
slave's ear. When the Church takes sword in hand, it usually shows
that it does not know how to wield it, and as often as not has
struck the wrong man. Christ tells Peter and us, in His word here,
what His servants' true weapons are, and rebukes all armed
resistance of evil. 'Suffer ye thus far' is a command to oppose
violence only by meek endurance, which wins in the long run, as
surely as the patient sunshine melts the thick ice, which is ice
still, when pounded with a hammer.

If 'thus far' as to His own seizure and crucifying was to be 'suffered,'
where can the breaking-point of patience and non-resistance be fixed?
Surely every other instance of violence and wrong lies far on this side
of that one. The prisoner heals the wound. Wonderful testimony that not
inability to deliver Himself, but willingness to be taken, gave Him
into the hands of His captors! Blessed proof that He lavishes benefits
on His foes, and that His delight is to heal all wounds and stanch
every bleeding heart!

The last incident here is Christ's piercing rebuke, addressed, not to
the poor, ignorant tools, but to the prime movers of the conspiracy,
who had come to gloat over its success. He asserts His own innocence,
and hints at the preposterous inadequacy of 'swords and staves' to
take Him. He is no 'robber,' and their weapons are powerless, unless
He wills. He recalls His uninterrupted teaching in the Temple, as if
to convict them of cowardice, and perchance to bring to remembrance
His words there. And then, with that same sublime and strange majesty
of calm submission which marks all His last hours, He unveils to
these furious persecutors the true character of their deed. The
sufferings of Jesus were the meeting-point of three worlds--earth,
hell, and heaven. 'This is your hour.' But it was also Satan's hour,
and it was Christ's 'hour,' and God's. Man's passions, inflamed from
beneath, were used to work out God's purpose; and the Cross is at
once the product of human unbelief, of devilish hate, and of divine
mercy. His sufferings were 'the power of darkness.'

Mark in that expression Christ's consciousness that He is the light,
and enmity to Him darkness. Mark, too, His meek submission, as
bowing His head to let the black flood flow over Him. Note that
Christ brands enmity to Him as the high-water mark of sin, the
crucial instance of man's darkness, the worst thing ever done. Mark
the assurance that animated Him, that the eclipse was but for an
'hour.' The victory of the darkness was brief, and it led to the
eternal triumph of the Light. By dying He is the death of death.
This Jonah inflicts deadly wounds on the monster in whose maw He lay
for three days. The power of darkness was shivered to atoms in the
moment of its proudest triumph, like a wave which is beaten into
spray as it rises in a towering crest and flings itself against the
rock.




THE CROSS THE VICTORY AND DEFEAT OF DARKNESS


    'This is your hour, and the power of darkness.'
    --Luke xxii. 53.

The darkness was the right time for so dark a deed. The surface
meaning of these pathetic and far-reaching words of our Lord's in
the garden to His captors is to point the correspondence between the
season and the act. As He has just said, 'He had been daily with
them in the Temple,' but in the blaze of the noontide they laid no
hands upon Him. They found a congenial hour in the midnight. But the
words go a great deal deeper than allusive symbolism of that sort.
Looking at them as giving us a little glimpse into the thoughts and
feelings of Christ, we can scarcely help tracing in them the very
clear consciousness that He was the Light, and that all antagonism
to Him was the work of darkness in an eminent and especial sense.
But whilst this unobscured consciousness, which no mere man could
venture so unqualifiedly to assert, is manifest in the words, there
is also in them, to my ear, a tone of majestic resignation, as if He
said, 'There! do your worst!' and bowed His head, as a man might do,
standing breast high in the sea, that the wave might roll over Him.
And there is in them, too, a shrinking as of horror from the surging
upon Him of the black tide to which He bows His head.

But whilst thus pathetic and significant in their indication of the
feelings of our Lord, they have a wider and a deeper meaning still,
I think, if we ponder them; inasmuch as they open before us some
aspects of His sufferings and eminently of His Cross, which it
becomes us all to lay to heart. And it is to these that I desire to
turn your attention for a few moments.

I. I see in them, then, first, this great thought, that the Cross of
Jesus Christ is the centre and the meeting-point for the energies of
three worlds.

'This is your hour.' Now our Lord habitually speaks of His
sufferings, and of other points in His life, as being 'My hour,' by
which, of course, He means the time appointed to Him by God for the
doing of an appointed work. And that idea is distinctly to be
attached to the use of the word here. But, on the other hand, there
is emphasis laid on '_your_,' and that hour is thereby designated as
a time in which they could do as they would. It was their opportunity,
or, as we say in our colloquialism, now was their time when, unhindered,
they might carry into effect their purposes.

So there is given us the thought of His passion and death as being
the most eminent and awful instance of men being left unchecked to
work out whatsoever was in their evil hearts, and to carry into
effect their blackest purposes.

But, on the other hand, there goes with the phrase the idea to which
I have already referred; and 'this is their hour,' not merely in the
sense that it was their opportunity, but also that it was the hour
appointed by God and allotted them for their doing the thing which
their unhindered evil passions impelled them to do. And so we are
brought face to face with the most eminent instance of that great
puzzle that runs through all life--how God works out His lofty
designs by means of responsible agents, 'making the wrath of men to
praise Him,' and girding Himself with the remainder.

Nor is that all. For the next words of my text bring in a third set
of powers as in operation. 'This is your hour' lets us see man
overarched by the abyss of the heavens, 'and the power of darkness'
lets us see the deep and awful forces that are working beneath and
surging upwards into humanity, and opens the subterranean volcanoes.
I do not say that there is any reference here to a personal
Antagonist of good, in whom these dark tendencies are focussed, but
there is a distinct reference to 'the darkness' as a whole, a kind
of organic whole, which operates upon men. Even when they think
themselves to be freest, and are carrying out their own wicked
designs, they are but the slaves of impulses that come straight from
the dark kingdom. If I may turn from the immediate purpose of my
sermon for a moment, I pray you to consider that solemn aspect of
our life, a film between two firmaments, like the earth with the
waters above and the waters beneath. On the one side it is open and
pervious to heavenly influences, and moulded by the overarching and
sovereign will, and on the other side it is all honeycombed beneath
with, and open to, the uprisings of evil, straight from the
bottomless pit.

But if we turn to the more immediate purpose of the words, think for
a moment of the solemn and wonderful aspect which the Cross of
Christ assumes, thus contemplated. Three worlds focus their energies
upon it--heaven, earth, hell. Looked at from one side it is all
radiant and glorious, as the transcendent exhibition of the divine
love and sweetness and sacrifice and righteousness and tenderness.
But the sunshine that plays upon it shifts and passes, and looked at
from another point of view it is swathed in blackness, as the most
awful display of man's unbridled antagonism to the good. And looked
at from yet another, it assumes a still more lurid aspect as the
last stroke which the kingdom of darkness attempted to strike in
defence of its ancient and solitary reign. So earth, heaven, hell,
the God that works through man's evil passions, and yet does not
acquit them though He utilises them to a lofty issue; man that is
evil and thinks himself free; and the kingdom of darkness that uses
him as its slave--all hare part in that cross, which is thus the
result of such diametrically opposite forces.

The divine government which reached its most beneficent ends through
the unbridled antagonism of sinful men, and made even the dark
counsels of the kingdom of darkness tributary to the diffusion of the
light, works ever in the same fashion. Antagonism and obedience both
work out its purposes. Let us learn to bow before that all-encompassing
Providence in whose great scheme both are included. Let us not confuse
ourselves by the attempt to make plain to our reason the harmony of the
two certain facts--man's freedom and God's sovereignty. Enough for us
to remember that the sin is none the less though the issue may coincide
with the divine purpose, for sin lies in the motive, which is ours, not
in the unintended result, which is God's. Enough for us to realise the
tremendous solemnity of the lives we live, with all sweet heavenly
influences falling on them from above, and all sulphurous suggestions
rising into them from the fires beneath, and to see to it that we keep
our hearts open to the one, and fast closed against the other.

'This is your hour'--a time in which you feel yourselves free, and
yet are instruments in the hands of God, and also are tools in the
claws of evil.

II. Still further, my text brings before us the thought that the
Cross is the high-water mark of man's sin.

'This is the power of darkness'--the specimen instance of what it
would and can do. Strange to think that, amidst all the black
catalogue of evil deeds that have been done in this world from the
beginning, there is one deed which is the worst, and that it is this
one! Not that the doers were 'sinners above all men': for that is a
question of knowledge and of motives, but that the deed in itself
was the worst thing that ever man did. Of course I take for granted
the belief that Jesus Christ is the Son of God; that He came from
heaven, that He lived a life of perfect purity and beauty, and that
He died on the Cross as the Gospel tells us. And taking these things
for granted, is it not true that His rejection, His condemnation,
and His death do throw the most awful and solemn light upon what
poor humanity left to itself, and yielding to the suggestions and
the impulses of the kingdom of darkness, does when it comes in
contact with the Light?

It is the great crucial instance of the incapacity of the average
man to behold spiritual beauty and lofty elevation of character.
People lament over the blindness of embruted souls to natural
beauty, to art, to high thinking, and so on; but all these, tragic
as they are, are nothing as compared with this stunning fact, that
perfect righteousness and perfect tenderness and ideal beauty of
character walked about the world for thirty and three years, and
that all the wise and religious men who came across Him thought that
the best thing they could do was to crucify Him. So it has ever been
from the days of Cain and Abel. As the Apostle John asks, 'Wherefore
slew be him?' For a very good reason, 'Because his own works were
evil, and his brother's righteous.' That is reason enough for
killing any prophets and righteous men. It was so in the past, and
in modified forms it is so today. The plain fact is that humanity
has in it a depth of incapacity to behold, and of angry
indisposition to admire, lofty and noble lives. The power of the
darkness to blind men is set forth once in the superlative degree
that we may all beware of it in the lower instances, by that fact,
the most tragical in the history of the world, 'the Light shineth in
the darkness, and the darkness apprehendeth it not.'

And not only does that Cross mark the high-water mark of man's
blindness, and of man's hatred to the lofty and the true and the good,
but it marks, too, the awful power that seems, by the very make of the
world, to be lodged on the side of evil and against good. The dice
seem to be so terribly loaded. Virtue and beauty and truth and
tenderness, and all that is noble and lofty and heart-appealing, have
no chance against a mere piece of savage brutality. And that fact,
which has been repeated over and over again from the beginning, and
so largely makes the misery of mankind, reaches its very climax, and
most solemn and awful illustration, in the fact that a handful of
ruffians and a detachment of Roman soldiers were able to put an end
to the life of God manifest in the flesh. If we have nothing more to
say about Jesus than that He lived upon earth and did works of goodness
and of beauty for a few short years, and then died, and there an end,
it seems to me that the story of the Death of Christ is the most
despairing page in the whole history of humanity, and that it
accentuates and makes still more dreadful the dreadful old puzzle of
how it comes that, in a world with a God in it, evil seems to be so
riotously preponderant and good seems to be ever trodden under foot.
Either the Death of Christ, if He died and did not rise again, is the
strongest argument in the history of mankind for rank atheism, or
else it is true that He rose, the King of humanity, glorified and
exalted by the vain attempts of His foes.

And now notice that this high-water mark, as I have called it, or
climax of human sin, was reached through very common and ordinary
transgressions. Judas betrayed Christ because he had always felt
uncomfortable with his earthly tendencies beside that pure spirit,
and also because he wanted to jingle the thirty pieces of silver in
his pocket. The priests did Him to death because He claimed the
Messiahship and to be the Son of God, and their formalism rose
against Him, and their blindness to all spiritual elevation made
them hate Him. Pilate sent Him to the Cross because he was a coward,
and thought that the life of a Jewish peasant was a small thing to
give in order to secure his position. And the mob howled at His
heels, and wagged their heads as they passed by, oblivious of His
miracles and His benevolence, simply because of the vulgar hatred of
anything that is lofty, and because they were so absorbed in
material things that they had no eyes for that radiant beauty. In
the whole list of these motives there is not a sin that you and I do
not commit, nor is there any one of them which may not be
reproduced, and as a matter of fact, is reproduced, by hundreds and
thousands in this professedly Christian land.

Oh, brethren! the actual murderers are not the worst criminals,
though their deed be the worst, considered in itself. Those Roman
soldiers who nailed His hands to the Cross, and went back to their
barracks that night, quite comfortable and unconscious that they had
been doing anything beyond their routine military duty, were
innocent and white-handed compared with the men and women among us,
who, with the additional evidence of the Cross, and the empty grave,
and the throne in the heavens, and the Christian Church, still stand
aloof and say, 'We see no beauty in Him that we should desire Him.'
Take care lest your attitude to Jesus Christ bring the level of your
criminality close up to that high-water mark, or carry it even
beyond it, for it is possible to 'crucify the Son of God afresh,'
and they who do so have the greater guilt.

III. Now, lastly, my text suggests that the temporary triumph of the
darkness is the eternal victory of the light.

'_This_ is your hour'--not the next. 'This is your
_hour_.' Sixty minutes tick, and it will be gone. When Christ
was beaten He was Conqueror, and as He looked upon His Cross He
said, 'I have overcome the world.' The eclipse which hung over the
little hill and the land of Palestine, during the long hours of that
slowly passing day, ended before He died. And His death was but the
passing for a brief moment of the shadow of death across the bright
luminary which, when the shadow has passed, shines out and 'with new
spangled beams, flames in the forehead of the morning sky.' The
darkness triumphed, and in its triumph it was overcome.

He, by dying, is the death of death. This Jonah inflicted a mortal
wound on the loathly monster in whose maw He lay for three days. He,
by bearing the penalty of sin, takes away the penalty of it for us
all. He, in the quenching of the light of His life in the night of
death, reveals God more than even He did in His life, and is never
more truly the Illuminator of mankind than when He lies in the
darkness of the grave and brings immortality to light. He, by His
death, delivers men from the kingdom of darkness, and translates
them into His own kingdom; giving them new powers for holiness, new
hopes, inspiriting them to rebellion against the tyrants that have
dominion over them; and thus conquering when He falls. The power of
the darkness is broken like a crested wave, toppling over at its
highest and dissolving in ineffectual spray.

So we have encouragement for all momentary checks and defeats, if
there be such in our experience, when we are doing Christ's work.
The history of the Church repeats in all ages, generation after
generation, the same law to which the Master submitted: 'Except a
corn of wheat fall into the ground and die it abideth alone; but if
it die it bringeth forth much fruit.' We conquer when we are
overcome; Christ conquered so, and His servants after Him.

And now apply all these principles which I have so imperfectly
stated to your own personal lives. Men and the kingdom of darkness
over-reached and outwitted themselves when they slew Jesus Christ.
And so all antagonism to Him, whether it be theoretical or whether
it be practical, and alienation of heart only, is suicidal folly.
When it most succeeds it is nearest the breaking point of utter
failure, like a man sawing off the branch on which he sits. Every
man that sets himself against God in Christ, either to argue Him
down and talk Him out of existence, or to 'break His bands asunder
and cast away His cords,' has begun a Sisyphean task which will
never come to any good. All sin is essentially irrational and
opposed to the whole motion of the universe, and must necessarily be
annihilated and come to nothing. The coarse title of one of our old
English plays carries a great truth in it; 'The Devil is an Ass,'
and for the man that obeys the kingdom of darkness the right epitaph
is 'Thou fool! Oh, brothers! do not fling yourselves into that
hopeless struggle. Put yourselves on the right side in this age-long
conflict, of which the issue was determined before evil was, and was
accomplished when Christ died. For be sure of this, that as
certainly as 'The darkness is past, and the true Light now shineth,'
so certainly all they that fight against the light--and all men
fight against it who shut their eyes to it--are engaged in a
conflict of which only one issue is possible, and that is defeat,
bitter, complete, absolute. Rather let us all, though we be evil,
and though there be a bad self in us that knows itself to be evil
and hates the Light--let us all go to it. It may pain the eye, but
it is the only cure for the ophthalmia. Let us go to it, spread
ourselves out before it, and say, 'Search me, O Christ, and try me,
and see if there be any wicked way in me. Lead me, a blind man, into
the light.' And His answer will come: 'I am the Light of the world;
he that followeth Me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the
Light of life.'




IN THE HIGH PRIEST'S PALACE


    'Then took they Him, and led Him, and brought Him into
    the high priest's house. And Peter followed afar off.
    55. And when they had kindled a fire in the midst of
    the hall, and were set down together, Peter sat down
    among them. 56. But a certain maid beheld him as he
    sat by the fire, and earnestly looked upon him, and
    said, This man was also with Him. 57. And he denied
    Him, saying, Woman, I know Him not. 58. And, after a
    little while, another saw him, and said, Thou art also
    of them. And Peter said, Man, I am not. 59. And about
    the space of one hour after another confidently
    affirmed, saying, Of a truth this fellow also was with
    Him; for he is a Galilean. 60. And Peter said, Man, I
    know not what thou sayest. And immediately, while he
    yet spake, the cock crew. 61. And the Lord turned, and
    looked upon Peter: and Peter remembered the word of
    the Lord, how He had said unto him, Before the cock
    crow, thou shalt deny Me thrice. 62. And Peter went
    out, and wept bitterly. 63. And the men that held
    Jesus mocked Him and smote Him. 64. And when they had
    blindfolded Him, they struck Him on the face, and
    asked Him, saying, Prophesy, who is it that smote
    Thee? 65. And many other things blasphemously spake
    they against Him. 66. And as soon as it was day, the
    elders of the people, and the chief priests, and the
    scribes, came together, and led Him into their
    council, 67. Saying, Art Thou the Christ? tell us. And
    He said unto them, If I tell you, ye will not believe:
    68. And If I also ask you, ye will not answer Me, nor
    let Me go. 69. Hereafter shall the Son of man sit on
    the right hand of the power of God. 70. Then said they
    all, Art Thou then the Son of God? And He said unto
    them, Ye say that I am. 71. And they said, What need
    we any further witness? for we ourselves have heard of
    His own mouth.'--LUKE xxii. 54-71.

The present passage deals with three incidents, each of which may be
regarded either as an element in our Lord's sufferings or as a
revelation of man's sin. He is denied, mocked, and formally rejected
and condemned. A trusted friend proves faithless, the underlings of
the rulers brutally ridicule His prophetic claims, and their masters
vote Him a blasphemer for assenting His divinity and Messiahship.

I. We have the failure of loyalty and love in Peter's denials. I may
observe that Luke puts all Peter's denials before the hearing by the
council, from which it is clear that the latter was later than the
hearing recorded by Matthew and John. The first denial probably took
place in the great hall of the high priest's official residence, at
the upper end of which the prisoner was being examined, while the
hangers--on huddled round the fire, idly waiting the event.

The morning air bit sharply, and Peter, exhausted, sleepy, sad, and
shivering, was glad to creep near the blaze. Its glinting on his
face betrayed him to a woman's sharp eye, and her gossiping tongue
could not help blurting out her discovery. Curiosity, not malice,
moved her; and there is no reason to suppose that any harm would
have come to Peter, if he had said, as he should have done, 'Yes, I
am His disciple.' The day for persecuting the servants was not yet
come, but for the present it was Jesus only who was aimed at.

No doubt, cowardice had a share in the denials, but there was more
than that in them. Peter was worn out with fatigue, excitement, and
sorrow. His susceptible nature would be strongly affected by the
trying scenes of the last day, and all the springs of life would be
low. He was always easily influenced by surroundings, and just as,
at a later date, he was 'carried away' by the presence at Antioch of
the Judaisers, and turned his back on the liberal principles which
he had professed, so now he could not resist the current of opinion,
and dreaded being unlike even the pack of menials among whom he sat.
He was ashamed of his Master and hid his colours, not so much for
fear of bodily harm as of ridicule. Was there not a deeper depth
still in his denials, even the beginnings of doubt whether, after
all, Jesus was what he had thought Him? Christ prayed that Peter's
'faith' should not 'fail' or be totally eclipsed, and that may
indicate that the assault was made on his 'faith' and that it
wavered, though it recovered steadfastness.

If he had been as sure of Christ's work and nature as when he made
his great confession, he could not have denied Him. But the sight of
Jesus bound, unresisting, and evidently at the mercy of the rulers,
might well make a firmer faith stagger. We have not to steel
ourselves to bear bodily harm if we confess Christ; but many of us
have to run counter to a strong current flowing around us, and to be
alone in the midst of unsympathising companions ready to laugh and
gibe, and some of us are tempted to waver in our convictions of
Christ's divinity and redeeming power, because He still seems to
stand at the bar of the wise men and leaders of opinion, and to be
treated by them as a pretender. It is a wretched thing to be
persecuted out of one's Christianity in the old-fashioned fire and
sword style; but it is worse to be laughed out of it or to lose it,
because we breathe an atmosphere of unbelief. Let the doctors at the
top of the hall and the lackeys round the fire who take their
opinions from them say what they like, but let them not make us
ashamed of Jesus.

Peter slipped away to the gateway, and there, apparently, was again
attacked, first by the porteress and then by others, which
occasioned the second denial, while the third took place in the same
place, about an hour afterwards. One sin makes many. The devil's
hounds hunt in packs. Consistency requires the denier to stick to
his lie. Once the tiniest wing tip is in the spider's web, before
long the whole body will be wrapped round by its filthy, sticky
threads.

If Peter had been less confident, he would have been more safe. If
he had said less about going to prison and death, he would have had
more reserve fidelity for the time of trial. What business had he
thrusting himself into the palace? Over-reliance on self leads
us to put ourselves in the way of temptations which it were wiser to
avoid. Had he forgotten Christ's warnings?  Apparently so. Christ
predicts the fall that it may not happen, and if we listen to Him,
we shall not fall.

The moment of recovery seems to have been while our Lord was passing
from the earlier to the later examination before the rulers. In the
very floodtide of Peter's oaths, the shrill cock-crow is heard, and
at the sound the half-finished denial sticks in his throat. At the
same moment he sees Jesus led past him, and that look, so full of
love, reproof, and pardon, brought him back to loyalty, and saved
him from despair. The assurance of Christ's knowledge of our sins
against Him melts the heart, when the assurance of His forgiveness
and tender love comes with it. Then tears, which are wholly humble
but not wholly grief, flow. They do not wash away the sin, but they
come from the assurance that Christ's love, like a flood, has swept
it away. They save from remorse, which has no healing in it.

II. We have the rude taunts of the servants. The mockery here comes
from Jews, and is directed against Christ's prophetic character,
while the later jeers of the Roman soldiers make a jest of His
kingship. Each set lays hold of what seems to it most ludicrous in
His pretensions, and these servants ape their masters on the
judgment seat, in laughing to scorn this Galilean peasant who
claimed to be the Teacher of them all. Rude natures have to take
rude ways of expression, and the vulgar mockery meant precisely the
same as more polite and covert scorn means from more polished
people; namely, rooted disbelief in Him. These mockers were
contented to take their opinions on trust from priests and rabbis.
How often, since then, have Christ's servants been objects of
popular odium at the suggestion of the same classes, and how often
have the ignorant people been misled by their trust in their
teachers to hate and persecute their true Master!

Jesus is silent under all the mockery, but then, as now, He knows
who strikes Him. His eyes are open behind the bandage, and see the
lifted hands and mocking lips. He will speak one day, and His speech
will be detection and condemnation. Then He was silent, as patiently
enduring shame and spitting for our sakes. Now He is silent, as
long-suffering and wooing us to repentance; but He keeps count and
record of men's revilings, and the day comes when He whose eyes are
as a flame of fire will say to every foe, 'I know thy works.'

III. We have the formal rejection and condemnation by the council.
The hearing recorded in verses 66 to  71 took place 'as soon as it
was day,' and was apparently a more formal official ratification of
the proceedings of the earlier examination described by Matthew and
John. The ruler's question was put simply in order to obtain
material for the condemnation already resolved on. Our Lord's answer
falls into two parts, in the first of which He in effect declines to
recognise the _bona fides_ of His judges and the competency of
the tribunal, and in the second goes beyond their question, and
claims participation in divine glory and power. 'If I tell you, ye
will not believe'; therefore He will not tell them.

Jesus will not unfold His claims to those who only seek to hear them
in order to reject, not to examine, them. Silence is His answer to
ingrained prejudice masquerading as honest inquiry. It is ever so.
There is small chance of truth at the goal if there be foregone
conclusions or biased questions at the starting-point. 'If I ask
you, ye will not answer.' They had taken refuge in judicious but
self-condemning silence when He had asked them the origin of John's
mission and the meaning of the One Hundred and Tenth Psalm, and
thereby showed that they were not seeking light. Jesus will gladly
speak with any who will be frank with Him, and let Him search their
hearts; but He will not unfold His mission to such as refuse to
answer His questions. But while thus He declines to submit Himself
to that tribunal, and in effect accuses them of obstinate blindness
and a fixed conclusion to reject the claims which they were
pretending to examine, He will not leave them without once more
asserting an even higher dignity than that of Messiah. As a prisoner
at their bar, He has nothing to say to them; but as their King and
future Judge, He has something. They desire to find materials for
sentence of death, and though He will not give these in the
character of a criminal before His judges, He also desires that the
sentence should pass, and He will declare His divine prerogatives
and fall possession of divine power in the hearing of the highest
court of the nation.

It was fitting that the representatives of Israel, however
prejudiced, should hear at that supreme moment the full assertion of
full deity. It was fitting that Israel should condemn itself, by
treating that claim as blasphemy. It was fitting that Jesus should
bring about His death by His twofold claim--that made to the
Sanhedrim, of being the Son of God, and that before Pilate, of being
the King of the Jews.

The whole scene teaches us the voluntary character of Christ's
Death, which is the direct result of this tremendous assertion. It
carries our thoughts forward to the time when the criminal of that
morning shall be the Judge, and the judges and we shall stand at His
bar. It raises the solemn question, Did Jesus claim truly when He
claimed divine power? If truly, do we worship Him? If falsely, what
was He? It mirrors the principles on which He deals with men
universally, answering 'him that cometh, according to the multitude
of his idols,' and meeting hypocritical pretences of seeking the
truth about Him with silence, but ever ready to open His heart and
the witness to His claims to the honest and docile spirits who are
ready to accept His words, and glad to open their inmost secrets to
Him.




CHRIST'S LOOK


    'And the Lord turned and looked upon Peter.'
    --Luke xxii. 61.

All four Evangelists tell the story of Peter's threefold denial and
swift repentance, but we owe the knowledge of this look of Christ's
to Luke only. The other Evangelists connect the sudden change in the
denier with his hearing the cock crow only, but according to Luke
there were two causes co-operating to bring about that sudden
repentance, for, he says, 'Immediately, while he yet spake, the cock
crew. And the Lord turned and looked upon Peter.' And we cannot
doubt that it was the Lord's look enforcing the fulfilment of His
prediction of the cock-crow that broke down the denier.

Now, it is very difficult, if not impossible, to weave a consecutive
whole out of the four versions of the story of Peter's triple
denial. But this at least is clear from them all, that Jesus was
away at the upper, probably the raised, end of the great hall, and
that if any of the three instances of denial took place within that
building, it was at such a distance that neither could the words be
heard, nor could a look from one end of it to the other have been
caught. I think that if we try to localise, and picture the whole
scene ourselves, we are obliged to suppose that that look, which
smote Peter into swift collapse of penitence, came as the Lord Jesus
was being led bound down the hall out through the porch, past the
fire, and into the gloomy archway, on His road to further suffering.
As He was thus brought for a moment close to him, 'the Lord turned
and looked upon Peter,' and then He passed from his sight for ever,
as he would fear.

I wish, then, to deal--although it must be very imperfectly and
inadequately--with that look that changed this man. And I desire to
consider two things about it: what it said, and what it did.

I. What it said.--It spoke of Christ's knowledge, of Christ's pain,
of Christ's love.

Of Christ's knowledge--I have already suggested that we cannot
suppose that the Prisoner at one end of the hall, intensely occupied
with the questionings and argumentation of the priests, and with the
false witnesses, could have heard the denial, given in tones subdued
by the place, at the other end. Still less could He have heard the
denials in louder tones, and accompanied with execrations, which
seemed to have been repeated in the porch without. But as He passed
the Apostle that look said: 'I heard them all--denials and oaths and
passion; I heard them all.' No wonder that after the Resurrection,
Peter, with that remembrance in his mind, fell at the Master's feet
and said, 'Lord! Thou knowest all things. Thou didst know what Thou
didst not hear, my muttered recreancy and treason, and my blurted
out oaths of denial. Thou knowest all things.' No wonder that when
he stood up amongst the Apostles after the Resurrection and the
Ascension, and was the mouthpiece of their prayers, remembering this
scene as well as other incidents, he began his prayer with 'Thou,
Lord, which knowest the hearts of all men.' But let us remember that
this--call it, if you like, supernatural--knowledge which Jesus
Christ had of the denial, is only one of a great body of facts in
His life, if we accept these Gospels, which show that, as one of the
Evangelists says, at almost the beginning of his history, 'He needed
not that any man should testify of man, for He knew what was in
man.' It is precisely on the same line, as His first words to Peter,
whom He greeted as he came to Him with 'Thou art Simon; thou shalt
be Cephas.' It is entirely on the same line as the words with which
He greeted another of this little group, 'When thou wast under the
fig-tree I saw thee.' It is on the same line as the words with which
He penetrated to the unspoken thoughts of His churlish entertainer
when He said, 'Simon! I have somewhat to say unto thee.' It
is on the lines on which we have to think of that Lord now as
knowing us all. He looks still from the judgment-seat, where He does
not stand as a criminal, but sits as the supreme and omniscient
Arbiter of our fates, and Judge of our actions. And He beholds us,
each of us, moment by moment, as we go about our work, and often, by
our cowardice, by our faithlessness, by our inconsistencies, 'deny
the Lord that bought' us. It is an awful thought, and therefore do
men put it away from them: 'Thou God seest me.' But it is stripped
of all its awfulness, while it retains all its purifying and
quickening power, when we think, as our old hymn has it:

  'Though now ascended up on high,
  He bends on earth a Brother's eye.'

And we have not only to feel that the eye that looks upon us is
cognisant of our denials, but that it is an eye that pities our
infirmities, and knowing us altogether, loves us better than we
know. Oh! if we believed in Christ's look, and that it was the look
of infinite love, life would be less solitary, less sad, and we
should feel that wherever His glance fell there His help was sure,
and there were illumination and blessedness. The look spoke of
Christ's knowledge.

Again, it spoke of Christ's pain. Peter had not thought that he was
hurting his Master by his denials; he only thought of saving
himself. And, perhaps, if it had come into his loving and impulsive
nature, which yielded to the temptation the more readily because of
the same impulsiveness which also led it to yield swiftly to good
