
And so I might go on enumerating many remarkable gaps in this Gospel.
Nearly half of it is taken up with the incidents of one week at the end
of His life, and the incidents of and after the Resurrection. Of the
remainder-by far the larger portion consists of several conversations
which are hung upon miracles that seem to be related principally for
the sake of these. The whole of the phenomena show us at once the
fragmentary character of this Gospel as stamped upon the very surface.

And when we turn to the other three, the same thing is true, though
less strikingly so. Why was it that in the Church, after the completion
of the Scriptural canon, there sprang up a whole host of Apocryphal
Gospels, full of childish stories of events which people felt had been
passed over with strange silence, in the teachings of the four
Evangelists: stories of His childhood, for instance, and stories about
what happened between His death and His resurrection? A great many
miracles were added to those that have been told us in Scripture. The
condensed hints of the canonical Gospels received a great expansion,
which indicated how much their silence about certain points had been
felt. What a tiny pamphlet they make! Is it not strange that the
greatest event in the world's history should be told in such brief
outline, and that here, too, the mustard seed, 'less than the least of
all seeds,' should have become such a great tree? Put the four Gospels
down by the side of the two thick octavo volumes, which it is the
regulation thing to write nowadays, as the biography of any man that
has a name at all, and you will feel their incompleteness as
biographies. They are but a pen-and-ink drawing of the Sun! And yet,
although they be so tiny that you might sit down and read them all in
an evening over the fire, is it not strange that they have stamped on
the mind of the world an image so deep and so sharp, of such a
character as the world never saw elsewhere? They are fragments, but
they have left a symmetrical and an unique impression on the
consciousness of the whole world.

And then, if you turn to the whole Book, the same thing is true, though
in a modified sense there. I have no time to dwell upon that fruitful
field, but the silence of Scripture is quite as eloquent as its speech.
Think, for instance, of how many things in the Bible are taken for
granted which one would not expect to be taken for granted in a book of
religious instruction. It takes for granted the being of a God. It
takes for granted our relations to Him. It takes for granted our moral
nature. In its later portions, at all events, it takes for granted the
future life. Look at how the Bible, as a whole, passes by, without one
word of explanation or alleviation, a great many of the difficulties
which gather round some of its teaching. For instance, we find no
attempt to explain the divine nature of our Lord; or the existence of
the three Persons in the Godhead. It has not a word to say in
explanation of the mystery of prayer; or of the difficulty of
reconciling the Omnipotent will of God on the one hand, with our own
free will on the other. It has not a word to explain, though many a
word to proclaim and enforce, the fact of Christ's death as the
atonement for the sins of the whole world. Observe, too, how scanty the
information on points on which the heart craves for more light. How
closely, for instance, the veil is kept over the future life! How many
questions which are not prompted by mere curiosity, our sorrow and our
love ask in vain!

Nor is the incompleteness of Scripture as a historical book less
marked. Nations and men appear on its pages abruptly, rending the
curtain of oblivion, and striding to the front of the stage for a
moment, and then they disappear, swallowed up of night. It has no care
to tell the stories of any of its heroes, except for so long as they
were the organs of that divine breath, which, breathed through the
weakest reed, makes music. The self-revelation of God, not the acts and
fortunes of even His noblest servants, is the theme of the Book. It is
full of gaps about matters that any sciolist or philosopher or
theologian would have filled up for it. There it stands, a Book unique
in the world's history, unique in what it says, and no less unique in
what it does not say.

'Many other things truly did' that divine Spirit in His march through
the ages, 'which are not written in this book; but these are written
that ye might believe.'

II. And so that brings me next to say a word or two about the more
immediate purpose which explains all these gaps and incompletenesses.

John's Gospel, and the other three Gospels, and the whole Bible, New
Testament and Old, have this for their purpose, to produce in men's
hearts the faith in Jesus as 'the Christ' and as 'the Son of God.'

I need not speak at length about this one Gospel with any special
regard to that thought. I have already said that the Evangelist avows
that his work is a selection, that he declares that the purpose that
determined his selection was doctrinal, and that he picked out facts
which would tend to represent Jesus Christ to us in the twofold
capacity,--as the Christ, the Fulfiller of all the expectations and
promises of the Old Covenant, and as the Son of God. The one of these
titles is a name of office, the other a name of nature; the one
declares that He had come to be, and to do, all to which types and
prophecies and promises had dimly pointed, and the other declares that
He was 'the Eternal Word,' which 'in the beginning was with God and was
God,' and was manifest here upon earth to us.

This was his purpose, and this representation of Jesus Christ is that
which shapes all the facts and all the phenomena of this Gospel, from
the very first words of it to its close.

And so, although it is wide from my present subject, I may just make
one parenthetical remark, to the effect that it is ridiculous in the
face of this statement for 'critics' to say, as some of them do: 'The
author of the fourth Gospel has not told us this, that, and the other
incident in Christ's life, therefore, he did not know it.' Then some of
them will draw the conclusion that John's Gospel is not to be trusted
in the given case, because he does not give us a certain incident, and
others might draw the conclusion that the other three Evangelists are
not to be trusted because they do give it us. And the whole fabric is
built up upon a blunder, and would have been avoided if people had
listened when John said to them: 'I knew a great many things about
Jesus Christ, but I did not put them down here because I was not
writing a biography, but preaching a gospel; and what I wanted to
proclaim was that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God.'

But now we may extend that a great deal further. It is just as true
about the whole New Testament. The four Gospels are written to tell us
these two facts about Christ. They are none of them merely biographies;
as such they are singularly deficient, as we have seen. But they are
biographies _plus_ a doctrine; and the biography is told mainly for the
sake of carrying this twofold truth into men's understandings and
hearts, that Jesus is, first of all, the Christ, and second, the Son of
God.

And then comes the rest of the New Testament, which is nothing more
than the working out of the theoretical and practical consequence of
these great truths. All the Epistles, the Book of Revelation, and the
history of the Church, as embodied in the Acts of the Apostles,--all
these are but the consequences of that fundamental truth; and the whole
of Scripture in its later portions is but the drawing of the inferences
and the presenting of the duties that flow from the facts that 'Jesus
is the Christ, the Son of God.'

And what about the Old Testament? Why, this about it: that whatever may
be the conclusion as to the date and authorship of any of the books in
it,--and I am not careful to contend about these at present;--and
whatever a man may believe about the verbal prophecies which most of us
recognise there,--there is stamped unmistakably upon the whole system,
of which the Old Testament is the record, an onward-looking attitude.
It is all anticipatory of 'good things to come,' and of a Person who
will bring them. Sacrifice, sacred offices, such as priesthood and
kingship, and the whole history of Israel, have their faces turned to
the future. 'They that went before, and they that followed after, cried
"Hosanna! Blessed be He that cometh in the name of the Lord!"' This
Christ towers up above the history of the world and the process of
revelation, like Mount Everest among the Himalayas. To that great peak
all the country on the one side runs upwards, and from it all the
valleys on the other descend; and the springs are born there which
carry verdure and life over the world.

Christ, the Son of God, is the centre of Scripture; and the
Book--whatever be the historical facts about its origin, its
authorship, and the date of the several portions of which it is
composed--the Book is a unity, because there is driven right through
it, like a core of gold, either in the way of prophecy and
onward-looking anticipation, or in the way of history and grateful
retrospect, the reference to the one 'Name that is above every name,'
the name of the Christ, the Son of God.

And all its incompleteness, its fragmentariness, its carelessness about
persons, are intended, as are the slight parts in a skilful artist's
handiwork, to emphasise the beauty and the sovereignty of that one
central Figure on which all lights are concentrated, and on which the
painter has lavished all the resources of his art. So God--for _God_ is
the Author of the Bible--on this great canvas has painted much in
sketchy outline, and left much unfilled in, that every eye may be fixed
on the central Figure, the Christ of God, on whose head comes down the
Dove, and round whom echoes the divine declaration: 'This is My Beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased.'

But it is not merely in order to represent Jesus as the Christ of God
that these things are written, but it is that that representation may
become the object of our faith. If the intention of Scripture had been
simply to establish the fact that Jesus was the Christ and the Son of
God, it might have been done in a very different fashion. A theological
treatise would have been enough to do that. But if the object be that
men should not only accept with their understandings the truth
concerning Christ's office and nature, but that their hearts should go
out to Him, and that they should rest their sinful souls upon Him _as_
the Son of God and the Christ, then there is no other way to accomplish
that, but by the history of His life and the manifestation of His
heart. If the object were simply to make us know about Christ, we do
not need a Book like this; but if the object is to lead us to put our
faith in Him, then we must have what we have here, the infinitely
touching and tender Figure of Jesus Christ Himself, set before us in
all its sweetness and beauty as He lived and moved and died for us.

And so, dear friends, let me put one last word here about this part of
my subject. If this be the purpose of Scripture, then let us learn on
the one hand the wretched insufficiency of a mere orthodox creed, and
let us learn on the other hand the equal insufficiency of a mere
creedless emotion.

If the purpose of Scripture, in these Gospels, and all its parts, is
that we should believe 'that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God,' that
purpose is not accomplished when we simply yield our understanding to
that truth and accept it as a great many people do. That was much more
the fault of the last generation than of this, though many of us may
still make the mistake of supposing that we are Christians because we
idly assent to--or, at least, do not deny, and so fancy that we
accept--Christian truth. But, as Luther says in one of his rough
figures, 'Human nature is like a drunken peasant; if you put him up on
the horse on the one side, he is sure to tumble down on the other.' And
so the reaction from the heartless, unpractical orthodoxy of half a
century ago has come with a vengeance to-day, when everybody is saying,
'Oh! give me a Christianity without dogma!' Well, I say that too, about
a great many of the metaphysical subtleties which have been called
Doctrinal Christianity. But this doctrine of the nature and office of
Jesus Christ cannot be given up, and the Christianity which Christ and
His Apostles taught be retained. Do you believe that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God? Do you trust your soul to Him in these
characters? If you do, I think we can shake hands. If you do not,
Scripture has failed to do its work on you, and you have not reached
the point which all God's lavish revelation has been expended on the
world that you and all men might attain.

III. Now, lastly, notice the ultimate purpose of the whole.

Scripture is not given to us merely to make us know something about God
in Christ, nor only in order that we may have faith in the Christ thus
revealed to us, but for a further end--great, glorious, but, blessed be
His Name! not distant--namely, that we may 'have life in His name.'
'Life' is deep, mystical, inexplicable by any other words than itself.
It includes pardon, holiness, well-being, immortality, Heaven; but it
is more than they all.

This life comes into our dead hearts and quickens them by union with
God. That which is joined to God lives. Each being according to its
nature, is, on condition of the divine power acting upon it. This bit
of wood upon which I put my hand, and the hand which I put upon it,
would equally crumble into nothingness if they were separated from God.

You can separate your wills and your spiritual nature from Him, and
thus separated you are 'dead in trespasses and in sins.' And, O
brother! the message comes to you: there is life in that great Christ,
'in His name'; that is to say, in that revealed character of His by
which He is made known to us as the Christ and the Son of God.

Union with Him in His Sonship will bring life into dead hearts. He is
the true 'Prometheus' who has come from Heaven with 'fire,' the fire of
the divine Life in the 'reed' of His humanity, and He imparts it to us
all if we will. He lays Himself upon us, as the prophet laid himself on
the little child in the upper chamber; and lip to lip, and beating
heart to dead heart, He touches our death, and it is quickened into
life.

The condition on which that great Name will bring to us life is simply
our faith. Do you believe in Him, and trust yourself to Him, as He who
came to fulfil all that prophet, priest, and king, sacrifice, altar,
and Temple of old times prophesied and looked for? Do you trust in Him
as the Son of God who comes down to earth that we in Him might find the
immortal life which He is ready to give? If you do, then, dear
brethren! the end that God has in view in all His revelation, that
Christ had in view in His bitter Passion, has been accomplished for
you. If you do not it has not. You may admire Him, you may think
loftily of Him, you may be ready to call Him by many great and
appreciative names, but Oh! unless you have learned to see in Him the
divine Saviour of your souls, you have not seen what God means you to
see.

But if you have, then all other questions about this Book, important as
they are in their places, may settle themselves as they will; you have
got the kernel, the thing that it was meant to bring you. Many an
erudite scholar, who has studied the Bible all his life, has missed the
purpose for which it was given; and many a poor old woman in her garret
has found it. It is not meant to wrangle over, it is not meant to be
read as an interesting product of the religious consciousness, it is
not to be admired as all that remains of the literature of a nation
that had a genius for religion; but it is to be taken as being God's
great Word to the world, the record of the revelation that He has given
us in His Son. The Eternal Word is the theme of all the written word.
Have you made the jewel which is brought us in that casket your own? Is
Jesus to you the Son of the living God, believing on whom you share His
life, and become 'sons of God' by Him? Can you take on to your thankful
lips that triumphant and rapturous confession of the doubting
Thomas,--the flag flying on the completed roof-tree of this Gospel--'My
Lord and my God'? If you can, you will receive the blessing which
Christ then promised to all of us standing beyond the limits of that
little group, 'who have not seen and yet have believed'--even that
eternal life which flows into our dead spirits from the Christ, the Son
of God, who is the Light of the world, and the Life of men.



AN ELOQUENT CATALOGUE

'There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas called Didymus, and
Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, and the sons of Zebedee, and two other of
His disciples.'--JOHN xxi. 2.

This chapter, containing the infinitely significant and pathetic
account of our Lord's appearance to these disciples by the Sea of
Tiberias, is evidently an appendix to the Gospel of John. The design of
that Gospel is complete with the previous chapter, and there is a
formal close, as of the whole book, at the end thereof. But whilst
obviously an appendix, this chapter is as obviously the work of the
same hand as wrote the Gospel. There are many minute points of identity
between the style of it and of the rest of the work, so that there can
be no difficulty or doubt as to whence it came. This enumeration of
these seven disciples, regarded as being the work of John himself,
seems to me to be significant, and to contain a good many lessons. And
I desire to turn to these now.

I. First of all, the fact that they were together is significant.

How did they come to hold together? How had they not yielded to the
temptation to seek safety by flight, which would have been the natural
course after the death of their Leader on a charge of treason against
the Roman power? The process of disintegration had begun, and we see it
going on in the conduct of the disciples before the Resurrection. The
'Shepherd was smitten,' and, as a matter of course, 'the sheep' began
to 'scatter.' And yet here we find them back in Galilee, in their old
haunts, and not trying to escape by separation, which would have been
the first step suggested to ordinary men in an ordinary state of
things. But where everybody knew them, and they knew everybody, and
everybody knew them to be disciples of Jesus Christ, thither they go,
and hold together as if they had still a living centre and a uniting
bond. How did that come about? The fact that after Christ's death there
was a group of men united together simply and solely as disciples, and
exhibiting their unity as disciples conspicuously, in the face of the
men that knew them best, this forms a strange phenomenon that needs an
explanation. And there is only one explanation of it, that Jesus Christ
had risen from the dead. That drew them together once more. You cannot
build a Church on a dead Christ; and of all the proofs of the
Resurrection, I take it that there is none that it is harder for an
unbeliever to account for, in harmony with his hypothesis, than the
simple fact that Christ's disciples held together after He was dead,
and presented a united front to the world.

So, then, the fact of the group is itself significant, and we may claim
it as being a morsel of evidence for the historical veracity of the
resurrection of Jesus Christ.

II. Then the composition of this group is significant.

Taken in comparison with the original nucleus of the Church, the
calling of which we find recorded in the first chapter of this Gospel,
it is to be noticed that of the five men who made the Primitive Church,
there are three who reappear here by name--viz. Simon Peter, John and
Nathanael, and Nathanael never appears anywhere else except in these
two places. Then, note that there are two unnamed men here, 'two other
of His disciples'; who, I think, in all probability are the two of the
original five that we do not find named here--viz. 'Philip and Andrew,
Simon Peter's brother'--both of them connected with Bethsaida, the
place where probably this appearance of the risen Lord took place.

So, then, I think, the fair inference from the list before us is that
we have here the original nucleus again, the first five, with a couple
more, and the couple more are 'Thomas, who is called Didymus'--and we
shall see the reason for _his_ presence in a moment--and the brother of
John, one of the first pair.

Thus, then, to the original little group that had gathered round Him at
the first, and to whom He had been so often manifested in this very
scene where they were standing now, He is revealed again. There, along
the beach, is the place where James and John and Simon and Andrew were
called from their nets three short years ago. Across yonder, on the
other side of the lake, is the bit of green grass where the thousands
were fed. Behind it is the steep slope down which the devil-possessed
herd rushed. There, over the shoulder of the hill, is the road that
leads up to Cana of Galilee, which they had trod together on that
never-to-be-forgotten first morning, and from which little village one
of the group came. They who had companied with Him all the time of His
too short fellowship, and had seen all His manifestations, were
fittingly chosen to be the recipients of this last appearance, which
was to be full of instruction as to the work of the Church, its
difficulties, its discouragements, its rewards, its final success, and
His benediction of it until the very end of time. It was not for
nothing that they who were gathered together were that first nucleus of
the Church, who received again from their Master the charge to be
'fishers of men.'

And then, if we look at the list, having regard to the history of those
that make it up, it seems to me that that also brings us some valuable
considerations. Foremost stand, as receiving this great manifestation
of Jesus Christ, the two greatest sinners of the whole band, 'Simon
Peter, and Thomas, which is called Didymus,' the denier and the
doubter. Singularly contrasted these two men were in much of their
disposition; and yet alike in the fact that the Crucifixion had been
too much for their faith. The one of them was impetuous, the other of
them slow. The one was always ready to say more than he meant; the
other always ready to do more than he said. The one was naturally
despondent, disposed to look ahead and to see the gloomiest side of
everything--'Let us also go that we may die with Him'--the other never
looking an inch beyond his nose, and always yielding himself up to the
impulse of the moment. And yet both of them were united in this, that
the one, from a sudden wave of cowardice which swept him away from his
deepest convictions and made him for an hour untrue to his warmest
love, and the other, from giving way to his constitutional tendency to
despondency, and to taking the blackest possible view of
everything--they had both of them failed in their faith, the one
turning out a denier and the other turning out a doubter. And yet here
they are, foremost upon the list of those who saw the Risen Christ.

Well, there are two lessons there, and the one is this--let us
Christian people learn with what open hearts and hands we should
welcome a penitent when he comes back. The other is,--let us learn who
they are to whom Jesus Christ deigns to manifest Himself--not
immaculate monsters, but men that, having fallen, have learned humility
and caution, and by penitence have risen to a securer standing, and
have turned even their transgressions into steps in the ladder that
lifts them to Christ. It was something that the first to whom the risen
Saviour appeared when He came victorious and calm from the grave, was
the woman 'out of whom He had cast seven devils,' and the blessed truth
which that teaches is the same as that which is to be drawn from this
list of those whom He regarded, and whom we regard, as then
constituting the true nucleus of His Church--a list which is headed by
the blackest denier and the most obstinate and captious sceptic in the
whole company. 'There were together Simon Peter and Thomas, which is
called Didymus,' and the little group was glad to have them, and
