never seen the Lord. It would have been very natural for this good old
man to have said, 'I do not like these new-fangled ways. There was
nothing of this sort in my younger days. Is it not likely that we, who
were at the beginning of the Gospel, should understand the Gospel and
the Church's work without this new man coming to set us right? I am too
old to go in with these changes.' All the more honourable is it that he
should have been ready with an open house to shelter the great champion
of the Gentile Churches; and, as we may reasonably believe, with an
open heart to welcome his teaching. Depend on it, it was not every 'old
disciple' that would have done as much.

Now does not this flexibility of mind and openness of nature to welcome
new ways of work, when united with the persistent constancy in his old
creed, make an admirable combination? It is one rare enough at any age,
but especially in elderly men. We are always disposed to rend apart
what ought never to be separated, the inflexible adherence to a fixed
centre of belief, and the freest ranging around the whole changing
circumference. The man of strong convictions is apt to grip every
trifle of practice and every unimportant bit of his creed with the same
tenacity with which he holds its vital heart, and to take obstinacy for
firmness, and dogged self-will for faithfulness to truth. The man who
welcomes new light, and reaches forward to greet new ways, is apt to
delight in having much fluid that ought to be fixed, and to value
himself on a 'liberality' which simply means that he has no central
truth and no rooted convictions. And as men grow older they stiffen
more and more, and have to leave the new work for new hands, and the
new thoughts for new brains. That is all in the order of nature, but so
much the finer is it when we do see old Christian men who join to their
firm grip of the old Gospel the power of welcoming, and at least
bidding God-speed to, new thoughts and new workers and new ways of work.

The union of these two characteristics should be consciously aimed at
by us all. Hold unchanging, with a grasp that nothing can relax, by
Christ our life and our all; but with that tenacity of mind, try to
cultivate flexibility too. Love the old, but be ready to welcome the
new. Do not invest your own or other people's habits of thought or
forms of work with the same sanctity which belongs to the central
truths of our salvation; do not let the willingness to entertain new
light lead you to tolerate any changes there. It is hard to blend the
two virtues together, but they are meant to be complements, not
opposites, to each other. The fluttering leaves and bending branches
need a firm stem and deep roots. The firm stem looks noblest in its
unmoved strength when it is contrasted with a cloud of light foliage
dancing in the wind. Try to imitate the persistency and the open mind
of that 'old disciple' who was so ready to welcome and entertain the
Apostle of the Gentile Churches.

III. But there is still another lesson which, I think, this portrait
may suggest, and that is, the beauty that may dwell in an obscure life.

There is nothing to be said about this old man but that he was a
disciple. He had done no great thing for his Lord. No teacher or
preacher was he. No eloquence or genius was in him. No great heroic
deed or piece of saintly endurance is to be recorded of him, but only
this, that he had loved and followed Christ all his days. And is not
that record enough? It is his blessed fate to live for ever in the
world's memory, with only that one word attached to his name--a
disciple.

The world may remember very little about us a year after we are gone.
No thought, no deed may be connected with our names but in some narrow
circle of loving hearts. There may be no place for us in any record
written with a man's pen. But what does that matter, if our names, dear
friends, are written in the Lamb's Book of Life, with this for sole
epitaph, 'a disciple'? That single phrase is the noblest summary of a
life. A thinker? a hero? a great man? a millionaire? No, a 'disciple.'
That says all. May it be your epitaph and mine!

What Mnason could do he did. It was not his vocation to go into the
'regions beyond,' like Paul; to guide the Church, like James; to put
his remembrances of his Master in a book, like Matthew; to die for
Jesus, like Stephen. But he could open his house for Paul and his
company, and so take his share in their work. 'He that receiveth a
prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet's reward.' He
that with understanding and sympathy welcomes and sustains the prophet,
shows thereby that he stands on the same spiritual level, and has the
makings of a prophet in him, though he want the intellectual force and
may never open his lips to speak the burden of the Lord. Therefore he
shall be one in reward as he is in spirit. The old law in Israel is the
law for the warfare of Christ's soldiers. 'As his part is that goeth
down to the battle, so shall his part be that abideth by the stuff:
they shall part alike.' The men in the rear who guard the camp and keep
the communications open, may deserve honours, and crosses, and
prize-money as much as their comrades who led the charge that cut
through the enemy's line and scattered their ranks. It does not matter,
so far as the real spiritual worth of the act is concerned, what we do,
but only why we do it. All deeds are the same which are done from the
same motive and with the same devotion; and He who judges, not by our
outward actions but by the springs from which they come, will at last
bracket together as equals many who were widely separated here in the
form of their service and the apparent magnitude of their work.

'She hath done what she could.' Her power determined the measure and
the manner of her work. One precious thing she had, and only one, and
she broke her one rich possession that she might pour the fragrant oil
over His feet. Therefore her useless deed of utter love and
uncalculating self-sacrifice was crowned by praise from His lips whose
praise is our highest honour, and the world is still 'filled with the
odour of the ointment.'

So this old disciple's hospitality is strangely immortal, and the
record of it reminds us that the smallest service done for Jesus is
remembered and treasured by Him. Men have spent their lives to win a
line in the world's chronicles which are written on sand, and have
broken their hearts because they failed; and this passing act of one
obscure Christian, in sheltering a little company of travel-stained
wayfarers, has made his name a possession for ever. 'Seekest thou great
things for thyself? seek them not'; but let us fill our little corners,
doing our unnoticed work for love of our Lord, careless about man's
remembrance or praise, because sure of Christ's, whose praise is the
only fame, whose remembrance is the highest reward. 'God is not
unrighteous to forget your work and labour of love.'



PAUL IN THE TEMPLE

'And when the seven days were almost ended, the Jews which were of Asia
when they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the people, and laid
hands on him. 28. Crying out, Men of Israel, help: This is the man,
that teacheth all men everywhere against the people, and the law, and
this place: and further brought Greeks also into the temple, and hath
polluted this holy place. 29. (For they had seen before with him in the
city Trophimus an Ephesian, whom they supposed that Paul had brought
into the temple.) 30. And all the city was moved, and the people ran
together: and they took Paul, and drew him out of the temple: and
forthwith the doors were shut. 31. And as they went about to kill him,
tidings came unto the chief captain of the band, that all Jerusalem was
in an uproar. 32. Who immediately took soldiers and centurions, and ran
down unto them: and when they saw the chief captain and the soldiers,
they left beating of Paul. 33. Then the chief captain came near, and
took him, and commanded him to be bound with two chains; and demanded
who he was, and what he had done. 34. And some cried one thing, some
another, among the multitude: and when he could not know the certainty
for the tumult, he commanded him to be carried into the castle. 35. And
when he came upon the stairs, so it was, that he was borne of the
soldiers for the violence of the people. 36. For the multitude of the
people followed after, crying, Away with him. 37. And as Paul was to be
led into the castle, he said unto the chief captain, May I speak unto
thee? Who said, Canst thou speak Greek? 38. Art not thou that Egyptian,
which before these days madest an uproar, and leddest out into the
wilderness four thousand men that were murderers? 39. But Paul said, I
am a man which am a Jew of Tarsus, a city in Cilicia, a citizen of no
mean city: and, I beseech thee, suffer me to speak unto the
people.'--ACTS xxi. 27-39.

The stronger a man's faith, the greater will and should be his
disposition to conciliate. Paul may seem to have stretched
consideration for weak brethren to its utmost, when he consented to the
proposal of the Jerusalem elders to join in performing the vow of a
Nazarite, and to appear in the Temple for that purpose. But he was
quite consistent in so doing; for it was not Jewish ceremonial to which
he objected, but the insisting on it as necessary. For himself, he
lived as a Jew, except in his freedom of intercourse with Gentiles. No
doubt he knew that the death-warrant of Jewish ceremonial had been
signed, but he could leave it to time to carry out the sentence. The
one thing which he was resolved should not be was its imposition on
Gentile Christians. Their road to Jesus was not through Temple or
synagogue. As for Jewish Christians, let them keep to the ritual if
they chose. The conciliatory plan recommended by the elders, though
perfectly consistent with Paul's views and successful with the Jewish
Christians, roused non-Christian Jews as might have been expected.

This incident brings out very strikingly the part played by each of the
two factors in carrying out God's purposes for Paul. They are
unconscious instruments, and co-operation is the last thing dreamed of
on either side; but Jew and Roman together work out a design of which
they had not a glimpse.

I. Note the charge against Paul. The 'Jews from Asia' knew him by
sight, as they had seen him in Ephesus and elsewhere; and possibly some
of them had been fellow-passengers with him from Miletus. No wonder
that they construed his presence in the Temple into an insult to it. If
Luther or John Knox had appeared in St. Peter's, he would not have been
thought to have come as a worshipper. Paul's teaching may very
naturally have created the impression in hot-tempered partisans, who
could not draw distinctions, that he was the enemy of Temple and
sacrifice.

It has always been the vice of religious controversy to treat
inferences from heretical teaching, which appear plain to the critics,
as if they were articles of the heretic's belief. These Jewish zealots
practised a very common method when they fathered on Paul all which
they supposed to be involved in his position. Their charges against him
are partly flat lies, partly conclusions drawn from misapprehension of
his position, partly exaggeration, and partly hasty assumptions. He had
never said a word which could be construed as 'against the people.' He
had indeed preached that the law was not for Gentiles, and was not the
perfect revelation which brought salvation, and he had pointed to Jesus
as in Himself realising all that the Temple shadowed; but such teaching
was not 'against' either, but rather for both, as setting both in their
true relation to the whole process of revelation. He had not brought
'Greeks' into the Temple, not even the one Greek whom malice multiplied
into many. When passion is roused, exaggerations and assumptions soon
become definite assertions. The charges are a complete object-lesson in
the baser arts of religious (!) partisans; and they have been but too
faithfully reproduced in all ages. Did Paul remember how he had been
'consenting' to the death of Stephen on the very same charges? How far
he has travelled since that day!

II. Note the immediately kindled flame of popular bigotry. The always
inflammable population of Jerusalem was more than usually excitable at
the times of the Feasts, when it was largely increased by zealous
worshippers from a distance. Noble teaching would have left the mob as
stolid as it found them; but an appeal to the narrow prejudices which
they thought were religion was a spark in gunpowder, and an explosion
was immediate. It is always easier to rouse men to fight for their
'religion' than to live by it. Jehu was proud of what he calls his
'zeal for the Lord,' which was really only ferocity with a mask on. The
yelling crowd did not stop to have the charges proved. That they were
made was enough. In Scotland people used to talk of 'Jeddart justice,'
which consisted in hanging a man first, and trying him leisurely
afterwards. It was usually substantially just when applied to
moss-troopers, but does not do so well when administered to Apostles.

Notice the carefulness to save the Temple from pollution, which is
shown by the furious crowds dragging Paul outside before they kill him.
They were not afraid to commit murder, but they were horror-struck at
the thought of a breach of ceremonial etiquette. Of course! for when
religion is conceived of as mainly a matter of outward observances, sin
is reduced to a breach of these. We are all tempted to shift the centre
of gravity in our religion, and to make too much of ritual etiquette.
Kill Paul if you will, but get him outside the sacred precincts first.
The priests shut the doors to make sure that there should be no
profanation, and stopped inside the Temple, well pleased that murder
should go on at its threshold. They had better have rescued the victim.
Time was when the altar was a sanctuary for the criminal who could
grasp its horns, but now its ministers wink at bloodshed with secret
approval. Paul could easily have been killed in the crowd, and no
responsibility for his death have clung to any single hand. No doubt
that was the cowardly calculation which they made, and they were well
on the way to carry it out when the other factor comes into operation.

III. Note the source of deliverance. The Roman garrison was posted in
the fortress of Antonia, which commanded the Temple from a higher level
at the north-west angle of the enclosure. Tidings 'came _up_' to the
officer in command, Claudius Lysias by name (Acts xxiii. 26), that all
Jerusalem was in confusion. With disciplined promptitude he turned out
a detachment and 'ran down upon them.' The contrast between the quiet
power of the legionaries and the noisy feebleness of the mob is
striking. The best qualities of Roman sway are seen in this tribune's
unhesitating action, before which the excited mob cowers in fright.
They 'left beating of Paul,' as knowing that a heavier hand would fall
on them for rioting. With swift decision Lysias acts first and talks
afterwards, securing the man who was plainly the centre of disturbance,
and then having got him fast with two chains on him, inquiring who he
was, and what he had been doing.

Then the crowd breaks loose again in noisy and contradictory
explanations, all at the top of their voices, and each drowning the
other. Clearly the bulk of them could not answer either of Lysias'
questions, though they could all bellow 'Away with him!' till their
throats were sore. It is a perfect picture of a mob, which is always
ferocious and volubly explanatory in proportion to its ignorance. One
man kept his head in the hubbub, and that was Lysias, who determined to
hold his prisoner till he did know something about him. So he ordered
him to be taken up into the castle; and as the crowd saw their prey
escaping they made one last fierce rush, and almost swept away the
soldiers, who had to pick Paul up and carry him. Once on the stairs
leading to the castle they were clear of the crowd, which could only
send a roar of baffled rage after them, and to this the stolid
legionaries were as deaf as were their own helmets.

The part here played by the Roman authority is that which it performs
throughout the Acts. It shields infant Christianity from Jewish
assailants, like the wolf which, according to legend, suckled Romulus.
The good and the bad features of Roman rule were both valuable for that
purpose. Its contempt for ideas, and above all for speculative
differences in a religion which it regarded as a hurtful superstition,
its unsympathetic incapacity for understanding its subject nations, its
military discipline, its justice, which though often tainted was yet
better than the partisan violence which it coerced, all helped to make
it the defender of the first Christians. Strange that Rome should
shelter and Jerusalem persecute!

Mark, too, how blindly men fulfil God's purposes. The two bitter
antagonists, Jew and Roman, seem to themselves to be working in direct
opposition; but God is using them both to carry out His design. Paul
has to be got to Rome, and these two forces are combined by a wisdom
beyond their ken, to carry him thither. Two cogged wheels turning in
opposite directions fit into each other, and grind out a resultant
motion, different from either of theirs. These soldiers and that mob
were like pawns on a chessboard, ignorant of the intentions of the hand
which moves them.

IV. Note the calm courage of Paul. He too had kept his head, and though
bruised and hustled, and having but a minute or two beforehand looked
death in the face, he is ready to seize the opportunity to speak a word
for his Master. Observe the quiet courtesy of his address, and his calm
remembrance of the tribune's right to prevent his speaking. There is
nothing more striking in Paul's character than his self-command and
composure in all circumstances. This ship could rise to any wave, and
ride in any storm. It was not by virtue of happy temperament but of a
fixed faith that his heart and mind were kept in perfect peace. It is
not easy to disturb a man who counts not his life dear if only he may
complete his course. So these two men front each other, and it is hard
to tell which has the quieter pulse and the steadier hand. The same
sources of tranquil self-control and calm superiority to fortune which
stood Paul in such good stead are open to us. If God is our rock and
our high tower we shall not be moved.

The tribune had for some unknown reason settled in his mind that the
Apostle was a well-known 'Egyptian,' who had headed a band of 'Sicarii'
or 'dagger-men,' of whose bloody doings Josephus tells us. How the Jews
should have been trying to murder such a man Lysias does not seem to
have considered. But when he heard the courteous, respectful Greek
speech of the Apostle he saw at once that he had got no uncultured
ruffian to deal with, and in answer to Paul's request and explanation
gave him leave to speak. That has been thought an improbability. But
strong men recognise each other, and the brave Roman was struck with
something in the tone and bearing of the brave Jew which made him
instinctively sure that no harm would come of the permission. There
ought to be that in the demeanour of a Christian which is as a
testimonial of character for him, and sways observers to favourable
constructions.



PAUL ON HIS OWN CONVERSION

'And it came to pass, that, as I made my journey, and was come nigh
unto Damascus about noon, suddenly there shone from heaven a great
light round about me. 7. And I fell unto the ground, and heard a voice
saying unto me, Saul, Saul, why perseoutest thou Me? 8. And I answered,
Who art Thou, Lord? And He said unto me, I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom
thou persecutest. 9. And they that were with me saw indeed the light,
and were afraid; but they heard not the voice of Him that spake to me.
10. And I said, What shall I do, Lord? And the Lord said unto me,
Arise, and go into Damascus; and there it shall be told thee of all
things which are appointed for thee to do. 11. And when I could not see
for the glory of that light, being led by the hand of them that were
with me, I came into Damascus. 12. And one Ananias, a devout man
according to the law, having a good report of all the Jews which dwelt
there, 13. Came unto me, and stood, and said unto me, Brother Saul,
receive thy sight. And the same hour I looked up upon him. 14. And he
said, The God of our fathers hath chosen thee, that thou shouldest know
His will, and see that Just One, and shouldest hear the voice of His
mouth. 15. For thou shalt be His witness unto all men of what thou hast
seen and heard. 16. And now why tarriest thou? arise, and be baptized,
and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord.'--ACTS xxii.
6-16.

We follow Paul's example when we put Jesus' appearance to him from
heaven in a line with His appearances to the disciples on earth. 'Last
of all, He appeared to me also.' But it does not follow that the
appearances are all of the same kind, or that Paul thought that they
were. They were all equally real, equally 'objective,' equally valid
proofs of Jesus' risen life. On two critical occasions Paul told the
story of Jesus' appearance as his best 'Apologia.' 'I saw and heard
Him, and that revolutionised my life, and made me what I am.' The two
accounts are varied, as the hearers were, but the differences are
easily reconciled, and the broad facts are the same in both versions,
and in Luke's rendering in chapter ix.

A favourite theory in some quarters is that Paul's conversion was not
sudden, but that misgivings had been working in him ever since
Stephen's death. Surely that view is clean against facts. Persecuting
its adherents to the death is a strange result of dawning belief in
'this way.' Paul may be supposed to have known his state of mind as
well as a critic nineteen centuries off does, and he had no doubt that
he set out from Jerusalem a bitter hater of the convicted impostor
Jesus, and stumbled into Damascus a convinced disciple because he had
seen and heard Him. That is his account of the matter, which would not
have been meddled with if the meddlers had not taken offence at 'the
supernatural element.' We note the emphasis which Paul puts on the
suddenness of the appearance, implying that the light burst all in a
moment. A little bit of personal reminiscence comes up in his
specifying the time as 'about noon,' the brightest hour. He remembers
how the light outblazed even the blinding brilliance of a Syrian
noontide. He insists too on the fact that his senses were addressed,
both eye and ear. He saw the glory of that light, and heard the voice.
He does not say here that he saw Jesus, but that he did so is clear
from Ananias' words, 'to see the Righteous One' (ver. 14), and from I
Corinthians xv. 8. Further, he makes it very emphatic that the vision
was certified as no morbid fancy of his own, but yet was marked as
meant for him only, by the double fact that his companions did share in
it, but only in part. They did see the light, but not 'the Righteous
One'; they did hear the sound of the voice, but not so as to know what
it said. The difference between merely hearing a noise and discerning
the sense of the words is probably marked by the construction in the
Greek, and is certainly to be understood.

The blaze struck all the company to the ground (Acts xxvi. 14). Prone
on the earth, and probably with closed eyes, their leader heard his own
name twice sounded, with appeal, authority, and love in the tones. The
startling question which followed not only pierced conscience, and
called for a reasonable vindication of his action, but flashed a new
light on it as being persecution which struck at this unknown heavenly
speaker. So the first thought in Saul's mind is not about himself or
his doings but about the identity of that Speaker. Awe, if not actual
worship, is expressed in addressing Him as Lord. Wonder, with perhaps
some foreboding of what the answer would be, is audible in the
question, 'Who art Thou?' Who can imagine the shock of the answer to
Saul's mind? Then the man whom he had thought of as a vile apostate,
justly crucified and not risen as his dupes dreamed, lived in heaven,
knew him, Saul, and all that he had been doing, was 'apparelled in
celestial light,' and yet in heavenly glory was so closely identified
with these poor people whom he had been hunting to death that to strike
them was to hurt Him! A bombshell had burst, shattering the foundation
of his fortifications. A deluge had swept away the ground on which he
had stood. His whole life was revolutionised. Its most solid elements
were dissolved into vapour, and what he had thought misty nonsense was
now the solid thing. To find a 'why' for his persecuting was
impossible, unless he had said (what in effect he did say), 'I did it
ignorantly.' When a man has a glimpse of Jesus exalted to heaven, and
is summoned by Him to give a reason for his life of alienation, that
life looks very different from what it did, when seen by dimmer light.
Clothes are passable by candle-light that look very shabby in sunshine.
When Jesus comes to us, His first work is to set us to judge our past,
and no man can muster up respectable answers to His question, 'Why?'
for all sin is unreasonable, and nothing but obedience to Him can
vindicate itself in His sight.

Saul threw down his arms at once. His characteristic impetuosity and
eagerness to carry out his convictions impelled him to a surrender as
complete as his opposition. The test of true belief in the ascended
Jesus is to submit the will to Him, to be chiefly desirous of knowing
His will, and ready to do it. 'Who art Thou, Lord?' should be followed
by 'What shall I do, Lord?'

Blind Saul, led by the hand into the city which he had expected to
enter so differently, saw better than ever before. 'The glory of that
light' blinds us to things seen, but makes us able to see afar off the
only realities, the things unseen. Speaking to Jews, as here, Paul
described Ananias as a devout adherent of the law, in order to
conciliate them and to suggest his great principle that a Christian was
not an apostate but a complete Jew. To Agrippa he drops all reference
to Ananias as irrelevant, and throws together the words on the road and
the commission received through Ananias as equally Christ's voice. Here
he lays stress on his agency in restoring sight, and on his message as
including two points--that it was 'the God of our fathers' who had
'appointed' the vision, and that the purpose of the vision was to make
Saul a witness to all men. The bearing of this on the conciliatory aim
of the discourse is plain. We note also the precedence given in the
statement of the particulars of the vision to 'knowing his will'--that
was the end for which the light and the voice were given. Observe too
how the twofold evidence of sense is signalised, both in the reference
to seeing the Righteous One and to hearing His voice and in the
commission to witness what Saul had seen and heard. The personal
knowledge of Jesus, however attained, constitutes the qualification and
the obligation to be His witness. And the convincing testimony is when
we can say, as we all can say if we are Christ's, 'That which we have
heard, that which we have seen with our eyes, that ... declare we unto
you.'



ROME PROTECTS PAUL

'And it came to pass, that, when I was come again to Jerusalem, even
while I prayed in the Temple, I was in a trance; 18. And saw Him saying
unto me, Make haste, and get thee quickly out of Jerusalem: for they
will not receive thy testimony concerning Me. 19. And I said, Lord,
they know that I imprisoned and beat in every synagogue them that
believed on Thee: 20. And when the blood of Thy martyr Stephen was
shed, I also was standing by, and consenting unto his death, and kept
the raiment of them that slew him. 21. And He said unto me, Depart: for
I will send thee far hence unto the Gentiles. 22. And they gave him
audience unto this word, and then lifted up their voices, and said,
Away with such a fellow from the earth: for it is not fit that he
should live. 23. And as they cried out, and cast off their clothes, and
threw dust into the air, 24. The chief captain commanded him to be
brought into the castle, and bade that he should be examined by
scourging; that he might know wherefore they cried so against him. 25.
And as they bound him with thongs, Paul said unto the centurion that
stood by, Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and
uncondemned? 26. When the centurion heard that, he went and told the
chief captain, saying, Take heed what thou doest: for this man is a
Roman. 27. Then the chief captain came, and said, Tell me, art thou a
Roman? He said, Yea. 28. And the chief captain answered, With a great
sum obtained I this freedom. And Paul said, But I was free born. 29.
Then straightway they departed from him which should have examined him:
and the chief captain also was afraid, after he knew that he was a
Roman, and because he had bound him. 30. On the morrow, because he
would have known the certainty wherefore he was accused of the Jews, he
loosed him from his bands, and commanded the chief priests and all
their council to appear, and brought Paul down, and set him before
them.'--ACTS xxii. 17-30.

The threatened storm soon burst on Paul in Jerusalem. On the third day
after his arrival he began the ceremonial recommended by the elders to
prove his adherence to the law. Before the seven days during which it
lasted were over the riot broke out, and he was saved from death only
by the military tribune hurrying down to the Temple and dragging him
from the mob.

The tribune's only care was to stamp out a riot, and whether the victim
was 'that Egyptian' or not, to prevent his being murdered. He knew
nothing, and cared as little, about the grounds of the tumult, but he
was not going to let a crowd of turbulent Jews take the law into their
own hands, and flout the majesty of Roman justice. So he lets the
nearly murdered man say his say and keeps the mob off him. It was a
strange scene--below, the howling zealots; above, on the stairs, the
Christian apologists guarded from his countrymen by a detachment of
legionaries; and the assembly presided over by a Roman tribune.

It is very characteristic of Paul that he thought that his own
conversion was the best argument that he could use with his
fellow-Israelites. So he tells his story, and this section strikes into
his speech at the point where he is coming to very thin ice indeed, and
is about to vindicate his work among the Gentiles by declaring that it
was done in obedience to a command from heaven. We need not discuss the
date of the trance, whether it was in his first visit to Jerusalem
after his conversion or, as Ramsay strongly argues, is to be put at the
visit mentioned in Acts xi. 30 and xii. 25.

We note the delicate, conciliatory skill with which he brings out that
his conversion had not made him less a devout worshipper in the Temple,
by specifying it as the scene of the trance, and prayer as his
occupation then. The mention of the Temple also invested the vision
with sanctity.

Very noticeable too is the avoidance of the name of Jesus, which would
have stirred passion in the crowd. We may also observe that the first
words of our Lord, as given by Paul, did not tell him whither he was to
go, but simply bade him leave Jerusalem. The full announcement of the
mission to the Gentiles was delayed both by Jesus to Paul and by Paul
to his brethren. He was to 'get quickly out of Jerusalem'; that was
tragic enough. He was to give up working for his own people, whom he
loved so well. And the reason was their rooted incredulity and their
hatred of him. Other preachers might do something with them, but Paul
could not. 'They will not receive testimony of _thee_.'

But the Apostle's heart clung to his nation, and not even his Lord's
command was accepted without remonstrance. His patriotism led him to
the verge of disobedience, and encouraged him to put in his 'But,
Lord,' with boldness that was all but presumption. He ventures to
suggest a reason why the Jews _would_, as he thinks, receive his
testimony. They knew what he had been, and they must bethink themselves
that there must be something real and mighty in the power which had
turned his whole way of thinking and living right round, and made him
love all that he had hated, and count all that he had prized 'but
dung.' The remonstrance is like Moses', like Jeremiah's, like that of
many a Christian set to work that goes against the grain, and called to
relinquish what he would fain do, and do what he would rather leave
undone.

But Jesus does not take His servants' remonstrances amiss, if only they
will make them frankly to Him, and not keep muttering them under their
breath to themselves. Let us say all that is in our hearts. He will
listen, and clear away hesitations, and show us our path, and make us
willing to walk in it. Jesus did not discuss the matter with Paul, but
reiterated the command, and made it more pointed and clear; and then
Paul stopped objecting and yielded his will, as we should do. 'When he
would not be persuaded, we ceased, saying, The will of the Lord be
done.' The Apostle had kept from the obnoxious word as long as he
could, but it had to come, and he tells the enraged listeners at last,
without circumlocution, that he is the Apostle of the Gentiles, that
Jesus has made him so against his will, and that therefore he must do
the work appointed him, though his heart-strings crack with seeming to
be cold to Israel.

The burst of fury, expressed in gestures which anybody who has ever
seen two Easterns quarrelling can understand, looks fitter for a
madhouse than an audience of men in their senses. They yelled and tore
their garments (and their beards, no doubt), and clutched handfuls of
dust and tossed it in the air, like Shimei cursing David. What a
picture of frenzied hate! And what was it all for? Because Gentiles
were to be allowed to share in Israel's privileges. And what were the
privileges which they thus jealously monopolised? The favour and
protection of the God who, as their own prophets had taught them, was
the God of the whole earth, and revealed Him to Israel that Israel
might reveal Him to the world.

The less they entered into the true possession of their heritage, the
more savagely they resented sharing it with the nations. The more their
prerogative became a mere outward thing, the more they snarled at any
one who proposed to participate in it. To seek to keep religious
blessings to one's self is a conclusive proof that they are not really
possessed. If we have them we shall long to impart them. Formal
religionists always dislike missionary enterprise.

The tribune no doubt had been standing silently watching, in his
strong, contemptuous Roman way, the paroxysm of rage sweeping over his
troublesome charge. Of course he did not understand a word that the
culprit had been saying, and could not make out what had produced the
outburst. He felt that there was something here that he had not
fathomed, and that he must get to the bottom of. It was useless to lay
hold of any of these shrieking maniacs and try to get a reasonable word
out of them. So he determined to see what he could make of the orator,
who had already astonished him by traces of superior education, and was
evidently no mere vulgar firebrand or sedition-monger. He might have
tried gentler means of extracting the truth than scourging, but that
process of 'examination,' as it is flatteringly called, was common, and
has not been antiquated for so many centuries that we need wonder at
this Roman officer using it.

Paul submitted, and was already tied up to some whipping-post, in an
attitude which would expose his back to the lash, when he quietly
dropped, to the inferior officer detailed to superintend the flogging,
the question which fell like a bombshell. Possibly the Apostle had not
known what the soldiers were ordered to do with him till he was tied
up. We cannot tell why he did not plead his citizenship sooner. But we
may remember that at Philippi he did not plead it at all till after the
scourging. Why he delayed so long in the present instance, and why he
at last spoke the magic words, 'I am a Roman citizen,' we cannot say.
But we may gather the two lessons that Christ's servants are often wise
in submitting silently to wrongs, and that they are within their rights
in availing themselves of legal defences against illegal treatment.
Whether silence or protest is the more expedient must be determined in
each case by conscience, guided by the sought-for guidance of the
enlightening Spirit. The determining consideration should be, Which
course will best glorify my Master?

The information brought the tribune in haste to the place where the
Apostle was still tied up. The tables were turned indeed. His brief
answer, 'Yea,' was accepted at once, for to claim the sacred name of
Roman falsely would have been too dangerous, and no doubt Paul's
bearing impressed the tribune with a conviction of his truthfulness. A
hint of contempt and doubt lies in his remark that he had paid dearly
for the franchise, which remark implies, 'Where did a poor man like you
get the money then?' A shameful trade in selling citizens' rights was
carried on in the degraded days of the Empire by underlings at court,
and no doubt the tribune had procured his citizenship in that way.
Paul's answer explains that he was born free, and so was above his
questioner.

That discovery put an end to all thought of scourging. Paul was at once
liberated, and the tribune, terrified that he might be reported, seeks
to repair his error and changes his tactics, retaining Paul for safety
in the castle, and summoning the Sanhedrim, to try to find out more of
this strange affair through them. The great council of the nation had
sunk low indeed when it had to obey the call of a Roman soldier.

Thus once more, as so continually in the Acts, Rome is friendly to the
Christian teachers and saves them from Jewish fury. To point out that
early protection and benevolent sufferance is one purpose of the whole
book. The days of Roman persecution had not yet come. The Empire was
favourable to Christianity, not only because its officials were too
proud to take interest in petty squabbles between two sects of Jews
about their absurd superstitions, but reasons of political wisdom
combined with supercilious indifference to bring about this attitude.

The strong hand of Rome, too, if it crushed national independence, also
suppressed violence, kept men from flying at each other's throats,
spread peace over wide lands, and made the journeyings of Paul and the
planting of the early Christian Churches possible. It was a
God-appointed, though an imperfect, and in some aspects, mischievous
unity, and prepared the way for that higher form of unity realised in
the Church which finally shattered the coarser Empire which had at
first sheltered it. The Caesars were doing God's work when they were
following their own lust of empire. They were yoked to Christ's
chariot, though unwitting and unwilling. To them, as truly as to Cyrus,
might the divine voice have said, 'I girded thee, though thou hast not
known Me.'



CHRIST'S WITNESSES

'And the night following the Lord stood by him, and said, Be of good
cheer, Paul: for as thou hast testified of Me in Jerusalem, so must
thou bear witness also at Rome.'--ACTS xxiii. 11.

It had long been Paul's ambition to 'preach the Gospel to you that are
at Rome also.' His settled policy, as shown by this Book of the Acts,
was to fly at the head, to attack the great centres of population. We
trace him from Antioch to Philippi, Thessalonica, Athens, Corinth,
Ephesus; and of course Rome was the goal, where a blow struck at the
heart might reverberate through the empire. So he had planned for it,
and prayed about it, and thought about it, and spoken about it. But his
wish was accomplished, as our prayers and purposes so often are, in a
manner very strange to him. A popular riot in Jerusalem, a
half-friendly arrest by the contemptuous impartiality of a Roman
officer, a final rejection by the Sanhedrim, a prison in Caesarea, an
appeal to Caesar, a weary voyage, a shipwreck: this was the chain of
circumstances which fulfilled his desire, and brought him to the
imperial city.

My text comes at the crisis of his fate. He has just been rejected by
his people, and for the moment is in safety in the castle under the
charge of the Roman garrison. One can fancy how, as he lay there in the
barrack that night, he felt that he had come to a turning-point; and
the thoughts were busy in his mind, 'Is this for life or for death? Am
I to do any more work for Christ, or am I silenced for ever?'--'And the
Lord stood by him and said, Be of good cheer, Paul!' The divine message
assured him that he should live; it testified of Christ's approbation
of his past, and promised him that, in recompense for that past, he
should have wider work to do. So he passed to the unknown future
quietly; and went on his way with the Master by his side.

Now, dear friends, it seems to me that in these great words there lie
lessons applying to all Christian people as truly, though in different
fashion, as they did to the Apostle, and having an especial bearing on
that great enterprise of Christian missions, with which I would connect
them in this sermon. I desire, then, to draw out the lessons which seem
to me to lie under the surface of this great promise.

I. To live ought to be, for a Christian, to witness.

The promise in form is a promise of continued testimony-bearing; in its
substance, one might say, it is a promise of continued life. Paul is
cheered, not by being told that the wrath of the enemy will launch
itself at his head in vain, and that he will bear a charmed life
through it all, but by being told that there is work for him to do yet.
That is the shape in which the promise of life is held out to him. So
it always ought to be; a Christian man's life ought to be one
continuous witnessing for that Lord Christ who stood by the Apostle in
the castle at Jerusalem.

Let me just urge this upon you for a few moments. It seems to me that
to raise up witnesses for Himself is, in one aspect, the very purpose
of all Christ's work. You and I, dear brethren, if we have any living
hold of that Lord, have received Him into our hearts, not only in order
that for ourselves we may rejoice in Him, but in order that, for
ourselves rejoicing in Him, we may 'show forth the virtues of Him who
hath called us out of darkness into His marvellous light.' There is no
creature so great as that he is not regarded as a means to a further
end; and there is no creature so small but that he has the right to
claim happiness and blessing from the Hand that made him. Jesus Christ
has drawn us to Himself, that we may know the sweetness of His
presence, the cleansing of His blood, the stirring and impulse of His
indwelling life in us for our own joy and our own completion, but also
that we may be His witnesses and weapons, according to that great word:
'This people have I formed for Myself. They shall shew forth My praise.'

God has 'shined into our hearts in order that we may give,' reflecting
the beams that fall upon them, 'the light of the knowledge of the glory
of God, in the face of Jesus Christ.' Brother and sister, if you have
the Christian life in your souls, one purpose of your possessing it is
that you may bear witness for Him.

Again, such witness-bearing is the result of all true, deep, Christian
life. All life longs to manifest itself in action. Every conviction
that a man has seeks for utterance; especially so do the beliefs that
go deepest and touch the moral and spiritual nature and relationships
of a man. He that perceives them is thereby impelled to desire to utter
them. There can be no real, deep possession of that great truth of the
Gospel which we profess to be the foundation of our personal lives,
unless we have felt the impulse to spread the name and to declare the
sweetness of the Lord. The very same impulse that makes the loving
heart carve the beloved name on the smooth rind of the tree makes it
sweet to one who is in real touch and living fellowship with Jesus
Christ to speak about Him. O brother! _there_ is a very sharp test for
us. I know that there are hundreds of professing Christians--decent,
respectable sort of people, with a tepid, average amount of Christian
faith and principle in them--who never felt that overmastering desire,
'I _must_ let this thing out through my lips.' Why? Why do they not
feel it? Because their own possession of Christ is so superficial and
partial. Jeremiah's experience will be repeated where there is vigorous
Christian life: 'Thy word shut up in my bones was like a fire'--that
burned itself through all the mass that was laid upon it, and ate its
way victoriously into the light--'and I was weary with forbearing, and
I could not stay.' Christian men and women, do you know anything of
that o'er-mastering impulse? If you do not, look to the depth and
reality of your Christian profession.

Again, this witnessing is the condition of all strong life. If you keep
nipping the buds off a plant you will kill it. If you never say a word
to a human soul about your Christianity, your Christianity will tend to
evaporate. Action confirms and strengthens convictions; speech deepens
conviction; and although it is possible for any one--and some of us
ministers are in great danger of making the possibility a reality--to
talk away his religion, for one of us who loses it by speaking too much
about it, there are twenty that damage it by speaking too little. Shut
it up, and it will be like some wild creature put into a cellar, fast
locked and unventilated; when you open the door it will be dead. Shut
it up, as so many of our average Christian professors and members of
our congregations and churches do, and when you come to take it out, it
will be like some volatile perfume that has been put into a vial and
locked away in a drawer and forgotten; there will be nothing left but
an empty bottle, and a rotten cork. Speak your faith if you would have
your faith strengthened. Muzzle it, and you go a long way to kill it.
You are witnesses, and you cannot blink the obligation nor shirk the
duties without damaging that in yourselves to which you are to witness.

Further, this task of witnessing for Christ can be done by all kinds of
life. I do not need to dwell upon the distinction between the two great
methods which open themselves out before every one of us. They do so;
for direct work in speaking the name of Jesus Christ is possible for
every Christian, whoever he or she is, however weak, ignorant,
uninfluential, with howsoever narrow a circle. There is always somebody
that God means to be the audience of His servant whenever that servant
speaks of Christ. Do you not know that there are people in this world,
as wives, children, parents, friends of different sorts, who would
listen to you more readily than they would listen to any one else
speaking about Jesus Christ? Friend, have you utilised these
relationships in the interests of that great Name, and in the highest
interests of the persons that sustain them to you, and of yourselves
who sustain these to them?

And then there is indirect work that we can all do in various ways, I
do not mean only by giving money, though of course that is important,
but I mean all the manifold ways in which Christian people can show
their sympathy with, and their interest in, the various forms in which
adventurous, chivalrous, enterprising Christian benevolence expresses
itself. It was an old law in Israel that 'as his part was that went
down into the battle, so should his part be that tarried by the stuff.'
When victory was won and the spoil came to be shared, the men who had
stopped behind and looked after the base of operations and kept open
the communications received the same portion as the man that, in the
front rank of the battle, had rushed upon the spears of the Amalekites.
Why? Because from the same motive they had been co-operant to the same
great end. The Master has taken up that very thought, and has applied
it in relation to the indirect work of His people, when He says, 'He
that receiveth a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a
prophet's reward.' The motive is the same; therefore the essential
character of the act is the same; therefore the recompense is
identical. You can witness for Christ directly, if you can say--and you
