at their pleasure they roam about in the world of mortal beings. How can
they then rightfully claim the juice of the Soma?"'

"Lomasa said, 'When these very identical words were spoken again and
again by the lord of celestials, the son of Bhrigu, setting Indra at
naught, took up the offering he had intended to make. And as he was
about to take up an excellent portion of the Soma juice with the object
of offering it to the two Aswins, the destroyer of the demon Vala
(Indra) observed his act, and thus spoke unto him, "If thou take up the
Soma with a view to offering it to those celestials, I shall hurl at
thee my thunderbolt of awful form, which is superior to all the weapons
that exist." Thus addressed by Indra, the son of Bhrigu, cast at Indra a
smiling glance, and took up in due form a goodly quantity of the Soma
juice, to make an offering to the Aswins. Then Sachi's lord hurled at
him the thunderbolt of awful form. And as he was about to launch it, his
arm was paralysed by Bhrigu's son. And having paralysed his arm,
Chyavana recited sacred hymns, and made offering on the fire. His object
gained, he now attempted to destroy that celestial. Then by the virtue
of that saint's ascetic energy, an evil spirit came into being,--a huge
demon, _Mada_ by name, of great strength and gigantic proportions. And
his body was incapable of being measured either by demons or by gods.
And his mouth was terrible and of huge size, and with teeth of sharpened
edge. And one of his jaws rested on the earth, and the other stretched
to heaven. And he had four fangs, each extending as far as one hundred
_yojanas_, and his other fangs were extended to the distance of ten
_yojanas_, and were of a form resembling towers on a palace, and which
might be likened to the ends of spears. And his two arms were like unto
hills, and extended ten thousand _yojanas_, and both were of equal bulk.
And his two eyes resembled the sun and the moon; and his face rivalled
the conflagration at the universal dissolution. And he was licking his
mouth with his tongue, which, like lightning, knew no rest. And his
mouth was open, and his glance was frightful, and seemed as if he would
forcibly swallow up the world. The demon rushed at the celestial by whom
a hundred sacrifices had been performed. And his intent was to devour
that deity. And the world resounded with the loud and frightful sounds
uttered by the Asura.'"


SECTION CXXV

"Lomasa said, 'When the god who had performed a hundred sacrifices
(Indra) beheld the demon _Mada_ of a frightful mien, coming towards him
with open mouth, his intention being to devour him, and looking like the
god of death himself, while his own arms remained paralysed, he through
fear repeatedly licked the corners of his mouth. Then the lord of the
celestials, tortured with fright, spake to Chyavana saying, "O Bhrigu's
son! O Brahmana! verily I tell thee as truth itself, that from this day
forward the two Aswins will be entitled to the Soma juice. Be merciful
to me! My undertaking can never come to naught. Let this be the rule.
And I know, O saint of the sacerdotal caste! that thy work can never
come to nothing. These two Aswins will have a right to drink the Soma
juice, since thou hast made them entitled to the same. And, O Bhrigu's
son, I have done this but to spread the fame of thy powers, and my
object was to give thee an occasion for displaying thy powers. My other
object was that the fame of the father of this Sukanya here might spread
everywhere. Therefore be merciful to me: let it be as thou wishest."
Being thus addressed by Indra, the wrath of Chyavana of mighty soul was
quickly appeased, and he set free the demolisher of hostile cities
(Indra). And the powerful saint, O king! distributed _Mada_ (_literally_
intoxication), and put it piece-meal in drinks, in women, in gambling,
and in field sports, even this same _Mada_ who had been created
repeatedly before. Having thus cast down the demon _Mada_ and gratified
Indra with a Soma draught and assisted king Sarvati in worshipping all
the gods together with the two Aswins and also spread his fame for power
over all the worlds, the best of those endued with speech passed his
days happily in the wood, in the company of Sukanya, his loving wife.
This is his lake, shining, O king! and resounding with the voice of
birds. Here must thou, together with thy uterine brothers, offer
libations of water to thy forefathers and the gods. And, O ruler of
earth! O scion of Bharata's race! having visited it and Sikataksha also,
thou shalt repair to the Saindhava wood, and behold a number of small
artificial rivers. And O great king, O scion of Bharata's race! thou
shalt touch the waters of all the holy lakes and reciting the hymns of
the god Sthanu (Siva), meet with success in every undertaking. For this
is the junction, O most praiseworthy of men, of the two ages of the
world, _viz_., _Dwapara_ and _Treta_. It is a time, O Kunti's son!
capable of destroying all the sins of a person. Here do thou perform
ablutions, for the spot is able to remove all the sins of an individual.
Yonder is the Archika hill, a dwelling place for men of cultured minds.
Fruits of all the seasons grow here at all times and the streams run for
ever. It is an excellent place fit for the celestials. And there are the
holy cairns of diverse forms, set up by the celestials. O Yudhishthira!
this is the bathing spot belonging to the Moon. And the saints are in
attendance here on all sides round--they are the dwellers of the wood
and the Valakhilyas, and the Pavakas, who subsist on air only. These are
three peaks and three springs. Thou mayst walk round them all, one by
one: then thou mayst wash thyself at pleasure. Santanu, O king! and
Sunaka the sovereign of men, and both _Nara_ and _Narayana_ have
attained everlasting regions from this place. Here did the gods
constantly lie down, as also the forefathers, together with the mighty
saints. In this Archika hill, they all carried on austerities. Sacrifice
to them, O Yudhishthira! Here did they, also the saints, eat rice cooked
in milk, O protector of men! And here is the Yamuna of an exhaustless
spring. Krishna here engaged himself in a life of penances, O Pandu's
son. O thou that draggest the dead bodies of thy foes! the twin
brothers, and Bhimasena and Krishna and all of us will accompany thee to
this spot. O lord of men, this is the holy spring that belongeth to
Indra. Here the creative and the dispensing deity, and Varuna also rose
upwards, and here too they dwelt, O king! observing forbearance, and
possessed of the highest faith. This excellent and propitious hill is
fit for persons of a kindly and candid disposition. This is that
celebrated Yamuna, O king! frequented by hosts of mighty saints, the
scene of diverse religious rites, holy, and destructive of the dread of
sin. Here did Mandhata himself, of a mighty bow, perform sacrificial
rites for the gods; and so did Somaka, O Kunti's son! who was the son of
Sahadeva, and a most excellent maker of gifts.'"


SECTION CXXVI

"Yudhishthira said, 'O great Brahmana, how was that tiger among kings,
Mandhata, Yuvanaswa's son, born,--even he who was the best of monarchs,
and celebrated over the three worlds? And how did he of unmeasured
lustre attain the very height of real power, since all the three worlds
were as much under his subjection, as they are under that of Vishnu of
mighty soul? I am desirous of hearing all this in connection with the
life and achievements of that sagacious monarch. I should also like to
hear how his name of Mandhata originated, belonging as it did to him who
rivalled in lustre Indra himself: and also how he of unrivalled strength
was born, for thou art skilled in the art of narrating events.'

"Lomasa said, 'Hear with attention, O king! how the name of Mandhata
belonging to that monarch of mighty soul hath come to be celebrated
throughout all the worlds. Yuvanaswa, the ruler of the earth, was sprung
from Ikshvaku's race. That protector of the earth performed many
sacrificial rites noted for magnificent gifts. And the most excellent
of all virtuous men performed a thousand times the ceremony of
sacrificing a horse. And he also performed other sacrifices of the
highest order, wherein he made abundant gifts. But that saintly king had
no son. And he of mighty soul and rigid vows made over to his ministers
the duties of the state, and became a constant resident of the woods.
And he of cultured soul devoted himself to the pursuits enjoined in the
sacred writ. And once upon a time, that protector of men, O king! had
observed a fast. And he was suffering from the pangs of hunger and his
inner soul seemed parched with thirst. And (in this state) he entered
the hermitage of Bhrigu. On that very night, O king of kings! the great
saint who was the delight of Bhrigu's race, had officiated in a
religious ceremony, with the object that a son might be born to
Saudyumni. O king of kings! at the spot stood a large jar filled with
water, consecrated with the recitation of sacred hymns, and which had
been previously deposited there. And the water was endued with the
virtue that the wife of Saudyumni would by drinking the same, bring
forth a god-like son. Those mighty saints had deposited the jar on the
altar and had gone to sleep, having been fatigued by keeping up the
night. And as Saudyumni passed them by, his palate was dry, and he was
suffering greatly from thirst. And the king was very much in need of
water to drink. And he entered that hermitage and asked for drink. And
becoming fatigued, he cried in feeble voice, proceeding from a parched
throat, which resembled the weak inarticulate utterance of a bird. And
his voice reached nobody's ears. Then the king beheld the jar filled
with water. And he quickly ran towards it, and having drunk the water,
put the jar down. And as the water was cool, and as the king had been
suffering greatly from thirst, the draught of water relieved the
sagacious monarch and appeased his thirst. Then those saints together
with him of ascetic wealth, awoke from sleep; and all of them observed
that the water of the jar had gone. Thereupon they met together and
began to enquire as to who might have done it. Then Yuvanaswa truthfully
admitted that it was his act. Then the revered son of Bhrigu spoke unto
him, saying. "It was not proper. This water had an occult virtue infused
into it, and had been placed there with the object that a son might be
born to thee. Having performed severe austerities, I infused the virtue
of my religious acts in this water, that a son might be born to thee. O
saintly king of mighty valour and physical strength! a son would have
been born to thee of exceeding strength and valour, and strengthened by
austerities, and who would have sent by his bravery even Indra to the
abode of the god of death. It was in this manner, O king! that this
water had been prepared by me. By drinking this water, O king, thou hast
done what was not at all right. But it is impossible now for us to turn
back the accident which hath happened. Surely what thou hast done must
have been the fiat of Fate. Since thou, O great king, being athirst
hast drunk water prepared with sacred hymns, and filled with the virtue
of my religious labours, thou must bring forth out of thy own body a son
of the character described above. To that end we shall perform a
sacrifice for thee, of wonderful effect so that, valorous as thou art,
thou wilt bring forth a son equal to Indra. Nor wilt thou experience any
trouble on account of the labour pains." Then when one hundred years had
passed away, a son shining as the sun pierced the left side of the king
endowed with a mighty soul, and came forth. And the son was possessed of
mighty strength. Nor did Yuvanaswa die--which itself was strange. Then
Indra of mighty strength came to pay him a visit. And the deities
enquired of the great Indra, "What is to be sucked by this boy?" Then
Indra introduced his own forefinger into his mouth. And when the wielder
of the thunderbolt said, "He will suck me," the dwellers of heaven
together with Indra christened the boy Mandhata, (_literally_, Me he
shall suck). Then the boy having tasted the forefinger extended by
Indra, became possessed of mighty strength, and he grew thirteen cubits,
O king. And O great king! the whole of sacred learning together with the
holy science of arms, was acquired by that masterful boy, who gained all
that knowledge by the simple and unassisted power of his thought. And
all at once, the bow celebrated under the name of Ajagava and a number
of shafts made of horn, together with an impenetrable coat of mail, came
to his possession on the very same day, O scion of Bharata's race! And
he was placed on the throne by Indra himself and he conquered the three
worlds in a righteous way, as Vishnu did by his three strides. And the
wheel of the car of that mighty king as irresistible in its course
(throughout the world). And the gems, of their own accord, came into the
possession of that saintly king. This is the tract of land, O lord of
earth, which belonged to him. It abounds in wealth. He performed a
number of sacrificial rites of various kinds, in which abundant
gratuities were paid to the priests. O king! he of mighty force and
unmeasured lustre, erected sacred piles, and performed splendid pious
deeds, and attained the position of sitting at Indra's side. That
sagacious king of unswerving piety sent forth his fiat, and simply by
its virtue conquered the earth, together with the sea--that source of
gems--and all the cities (or the earth), O great king! The sacrificial
grounds prepared by him were to be found all over the earth on all sides
round--not a single spot, but was marked with the same. O great king!
the mighty monarch is said to have given to the Brahmanas ten thousand
padmas of kine. When there was a drought, which continued for twelve
consecutive years, the mighty king caused rain to come down for the
growth of crops, paying no heed to Indra, the wielder of the
thunder-bolt, who remained staring (at him). The mighty ruler of the
Gandhara land, born in the lunar dynasty of kings, who was terrible like
a roaring cloud, was slain by him, who wounded him sorely with his
shafts. O king! he of cultured soul protected the four orders of people,
and by him of mighty force the worlds were kept from harm, by virtue of
his austere and righteous life. This is the spot where he, lustrous like
the sun, sacrificed to the god. Look at it! here it is, in the midst of
the field of the Kurus, situated in a tract, the holiest of all. O
preceptor of earth! requested by thee, I have thus narrated to thee the
great life of Mandhata, and also the way in which he was born, which was
a birth of an extraordinary kind.'"

Vaisampayana said, "O scion of Bharata's race! Kunti's son, thus
addressed by the mighty saint, Lomasa, immediately put fresh questions
to him, with regard to Somaka."


SECTION CXXVII

"Yudhishthira said, 'O best of speakers! what was the extent of power
and strength possessed by king Somaka? I am desirous of hearing an exact
account of his deeds and of his power.'

"Lomasa said, 'O Yudhishthira! there was a virtuous king Somaka by name.
He had one hundred wives, O king, all suitably matched to their husband.
He took great care, but could not succeed in getting a single son from
any one of them, and a long time elapsed during which he continued a
sonless man. Once upon a time, when he had become old, and was trying
every means to have a son, a son was born to him, Jantu by name, out of
that century of women. And, O ruler of men! All the mothers used to sit
surrounding their son and every one giving him such objects as might
conduce to his enjoyment and pleasure. And it came to pass that one day
an ant stung the boy at his hip. And the boy screamed loudly on account
of the pain caused by the sting. And forthwith the mothers were
exceedingly distressed to see how the child had been stung by the ant.
And they stood around him and set up cries. Thus there arose a
tumultuous noise. And that scream of pain suddenly reached (the ears of)
the sovereign of the earth, when he was seated in the midst of his
ministers, with the family priest at his side. Then the king sent for
information as to what it was about. And the royal usher explained to
him precisely what the matter was with reference to his son. And Somaka
got up together with his ministers and hastened towards the female
apartments. And on coming there, O subjugator of foes! he soothed his
son. And having done so and coming out from the female apartments, the
king sat with his family priest and ministers.

"'Somaka then spoke thus, "Fie on having only a single son! I had rather
be a sonless man. Considering how constantly liable to disease are all
organized beings, to have an only son is but a trouble. O Brahmana! O my
lord! With the view that I might have many sons born to me, this century
of wives hath been wedded by me, after inspection, and after I had
satisfied myself that they would prove suitable to me. But issue they
have none. Having tried every means, and put forth great efforts, they
have borne this single son, Jantu. What grief can be greater than this?
O most excellent of the twice-born caste! I am grown old in years and so
are my wives too. And yet this only son is like the breath of their
nostrils, and so he is to me also. But is there any ceremony, by
celebrating which one may get a hundred sons? (And if there is one
such), tell me whether it is great or small, and easy or difficult to
perform."

"'The family priest said, "There is a ceremony by virtue of which a man
may get a century of sons. If thou art able to perform it, O Somaka,
then I shall explain it to thee."

"'Somaka said, "Whether it be a good or an evil deed, the ceremony by
which a hundred sons may be born, may be taken by thee as already
performed. Let thy blessed self explain it to me."

"'The family priest thereupon said, "O king! Let me set on foot a
sacrifice and thou must sacrifice thy son, Jantu in it. Then on no
distant date, a century of handsome sons will be born to thee. When
Jantu's fat will be put into the fire as an offering to the gods, the
mothers will take a smell of that smoke, and bring forth a number of
sons, valourous and strong. And Jantu also will once more be born as a
self-begotten son of thine in that very (mother); and on his back there
will appear a mark of gold."'"


SECTION CXXVIII

"'Somaka said, "O Brahmana! whatever is to be performed--do precisely as
it may be necessary. As I am desirous of having a number of sons, I
shall do all that may be prescribed by thee."'

"Lomasa said, 'Then the priest officiated in the sacrifice in which
Jantu was offered as the victim. But the mothers as in pity forcibly
snatched the son and took him away. And they cried, "We are undone!" And
they were smitten with torturing grief and they caught hold of Jantu by
his right hand, and wept in a piteous way. But the officiating priest
held the boy by the right hand and pulled him. And like female ospreys
they screamed in agony! but the priest dragged the son, killed him, and
made a burnt offering of his fat in the proper form. And, O delight of
the race of Kuru! While the fat was being made an offering of the
agonised mothers smelt its smell, and of a sudden fell to the ground
(and swooned away.) And then all those lovely women became with child,
and O lord of men! O scion of Bharata's race! When ten months had passed
a full century of sons was born to Somaka begotten on all those women.
And, O monarch of the earth! Jantu became the eldest and was born of his
former mother and he became the most beloved to the women,--not so were
their own sons. And on his back there was that mark of gold and of that
century of sons, he was also superior in merit. Then that family priest
of Somaka departed this life as also Somaka after a certain time. Now he
beheld that the priest was being grilled in a terrible hell. And
thereupon he questioned him, "Why art thou, O Brahmana! being grilled in
this hell?" Then the family priest exceedingly scorched with fire, spake
to him saying, "This is the outcome of my having officiated in that
sacrifice of thine." O king, hearing this, the saintly king thus spake
to the god who meteth out punishments to departed souls, "I shall enter
here. Set free my officiating priest; this reverend man is being grilled
by hell-fire on my account only."

"'Dharmaraja thereat answered thus, "One cannot enjoy or suffer for
another person's acts. O best of speakers! these are the fruits of thy
acts; see it here."

"'Somaka said, "Without this Brahmana here, I desire not go to the
blessed regions. My desire is to dwell in company with this very man,
either in the abode of the gods, or in hell, for, O Dharmaraja! my deed
is identical with what hath been done by him and the fruit of our
virtuous or evil deed must be the same for both of us."

"'Dharmaraja said, "O king! If this is thy wish, then taste with him the
fruit of that act, for the same period that he must do. After that thou
shall go to the blessed regions."'

"Lomasa said, 'The lotus-eyed king did all that exactly in the way
prescribed to him. And when his sins were worked off, he was set free
together with the priest. O king! Fond of the priest as he was, he won
all those blessings to which he had entitled himself by his meritorious
acts and shared everything with the family priest. This is his hermitage
which looketh lovely before our eyes. Any one would attain the blessed
regions, if he should spend six nights here controlling his passions. O
king of kings! O leader of the tribe of Kurus! Here, free from
excitement and self-controlled, we must spend six nights. Be thou ready
therefor.'"


SECTION CXXIX

"Lomasa said, 'Here, O king! The lord of born beings himself performed a
sacrifice in former times,--the ceremony called _Ishtikrita_, which
occupied one thousand years. And Amvarisha, son of Nabhaga, sacrificed
near the Yamuna river. And having sacrificed there, he gave away ten
_Padmas_ (of gold coins) to the attendant priests, and he obtained the
highest success by his sacrifices and austerities. And, O Kunti's son!
This is the spot where that sovereign of the entire earth, Nahusha's
son, Yayati, of unmeasured force, and who led a holy life, performed his
sacrificial rites. He competed with Indra and performed his sacrifice
here. Behold how the ground is studded with places for the sacrificial
fires of various forms, and how the earth seems to be subsiding here
under the pressure of Yayati's pious works. This is the Sami tree, which
hath got but a single leaf, and this is a most excellent lake. Behold
these lakes of Parasurama, and the hermitage of Narayana. O protector of
earth! This is the path which was followed by Richika's son, of
unmeasured energy, who roamed over the earth, practising the Yoga rites
in the river Raupya. And, O delight of the tribe of Kurus! Hear what a
_Pisacha_ woman (she-goblin), who was decked with pestles for her
ornaments, said (to a Brahmana woman), as I was reciting here the table
of genealogy. (She said), "Having eaten curd in Yugandhara, and lived in
Achutasthala, and also bathed in Bhutilaya, thou shouldst live with thy
sons." Having passed a single night here, if thou wilt spend the second,
the events of the night will be different from those that have happened
to thee in the day-time, O most righteous of Bharata's race! Today we
shall spend the night at this very spot. O scion of Bharata's race! this
is the threshold of the field of the Kurus. O king! At this very spot,
the monarch Yayati, son of Nahusha, performed sacrificial rites, and
made gifts of an abundance of gems. And Indra was pleased with those
sacred rites. This is an excellent holy bathing-place on the river
Yamuna, known as Plakshavatarana (descent of the banian tree). Men of
cultured minds call it the entrance to the region of heaven. O respected
sir! here, after having performed sacrificial rites of the Saraswata
king, and making use of the sacrificial stake for their pestle, the
highest order of saints performed the holy plunge prescribed at the end
of a sacred ceremony. O monarch! King Bharata here performed sacrificial
rites. To celebrate the horse-sacrifice, he here set free the horse who
was the intended victim. That monarch had won the sovereignty of the
earth by righteousness. The horse he let go more than once were of a
colour checkered with black. O tiger among men! it was here that Marutta
sheltered by Samvartta, leader of saints, succeeded in performing
excellent sacrifices. O sovereign of kings! Having taken his bath at
this spot, one can behold all the worlds, and is purified from his evil
deeds. Do thou, therefore, bathe at this spot.'"

Vaisampayana said, "Then that most praiseworthy of Pandu's sons, there
bathed with his brothers, while the mighty saints were uttering
laudatory words to him. And he addressed the following words to Lomasa,
'O thou whose strength lieth in truthfulness! By virtue of this pious
act, I behold all the worlds. And from this place, I behold that most
praiseworthy of Pandu's sons Arjuna, the rider of white steed.'

"Lomasa said, 'It is even so, O thou of powerful arms! The saints of the
highest order thus behold all the regions. Behold this holy Saraswati
here, thronged by persons who look upon her as their sole refuge. O most
praiseworthy of men! having bathed here, thou wilt be free from all thy
sins. O Kunti's son! here the celestial saints performed sacrificial
rites of Saraswata king: and so did the saints and the royal saints.
This is the altar of the lord of beings, five _yojanas_ in extent on all
sides round. And this is the field of the magnanimous Kurus, whose habit
it was to perform sacrifices.'"


SECTION CXXX

"Lomasa said, 'O son of Bharata's race! If mortals breathe their last at
this spot, they go to heaven. O king! Thousands upon thousands of men
come to this place to die. A blessing was pronounced on this spot by
Daksha, when he was engaged in sacrifice here, (in these words), "Those
men that shall die at this spot shall win a place in heaven." Here is
the beautiful and sacred river, Saraswati, full of water: and here, O
lord of men, is the spot known as _Vinasana_, or the place where the
Saraswati disappeared. Here is the gate of the kingdom of the Nishadas
and it is from hatred for them that the Saraswati entered into the earth
in order that the Nishadas might not see her. Here too is the sacred
region of Chamashodbheda where the Saraswati once more became visible to
them. And here she is joined by other sacred rivers running seawards. O
conqueror of foes, here is that sacred spot known by the name of
Sindhu--where Lopamudra accepted the great sage Agastya as her lord and,
O thou whose effulgence is like unto that of the sun, here is the sacred
_tirtha_ called Prabhasa, the favoured spot of Indra and which removeth
all sins. Yonder is visible the region of Vishnupada. And here is the
delightful and sacred river, Vipasa. From grief for the death of his
sons the great sage Vasistha had thrown himself into this stream, after
binding his limbs. And when he rose from the water, lo! he was
unfettered. Look, O king with thy brothers at the sacred region of
Kasmeera, frequented by holy sages. Here, O scion of Bharata's race, is
the spot, where a conference took place between Agni and the sage
Kasyapa, and also between Nahusha's son and the sages of the north. And,
O great prince, yonder is the gate of the Manasasarovara. In the midst
of this mountain, a gap hath been opened by Rama. And here, O prince of
prowess incapable of being baffled, is the well-known region of
Vatikhanda, which, although adjacent to the gate of Videha, lieth on the
north of it. And O bull among men, there is another very remarkable
thing connected with this place,--namely, that on the waning of every
_yuga_, the god Siva, having the power to assume any shape at will, may
be seen with Uma and his followers. In yonder lake also people desirous
of securing welfare to the family, propitiate with sacrifices the holder
of the great bow Pinaka, in the month of Chaitra. And persons of
devotion having passions under control, performing their ablutions in
this lake, become free from sins and, without doubt, attain to the holy
regions. Here is the sacred _tirtha_ called Vijanaka, where the holy
sage Vasistha with his wife Arundhati and also the sage Yavakri obtained
tranquillity. Yonder is the lake Kausava, where grown the lotuses called
Kausesaya, and here also is the sacred hermitage of Rukmini, where she
attained peace, after conquering that evil passion, anger. I think, O
prince, that thou hast heard something about that man of meditations,
Bhrigutunga. There, O king, before thee is that lofty peak. And, O
foremost of kings, yonder is Vitasta, the sacred stream that absolveth
men from all sins. The water of this stream is extremely cool and
limpid, and it is largely used by the great sages. O prince, behold the
holy rivers Jala and Upajala, on either side of the Yamuna. By
performing a sacrifice here, king Usinara surpassed in greatness Indra
himself. And, O descendant of Bharata, desirous of testing Usinara's
merit and also of bestowing boons on him, Indra and Agni presented
themselves at his sacrificial ground. And Indra assuming the shape of a
hawk, and Agni that of a pigeon, came up to that king. And the pigeon in
fear of the hawk, fell upon the king's thigh, seeking his protection.'"


