If thou be made the master [of a feast,] lift not thyself up,
but be among them as one of the rest; take diligent care for
them, and so sit down.

Sir 32:2
And when thou hast done all thy office, take thy place, that
thou mayest be merry with them, and receive a crown for thy well
ordering of the feast.

Sir 32:3
Speak, thou that art the elder, for it becometh thee, but
with sound judgment; and hinder not musick.

Sir 32:4
Pour not out words where there is a musician, and shew not
forth wisdom out of time.

Sir 32:5
A concert of musick in a banquet of wine is as a signet of
carbuncle set in gold.

Sir 32:6
As a signet of an emerald set in a work of gold, so is the
melody of musick with pleasant wine.

Sir 32:7
Speak, young man, if there be need of thee: and yet scarcely
when thou art twice asked.

Sir 32:8
Let thy speech be short, comprehending much in few words; be
as one that knoweth and yet holdeth his tongue.

Sir 32:9
If thou be among great men, make not thyself equal with them;
and when ancient men are in place, use not many words.

Sir 32:10
Before the thunder goeth lightning; and before a shamefaced
man shall go favour.

Sir 32:11
Rise up betimes, and be not the last; but get thee home
without delay.

Sir 32:12
There take thy pastime, and do what thou wilt: but sin not by
proud speech.

Sir 32:13
And for these things bless him that made thee, and hath
replenished thee with his good things.

Sir 32:14
Whoso feareth the Lord will receive his discipline; and they
that seek him early shall find favour.

Sir 32:15
He that seeketh the law shall be filled therewith: but the
hypocrite will be offended thereat.

Sir 32:16
They that fear the Lord shall find judgment, and shall kindle
justice as a light.

Sir 32:17
A sinful man will not be reproved, but findeth an excuse
according to his will.

Sir 32:18
A man of counsel will be considerate; but a strange and proud
man is not daunted with fear, even when of himself he hath done
without counsel.

Sir 32:19
Do nothing without advice; and when thou hast once done,
repent not.

Sir 32:20
Go not in a way wherein thou mayest fall, and stumble not
among the stones.

Sir 32:21
Be not confident in a plain way.

Sir 32:22
And beware of thine own children.

Sir 32:23
In every good work trust thy own soul; for this is the
keeping of the commandments.

Sir 32:24
He that believeth in the Lord taketh heed to the commandment;
and he that trusteth in him shall fare never the worse.

Sir 33:1
There shall no evil happen unto him that feareth the Lord;
but in temptation even again he will deliver him.

Sir 33:2
A wise man hateth not the law; but he that is an hypocrite
therein is as a ship in a storm.

Sir 33:3
A man of understanding trusteth in the law; and the law is
faithful unto him, as an oracle.

Sir 33:4
Prepare what to say, and so thou shalt be heard: and bind up
instruction, and then make answer.

Sir 33:5
The heart of the foolish is like a cartwheel; and his
thoughts are like a rolling axletree.

Sir 33:6
A stallion horse is as a mocking friend, he neigheth under
every one that sitteth upon him.

Sir 33:7
Why doth one day excel another, when as all the light of
every day in the year is of the sun?

Sir 33:8
By the knowledge of the Lord they were distinguished: and he
altered seasons and feasts.

Sir 33:9
Some of them hath he made high days, and hallowed them, and
some of them hath he made ordinary days.

Sir 33:10
And all men are from the ground, and Adam was created of
earth:

Sir 33:11
In much knowledge the Lord hath divided them, and made their
ways diverse.

Sir 33:12
Some of them hath he blessed and exalted and some of them he
sanctified, and set near himself: but some of them hath he
cursed and brought low, and turned out of their places.

Sir 33:13
As the clay is in the potter's hand, to fashion it at his
pleasure: so man is in the hand of him that made him, to render
to them as liketh him best.

Sir 33:14
Good is set against evil, and life against death: so is the
godly against the sinner, and the sinner against the godly.

Sir 33:15
So look upon all the works of the most High; and there are
two and two, one against another.

Sir 33:16
I awaked up last of all, as one that gathereth after the
grapegatherers: by the blessing of the Lord I profited, and tred
my winepress like a gatherer of grapes.

Sir 33:17
Consider that I laboured not for myself only, but for all
them that seek learning.

Sir 33:18
Hear me, O ye great men of the people, and hearken with your
ears, ye rulers of the congregation.

Sir 33:19
Give not thy son and wife, thy brother and friend, power over
thee while thou livest, and give not thy goods to another: lest
it repent thee, and thou intreat for the same again.

Sir 33:20
As long as thou livest and hast breath in thee, give not
thyself over to any.

Sir 33:21
For better it is that thy children should seek to thee, than
that thou shouldest stand to their courtesy.

Sir 33:22
In all thy works keep to thyself the preeminence; leave not a
stain in thine honour.

Sir 33:23
At the time when thou shalt end thy days, and finish thy
life, distribute thine inheritance.

Sir 33:24
Fodder, a wand, and burdens, are for the ass; and bread,
correction, and work, for a servant. .

Sir 33:25
If thou set thy servant to labour, thou shalt find rest: but
if thou let him go idle, he shall seek liberty.

Sir 33:26
A yoke and a collar do bow the neck: so are tortures and
torments for an evil servant.

Sir 33:27
Send him to labour, that he be not idle; for idleness
teacheth much evil.

Sir 33:28
Set him to work, as is fit for him: if he be not obedient,
put on more heavy fetters.

Sir 33:29
But be not excessive toward any; and without discretion do
nothing.

Sir 33:30
If thou have a servant, let him be unto thee as thyself,
because thou hast bought him with a price.

Sir 33:31
If thou have a servant, entreat him as a brother: for thou
hast need of him, as of thine own soul: if thou entreat him
evil, and he run from thee, which way wilt thou go to seek him?

Sir 34:1
The hopes of a man void of understanding are vain and false:
and dreams lift up fools.

Sir 34:2
Whoso regardeth dreams is like him that catcheth at a shadow,
and followeth after the wind.

Sir 34:3
The vision of dreams is the resemblance of one thing to
another, even as the likeness of a face to a face.

Sir 34:4
Of an unclean thing what can be cleansed? and from that thing
which is false what truth can come?

Sir 34:5
Divinations, and soothsayings, and dreams, are vain: and the
heart fancieth, as a woman's heart in travail.

Sir 34:6
If they be not sent from the most High in thy visitation, set
not thy heart upon them.

Sir 34:7
For dreams have deceived many, and they have failed that put
their trust in them.

Sir 34:8
The law shall be found perfect without lies: and wisdom is
perfection to a faithful mouth.

Sir 34:9
A man that hath travelled knoweth many things; and he that
hath much experience will declare wisdom.

Sir 34:10
He that hath no experience knoweth little: but he that hath
travelled is full of prudence.

Sir 34:11
When I travelled, I saw many things; and I understand more
than I can express.

Sir 34:12
I was ofttimes in danger of death: yet I was delivered
because of these things.

Sir 34:13
The spirit of those that fear the Lord shall live; for their
hope is in him that saveth them.

Sir 34:14
Whoso feareth the Lord shall not fear nor be afraid; for he
is his hope.

Sir 34:15
Blessed is the soul of him that feareth the Lord: to whom
doth he look? and who is his strength?

Sir 34:16
For the eyes of the Lord are upon them that love him, he is
their mighty protection and strong stay, a defence from heat,
and a cover from the sun at noon, a preservation from stumbling,
and an help from falling.

Sir 34:17
He raiseth up the soul, and lighteneth the eyes: he giveth
health, life, and blessing.

Sir 34:18
He that sacrificeth of a thing wrongfully gotten, his
offering is ridiculous; and the gifts of unjust men are not
accepted.

Sir 34:19
The most High is not pleased with the offerings of the
wicked; neither is he pacified for sin by the multitude of
sacrifices.

Sir 34:20
Whoso bringeth an offering of the goods of the poor doeth as
one that killeth the son before his father's eyes.

Sir 34:21
The bread of the needy is their life: he that defraudeth him
thereof is a man of blood.

Sir 34:22
He that taketh away his neighbour's living slayeth him; and
he that defraudeth the labourer of his hire is a bloodshedder.

Sir 34:23
When one buildeth, and another pulleth down, what profit have
they then but labour?

Sir 34:24
When one prayeth, and another curseth, whose voice will the
Lord hear?

Sir 34:25
He that washeth himself after the touching of a dead body, if
he touch it again, what availeth his washing?

Sir 34:26
So is it with a man that fasteth for his sins, and goeth
again, and doeth the same: who will hear his prayer? or what
doth his humbling profit him?

Sir 35:1
He that keepeth the law bringeth offerings enough: he that
taketh heed to the commandment offereth a peace offering.

Sir 35:2
He that requiteth a goodturn offereth fine flour; and he that
giveth alms sacrificeth praise.

Sir 35:3
To depart from wickedness is a thing pleasing to the Lord;
and to forsake unrighteousness is a propitiation.

Sir 35:4
Thou shalt not appear empty before the Lord.

Sir 35:5
For all these things [are to be done] because of the
commandment.

Sir 35:6
The offering of the righteous maketh the altar fat, and the
sweet savour thereof is before the most High.

Sir 35:7
The sacrifice of a just man is acceptable, and the memorial
thereof shall never be forgotten.

Sir 35:8
Give the Lord his honour with a good eye, and diminish not
the firstfruits of thine hands.

Sir 35:9
In all thy gifts shew a cheerful countenance, and dedicate
thy tithes with gladness.

Sir 35:10
Give unto the most High according as he hath enriched thee;
and as thou hast gotten, give with a cheerful eye.

Sir 35:11
For the Lord recompenseth, and will give thee seven times as
much.

Sir 35:12
Do not think to corrupt with gifts; for such he will not
receive: and trust not to unrighteous sacrifices; for the Lord
is judge, and with him is no respect of persons.

Sir 35:13
He will not accept any person against a poor man, but will
hear the prayer of the oppressed.

Sir 35:14
He will not despise the supplication of the fatherless; nor
the widow, when she poureth out her complaint.

Sir 35:15
Do not the tears run down the widow's cheeks? and is not her
cry against him that causeth them to fall?

Sir 35:16
He that serveth the Lord shall be accepted with favour, and
his prayer shall reach unto the clouds.

Sir 35:17
The prayer of the humble pierceth the clouds: and till it
come nigh, he will not be comforted; and will not depart, till
the most High shall behold to judge righteously, and execute
judgment.

Sir 35:18
For the Lord will not be slack, neither will the Mighty be
patient toward them, till he have smitten in sunder the loins of
the unmerciful, and repayed vengeance to the heathen; till he
have taken away the multitude of the proud, and broken the
sceptre of the unrighteous;

Sir 35:19
Till he have rendered to every man according to his deeds,
and to the works of men according to their devices; till he have
judged the cause of his people, and made them to rejoice in his
mercy.

Sir 35:20
Mercy is seasonable in the time of affliction, as clouds of
rain in the time of drought.

Sir 36:1
Have mercy upon us, O Lord God of all, and behold us:

Sir 36:2
And send thy fear upon all the nations that seek not after
thee.

Sir 36:3
Lift up thy hand against the strange nations, and let them
see thy power.

Sir 36:4
As thou wast sanctified in us before them: so be thou
magnified among them before us.

Sir 36:5
And let them know thee, as we have known thee, that there is
no God but only thou, O God.

Sir 36:6
Shew new signs, and make other strange wonders: glorify thy
hand and thy right arm, that they may set forth thy wondrous
works.

Sir 36:7
Raise up indignation, and pour out wrath: take away the
adversary, and destroy the enemy.

Sir 36:8
Sake the time short, remember the covenant, and let them
declare thy wonderful works.

Sir 36:9
Let him that escapeth be consumed by the rage of the fire;
and let them perish that oppress the people.

Sir 36:10
Smite in sunder the heads of the rulers of the heathen, that
say, There is none other but we.

Sir 36:11
Gather all the tribes of Jacob together, and inherit thou
them, as from the beginning.

Sir 36:12
O Lord, have mercy upon the people that is called by thy
name, and upon Israel, whom thou hast named thy firstborn.

Sir 36:13
O be merciful unto Jerusalem, thy holy city, the place of thy
rest.

Sir 36:14
Fill Sion with thine unspeakable oracles, and thy people with
thy glory:

Sir 36:15
Give testimony unto those that thou hast possessed from the
beginning, and raise up prophets that have been in thy name.

Sir 36:16
Reward them that wait for thee, and let thy prophets be found
faithful.

Sir 36:17
O Lord, hear the prayer of thy servants, according to the
blessing of Aaron over thy people, that all they which dwell
upon the earth may know that thou art the Lord, the eternal God.

Sir 36:18
The belly devoureth all meats, yet is one meat better than
another.

Sir 36:19
As the palate tasteth divers kinds of venison: so doth an
heart of understanding false speeches.

Sir 36:20
A froward heart causeth heaviness: but a man of experience
will recompense him.

Sir 36:21
A woman will receive every man, yet is one daughter better
than another.

Sir 36:22
The beauty of a woman cheereth the countenance, and a man
loveth nothing better.

Sir 36:23
If there be kindness, meekness, and comfort, in her tongue,
then is not her husband like other men.

Sir 36:24
He that getteth a wife beginneth a possession, a help like
unto himself, and a pillar of rest.

Sir 36:25
Where no hedge is, there the possession is spoiled: and he
that hath no wife will wander up and down mourning.

Sir 36:26
Who will trust a thief well appointed, that skippeth from
city to city? so [who will believe] a man that hath no house,
and lodgeth wheresoever the night taketh him?

Sir 37:1
Every friend saith, I am his friend also: but there is a
friend, which is only a friend in name.

Sir 37:2
Is it not a grief unto death, when a companion and friend is
turned to an enemy?

Sir 37:3
O wicked imagination, whence camest thou in to cover the
earth with deceit?

Sir 37:4
There is a companion, which rejoiceth in the prosperity of a
friend, but in the time of trouble will be against him.

Sir 37:5
There is a companion, which helpeth his friend for the belly,
and taketh up the buckler against the enemy.

Sir 37:6
Forget not thy friend in thy mind, and be not unmindful of
him in thy riches.

Sir 37:7
Every counsellor extolleth counsel; but there is some that
counselleth for himself.

Sir 37:8
Beware of a counsellor, and know before what need he hath;
for he will counsel for himself; lest he cast the lot upon thee,

Sir 37:9
And say unto thee, Thy way is good: and afterward he stand on
the other side, to see what shall befall thee.

Sir 37:10
Consult not with one that suspecteth thee: and hide thy
counsel from such as envy thee.

Sir 37:11
Neither consult with a woman touching her of whom she is
jealous; neither with a coward in matters of war; nor with a
merchant concerning exchange; nor with a buyer of selling; nor
with an envious man of thankfulness; nor with an unmerciful man
touching kindness; nor with the slothful for any work; nor with
an hireling for a year of finishing work; nor with an idle
servant of much business: hearken not unto these in any matter
of counsel.

Sir 37:12
But be continually with a godly man, whom thou knowest to keep
the commandments of the Lord, whose mind is according to thy
mind, and will sorrow with thee, if thou shalt miscarry.

Sir 37:13
And let the counsel of thine own heart stand: for there is no
man more faithful unto thee than it.

Sir 37:14
For a man's mind is sometime wont to tell him more than seven
watchmen, that sit above in an high tower.

Sir 37:15
And above all this pray to the most High, that he will direct
thy way in truth.

Sir 37:16
Let reason go before every enterprize, and counsel before
every action.

Sir 37:17
The countenance is a sign of changing of the heart.

Sir 37:18
Four manner of things appear: good and evil, life and death:
but the tongue ruleth over them continually.

Sir 37:19
There is one that is wise and teacheth many, and yet is
unprofitable to himself.

Sir 37:20
There is one that sheweth wisdom in words, and is hated: he
shall be destitute of all food.

Sir 37:21
For grace is not given, him from the Lord, because he is
deprived of all wisdom.

Sir 37:22
Another is wise to himself; and the fruits of understanding
are commendable in his mouth.

Sir 37:23
A wise man instructeth his people; and the fruits of his
understanding fail not.

Sir 37:24
A wise man shall be filled with blessing; and all they that
see him shall count him happy.

Sir 37:25
The days of the life of man may be numbered: but the days of
Israel are innumerable.

Sir 37:26
A wise man shall inherit glory among his people, and his name
shall be perpetual.

Sir 37:27
My son, prove thy soul in thy life, and see what is evil for
it, and give not that unto it.

Sir 37:28
For all things are not profitable for all men, neither hath
every soul pleasure in every thing.

Sir 37:29
Be not unsatiable in any dainty thing, nor too greedy upon
meats:

Sir 37:30
For excess of meats bringeth sickness, and surfeiting will
turn into choler.

Sir 37:31
By surfeiting have many perished; but he that taketh heed
prolongeth his life.

Sir 38:1
Honour a physician with the honour due unto him for the uses
which ye may have of him: for the Lord hath created him.

Sir 38:2
For of the most High cometh healing, and he shall receive
honour of the king.

Sir 38:3
The skill of the physician shall lift up his head: and in the
sight of great men he shall be in admiration.

Sir 38:4
The Lord hath created medicines out of the earth; and he that
is wise will not abhor them.

Sir 38:5
Was not the water made sweet with wood, that the virtue
thereof might be known?

Sir 38:6
And he hath given men skill, that he might be honoured in his
marvellous works.

Sir 38:7
With such doth he heal [men,] and taketh away their pains.

Sir 38:8
Of such doth the apothecary make a confection; and of his
works there is no end; and from him is peace over all the earth,

Sir 38:9
My son, in thy sickness be not negligent: but pray unto the
Lord, and he will make thee whole.

Sir 38:10
Leave off from sin, and order thine hands aright, and cleanse
thy heart from all wickedness.

Sir 38:11
Give a sweet savour, and a memorial of fine flour; and make a
fat offering, as not being.

Sir 38:12
Then give place to the physician, for the Lord hath created
him: let him not go from thee, for thou hast need of him.

Sir 38:13
There is a time when in their hands there is good success.

Sir 38:14
For they shall also pray unto the Lord, that he would prosper
that, which they give for ease and remedy to prolong life.

Sir 38:15
He that sinneth before his Maker, let him fall into the hand
of the physician.

Sir 38:16
My son, let tears fall down over the dead, and begin to
lament, as if thou hadst suffered great harm thyself; and then
cover his body according to the custom, and neglect not his
burial.

Sir 38:17
Weep bitterly, and make great moan, and use lamentation, as
he is worthy, and that a day or two, lest thou be evil spoken
of: and then comfort thyself for thy heaviness.

Sir 38:18
For of heaviness cometh death, and the heaviness of the heart
breaketh strength.

Sir 38:19
In affliction also sorrow remaineth: and the life of the poor
is the curse of the heart.

Sir 38:20
Take no heaviness to heart: drive it away, and member the
last end.

Sir 38:21
Forget it not, for there is no turning again: thou shalt not
do him good, but hurt thyself.

Sir 38:22
Remember my judgment: for thine also shall be so; yesterday
for me, and to day for thee.

Sir 38:23
When the dead is at rest, let his remembrance rest; and be
comforted for him, when his Spirit is departed from him.

Sir 38:24
The wisdom of a learned man cometh by opportunity of leisure:
and he that hath little business shall become wise.

Sir 38:25
How can he get wisdom that holdeth the plough, and that
glorieth in the goad, that driveth oxen, and is occupied in
their labours, and whose talk is of bullocks?

Sir 38:26
He giveth his mind to make furrows; and is diligent to give
the kine fodder.

Sir 38:27
So every carpenter and workmaster, that laboureth night and
day: and they that cut and grave seals, and are diligent to make
great variety, and give themselves to counterfeit imagery, and
watch to finish a work:

Sir 38:28
The smith also sitting by the anvil, and considering the iron
work, the vapour of the fire wasteth his flesh, and he fighteth
with the heat of the furnace: the noise of the hammer and the
anvil is ever in his ears, and his eyes look still upon the
pattern of the thing that he maketh; he setteth his mind to
finish his work, and watcheth to polish it perfectly:

Sir 38:29
So doth the potter sitting at his work, and turning the wheel
about with his feet, who is alway carefully set at his work, and
maketh all his work by number;

Sir 38:30
He fashioneth the clay with his arm, and boweth down his
strength before his feet; he applieth himself to lead it over;
and he is diligent to make clean the furnace:

Sir 38:31
All these trust to their hands: and every one is wise in his
work.

Sir 38:32
Without these cannot a city be inhabited: and they shall not
dwell where they will, nor go up and down:

Sir 38:33
They shall not be sought for in publick counsel, nor sit high
in the congregation: they shall not sit on the judges' seat, nor
understand the sentence of judgment: they cannot declare justice
and judgment; and they shall not be found where parables are
spoken.

Sir 38:34
But they will maintain the state of the world, and [all]
their desire is in the work of their craft.

Sir 39:1
But he that giveth his mind to the law of the most High, and
is occupied in the meditation thereof, will seek out the wisdom
of all the ancient, and be occupied in prophecies.

Sir 39:2
He will keep the sayings of the renowned men: and where
subtil parables are, he will be there also.

Sir 39:3
He will seek out the secrets of grave sentences, and be
conversant in dark parables.

Sir 39:4
He shall serve among great men, and appear before princes: he
will travel through strange countries; for he hath tried the
good and the evil among men.

Sir 39:5
He will give his heart to resort early to the Lord that made
him, and will pray before the most High, and will open his mouth
in prayer, and make supplication for his sins.

Sir 39:6
When the great Lord will, he shall be filled with the spirit
of understanding: he shall pour out wise sentences, and give
thanks unto the Lord in his prayer.

Sir 39:7
He shall direct his counsel and knowledge, and in his secrets
shall he meditate.

Sir 39:8
He shall shew forth that which he hath learned, and shall
glory in the law of the covenant of the Lord.

Sir 39:9
Many shall commend his understanding; and so long as the
world endureth, it shall not be blotted out; his memorial shall
not depart away, and his name shall live from generation to
generation.

Sir 39:10
Nations shall shew forth his wisdom, and the congregation
shall declare his praise.

Sir 39:11
If he die, he shall leave a greater name than a thousand: and
if he live, he shall increase it.

Sir 39:12
Yet have I more to say, which I have thought upon; for I am
filled as the moon at the full.

Sir 39:13
Hearken unto me, ye holy children, and bud forth as a rose
growing by the brook of the field:

Sir 39:14
And give ye a sweet savour as frankincense, and flourish as a
lily, send forth a smell, and sing a song of praise, bless the
Lord in all his works.

Sir 39:15
Magnify his name, and shew forth his praise with the songs of
your lips, and with harps, and in praising him ye shall say
after this manner:

Sir 39:16
All the works of the Lord are exceeding good, and whatsoever
he commandeth shall be accomplished in due season.

Sir 39:17
And none may say, What is this? wherefore is that? for at
time convenient they shall all be sought out: at his commandment
the waters stood as an heap, and at the words of his mouth the
receptacles of waters.

Sir 39:18
At his commandment is done whatsoever pleaseth him; and none
can hinder, when he will save.

Sir 39:19
The works of all flesh are before him, and nothing can be hid
from his eyes.

Sir 39:20
He seeth from everlasting to everlasting; and there is
nothing wonderful before him.

Sir 39:21
A man need not to say, What is this? wherefore is that? for
he hath made all things for their uses.
