    a whole day and night. The Vaishnava asterism is as explained by
    Nilakantha, the Sravava.


SECTION CCLXL

"Markandeya said, 'It was thus, O mighty-armed one, that Rama of
immeasurable energy had suffered of old such excessive calamity in
consequence of his exile in the woods! O tiger among men, do not grieve,
for, O chastiser of foes, thou art _Kshatriya_! Thou too treadest in the
path in which strength of arms is to be put forth,--the path that
leadeth to tangible rewards. Thou hast not even a particle of sin. Even
the celestials with Indra at their head, and the _Asuras_ have to tread
in the path that is trod by thee! It was after such afflictions that the
wielder of the thunderbolt, aided by the _Maruts_, slew _Vritra_, and
the invincible _Namuchi_ and the Rakshasi of long tongue! He that hath
assistance, always secureth the accomplishment of all his purposes! What
is that which cannot be vanquished in battle by him that hath Dhananjaya
for his brother? This Bhima, also, of terrible prowess, is the foremost
of mighty persons. The heroic and youthful sons of Madravati again are
mighty bowmen. With allies such as these, why dost thou despair, O
chastiser of foes? These are capable of vanquishing the army of the
wielder himself of the thunderbolt with the _Maruts_ in the midst.
Having these mighty bowmen of celestial forms for thy allies, thou, O
bull of Bharata race, art sure to conquer in battle all thy foes!
Behold, this Krishna, the daughter of Drupada, forcibly abducted by the
wicked-minded Saindhava from pride of strength and energy, hath been
brought back by these mighty warriors after achieving terrible feats!
Behold, king Jayadratha was vanquished and lay powerless before thee!
The princess of Videha was rescued with almost no allies by Rama after
the slaughter in battle of the Ten-necked _Rakshasa_ of terrible
prowess! Indeed, the allies of Rama (in that contest) were monkeys and
black-faced bears, creatures that were not even human! Think of all
this, O king, in thy mind! Therefore, O foremost of Kurus, grieve not
for all (that hath occurred), O bull of the Bharata race! Illustrious
persons like thee never indulge in sorrow, O smiter of foes!'"

Vaisampayana continued, "It was thus that the king was comforted by
Markandeya. And then that high-souled one, casting off his sorrows, once
more spoke unto Markandeya."


SECTION CCLXLI

(_Pativrata-mahatmya Parva_)

"Yudhishthira said, 'O mighty sage, I do not so much grieve for myself
or these my brothers or the loss of my kingdom as I do for this daughter
of Drupada. When we were afflicted at the game of the dice by those
wicked-souled ones, it was Krishna that delivered us. And she was
forcibly carried off from the forest by Jayadratha. Hast thou even seen
or heard of any chaste and exalted lady that resembleth this daughter of
Drupada?'

"Markandeya said, 'Listen, O king, how the exalted merit of chaste
ladies, O Yudhishthira, was completely obtained by a princess named
Savitri. There was a king among the Madras, who was virtuous and highly
pious. And he always ministered unto the Brahmanas, and was high-souled
and firm in promise. And he was of subdued senses and given to
sacrifices. And he was the foremost of givers, and was able, and beloved
by both the citizens and the rural population. And the name of that lord
of Earth was Aswapati. And he was intent on the welfare of all beings.
And that forgiving (monarch) of truthful speech and subdued senses was
without issue. And when he got old, he was stricken with grief at this.
And with the object of raising offspring, he observed rigid vows and
began to live upon frugal fare, having recourse to the Brahmacharya mode
of life, and restraining his senses. And that best of kings, (daily)
offering ten thousand oblations to the fire, recited Mantras in honour
of _Savitri_[65] and ate temperately at the sixth hour. And he passed
eighteen years, practising such vows. Then when the eighteen years were
full, _Savitri_ was pleased (with him). And O king, issuing with great
delight, in embodied form, from the _Agnihotra_ fire, the goddess showed
herself to that king. And intent on conferring boons, she spoke these
words unto the monarch, "I have been gratified, O king, with thy
_Brahmacharya_ practices, thy purity and self-restraint and observance
of vows, and all thy endeavours and veneration! Do thou, O mighty king,
O Aswapati, ask for the boon that thou desirest! Thou ought, however, by
no means show any disregard for virtue." Thereat Aswapati said, "It is
with the desire of attaining virtue that I have been engaged in this
task. O goddess, may many sons be born unto me worthy of my race! If
thou art pleased with me, O goddess, I ask for this boon. The twice-born
ones have assured me that great merit lieth in having offspring!"
_Savitri_ replied, "O king, having already learnt this thy intention, I
had spoken unto that lord, the Grandsire, about thy sons. Through the
favour granted by the Self-create, there shall speedily be born unto
thee on earth a daughter of great energy. It behoveth thee not to make
any reply. Well-pleased, I tell thee this at the command of the
Grandsire."'

    [65] Also called Gayatri, the wife of Brahma.

"Markandeya said, 'Having accepted _Savitri's_ words and saying, "_So be
it!_" the king again gratified her and said, "May this happen soon!" On
_Savitri_ vanishing away, the monarch entered his own city. And that
hero began to live in his kingdom, ruling his subjects righteously. And
when some time had elapsed, that king, observant of vows, begat
offspring on his eldest queen engaged in the practice of virtue. And
then, O bull of the Bharata race, the embryo in the womb of the princess
of Malava increased like the lord of stars in the heavens during the
lighted fortnight. And when the time came, she brought forth a daughter
furnished with lotus-like eyes. And that best of monarchs, joyfully
performed the usual ceremonies on her behalf. And as she had been
bestowed with delight by the goddess _Savitri_ by virtue of the
oblations offered in honour of that goddess, both her father, and the
Brahmanas named her _Savitri_. And the king's daughter grew like unto
_Sree_ herself in an embodied form. And in due time, that damsel
attained her puberty. And beholding that graceful maiden of slender
waist and ample hips, and resembling a golden image, people thought, "We
have received a goddess." And overpowered by her energy, none could wed
that girl of eyes like lotus-leaves, and possessed of a burning
splendour.

"'And it came to pass that once on the occasion of a _parva_, having
fasted and bathed her head, she presented herself before the (family)
deity and caused the Brahmanas to offer oblations with due rites to the
sacrificial fire. And taking the flowers that had been offered to the
god, that lady, beautiful as _Sree_ herself, went to her high-souled
sire. And having reverenced the feet of her father and offering him the
flowers she had brought, that maiden of exceeding grace, with joined
hands, stood at the side of the king. And seeing his own daughter
resembling a celestial damsel arrived at puberty, and unsought by
people, the king became sad. And the king said, "Daughter, the time for
bestowing thee is come! Yet none asketh thee. Do thou (therefore)
thyself seek for a husband equal to thee in qualities! That person who
may be desired by thee should be notified to me. Do thou choose for thy
husband as thou listest. I shall bestow thee with deliberation. Do thou,
O auspicious one, listen to me as I tell thee the words which I heard
recited by the twice-born ones. The father that doth not bestow his
daughter cometh by disgrace. And the husband that knoweth not his wife
in her season meeteth with disgrace. And the son that doth not protect
his mother when her husband is dead, also suffereth disgrace. Hearing
these words of mine, do thou engage thyself in search of a husband. Do
thou act in such a way that we may not be censured by the gods!"'

"Markandeya said, 'Having said these words to his daughter and his old
counsellors, he instructed the attendants to follow her, saying,--_Go!_
Thereat, bashfully bowing down unto her father's feet, the meek maid
went out without hesitation, in compliance with the words of her sire.
And ascending a golden car, she went to the delightful asylum of the
royal sages, accompanied by her father's aged counsellors. There, O son,
worshipping the feet of the aged ones, she gradually began to roam over
all the woods. Thus the king's daughter distributing wealth in all
sacred regions, ranged the various places belonging to the foremost of
the twice-born ones.'"


SECTION CCLXLII

"Markandeya continued, 'On one occasion, O Bharata, when that king, the
lord of the Madras, was seated with Narada in the midst of his court,
engaged in conversation, Savitri, accompanied by the king's counsellors,
came to her father's abode after having visited various sacred regions
and asylums. And beholding her father seated with Narada, she worshipped
the feet of both by bending down her head. And Narada then said,
"Whither had this thy daughter gone? And, O king, whence also doth she
come? Why also dost thou not bestow her on a husband, now that she hath
arrived at the age of puberty?" Aswapati answered, saying, "Surely it
was on this very business that she had been sent, and she returneth now
(from her search). Do thou, O celestial sage, listen, even from her as
to the husband she hath chosen herself!"'

"Markandeya continued, 'Then the blessed maid, commanded by her father
with the words,--_Relate everything in detail_,--regarded those words of
her sire as if they were those of a god, and spoke unto him thus, "There
was, amongst the Salwas, a virtuous Kshatriya king known by the name of
Dyumatsena. And it came to pass that in course of time he became blind.
And that blind king possessed of wisdom had an only son. And it so
happened that an old enemy dwelling in the vicinity, taking advantage of
the king's mishap, deprived him of his kingdom. And thereupon the
monarch, accompanied by his wife bearing a child on her breast, went
into the woods. And having retired into the forests, he adopted great
vows and began to practise ascetic austerities. And his son, born in the
city, began to grow in the hermitage. That youth, fit to be my husband,
I have accepted in my heart for my lord!" At these words of hers, Narada
said, "Alas, O king, Savitri hath committed a great wrong, since, not
knowing, she hath accepted for her lord this Satyavan of excellent
qualities! His father speaketh the truth and his mother also is truthful
in her speech. And it is for this that the Brahmanas have named the son
_Satyavan_. In his childhood he took great delight in horses, and used
to make horses of clay. And he used also to draw pictures of horses. And
for this that youth is sometimes called by the name of _Chitraswa_." The
king then asked, "And is prince Satyavan, who is devoted to his father,
endued with energy and intelligence and forgiveness and courage?" Narada
replied, saying, "In energy Satyavan is like unto the sun, and in wisdom
like unto Vrihaspati! And he is brave like unto the lord of the
celestials and forgiving like unto the Earth herself!" Aswapati then
said, "And is the prince Satyavan liberal in gifts and devoted to the
Brahmanas? Is he handsome and magnanimous and lovely to behold?" Narada
said, "In bestowal of gifts according to his power, the mighty son of
Dyumatsena is like unto Sankriti's son Rantideva. In truthfulness of
speech and devotion unto Brahmanas, he is like Sivi, the son of Usinara.
And he is magnanimous like Yayati, and beautiful like the Moon. And in
beauty of person he is like either of the twin Aswins. And with senses
under control, he is meek, and brave, and truthful! And with passion in
subjection he is devoted to his friends, and free from malice and modest
and patient. Indeed, briefly speaking, they that are possessed of great
ascetic merit and are of exalted character say that he is always correct
in his conduct and that honour is firmly seated on his brow." Hearing
this, Aswapati said, "O reverend sage, thou tellest me that he is
possessed of every virtue! Do thou now tell me his defects if, indeed,
he hath any!" Narada then said, "He hath one only defect that hath
overwhelmed all his virtues. That defect is incapable of being conquered
by even the greatest efforts. He hath only one defect, and no other.
Within a year from this day, Satyavan, endued with a short life will
cast off his body!" Hearing these words of the sage, the king said,
"Come, O Savitri, go thou and choose another for thy lord, O beautiful
damsel! That one great defect (in this youth) existeth, covering all his
merits. The illustrious Narada honoured by even the gods, sayeth, that
Satyavan will have to cast off his body within a year, his days being
numbered!" At these words of her father, Savitri said, "The death can
fall but once; a daughter can be given away but once; and once only can a
person say, _I give away_! These three things can take place only once.
Indeed, with a life short or long, possessed of virtues or bereft of
them, I have, for once, selected my husband. Twice I shall not select.
Having first settled a thing mentally, it is expressed in words, and
then it is carried out into practice. Of this my mind is an example!"
Narada then said, "O best of men, the heart of thy daughter Savitri
wavereth not! It is not possible by any means to make her swerve from
this path of virtue! In no other person are those virtues that dwell in
Satyavan. The bestowal of thy daughter, therefore, is approved by me!"
The king said, "What thou hast said, O illustrious one, should never be
disobeyed, for thy words are true! And I shall act as thou hast said,
since thou art my preceptor!" Narada said, "May the bestowal of thy
daughter Savitri be attended with peace! I shall now depart. Blessed be
all of ye!"'

"Markandeya continued, 'Having said this, Narada rose up into the sky
and went to heaven. On the other hand, the king began to make
preparations for his daughter's wedding!'"


SECTION CCLXLIII

"Markandeya said, 'Having pondered over these words (of Narada) about
his daughter's marriage, the king began to make arrangements about the
nuptials. And summoning all the old Brahmanas, and _Ritwijas_ together
with the priests, he set out with his daughter on an auspicious day. And
arriving at the asylum of Dyumatsena in the sacred forest, the king
approached the royal sage on foot, accompanied by the twice-born ones.
And there he beheld the blind monarch of great wisdom seated on a
cushion of _Kusa_ grass spread under _Sala_ tree. And after duly
reverencing the royal sage, the king in an humble speech introduced
himself. Thereupon, offering him the _Arghya_, a seat, and a cow, the
monarch asked his royal guest,--_Wherefore is this visit?_--Thus
addressed the king disclosed everything about his intentions and purpose
with reference to Satyavan. And Aswapati said, "O royal sage, this
beautiful girl is my daughter named Savitri. O thou versed in morality,
do thou, agreeably to the customs of our order, take her from me as thy
daughter-in-law!" Hearing these words, Dyumatsena said, "Deprived of
kingdom, and taking up our abode in the woods, we are engaged in the
practice of virtue as ascetics with regulated lives. Unworthy of a
forest life, how will thy daughter, living in the sylvan asylum, bear
this hardship?" Aswapati said, "When my daughter knoweth, as well as
myself, that happiness and misery come and go (without either being
stationary), such words as these are not fit to be used towards one like
me! O king, I have come hither, having made up my mind! I have bowed to
thee from friendship; it behoveth thee not, therefore, to destroy my
hope! It behoveth thee not, also, to disregard me who, moved by love,
have come to thee! Thou art my equal and fit for an alliance with me, as
indeed, I am thy equal and fit for alliance with thee! Do thou,
therefore, accept my daughter for thy daughter-in-law and the wife of
the good Satyavan!" Hearing these words Dyumatsena said, "Formerly I had
desired an alliance with thee. But I hesitated, being subsequently
deprived of my kingdom. Let this wish, therefore, that I had formerly
entertained, be accomplished this very day. Thou art, indeed, a welcome
guest to me!"

"'Then summoning all the twice-born ones residing in the hermitages of
that forest, the two kings caused the union to take place with due
rites. And having bestowed his daughter with suitable robes and
ornaments, Aswapati went back to his abode in great joy. And Satyavan,
having obtained a wife possessed of every accomplishment, became highly
glad, while she also rejoiced exceedingly upon having gained the husband
after her own heart. And when her father had departed, she put off all
her ornaments, and clad herself in barks and cloths dyed in red. And by
her services and virtues, her tenderness and self-denial, and by her
agreeable offices unto all, she pleased everybody. And she gratified her
mother-in-law by attending to her person and by covering her with robes
and ornaments. And she gratified her father-in-law by worshipping him as
a god and controlling her speech. And she pleased her husband by her
honeyed speeches, her skill in every kind of work, the evenness of her
temper, and by the indications of her love in private. And thus, O
Bharata, living in the asylum of those pious dwellers of the forest,
they continued for some time to practise ascetic austerities. But the
words spoken by Narada were present night and day in the mind of the
sorrowful Savitri.'"


SECTION CCLXLIV

"Markandeya said, 'At length, O king, after a long time had passed away,
the hour that had been appointed for the death of Satyavan arrived. And
as the words that had been spoken by Narada were ever present in the
mind of Savitri, she had counted the days as they passed. And having
ascertained that her husband would die on the fourth day following, the
damsel fasted day and night, observing the _Triratra_ vow. And hearing
of her vow, the king became exceedingly sorrowful and rising up soothed
Savitri and said these words, "This vow that thou hast begun to observe,
O daughter of a king, is exceedingly hard; for it is extremely difficult
to fast for three nights together!" And hearing these words, Savitri
said, "Thou needst not be sorry, O father! This vow I shall be able to
observe! I have for certain undertaken this task with perseverance; and
perseverance is the cause of the successful observance of vows." And
having listened to her, Dyumatsena said, "I can by no means say unto
thee, _Do thou break thy vow_. One like me should, on the contrary,
say,--_Do thou complete thy vow!_" And having said this to her, the
high-minded Dyumatsena stopped. And Savitri continuing to fast began to
look (lean) like a wooden doll. And, O bull of the Bharata race,
thinking that her husband would die on the morrow, the woe-stricken
Savitri, observing a fast, spent that night in extreme anguish. And when
the Sun had risen about a couple of hand Savitri thinking within
herself--_To-day is that day_, finished her morning rites, and offered
oblations to the flaming fire. And bowing down unto the aged Brahmanas,
and her father-in-law, and mother-in-law, she stood before them with
joined hands, concentrating her senses. And for the welfare of Savitri,
all the ascetics dwelling in that hermitage, uttered the auspicious
benediction that she should never suffer widowhood. And Savitri immersed
in contemplation accepted those words of the ascetics, mentally
saying,--_So be it!_--And the king's daughter, reflecting on those words
of Narada, remained, expecting the hour and the moment.

"'Then, O best of the Bharatas, well-pleased, her father-in-law and
mother-in-law said these words unto the princess seated in a corner,
"Thou hast completed the vow as prescribed. The time for thy meal hath
now arrived; therefore, do thou what is proper!" Thereat Savitri said,
"Now that I have completed the purposed vow, I will eat when the Sun
goes down. Even this is my heart's resolve and this my vow!"

"Markandeya continued, 'And when Savitri had spoken thus about her meal,
Satyavan, taking his axe upon his shoulders, set out for the woods. And
at this, Savitri said unto her husband, "It behoveth thee not to go
alone! I will accompany thee. I cannot bear to be separated from thee!"
Hearing these words of hers, Satyavan said, "Thou hast never before
repaired to the forest. And, O lady, the forest-paths are hard to pass!
Besides thou hast been reduced by fast on account of thy vow. How
wouldst thou, therefore, be able to walk on foot?" Thus addressed,
Savitri said, "I do not feel langour because of the fast, nor do I feel
exhaustion. And I have made up my mind to go. It behoveth thee not,
therefore, to prevent me!" At this, Satyavan said, "If thou desirest to
go, I will gratify that desire of thine. Do thou, however, take the
permission of my parents, so that I may be guilty of no fault!"'

"Markandeya continued, 'Thus addressed by her lord, Savitri of high vows
saluted her father-in-law and mother-in-law and addressed them, saying,
"This my husband goeth to the forest for procuring fruits. Permitted by
my revered lady-mother and father-in-law, I will accompany him. For
to-day I cannot bear to be separated from him. Thy son goeth out for the
sake of the sacrificial fire and for his reverend superiors. He ought
not, therefore, to be dissuaded. Indeed, he could be dissuaded if he
went into the forest on any other errand. Do ye not prevent me! I will
go into the forest with him. It is a little less than a year that I have
not gone out of the asylum. Indeed, I am extremely desirous of beholding
the blossoming woods!" Hearing these words Dyumatsena said, "Since
Savitri hath been bestowed by her father as my daughter-in-law, I do not
remember that she hath ever spoken any words couching a request. Let my
daughter-in-law, therefore, have her will in this matter. Do thou,
however, O daughter, act in such a way that Satyavan's work may not be
neglected!"'

"Markandeya continued, 'Having received the permission of both, the
illustrious Savitri, departed with her lord, in seeming smiles although
her heart was racked with grief. And that lady of large eyes went on,
beholding picturesque and delightful woods inhabited by swarms of
peacocks. And Satyavan sweetly said unto Savitri, "Behold these rivers
of sacred currents and these excellent trees decked with flowers!" But
the faultless Savitri continued to watch her lord in all his moods, and
recollecting the words of the celestial sage, she considered her husband
as already dead. And with heart cleft in twain, that damsel, replying to
her lord, softly followed him expecting that hour.'"


SECTION CCLXLV

"Markandeya said, 'The powerful Satyavan then, accompanied by his wife,
plucked fruits and filled his wallet with them. And he then began to
fell branches of trees. And as he was hewing them, he began to perspire.
And in consequence of that exercise his head began to ache. And
afflicted with toil, he approached his beloved wife, and addressed her,
saying, "O Savitri, owing to this hard exercise my head acheth, and all
my limbs and my heart also are afflicted sorely! O thou of restrained
speech, I think myself unwell, I feel as if my head is being pierced
with numerous darts. Therefore, O auspicious lady, I wish to sleep, for
I have not the power to stand." Hearing these words, Savitri quickly
advancing, approached her husband, and sat down upon the ground, placing
his head upon her lap. And that helpless lady, thinking of Narada's
words, began to calculate the (appointed) division of the day, the hour,
and the moment. The next moment she saw a person clad in red attire with
his head decked with a diadem. And his body was of large proportions and
effulgent as the Sun. And he was of a darkish hue, had red eyes, carried
a noose in his hand, and was dreadful to behold. And he was standing
beside Satyavan and was steadfastly gazing at him. And seeing him,
Savitri gently placed her husband's head on the ground, and rising
suddenly, with a trembling heart, spake these words in distressful
accents, "Seeing this thy superhuman form, I take thee to be a deity. If
thou will tell me, O chief of the gods, who thou art and what also thou
intendst to do!" Thereat, Yama replied, "O Savitri, thou art ever
devoted to thy husband, and thou art also endued with ascetic merit. It
is for this reason that I hold converse with thee. Do thou, O auspicious
one, know me for Yama. This thy lord Satyavan, the son of a king, hath
his days run out. I shall, therefore, take him away binding him in this
noose. Know this to be my errand!" At these words Savitri said, "I had
heard that thy emissaries come to take away mortals, O worshipful one!
Why then, O lord, hast thou come in person?"'

"Markandeya continued, 'Thus addressed by her, the illustrious lord of
_Pitris_, with a view to oblige her, began to unfold to her truly all
about his intentions. And Yama said, "This prince is endued with virtues
and beauty of person, and is a sea of accomplishments. He deserveth not
to be borne away by my emissaries. Therefore is it that I have come
personally." Saying this, Yama by main force pulled out of the body of
Satyavan, a person of the measure of the thumb, bound in noose and
completely under subjection. And when Satyavan's life had thus been
taken out, the body, deprived of breath, and shorn of lustre, and
destitute of motion, became unsightly to behold. And binding Satyavan's
vital essence, Yama proceeded in a southerly direction. Thereupon, with
heart overwhelmed in grief, the exalted Savitri, ever devoted to her
lord and crowned with success in respect of her vows, began to follow
Yama. And at this, Yama said, "Desist, O Savitri! Go back, and perform
the funeral obsequies of thy lord! Thou art freed from all thy
obligations to thy lord. Thou hast come as far as it is possible to
come." Savitri replied, "Whither my husband is being carried, or whither
he goeth of his own accord, I will follow him thither. This is the
eternal custom. By virtue of my asceticism, of my regard for my
superiors, of my affection for my lord, of my observance of vows, as
well as of thy favour, my course is unimpeded. It hath been declared by
wise men endued with true knowledge that by walking only seven paces
with another, one contracteth a friendship with one's companion. Keeping
that friendship (which I have contracted with thee) in view, I shall
speak to thee something. Do thou listen to it. They that have not their
souls under control, acquire not merit by leading the four successive
modes of life, viz.,--celibacy with study, domesticity, retirement into
the woods, and renunciation of the world. That which is called religious
merit is said to consist of true knowledge. The wise, therefore, have
declared religious merit to be the foremost of all things and not the
passage through the four successive modes. By practising the duties of
even one of these four modes agreeable to the directions of the wise, we
have attained to true merit, and, therefore, we do not desire the second
or the third mode, viz., celibacy with study or renunciation. It is for
this again that the wise have declared religious merit to be the
foremost of all things!" Hearing these words of hers, Yama said, "Do
thou desist! I have been pleased with these words of thine couched in
proper letters and accents, and based on reason. Do thou ask for a boon!
Except the life of thy husband, O thou of faultless features, I will
bestow on thee any boon that thou mayst solicit!" Hearing these words,
Savitri said, "Deprived of his kingdom and bereft also of sight, my
father-in-law leadeth a life of retirement in our sylvan asylum. Let
that king through thy favour attain his eye-sight, and become strong
like either fire or the Sun!" Yama said, "O thou of faultless features,
I grant thee this boon! It will even be as thou hast said! It seems that
thou art fatigued with thy journey. Do thou desist, therefore, and
return! Suffer not thyself to be weary any longer!" Savitri said, "What
weariness can I feel in the presence of my husband? The lot that is my
husband's is certainly mine also. Whither thou carriest my husband,
thither will I also repair! O chief of the celestials, do thou again
listen to me! Even a single interview with the pious is highly
desirable; friendship with them is still more so. And intercourse with
the virtuous can never be fruitless. Therefore, one should live in the
company of the righteous!" Yama said, "These words that thou hast
spoken, so fraught with useful instruction, delight the heart and
enhance the wisdom of even the learned. Therefore, O lady, solicit thou
a second boon, except the life of Satyavan!" Savitri said, "Sometime
before, my wise and intelligent father-in-law was deprived of his
kingdom. May that monarch regain his kingdom. And may that superior of
mine never renounce his duties! Even this is the second boon that I
solicit!" Then Yama said,--"The king shall soon regain his kingdom. Nor
shall he ever fall off from his duties. Thus, O daughter of a king have
I fulfilled thy desire. Do thou now desist! Return! Do not take any
future trouble!" Savitri said, "Thou hast restrained all creatures by
thy decrees, and it is by thy decrees that thou takest them away, not
according to thy will. Therefore it is, O god, O divine one, that people
call thee _Yama_! Do thou listen to the words that I say! The eternal
duty of the good towards all creatures is never to injure them in
thought, word, and deed, but to bear them love and give them their due.
As regards this world, everything here is like this (husband of mine).
Men are destitute of both devotion and skill. The good, however, show
mercy to even their foes when these seek their protection." Yama said,
"As water to the thirsty soul, so are these words uttered by thee to me!
Therefore, do thou, O fair lady, if thou will, once again ask for any
boon except Satyavana's life!" At these words Savitri replied, "That
lord of earth, my father, is without sons. That he may have a hundred
sons begotten of his loins, so that his line may be perpetuated, is the
third boon I would ask of thee!" Yama said, "Thy sire, O auspicious
lady, shall obtain a hundred illustrious sons, who will perpetuate and
increase their father's race! Now, O daughter of a king, thou hast
obtained thy wish. Do thou desist! Thou hast come far enough." Savitri
said, "Staying by the side of my husband, I am not conscious of the
length of the way I have walked. Indeed, my mind rusheth to yet a longer
way off. Do thou again, as thou goest on, listen to the words that I
will presently utter! Thou art the powerful son of Vivaswat. It is for
this that thou art called _Vatvaswata_ by the wise. And, O lord, since
thou dealest out equal law unto all created things, thou hast been
designated the _lord of justice_! One reposeth not, even in one's own
self, the confidence that one doth in the righteous. Therefore, every
one wisheth particularly for intimacy with the righteous. It is goodness
of heart alone that inspireth the confidence of all creatures. And it is
for this that people rely particularly on the righteous." And hearing
these words, Yama said, "The words that thou utterest, O fair lady, I
have not heard from any one save thee; I am highly pleased with this
speech of thine. Except the life of Satyavan, solicit thou, therefore, a
fourth boon, and then go thy way!" Savitri then said, "Both of me and
Satyavan's loins, begotten by both of us, let there be a century of sons
possessed of strength and prowess and capable of perpetuating our race!
Even this is the fourth boon that I would beg of thee!" Hearing these
words of hers, Yama replied, "Thou shalt, O lady, obtain a century of
sons, possessed of strength and prowess, and causing thee great delight.
O daughter of a king, let no more weariness be thine! Do thou desist!
Thou hast already come too far!" Thus addressed, Savitri said, "They
that are righteous always practise eternal morality! And the communion
of the pious with the pious is never fruitless! Nor is there any danger
to the pious from those that are pious. And verily it is the righteous
who by their truth make the Sun move in the heaven. And it is the
righteous that support the earth by their austerities! And, O king, it
is the righteous upon whom both the past and the future depend!
Therefore, they that are righteous, are never cheerless in the company
of the righteous. Knowing this to be the eternal practice of the good
and righteous, they that are righteous continue to do good to others
without expecting any benefit in return. A good office is never thrown
away on the good and virtuous. Neither interest nor dignity suffereth
any injury by such an act. And since such conduct ever adheres to the
righteous, the righteous often become the protectors of all." Hearing
these words of hers, Yama replied, "The more thou utterest such speeches
that are pregnant with great import, full of honeyed phrases, instinct
with morality, and agreeable to mind, the more is the respect that I
feel for thee! O thou that art so devoted to thy lord, ask for some
incomparable boon!" Thus addressed, Savitri said, "O bestower of
honours, the boon thou hast already given me is incapable of
accomplishment without union with my husband. Therefore, among other
boons, I ask for this, may this Satyavan be restored to life! Deprived
of my husband, I am as one dead! Without my husband, I do not wish for
happiness. Without my husband, I do not wish for heaven itself. Without
my husband, I do not wish for prosperity. Without my husband, I cannot
make up my mind to live! Thou thyself hast bestowed on me the boon,
namely, of a century of sons; yet thou takest away my husband! I ask for
this boon, 'May Satyavan be restored to life,' for by that thy words
will be made true."'

"Markandeya continued, 'Thereupon saying,--_So be it_,--Vivaswat's son,
Yama, the dispenser of justice, untied his noose, and with cheerful
heart said these words to Savitri, "Thus, O auspicious and chaste lady,
is thy husband freed by me! Thou wilt be able to take him back free from
disease. And he will attain to success! And along with thee, he will
attain a life of four hundred years. And celebrating sacrifices with due
