controversy between monopoly and hard work, between capital and labor.
During the Revolutionary War there was a heavy piece of timber to be
lifted, perhaps for some fortress, and a corporal was overseeing the
work, and he was giving commands to some soldiers as they lifted:
"Heave away, there! yo heave!" Well, the timber was too heavy; they
could not get it up. There was a gentleman riding by on a horse, and
he stopped and said to this corporal, "Why don't you help them lift?
That timber is too heavy for them to lift." "No," he said, "I won't;
I am a corporal." The gentleman got off his horse and came up to the
place. "Now," he said to the soldiers, "all together--yo heave!" and
the timber went to its place. "Now," said the gentleman to the
corporal, "when you have a piece of timber too heavy for the men to
lift, and you want help, you send to your commander-in-chief." It was
Washington. Now, that is about all the Gospel I know--the Gospel of
giving somebody a lift, a lift out of darkness, a lift out of earth
into heaven. That is all the Gospel I know--the Gospel of helping
somebody else to lift.

"Oh," says some wiseacre, "talk as you will, the law of demand and
supply will regulate these things until the end of time." No, they
will not, unless God dies and the batteries of the Judgment Day are
spiked, and Pluto and Proserpine, king and queen of the infernal
regions, take full possession of this world. Do you know who Supply
and Demand are? They have gone into partnership, and they propose to
swindle this earth and are swindling it. You are drowning. Supply and
Demand stand on the shore, one on one side, the other on the other
side, of the life-boat, and they cry out to you, "Now, you pay us what
we ask you for getting you to shore, or go to the bottom!" If you can
borrow $5000 you can keep from failing in business. Supply and Demand
say, "Now, you pay us exorbitant usury, or you go into bankruptcy."
This robber firm of Supply and Demand say to you: "The crops are
short. We bought up all the wheat and it is in our bin. Now, you pay
our price or starve." That is your magnificent law of supply and
demand.

Supply and Demand own the largest mill on earth, and all the rivers
roll over their wheel, and into their hopper they put all the men,
women, and children they can shovel out of the centuries, and the
blood and the bones redden the valley while the mill grinds. That
diabolic law of supply and demand will yet have to stand aside, and
instead thereof will come the law of love, the law of cooperation, the
law of kindness, the law of sympathy, the law of Christ.

Have you no idea of the coming of such a time? Then you do not believe
the Bible. All the Bible is full of promises on this subject, and as
the ages roll on the time will come when men or fortune will be giving
larger sums to humanitarian and evangelistic purposes, and there will
be more James Lenoxes and Peter Coopers and William E. Dodges and
George Peabodys. As that time comes there will be more parks, more
picture-galleries, more gardens thrown open for the holiday people and
the working-classes.

I was reading only this morning in regard to a charge that had been
made in England against Lambeth Palace, that it was exclusive; and
that charge demonstrated the sublime fact that to the grounds of that
wealthy estate eight hundred poor families have free passes, and forty
croquet companies, and on the hall-day holidays four thousand poor
people recline on the grass, walk through the paths, and sit under the
trees. That is Gospel--Gospel on the wing, Gospel out-of-doors worth
just as much as in-doors. That time is going to come.

That is only a hint of what is going to be. The time is going to come
when, if you have anything in your house worth looking at--pictures,
pieces of sculpture--you are going to invite me to come and see it,
you are going to invite my friends to come and see it, and you will
say, "See what I have been blessed with. God has given me this, and so
far as enjoying it, it is yours also." That is Gospel.

In crossing the Alleghany Mountains, many years ago, the stage halted,
and Henry Clay dismounted from the stage, and went out on a rock at
the very verge of the cliff, and he stood there with his cloak wrapped
about him, and he seemed to be listening for something. Some one said
to him, "What are you listening for?" Standing there, on the top of
the mountain, he said: "I am listening to the tramp of the footsteps
of the coming millions of this continent." A sublime posture for an
American statesman! You and I to-day stand on the mountain-top of
privilege, and on the Rock of Ages, and we look off, and we hear
coming from the future the happy industries, and smiling populations,
and the consecrated fortunes, and the innumerable prosperities of the
closing nineteenth and the opening twentieth century.

While I speak this morning, there lies in state the dead author and
patriot of France, Victor Hugo. The ten thousand dollars in his will
he has given to the poor of the city are only a hint of the work he
has done for all nations and for all times. I wonder not that they
allow eleven days to pass between his death and his burial, his body
meantime kept under triumphal arch, for the world can hardly afford to
let go this man who for more than eight decades has by his
unparalleled genius blessed it. His name shall be a terror to all
despots, and an encouragement to all the struggling. He has made the
world's burden lighter, and its darkness less dense, and its chain
less galling, and its thrones of iniquity less secure. Farewell,
patriot, genius of the century, Victor Hugo! But he was not the
overtowering friend of mankind.

The greatest friend of capitalist and toiler, and the one who will yet
bring them together in complete accord, was born one Christmas night
while the curtains of heaven swung, stirred by the wings angelic.
Owner of all things--all the continents, all worlds, and all the
islands of light. Capitalist of immensity, crossing over to our
condition. Coming into our world, not by gate of palace, but by door
of barn. Spending His first night amid the shepherds. Gathering after
around Him the fishermen to be His chief attendants. With adze, and
saw, and chisel, and ax, and in a carpenter-shop showing himself
brother with the tradesmen. Owner of all things, and yet on a hillock
back of Jerusalem one day resigning everything for others, keeping not
so much as a shekel to pay for His obsequies, by charity buried in the
suburbs of a city that had cast Him out. Before the cross of such a
capitalist, and such a carpenter, all men can afford to shake hands
and worship. Here is the every man's Christ. None so high, but He was
higher. None so poor, but He was poorer. At His feet the hostile
extremes will yet renounce their animosities, and countenances which
have glowered with the prejudices and revenge of centuries shall
brighten with the smile of heaven as He commands: "Whatsoever ye would
that men should do to you, do ye even so to them."




DESPOTISM OF THE NEEDLE.

    "So I returned, and considered all the oppressions that are
    done under the sun: and behold the tears of such as were
    oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of their
    oppressors there was power; but they had no
    comforter."--ECCLES. iv: 1.


Very long ago the needle was busy. It was considered honorable for
women to toil in olden time. Alexander the Great stood in his palace
showing garments made by his own mother. The finest tapestries at
Bayeux were made by the queen of William the Conqueror. Augustus, the
Emperor, would not wear any garments except those that were fashioned
by some member of his royal family. So let the toiler everywhere be
respected!

The needle has slain more than the sword. When the sewing-machine was
invented some thought that invention would alleviate woman's toil and
put an end to the despotism of the needle. But no; while the
sewing-machine has been a great blessing to well-to-do families in
many cases, it has added to the stab of the needle the crush of the
wheel; and multitudes of women, notwithstanding the re-enforcement of
the sewing-machines, can only make, work hard as they will, between
two dollars and three dollars per week.

The greatest blessing that could have happened to our first parents
was being turned out of Eden after they had done wrong. Adam and Eve,
in their perfect state, might have got along without work, or only
such slight employment as a perfect garden with no weeds in it
demanded. But as soon as they had sinned, the best thing for them was
to be turned out where they would have to work. We know what a
withering thing it is for a man to have nothing to do. Old Ashbel
Green, at fourscore years, when asked why he kept on working, said: "I
do so to keep out of mischief." We see that a man who has a large
amount of money to start with has no chance. Of the thousand
prosperous and honorable men that you know, nine hundred and
ninety-nine had to work vigorously at the beginning. But I am now to
tell you that industry is just as important for a woman's safety and
happiness. The most unhappy women in our communities to-day are those
who have no engagements to call them up in the morning; who, once
having risen and breakfasted, lounge through the dull forenoon in
slippers down at the heel and with disheveled hair, reading Ouida's
last novel, and who, having dragged through a wretched forenoon and
taken their afternoon sleep, and having passed an hour and a half at
their toilet, pick up their card-case and go out to make calls, and
who pass their evenings waiting for somebody to come in and break up
the monotony. Arabella Stuart never was imprisoned in so dark a
dungeon as that.

There is no happiness in an idle woman. It may be with hand, it may be
with brain, it may be with foot; but work she must, or be wretched
forever. The little girls of our families must be started with that
idea.

The curse of American society is that our young women are taught that
the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, tenth,
fiftieth, thousandth thing in their life is to get somebody to take
care of them. Instead of that, the first lesson should be how under
God they may take care of themselves. The simple fact is that a
majority of them do have to take care of themselves, and that, too,
after having, through the false notions of their parents, wasted the
years in which they ought to have learned how successfully to maintain
themselves. We now and here declare the inhumanity, cruelty, and
outrage of that father and mother who pass their daughters into
womanhood, having given them no facility for earning their livelihood.
Madame de Stael said: "It is not these writings that I am proud of,
but the fact that I have facility in ten occupations, in any one of
which I could make a livelihood." You say you have a fortune to leave
them. Oh, man and woman, have you not learned that like vultures, like
hawks, like eagles, riches have wings and fly away? Though you should
be successful in leaving a competency behind you, the trickery of
executors may swamp it in a night? or some officials in our churches
may get up a mining company and induce your orphans to put their money
into a hole in Colorado, and if by the most skillful machinery the
sunken money can not be brought up again, prove to them, that it was
eternally decreed that that was the way they were to lose it, and that
it went in the most orthodox and heavenly style. Oh, the damnable
schemes that professed Christians will engage in until God puts His
fingers into the collar of the hypocrite's robe and strips it clear
down to the bottom! You have no right, because you are well off, to
conclude that your children are going to be as well off. A man died
leaving a large fortune. His son fell dead in a Philadelphia
grog-shop. His old comrades came in and said as they bent over his
corpse: "What is the matter with you, Boggsey?" The surgeon standing
over him said: "Hush ye! He is dead!" "Oh, he is dead," they said.
"Come, boys; let us go and take a drink in memory of poor Boggsey!"
Have you nothing better than money to leave your children? If you have
not, but send your daughters into the world with empty brain and
unskilled hand, you are guilty of assassination, homicide, regicide,
infanticide.

There are women toiling in our cities for two and three dollars per
week who were the daughters of merchant princes. These suffering ones
now would be glad to have the crumbs that once fell from their
fathers' table. That worn-out, broken shoe that she wears is the
lineal descendant of the twelve-dollar gaiters in which her mother
walked; and that torn and faded calico had ancestry of magnificent
brocade that swept Broadway clean without any expense to the street
commissioners. Though you live in an elegant residence and fare
sumptuously every day, let your daughters feel it is a disgrace to
them not to know how to work. I denounce the idea prevalent in society
that, though our young women may embroider slippers and crochet and
make mats for lamps to stand on without disgrace, the idea of doing
anything for a livelihood is dishonorable. It is a shame for a young
woman belonging to a large family to be inefficient when the father
toils his life away for her support. It is a shame for a daughter to
be idle while her mother toils at the wash-tub. It is as honorable to
sweep the house, make beds or trim hats as it is to twist a
watch-chain.

As far as I can understand, the line of respectability lies between
that which is useful and that which is useless. If women do that which
is of no value, their work is honorable. If they do practical work, it
is dishonorable. That our young women may escape the censure of doing
dishonorable work, I shall particularize. You may knit a tidy for the
back of an arm-chair, but by no means make the money wherewith to buy
the chair. You may with a delicate brush beautify a mantel ornament,
but die rather than earn enough to buy a marble mantel. You may learn
artistic music until you can squall Italian, but never sing
"Ortonville" or "Old Hundred." Do nothing practical if you would in
the eyes of refined society preserve your respectability. I scout
these fine notions. I tell you a woman, no more than a man, has a
right to occupy a place in this world unless she pays a rent for it.

In the course of a life-time you consume whole harvests and droves of
cattle, and every day you live, breathe forty hogsheads of good, pure
air. You must by some kind of usefulness pay for all this. Our race
was the last thing created--the birds and fishes on the fourth day,
the cattle and lizards on the fifth day, and man on the sixth day. If
geologists are right, the earth was a million of years in the
possession of the insects, beasts, and birds before our race came upon
it. In one sense we were innovators. The cattle, the lizards, and the
hawks had pre-emption right. The question is not what we are to do
with the lizards and summer insects, but what the lizards and summer
insects are to do with us. If we want a place in this world, we must
earn it. The partridge makes its own nest before it occupies it. The
lark by its morning song earns its breakfast before it eats it, and
the Bible gives an intimation that the first duty of an idler is to
starve when it says: "If he will not work, neither shall he eat."
Idleness ruins the health; and very soon nature says: "This man has
refused to pay his rent, out with him!" Society is to be reconstructed
on the subject of woman's toil. A vast majority of those who would
have woman industrious shut her up to a few kinds of work. My judgment
in this matter is that a woman has a right to do anything that she can
do well. There should be no department of merchandise, mechanism, art,
or science barred against her. If Miss Hosmer has genius for
sculpture, give her a chisel. If Rosa Bonheur has a fondness for
delineating animals, let her make "The Horse Fair." If Miss Mitchell
will study astronomy, let her mount the starry ladder. If Lydia will
be a merchant, let her sell purple. If Lucretia Mott will preach the
Gospel, let her thrill with her womanly eloquence the Quaker
meeting-house.

It is said, If woman is given such opportunities she will occupy
places that might be taken by men. I say, If she have more skill and
adaptedness for any position than a man has, let her have it! She has
as much right to her bread, to her apparel, and to her home, as men
have. But it is said that her nature is so delicate that she is
unfitted for exhausting toil. I ask in the name of all past history
what toil on earth is more severe, exhausting, and tremendous than
that toil of the needle to which for ages she has been subjected? The
battering-ram, the sword, the carbine, the battle-ax, have made no
such havoc as the needle. I would that these living sepulchers in
which women have for ages been buried might be opened, and that some
resurrection trumpet might bring up these living corpses to the fresh
air and sunlight.

Go with me and I will show you a woman who by hardest toil supports
her children, her drunken husband, her old father and mother, pays her
house rent, always has wholesome food on her table, and when she can
get some neighbor on the Sabbath to come in and take care of her
family, appears in church with hat and cloak that are far from
indicating the toil to which she is subjected. Such a woman as that
has body and soul enough to fit her for any position. She could stand
beside the majority of your salesmen and dispose of more goods. She
could go into your wheelwright shops and beat one half of your workmen
at making carriages. We talk about woman as though we had resigned to
her all the light work, and ourselves had shouldered the heavier. But
the day of judgment, which will reveal the sufferings of the stake and
Inquisition, will marshal before the throne of God and the hierarchs
of heaven the martyrs of wash-tub and needle. Now, I say if there be
any preference in occupation, let women have it. God knows her trials
are the severest. By her acuter sensitiveness to misfortune, by her
hour of anguish, I demand that no one hedge up her pathway to a
livelihood. Oh! the meanness, the despicability of men who begrudge a
woman the right to work anywhere in any honorable calling!

I go still further and say that woman should have equal compensation
with men. By what principle of justice is it that women in many of our
cities get only two thirds as much pay as men, and in many cases only
half? Here is the gigantic injustice--that for work equally well, if
not better, done, woman receives far less compensation than man. Start
with the National Government. Women clerks in Washington get nine
hundred dollars for doing that for which men receive eighteen hundred
dollars. The wheel of oppression is rolling over the necks of
thousands of women who are at this moment in despair about what they
are to do. Many of the largest mercantile establishments of our cities
