If our Christ-worshipers claim that God endowed their saints with power
to perform the miracles related in their lives, some of the Pagans claim
also that the daughters of Anius, high-priest of Apollo, had really
received from the god Bacchus the power to change all they desired into
wheat, into wine, or into oil, etc.; that Jupiter gave to the nymphs who
took care of his education, a horn of the goat which nursed him in his
infancy, with this virtue, that it could give them an abundance of all
they wished for.

If our Christ-worshipers assert that their saints had the power of
raising the dead, and that they had Divine revelations, the Pagans had
said before them that Athalide, son of Mercury, had obtained from his
father the gift of living, dying, and coming to life whenever he wished,
and that he had also the knowledge of all that transpired in this world
as well as in the other; and that Esculapius, son of Apollo, had raised
the dead, and, among others, he brought to life Hyppolites, son of
Theseus, by Diana's request; and that Hercules, also, raised from the
dead Alceste, wife of Admetus, King of Thessalia, to return her to her
husband.

If our Christ-worshipers say that Christ was miraculously born of a
virgin, the Pagans had said before them that Remus and Romulus, the
founders of Rome, were miraculously born of a vestal virgin named Ilia,
or Silvia, or Rhea Silvia; they had already said that Mars, Argus,
Vulcan, and others were born of the goddess Juno without sexual union;
and, also, that Minerva, goddess of the sciences, sprang from Jupiter's
brain, and that she came out of it, all armed, by means of a blow which
this god gave to his own head.

If our Christ-worshipers claim that their saints made water gush from
rocks, the Pagans pretend also that Minerva made a fountain of oil
spring forth from a rock as a recompense for a temple which had been
dedicated to her.

If our Christ-worshipers boast of having received images from Heaven
miraculously, as, for example, those of Notre-Dame de Loretto, and of
Liesse and several other gifts from Heaven, as the pretended Holy Vial
of Rheims, as the white Chasuble which St. Ildefonse received from the
Virgin Mary, and other similar things: the Pagans boasted before them of
having received a sacred shield as a mark of the preservation of their
city of Rome, and the Trojans boasted before them of having received
miraculously from Heaven their Palladium, or their Idol of Pallas, which
came, they said, to takes its place in the temple which they had erected
in honor of this Goddess.

If our Christ-worshipers pretend that Jesus Christ was seen by His
apostles ascending to Heaven, and that several of their pretended saints
were transported to Heaven by angels, the Roman Pagans had said before
them, that Romulus, their founder, was seen after his death; that
Ganymede, son of Troas, king of Troy, was transported to Heaven by
Jupiter to serve him as cup-bearer that the hair of Berenice, being
consecrated to the temple of Venus, was afterward carried to Heaven;
they say the same thing of Cassiope and Andromedes, and even of the ass
of Silenus.

If our Christ-worshipers pretend that several of their saints' bodies
were miraculously saved from decomposition after death, and that they
were found by Divine Revelations, after having been lost for a long
time, the Pagans say the same of the holy of Orestes, which they pretend
to have found through an oracle, etc.

If our Christ-worshipers say that the seven sleeping brothers slept
during one hundred and seventy-seven years, while they were shut up in a
cave, the Pagans claim that Epimenides, the philosopher, slept during
fifty-seven years in a cave where he fell asleep.

If our Christ-worshipers claim that several of their saints continued to
speak after losing the head, or having the tongue cut out, the Pagans
claim that the head of Gambienus recited a long poem after separation
from his body.

If our Christ-worshipers glorify themselves that their temples and
churches are ornamented with several pictures and rich gifts which show
miraculous cures performed by the intercession of their saints, we also
see, or at least we formerly saw in the temple of Esculapius at
Epidaurus, many paintings of miraculous cures which he had performed.

If our Christ-worshipers claim that several of their saints have been
miraculously preserved in the flames without having received any injury
to their bodies or their clothing, the Pagans claim that the Holy women
of the temple of Diana walked upon burning coals barefooted without
burning or hurting their feet, and that the priests of the Goddess
Feronie and of Hirpicus walked in the same way upon burning coals in the
fires which were made in honor of Apollo.

If the angels built a chapel for St. Clement at the bottom of the sea,
the little house of Baucis and of Philemon was miraculously changed into
a superb temple as a reward of their piety. If several of their saints,
as St. James and St. Maurice, appeared several times in their armies,
mounted and equipped in ancient style, and fought for them, Castor and
Pollux appeared several times in battles and fought for the Romans
against their enemies; if a ram was miraculously found to be offered as
a sacrifice in the place of Isaac, whom his father Abraham was about to
sacrifice, the Goddess Vesta also sent a heifer to be sacrificed in the
place of Metella, daughter of Metellus: the Goddess Diana sent a hind in
the place of Iphigenie when she was at the stake to be sacrificed to
her, and by this means Iphigenie was saved.

If St. Joseph went into Egypt by the warning of an angel, Simonides, the
poet, avoided several great dangers by miraculous warnings which had
been given to him.

If Moses forced a stream of water to flow from a rock by striking it
with his staff, the horse Pegasus did the same: by striking a rock with
his foot a fountain issued.

If St. Vincent Ferrier brought to life a dead man hacked into pieces,
whose body was already half roasted and half broiled, Pelops, son of
Tantalus king of Phrygia, having been torn to pieces by his father to be
sacrificed to the Gods, they gathered all the pieces, joined them, and
brought them to life.

If several crucifixes and other images have miraculously spoken and
answered, the Pagans say that their oracles have spoken and given
answers to those who consulted them, and that the head of Orpheus and
that of Policrates gave oracles after their death.

If God revealed by a voice from Heaven that Jesus Christ was His Son, as
the Evangelists say, Vulcan showed by the apparition of a miraculous
flame, that Coceculus was really his son.

If God has miraculously nourished some of His saints, the Pagan poets
pretend that Triptolemus was miraculously nourished with Divine milk by
Ceres, who gave him also a chariot drawn by two dragons, and that
Phineus, son of Mars, being born after his mother's death, was
nevertheless miraculously nourished by her milk.

If several saints miraculously tamed the ferocity of the most cruel
beasts, it is said that Orpheus attracted to him, by the sweetness of
his voice and by the harmony of his instruments, lions, bears, and
tigers, and softened the ferocity of their nature; that he attracted
rocks and trees, and that even the rivers stopped their course to listen
to his song.

Finally, to abbreviate, because we could report many others, if our
Christ-worshipers pretend that the walls of the city of Jericho fell by
the sound of their trumpets, the Pagans say that the walls of the city
of Thebes were built by the sound of the musical instruments of
Amphion; the stones, as the poets say, arranging themselves to the
sweetness of his harmony; this would be much more miraculous and more
admirable than to see the walls demolished.

There is certainly a great similarity between the Pagan miracles and our
own. As it would be great folly to give credence to these pretended
miracles of Paganism, it is not any the less so to have faith in those
of Christianity, because they all come from the same source of error. It
was for this that the Manicheans and the Arians, who existed at the
commencement of the Christian Era, derided these pretended miracles
performed by the invocation of saints, and blamed those who invoked them
after death and honored their relics.

Let us return at present to the principal end which God proposed to
Himself, in sending His Son into the world to become man; it must have
been, as they say, to redeem the world from sin and to destroy
entirely the works of the pretended Devil, etc. This is what our
Christ-worshipers claim also, that Jesus Christ died for them according
to His Father's intention, which is plainly stated in all the pretended
Holy Books. What! an Almighty God, who was willing to become a mortal
man for the love of men, and to shed His blood to the last drop, to save
them all, would yet have limited His power to only curing a few diseases
and physical infirmities of a few individuals who were brought to Him;
and would not have employed His Divine goodness in curing the
infirmities of the soul! that is to say, in curing all men of their
vices and their depravities, which are worse than the diseases of their
bodies! This is not credible. What! such a good God would desire to
preserve dead corpses from decay and corruption; and would not keep from
the contagion and corruption of vice and sin the souls of a countless
number of persons whom He sought to redeem at the price of His blood,
and to sanctify by His grace! What a pitiful contradiction!




IV.--OF THE FALSITY OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

Let us proceed to the pretended visions and Divine Revelations, upon
which our Christ-worshipers establish the truth and the certainty of
their religion.

In order to give a just idea of it, I believe it is best to say in
general, that they are such, that if any one should dare now to boast of
similar ones, or wish to make them valued, he would certainly be
regarded as a fool or a fanatic.

Here is what the pretended Visions and Divine Revelations are:

God, as these pretended Holy Books claim, having appeared for the first
time to Abraham, said to him: "Get thee out of thy country, and from thy
kindred and from thy father's house, into a land that I will show thee."
Abraham, having gone there, God, says the Bible, appeared the second
time to him, and said, "Unto thy seed will I give this land," and there
builded he an altar unto the Lord, who appeared unto him. After the
death of Isaac, his son, Jacob going one day to Mesopotamia to look for
a wife that would suit him, having walked all the day, and being tired
from the long distance, desired to rest toward evening; lying upon the
ground, with his head resting upon a few stones, he fell asleep, and
during his sleep he saw a ladder set upon the earth, and the top of it
reached to Heaven; and beheld the angels of God ascending and descending
on it. And behold, the Lord stood above it, and said: "I am the Lord,
God of Abraham thy father, and the God of Isaac; the land whereon thou
liest, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed. And thy seed shall be as
the dust of the earth, and thou shalt spread abroad to the west and to
the east, and to the north and to the south and in thee and in thy seed
shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. And behold, I am with
thee and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest, and will bring
thee again into this land: for I will not leave thee until I have done
that which I have spoken to thee of." And Jacob awaked out of his sleep,
and he said: "Surely the Lord is in this place, and I knew it not." And
he was afraid, and said: "How dreadful is this place! this is none other
than the house of God, and this is the gate of Heaven." And Jacob rose
up early in the morning, and took the stone that he had put for his
pillow, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil on the top of it, and
made at the same time a vow to God, that if he should return safe and
sound, he would give Him a tithe of all he might possess.

Here is yet another vision. Watching the flocks of his father-in-law,
Laban, who had promised him that all the speckled lambs produced by his
sheep should be his recompense, he dreamed one night that he saw all the
males leap upon the females, and all the lambs they brought forth were
speckled. In this beautiful dream, God appeared to him, and said: "Lift
up now thine eyes and see that the rams which leap upon the cattle are
ring-streaked, speckled, and grizzled; for I have seen all that Laban
does unto thee. Now arise, get thee out from this land, and return unto
the land of thy kindred." As he was returning with his whole family, and
with all he obtained from his father-in-law, he had, says the Bible, a
wrestle with an unknown man during the whole night, until the breaking
of the day, and as this man had not been able to subdue him, He asked
him who he was. Jacob told Him his name; and He said: "Thy name shall be
called no more Jacob, but Israel; for as a prince hast thou power with
God and with men, and hast prevailed."

This is a specimen of the first of these pretended Visions and Divine
Revelations. We can judge of the others by these. Now, what appearance
of Divinity is there in dreams so gross and illusions so vain? As if
some foreigners, Germans, for instance, should come into our France,
and, after seeing all the beautiful provinces of our kingdom, should
claim that God had appeared to them in their country, that He had told
them to go into France, and that He would give to them and to their
posterity all the beautiful lands, domains, and provinces of this
kingdom which extend from the rivers Rhine and Rhone, even to the sea;
that He would make an everlasting alliance with them, that He would
multiply their race, that He would make their posterity as numerous as
the stars of Heaven and as the sands of the sea, etc., who would not
laugh at such folly, and consider these strangers as insane fools!

Now there is no reason to think otherwise of all that has been said by
these pretended Holy Patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in regard to
the Divine Revelations which they claim to have had. As to the
institution of bloody sacrifices, the Holy Scriptures attribute it to
God. As it would be too wearisome to go into the disgusting details of
this kind of sacrifices, I refer the reader to Exodus. [See chapters
xxv., xxvii., xxyiii., and xxix.]

Were not men insane and blind to believe they were honoring God by
tearing into pieces, butchering, and burning His own creatures, under
the pretext of offering them as sacrifices to Him? And even now, how is
it that our Christ-worshipers are so extravagant as to expect to please
God the Father, by offering up to Him the sacrifice of His Divine Son,
in remembrance of His being shamefully nailed to a cross upon which He
died? Certainly this can spring only from an obstinate blindness of
mind.

In regard to the detail of the sacrifices of animals, it consists but in
colored clothing, blood, plucks, livers, birds' crops, kidneys, claws,
skins, in the dung, smoke, cakes, certain measures of oil and wine, the
whole being offered and infected by dirty ceremonies as filthy and
contemptible as the most extravagant performances of magic. What is most
horrible of all this is, that the law of this detestable Jewish people
commanded that even men should be offered up as sacrifices. The
barbarians, whoever they were, who introduced this horrible law,
commanded to put to death any man who had been consecrated to the God of
the Jews, whom they called Adonai: and it is according to this execrable
precept that Jephthah sacrificed his daughter, and that Saul wanted to
sacrifice his son.

But here is yet another proof of the falsity of these revelations of
which we have spoken. It is the lack of the fulfillment of the great and
magnificent promises by which they were accompanied, for it is evident
that these promises never have been fulfilled.

The proof of this consists in three principal points:

Firstly. Their posterity was to be more numerous than all the other
nations of the world.

Secondly. The people who should spring from their race were to be the
happiest, the holiest, and the most victorious of all the people of the
earth.

Thirdly. His covenant was to be everlasting, and they should possess
forever the country He should give them. Now it is plain that these
promises-never were fulfilled.

Firstly. It is certain that the Jewish people, or the people of
Israel--which is the only one that can be regarded as having descended
from the Patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and the only ones to whom
these promises should have been fulfilled--have never been so numerous
that it could be compared with the other nations of the earth, much less
with the sands of the sea, etc., for we see that in the very time when
it was the most numerous and the most flourishing, it never occupied
more than the little sterile provinces of Palestine and its environs,
which are almost nothing in comparison with the vast extent of a
