accepted it intellectually, who have not yet separated themselves
from their own religious communities. All this suggests the
possibility of a rapid development, when the Spirit shall be poured
out from on high.

"Were the Harpoot field limited to the district seventy miles
square, of which the city is the centre, it might now be safely
left, with its seminaries and hundreds of villages, to the eleven
churches and the native laborers found there, with an annual grant,
for a few years, from the American Board. As it is, there is good
hope that, by the blessing of God on the means in use, the whole
district, embracing more than twenty thousand square miles and half
a million of souls, may, in a few years, be relinquished as a
missionary field."

Some estimate may be formed of the influence exerted by the press,
when it is considered that more than ten and a half millions of
pages were issued, in the single year 1870, in the Armenian,
Armeno-Turkish, Graeco-Turkish, and Bulgarian languages; and that
nearly three hundred millions of pages have been issued by these
missions since they began their operations. The number of
missionaries among the Armenians, in 1870, was forty, and of female
assistant missionaries sixty.

When the missionaries entered Turkey, religion was administered
wholly by the hierarchy, and had everywhere a stereotype form. Death
was the penalty for heresy among the Moslems; and it was scarcely
less in the prevailing sentiment of the nominal Christian sects. The
history relates how far this obstacle existed, and how far it has
been overcome. Whatever be true as regards thy ecclesiastics, the
people have now accepted, in some good degree, the principle of
religious freedom, and so has the government of the Sultan.

Before the institution of Protestant missions, the school-books
among the Turks, Armenians, and Greeks were in the ancient
languages, and the schools were consequently of little practical
value. One of the first things done by the missionaries was the
publication of school-books in the languages spoken by the people;
and this simple movement took wonderfully with both Christians and
Moslems, and has wrought a mighty revolution in the empire.

The principle of self-support in native churches appears now to be
the well-defined policy of all the missions in Turkey, to be
realized in practice at the earliest possible day. In some of the
missionary districts, the forming of the church and the ordination
of the pastor are expected to occur at the same time; and when aid
is given it is only for a limited series of years; and the schools,
and all other necessary agencies, are to be transferred at the
earliest moment from the mission to the people themselves. As a
general rule, the missionaries do not now take the lead in the
building of school-houses and places of worship. They aid as may
seem necessary; but the responsibility and chief pecuniary burden
are left with the people; except where the power of precedent, from
a different course, is too strong to be overcome at once.

The various testimonies embodied in this chapter will not affect all
minds alike. Yet all must admit, that the Gospel has gained a
deeper, firmer hold on the Armenians, than it ever had before, from
the days of Gregory "the Illuminator" until now. A mental, moral,
and social revolution is in progress, and mainly as a consequence of
the republication of the Gospel by missionaries in the past half
century; and there is no probability of any event occurring that
shall be sufficient to arrest it. Doubtless great evil would result
from extensive inroads of sectarian zeal. But there is hope of
triumph even then,--from the Bible in their own language, brought by
the press within reach of thousands of families, with fathers,
mothers, and children able and free to read it; from self-governed,
self-supported, self-propagating churches, scattered over the
empire, each with its indoctrinated native pastor; from woman
holding such a place in the family and social circle, as she never
held before; and from common schools, and normal schools, and high
schools, and theological seminaries, and even colleges, all
independent of the hierarchy, and beyond the power of the Jesuits;
with the logic of free thought, and a free conscience.

It would seem that it may not be needful greatly to enlarge the
present number of missionaries among the Armenian people. The native
ministers and native churches are the main thing. And it must be
admitted, that the Gospel, through the grace of God, has been
republished, and its institutions replanted, extensively and most
hopefully in the Armenian Church of the Orient. "In the midst of
fermentation," writes the Constantinople station in 1872, "the
leaven of truth is making its way; and so is, also, that of
infidelity; but the latter is temporary in its influence, the former
permanent. There is far more Protestantism outside of the Protestant
church than within it. Protestant ideas of truth, of liberty of
conscience, of progress, are spread far and wide, and are convulsing
these nations."






CHAPTER XLVI.

THE MOHAMMEDANS.


The necessity for republishing the Gospel among the Oriental
Churches, in order to approach the Mohammedans successfully, was
stated in the Introduction to this History.[1] It seems proper now
to give some illustrations of the effect this republication is
likely to have upon that people.

[1] See Volume i. pp. 1-6.

A large portion of the Mohammedan population of Turkey is
undoubtedly of Christian origin, and therefore less firmly wedded to
the Moslem faith and ritual, than are the Osmanly Turks. Three
fourths of the four millions in European Turkey, are believed to be
of this class. The Kuzzelbashes in Eastern Turkey have a tradition
that their Christian ancestors were compelled to become Mohammedans,
and they are now regarded by the Turks as little better than
infidels; nor are the Koords in much higher repute. Of the Druzes
enough was said in the first volume.[1]

[1] See Chapter xv.

Though the penalty of death for embracing the Christian religion has
been abrogated in Turkey,[1] yet the convert from Mohammedanism does
not feel himself free from danger of secret assassination. Far
greater security of life and property is enjoyed by Protestant
Armenians and Bulgarians, than by Protestant Turks. Indeed, it is
not long since Protestant Turks had no security whatever; and in
Persia, they have none now. When Koord, Kuzzelbash, and Turk shall
feel as free to inquire, and to act on conviction, as the members of
the nominally Christian sects, there are facts encouraging the
belief, that large numbers of Moslems may be expected to embrace the
Christian faith.

[1] See Chapters ix. and xxv.

There is no more satisfactory way of illustrating this than by a
simple statement of some of the more important facts. Indeed, it is
requisite to the completeness of this history, that these be now
stated, since they were designedly omitted in the preceding pages,
in their various connections, in order to be recorded here.

I begin with the year 1854, when the Imperial Firman of 1850 became
known in the provinces.[1] Mr. Dunmore, on his way from Arabkir to
Diarbekir, with Priest Kevork, spent the first night at a Moslem
village. They had travelled in the rain, and were scarcely dry, says
Mr. Dunmore, "when a company of Turks asked us to read to them from
the New Testament, and tell them something of our belief. Kevork
read to them from the Gospels, explaining, as he passed along, the
precious teachings of our Lord, and closed with prayer. All listened
attentively, and pronounced it, 'Good,' 'True,' 'Just.'"

[1] See Chapters xxiv. and xxv.

At another place, Mr. Dunmore found Turks desirous to hear the
Gospel. "More than once," he says, "in passing through the streets,
rich Moslem merchants called us into their shops, expressed their
sympathy with us, and an earnest desire that we would remain. They
called the Armenians to discuss questions with us, but the latter
did so only when constrained by fear, or shame. We were frequently
followed by a number of respectable Moslems, as we went from shop to
shop to converse with the Armenians; and one day so many gathered
about us that we could scarcely proceed on our way; all exclaiming,
'Right,' 'True,' 'Good,' to all that we said."

The Hutti Humaioun was promulgated in 1855. In that year the Turkish
Scriptures were sold openly on the bridge between Galata and
Constantinople, no man forbidding.

In September, 1857, Dr. Hamlin described the official examination,
at his house, of a family converted from Mohammedanism. It was made
at the instigation of the mother of the wife, who was almost frantic
at the baptism of her daughter and grandchild. "Our dear friends,"
wrote Dr. Hamlin, "stood firm as a rock, and at length the officers
arose and said to me, as nearly as I can state; 'We are fully
convinced that no compulsion has been used in this case, and, so far
as we can see, the accusations of the mother are false. It is the
will of his Majesty, our Sovereign, and it has become the law of the
empire, that every subject, without exception, should enjoy entire
religious freedom. The Mussulman is now as free to become a
Christian, as a Christian is free to become a Mussulman. The
government will know no difference in the two cases. It will only
undertake, whenever an accusation of restraint or compulsion is
brought, to ascertain the true state of the case; and then only in
order to secure the most unexceptionable freedom of choice.'"

In May of the following year, Dr. Hamlin wrote, that Selim Effendi,
a converted Mussulman employed as an evangelist among his
countrymen, had many inquirers. "I think he conversed with eleven
last week; among whom a woman expressed a very decided desire to
embrace Christianity, but she was afraid of her son. Her son had
sometimes expressed the same wish, but he was afraid of his mother!
Selim introduced them to each other."

"Let the following statements be appreciated," said Dr. Schauffler,
in September, 1858, "and the difference between the present and the
former state of things will be better understood. (1.) The Imans and
Ulemas are obliged to resort to moral suasion and entreaty. No
threats of persecution are employed; the government takes no
responsibility in these matters; the police has nothing to do with
them. (2.) Although there are fewer purchasers of the New Testament,
yet men buy it publicly, fearing no civil penalty. 'Why do you buy
this infidel book?' says a bigot to a Mohammedan purchaser of the
Gospel. He replies: 'I chose to buy it, and with my own money; you
are welcome to mind your own business;' and so the matter ends. (3.)
We hear of no search being made for the books in circulation among
Mussulmans, No New Testaments have been burned yet, that we know of,
by the Turks, as many copies have been by the Greek or Catholic
priests and bishops."

Mr. Dunmore wrote, in the same year, after visiting thirty villages,
mostly Kuzzelbash and Turkish: "I really felt ashamed, that in
touring I had ever passed by a Turkish village, without stopping to
point them to the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sins of the
world? And I testify what I have seen, when I say, that the Turks
are approachable; and many of them ready to listen to the Gospel;
while others are anxious to search the Scriptures, and are
restrained only by the pressure of fears, which, as yet, the
Hatti-humaioun has scarcely begun to remove in this region."

I quote again from the same missionary: "At a Koordish village of
twenty houses we spent two hours in preaching the Word to a company
of thirty. One of them, who seemed to have received a few rays of
light from enlightened men, boldly declared, that he believed the
time was near, when the sword would no more be used to keep men in
Moslem bonds, but that they all would soon be free to embrace the
Gospel, if they wished. We spent a night at a Kuzzelbash village of
forty houses. Immediately on our arrival, we had an audience of
thirty or forty; and during the long evening, fifty or more listened
to the great truths of the Gospel. We preached 'Christ crucified;
the way, the truth, and the life;' and they received the word with
eagerness. When the evening was far spent, we bowed together before
the mercy-seat, after which our audience reluctantly retired. These
are but samples of our visits among Kuzzelbashes and Turks on this
tour."

Dr. Hamlin, speaking of Turks near the close of 1858, says: "There
have been, here and there, some burnings of the New Testament; not
publicly, but in private, or in small social circles. Among
Mussulmans themselves a spirited debate has repeatedly arisen as to
the moral character of the act. Some have approved, others have most
decidedly condemned it, affirming that the New Testament is the Word
of God. What impressed us most strongly is the bold manner in which
orthodox Turks have declared it to be the Word of God, and that to
burn it is a sin."[1]

[1] See _Missionary Herald_ for 1858, p. 380.

Dr. Dwight wrote in May, 1859: "The work among the Turks is looming
up; and if not hindered by some untoward event, or by our neglect,
it will by and by assume very large proportions. That Turkish
officials through the country have been instructed not to persecute
Mohammedans who embrace Christianity, is very evident. The governors
of Sivas, Cesarea, and Diarbekir have, to our knowledge, within a
short time, and with actual cases before them, publicly declared,
that a Mohammedan who became a Christian could not be molested."

Mr. White visited a place on the north of the Taurus Mountains in
May, 1860, and had many calls from Mussulmans. "Every day they
came," he says, "with an apparently sincere desire to learn the
truth; and held long conversations on man's sinfulness, and how it
was possible for God to forgive sin. 'We have lost God;' 'We have
lost the road;' 'We cannot find God;' were expressions they used
very often. At almost every meeting, from three to five Mussulmans
were present. One is known all over the city as a Protestant; and a
second is a member of the Governor's Council."

Mr. Herrick, speaking of the Turkish department in the Bebek
Seminary, wrote thus, in the same year: "Quite a number of
Mohammedans have renounced Islam, and become true Christians; many
more are soberly inquiring after the truth; and many others are
turning, unsatisfied, from a religion which cannot save, or wavering
in a merely nominal devotion to Islamism. That which is most
striking is the clear evidence, often, of the work of God's Spirit
in individual cases, and in general movements."

Dr. Schneider gives this testimony concerning the Mussulmans at an
out-station of Aintab: "There is a willingness among the Moslems
here to listen to arguments in favor of Christianity, that is
uncommon. By intercourse with Protestants, and the reading of the
Scriptures, many of them have obtained glimpses of the truth, and a
few are more or less convinced that Christianity is true. While I
was there, fifteen Mussulmans and several women attended a service.
Apparently there is no place in this region where there is so much
prospect of a speedy work to be done among the Mussulmans."

The inducement to labor among the Moslems, was much increased in the
year 1860. At one large town in the heart of Asia Minor, a Moslem
said to a Protestant, "Since you came here, you have caused us to
fall into doubt and fear." At another, a Turk and his wife appeared
to be true Christians. Though the man was zealous in making known
the Gospel, the Moslems agreed to ignore his being a Protestant. At
Diarbekir, a Turk declared himself a Christian, and a captain of the
army at Harpoot did the same. Many Turks in the latter region
purchased the New Testament, and some the whole Bible. The military
Pasha of this district bought a Bible publicly, and so did the civil
Pasha; thus showing the effect of the thorough evangelization of
that community. At Constantinople, Dr. Dwight reported his having
read the Scriptures and bowed in prayer with a high officer of the
army in the palace of a Pasha, in the Mussulman quarter of the city,
and in the presence of servants; the officer appearing to be
strongly under the influence of evangelical ideas and feelings. Six
Moslem converts were baptized that year at the capital. One of these
was an Iman, seventy years of age. There had then been fifteen
baptisms of adult converts from Mohammedanism in Constantinople.[1]
The Grand Vizier subsequently required the Serasker to call Abdi
Effendi, the baptized Iman above mentioned, and examine him. This
was done, and the old man made the following confession and
statement: "We are no ghiaours (_i. e_. we worship neither pictures,
nor crosses, nor saints); we assemble and read out of this book
(drawing out of his bosom the New Testament); we sing out of this
one (producing a Turkish Hymn Book); and we listen to preaching from
the Gospel, and engage in prayer for all men. If there is anything
wrong in this book, please point it out to me." He supposed (on
inquiry) that there might be some forty men who were like him, and
mentioned some of their names.

[1] In part, by English missionaries.

It would be easy to multiply illustrations like the foregoing of the
susceptibility of Mohammedans to Christian influence; and the reader
will notice that they are of the same general nature with the early
manifestations of interest among the Armenians. There have been,
also, Turkish converts, who braved death in their Christian
profession, and remained steadfast unto the end.

No churches have been formed by our missionaries exclusively of
Turkish Christians; and it can hardly be said, that the Board has
yet had an organized mission to this people. Of the four
missionaries sent especially to the Turks, Dr. Schauffler has
devoted himself chiefly to translating the Scriptures into the
Osmanli-Turkish; Mr. Herrick, besides doing service by his
commentaries and other literary labors in that language, has been
mainly employed in the Turkish department of the Theological
Seminary, first at Bebek, and then at Marsovan; the younger Mr.
Schauffler was born on the ground, as we may say, and began his
labors amid the strifes of the Armenians in Constantinople with the
missionaries, which was a great hindrance to his work, and the
health of his family not allowing him to remain in Turkey, he is now
a pioneer in the new mission to Austria; and Mr. Hutchison had
scarcely entered the Turkish department of the Bebek Seminary, when
the failure of his wife's health required a return to the United
States. The mission of the Rev. James L. Merrick to the Persian
Mohammedans, in 1834, was little more than a tentative exploration
of the field, and was not continued.[1]

[1] It should be stated that the English Church Missionary Society
has had a missionary to the Mohammedans in Constantinople since
1862, and reports five converts who are communicants. For the
reactionary movement among the Turks at Constantinople, in
consequence of the distribution of Dr. Pfander's _Defense of
Christianity against Mohammedanism_, see page 234 of this volume.

With a field so inviting as the Armenian along side of the
Mohammedan, it was not easy to obtain missionaries to the Moslems.
Then again, missionaries to the Armenians soon became engrossed by
their labors. "The Mohammedans," wrote Dr. Schauffler in 1859,
"never will be cared for by missionaries to the Armenians or the
Bulgarians. We can all render each other important services, but no
missionary can take charge of two nationalities. Each one, soon
after coming, finds his hands so full of business for which he feels
responsible, that he cannot do much besides. Moreover, every man
gets his sympathies enlisted for the people of his charge. This is
probably necessary to enable us to labor with energy, and suffer
with patience; but this needful concentration of feeling precludes
the idea of universality in missionary labor."

Experience has also developed the great law here, as well as
elsewhere, that the main work of winning races to Christianity must
be performed by men of the same race. A Moslem will listen more
patiently to a Christian Turk ("renegade" though he be), than he
will to an Armenian; nor has it been found easy to enlist the
Protestant Armenians effectively in labors for the Turks. It may be
otherwise when the work is more advanced, and the Armenians are
elevated to a higher social level. But a ministry raised from among
themselves, is indispensable to the most efficient evangelization of
the Turks.

It would seem, therefore, that, up to the present time, the original
plan of the mission to Turkey has been more promising of good, than
any other; namely, that of operating upon the Mohammedans through
regenerated churches planted in the communities where they dwell;
and the greatest usefulness of these churches, for obvious reasons,
must be expected in the interior, rather than in the capital. Thus
far, there has been no material or very obvious change in the
missionary policy; and the risk of such a change, and its probable
advantages on the whole, should be carefully estimated. The
Protestant nations of Europe are substantially with us in our
evangelical labors among the Oriental Churches; and the churches we
gather are "our epistle," "known and read" by the Mohammedans.
Gradually, it may be, some of the missionaries now in the field, who
are familiar with the Turkish language, and have their Armenian
churches supplied with pastors, will turn their attention mainly to
the Moslems, in the exercise of a sound discretion, both as regards
the Turks and the Christians. It may be found that both classes may
be happily inclosed in the same fold. The missionary now occupies a
higher and more influential position with both, than he did years
ago. The Turk, too, is better appreciated as he becomes known. He
has more of manliness, self-respect, and religious feeling, than
some races for whose salvation our labors have been blest. The
masses are by no means hopeless, and the middle class is full of
promise.

The future is in the hands of the great Head of the Church; who has
so crowned with success the past labors of his servants in Turkey,
as to warrant the expectation, that whatever is needful to the
effectual republication of the Gospel in those Bible lands, may be
attempted with the glad assurance of success.






MISSIONARIES






MISSIONARIES.


When no date occurs in the right hand column, it is because the
missionary is still in the field.

In several instances, the date of the wife's arrival in the field
precedes the arrival of the husband. The explanation is that the
wife, previous to marriage, had been connected with the mission as a
teacher.

Dr. Eli Smith's Exploring Tour is included in his thirty years'
missionary service. So in the case of Dr. H. G. O. Dwight, and some
others.

Cyprus is included in the Mission to Greece and the Greeks; the
population consisting largely of that element.

The asterisk (*) placed before a name, denotes that the person is
deceased. When it is placed before a _date_, in the right hand
column, it denotes that the person died _at the time there
indicated_, and in the field.

The Assyria Mission terminated in November, 1860, when it was merged
in the Mission to the Armenians. The persons composing that mission
remained at their stations.

It should be specially noted, that this table is not destined to
state the time of a missionary's connection either with the Mission,
or with the Board, but only of his residence in the field.

MISSION TO PALESTINE.

  ORDAINED            WIVES OF           TIME OF        TIME OF
MISSIONARIES.       MISSIONARIES.       ENTERING.       LEAVING.
*Pliny Fisk                          Jan. 15, 1820.  *Oct. 23, 1825.
*Levi Parsons                        Jan. 15, 1820.  *Feb. 10, 1822.
*Jonas King, D.D.    [See Mission
                       to Greece]    Nov.  2, 1822.   Aug. 26, 1825.
*George B. Whiting   [See Mission
                       to Syria]     Oct.,    1834.   Autumn,  1843.
                     Mrs. Matilda S.
                       Whiting       Oct.,    1834.   Autumn,  1843.
Wm. M. Thomson, D.D. [See Mission
                       to Syria]     April,   1834.
                     *Mrs. Eliza N.
                       Thomson       April,   1834.  *July 22, 1834.
*John F. Lanneau     [See Mission
                       to Syria]     May   1, 1836.   June 11, 1846.
