in their own day were persecuted by all orthodox Christians.

"Historically, churches have stood on the side of the powers that be.
They have defended slavery or have held their tongues about it. They
have maintained serfdom and kept serfs. They have opposed every movement
undertaken for the liberation of the masses of men; the ideals of
liberty, equality and fraternity are the creations of the camps of their
enemies, of the rationalists of the eighteenth century, and the liberals
and socialists of the nineteenth century. They have defended and
condoned the industrial exploitation of children. They have fought
bitterly the enfranchisement of women. They have justified unjust war.
They have fought with book and bill and candle and fagot every new great
step in the advancement of science from gravitation to evolution.
Wardens, ever since Constantine gave the schools of antiquity into the
keeping of the Christian bishops, of the education of the people, they
have fought with all their power the establishment of free public
schools and the spread of literacy and knowledge among the people."
(_Horace M. Kallen: "Why Religion."_)

If Christianity has made any progress in the assimilation of doctrines
that are less barbarous than heretofore, they have been effected in
spite of the most vigorous resistance, and solely as a result of the
onslaught of freethinkers.

Throughout the ages, when a thinking man had questioned the how and why
of any secular problem, so long as that problem had no direct or
indirect bearing upon religion, or upon any branch of knowledge that was
assumed to be infallibly foretold in the Bible, that man was unmolested.
The problems falling into the above classification were extremely small
due to the strongly defended theological lunacy that asserted itself in
the declaration that all knowledge both spiritual and material was
contained in the Bible as interpreted by the Church.

Man, however, when he broached his religious doubts, was regarded as the
most sinful of beings, and it was forbidden him to question and yield to
the conclusions that his mind evolved.

Think of the irony and tragedy of this self-enslavement of the human
mind! There is one characteristic that man prides himself as having
apart from all lower animals, his ability to reason and to think. Is it
his superior musculature and brute strength that has placed man upon
his present pinnacle of advanced civilization, or is it his mental
development, his mind, that has taught him to harness the forces of
nature? Has not his mind so co-*ordinated his movements that he has
enslaved those forces of nature to be his aid? And yet, if mind is one
thing that has enabled man to pull himself out of the morass of brute
life, why has it been that man himself has been so persistently decrying
and degrading the efforts of that mind?

The answer is, that religion has provided the shackles and securely and
jealously enslaved the mind. With the aid of his religious beliefs man
has been ensnared into a mental prison in which he has been an all too
willing captive. Surely it is easier to believe than to think.

Napoleon, himself a sceptic, was cognizant of this slave philosophy.
"What is it," he is reported to have asked, "that makes the poor man
think it is quite natural that there are fires in my castle when he is
dying of cold? That I have ten coats in my wardrobe while he goes naked?
That at each of my meals enough is served to feed his family for a week?
It is simply religion, which tells him that in another life I shall be
only his equal, and that he actually has more chance of being happy than
I. Yes, we must see to it that the doors of the churches are open to
all, and that it does not cost the poor man much to have prayers said on
his tomb."

How well the ecclesiastical psychologists have grasped this fact, and
how well they have fashioned a strong chain for the mind out of this
weakness of human minds!

Church and government have been well aware of this psychology, and have
fought constantly the spread of Freethought literature to the masses.
Professor Bury, in his "History of Freedom of Thought," speaking of
England, tells us, "If we take the cases in which the civil authorities
have intervened to repress the publication of unorthodox opinions during
the last two centuries, we find that the object has always been to
prevent the spread of free thought among the masses."

Think but a moment how well the above is borne out by the attitude of
the Church in the stand that it took during the Middle Ages, when she
prohibited the reading of the Bible by any person except her clergy.
When she prohibited the printing of all books except those that she
approved of; books that minutely agreed in all details with the
phantastic fables of her Bible were the only ones allowed to be printed.

The Church also strenuously objected to the printing of Bibles in the
languages of the masses. That most efficient shackle to the mind, that
precept that there was no knowledge, whether material or spiritual, that
was not contained in the Bible, how strenuously the Church upheld that
doctrine!

And in our own day, the ridiculous assumption that "mysteries" (a
special form of ignorance) are the special province of the Church.
Considering these few examples as well as all ecclesiastical endeavor,
no rational mind can escape the fact that that primeval curse, religion,
has had for its object, down through the centuries, the sadistic desire
to enslave and trample on the mind of man. It has been a defensive
measure on the part of the Church, for she well recognizes that once the
mind is free, it will free itself of the shackles of religion also.

Nor is this all. I execrate the enslavement of the mind of our young
children by the ecclesiastics. Is anything so pitiful to behold as the
firm grasp that the Church places on the mind of the youngest of
children? Children at play, children of four and five years of age, will
be heard to mention with fearful tones various religious rites, such as
baptism and confirmation, and to perform in their manner these rites
with their dolls. Fear! Fear! instilled into the minds of the
impressionable children! Think of the degradation that the ecclesiastics
practice when they insist that from the time a child is out of its
infancy its instruction shall be placed in their hands. They take the
most precious possession of man, his mind, and mould it to their desire.
The mind of a child is plastic, it is like a moist piece of clay and
they mould it and form it to their desire. Warped and poured into the
ecclesiastic mould of fear, the mind of the child becomes set and fixed
with the years. Then it is too late for rational thinking, as far as
religious matters go, the mind of the adult is firmly set in the form
that the ecclesiastic has fashioned for him in his youth. It is
impossible for the adult so taught to reason clearly and rationally
concerning his religion; the mould is too strong, the clay has set,
reason cannot penetrate into that hardened form. That is why it is
almost impossible for the adult who has been exposed to this mental
moulding from his infancy to break away from the fears and superstitions
learned on his mother's knee.

If Christianity, Hebrewism, Mohammedanism, or any other creed is true,
its truth must be more apparent at the age of twenty-five than it is at
the age of five. Why does the ecclesiastic not leave off his advances
until the child reaches a mature age, an age when he can reason? Then,
if theism is true, he can accept it with a reasoning mind, not a blindly
faithful mind. The theist realizes, however, that belief is at one pole,
reason at the other. Belief, creed, religion, are ideations of the
primitive mind and the mind of the child; reason is the product of
mature thought. Schopenhauer remarked that, "The power of religious
dogma when inculcated early is such as to stifle conscience, compassion,
and finally every feeling of humanity."

It is an undeniable fact that if the clergy would but leave their
tainted hands off the minds of our children until they would have
reached a mature age, there would be no religious instinct. Religious
instinct is a myth. Give me but two generations of men who have not been
subjected to this religious influence in childhood, and there will be a
race of atheists.

The ecclesiastic has from earliest times taken the standpoint that the
masses of people are of crude susceptibility and clumsy intelligence,
"sordid in their pursuits and sunk in drudgery; and religion provides
the only means of proclaiming and making them feel the high import of
life." (_Schopenhauer._) Thus the theist is led to the conclusion that
the end justifies the means.

Theism is a hypothesis which, among other things, attempts an
explanation of the universe. The theist recognizes a creator who created
the universe and is responsible for its operation. The atheist clearly
perceives that the assumption of a creator does not advance him in the
slightest degree towards the solution of the mysterious problem of the
universe. The oft-repeated question still admits of no answer, "Who
created the creator"?

It is an absurd answer to reply that the creator created himself, yet,
even if this is granted, may not the universe have created itself? If
the theist puts forward the statement that God has always existed, the
atheist may well reply that if God has always existed, why can he not
say that the universe has always existed? The atheist is not concerned
with the creation of the universe; to him it presents a problem which is
beyond the comprehension of his present mental capacities. He
comprehends the fact of its being, and that is as far as he or any
rational mind can go. Atheism confines itself to a refutation of theism,
and avoids the theistic fallacy of assuming without any proofs or
reasonable arguments to substantiate the assumption of an intelligent,
omnipotent, omniscient, anthropomorphic, and anthropocentric creator.
The theistic assumption has but retarded the advance of practical
knowledge, and prepared the soil for superstition and the countless
terrors of religious beliefs.

Atheism, as far as a rational explanation of the universe is covered,
although it does not offer an explanation of the "ultimate," or "the
riddle of the universe," does insist that any view held be one that
shall be based on truth and conformity to reality. It further maintains
that if a view be propagated it should be held in the same position that
any scientific proposition is held. It must be open to verification; if
it be verified as any scientific theory is verified, it will be accepted
in part, or in toto, and be proven to be true or displaced by a closer
approximation to the truth. To certain types of men there may be a
negative attitude expressed in this credo, which leaves the mind
unsatisfied. This is but an emotional bias and has nothing to do
whatsoever with the attainment of truth. A delusion may be more
comforting than the truth, but that does not necessitate the conclusion
that a delusion may be of more ultimate benefit than a constant striving
for the truth. It has often been said that atheism, in that negative
aspect, places a question mark upon our problems. However, while a
question mark may indicate a negative value, it may also prove to be a
mental provocative. A period placed at the end of a problem denotes that
it has been definitely solved. In connection with the origin of the
universe, no period can be placed at the end of that problem, and since
we are awaiting the solution, it is much more to the interest of further
advances to place the question mark there, than to consider the matter
solved. Surely, sufficient instances have been enumerated in this
discussion to show the stultification and retardation that ensues when
an institution maintains an insistence that a problem be held to
conform in any of its explanatory aspects to a preconceived infallible
statement, or considers a problem not to exist, or closes its eyes to
the inconsistencies in an explanation which is being maintained by
mental persuasion and force. When the Bible was considered as containing
the answer to all our problems we have seen what the result was. If
atheism places a question mark upon the problem of the universe, it does
so in a constructive manner; for that mark points to the direction in
which a logical solution may be possible. Such is the mental attitude of
the scientist. He places an interrogation point upon his problems and
that mark is the impetus, the mental stimulus, that leads him on to take
infinite pains in his labors and, as time passes, each question mark is
replaced by knowledge; it is knowledge and knowledge alone, reason not
faith, that furnishes the period.

It was Haeckel who asserted that, "The most dangerous of the three great
enemies of reason and knowledge is not malice, but ignorance, or
perhaps, indolence." The question mark as applied to a problem that is
recognizably not solved is a signpost to the knowledge that time must
bring. The spurious period placed at the end of a problem is the death
warrant for that problem and there it must lie devitalized by ignorance
and indolence.

It has often been affirmed that what we see in this universe is
phenomena, and all explanations but interpret the manifestations of
these phenomena. What is in back of and beyond these phenomena may never
be known, and if it be known, would be of no further use to us. It is
equally as true that if we but see phenomena and our mental capacities
deny us a conception of the reality beyond phenomena, yet, we have a
growing knowledge of the laws that govern these phenomena. And it is a
comprehensive knowledge of these invariable laws that govern the
universe that are of universal value. These laws have been ascertained
by the questioning mental attitude, and not by a futile reliance on
faith.

Human knowledge has expanded immensely in the last fifty years, and this
by the purely scientific method, the materialistic method, and the
questioning attitude. The value of these findings when they can be
converted into practical applications in industry are well known to all.

We have added nothing to our store of knowledge except by the exercise
of our mentality and reason. The application of the scientific method to
the workings of the mind has made more progress in explaining the mind
in the brief period of fifty years than philosophical deductions had
made in the past two thousand years. Every new fact that has been
discovered has fitted into the mechanistic scheme of the universe, and
not one new fact has been disclosed that suggested anything beyond
nature. The theistic interpretation of the universe has been completely
discredited by the scientific investigations. Science has brought to the
confines of invariable laws multitudes of problems that had hitherto
been supposed to point to "spiritual" interference. Theology has been
driven out of the open spaces of reason and still persists in clinging
to the twilight zone of the present unknown, only to be driven from its
precarious position constantly by our increasing knowledge and with
increasing rapidity from shadow to shadow.

There has been an increasing tendency shown by physicists to consider
that matter and energy are interchangeable, and that the one ultimate
reality is energy. If this be so, we are still dealing with an ultimate
that is a material reality. The Nobel prize in medicine for the year
1932 was awarded to two British investigators, Sir Charles Scott
Sherrington, professor of physiology at Oxford University, and Dr. Edgar
Douglas Adrian, professor of physiology at Cambridge University. Their
researches seem to have settled definitely a problem that has long been
a bone for contention. Nerve energy has been shown conclusively to be of
an electric type of energy. The old question of whether mind was part of
the material world has been shown by these experiments to be answered in
the affirmative. There is no duality, mind and matter are one, and mind
is but a special property of highly specialized matter.

It is with a great deal of regret that the freethinker contemplates the
attitude of such scientists as Jeans, Eddington, Millikan, and the
philosopher Professor Whitehead. Their hesitation to divorce themselves
completely from all conceptions of a supernatural force leads to a great
deal of confusion. An acquaintance with the writings of Einstein brings
one the certainty that he is as much in accordance with the attitude of
freethought as is the most militant atheist. The "cosmic sense" and
"totality of existence" of Einstein is as far removed from the
conception of a Yahveh as is the mentality of an Australian black man
from that of Einstein's mental grasp. Similarly with the cosmic
consciousness expressed in the writings of Jeans, Eddington, and
Whitehead. With characteristic disregard for the truth certain modern
theologians have grasped this cringing attitude of the above-mentioned
men and have stressed their viewpoints by a dishonest interpretation
that these men actually give a scientific certitude to their own
theologic creeds and dogmas. Nothing can be further from the truth. The
freethinker would have each theologian who tells his adherents that
these men lend credence to their beliefs to consider the following: if
the above-named men would be asked if they believed in a deity who
actively interposed his will and influence in the lives of men, as is
commonly expressed in the term "Providence," if they ascribed to the
belief in personal immorality, if they themselves believed in the
existence of a "soul," if they ascribed to the statement that "prayer"
influenced the opinion of an all-powerful being to intercede for them in
their problems and grief, if they believed that the Bible was a book
dictated by God, or that a god caused to be written for him his
"revelations"; that heaven and hell exist in the meaning that
theologians assure their adherents that they do; that sin and morality
is what theologians still hold it to be; that there has been a "fall"
and therefore the necessity for a "redemption" of man; and that creed
and dogma are necessary factors in the worship of a deity,--what would
their answers be? Eddington, Jeans, Einstein, and Whitehead would answer
these questions exactly as would the most militant atheists.

The mental attitude of these men can best be explained when one
considers certain similarities between theological asceticism and
scientific asceticism. And it is the duty of the freethinker clearly to
point out why this confusion has arisen. During the ages of faith, the
world beheld a swarm of men and women who retired from the grim
realities of a world which at that time was made abhorrent to all
sensitive men by the most exacting insistence of theologians that
"faith" was the all necessary ingredient of life, and that closed its
eyes completely to the degrading actualities of life that this
insistence led to. Multitudes of men retired to the desert and to the
protective walls of monasteries. There, by constant privations,
fastings, continual prayer, flagellation, and introspection, they spent
their lives. These ascetic individuals by these means were enabled to
enter what may be called a "theologic trance" and their subsequent
hallucinations, illusions, and delusions gave to them what they deemed
to be a transcendental insight into the construction of the universe
and what was expected between "fallen" and debased man and his
omnipotent creator. These men keenly apprehended what some today, in a
gentler age, have called "cosmic consciousness."

I do not mean to imply that these before-mentioned scientists have
applied such a rigor to their lives. What is meant to be stated is that
these men by their research and comprehension of the vastness of the
universe stand in awe and fear before this brain-benumbing aspect.
Modern astrophysics, to one who attempts to comprehend its vastness,
