prefer the wisdom of this world, to the eternal wisdom of God in Christ
Jesus. And as none but a madman would make use of the light of a candle in
sunshine; so no man in his senses would think himself more enlightened by
worldly wisdom, than by the divine wisdom. Strange madness! that a man
should expect more light from the creature, than from the Creator, the
Father of lights, God blessed for ever! Whosoever duly apprehends my
meaning, has in him the beginning of the divine, eternal, and heavenly
wisdom, which is the subject of the whole 119th Psalm.

25. As the sun is the ornament of heaven, so Christ is the ornament of his
church, and of the new heaven, and new earth in their future glory, where
it will be manifested to all the elect, that he is "the brightness of his
Father's glory, and the express image of his person." Heb. 1:3; Col. 1:15.

26. As dwellings are pleasant, in proportion as they receive the light, so
"God dwelleth in light." 1 Tim. 6:16. And the heavenly Jerusalem is
described as full of sweet and refreshing light. "It hath no need of the
sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it: for the glory of God enlightens
it, and the Lamb is the light thereof." Rev. 21:23.

27. Ah the light makes all things clear and plain; so there is nothing in
heaven or in earth, no spirit, no being, nor the very thoughts of the
heart, that can be hidden from the light of divine wisdom. Heb. 4:12, 13.
Hence the Psalmist says, "Thou hast set our iniquities before thee, our
secret sins in the light of thy countenance." Ps. 90:8. And "Thou
understandest my thought afar off." Ps. 139:2.

28. As the light communicates itself to all creatures, and diffuses itself
over the world; so God communicates himself to all creatures, particularly
to men, delighting most of all in doing them good.

29. Lastly, the light and sun are a witness of the glorification of our
souls and bodies at the resurrection. The glorification of our souls is,
indeed, in some degree accomplished in this life by the Holy Spirit,
according to the words of St. Paul, "We all, with open face beholding as
in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from
glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord." 2 Cor. 3:18. These,
however, are but the imperfect beginnings, and first glimpses of eternal
happiness; but hereafter both soul and body shall be clothed with
everlasting light and glory. Hence St. Paul says, "There is one glory of
the sun, and another glory of the moon, and another glory of the stars: so
also is the resurrection of the dead." 1 Cor. 15:41, 42. "They that be
wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn
many to righteousness, as the stars forever and ever." Dan. 12:13.

30. Of this we find an image in the transfiguration of our Lord, when "his
face did shine as the sun, and his raiment was white as the light." Matt.
17:2. This was the heavenly brightness the splendor of the everlasting
Sun. So the face of Moses shone like the brightness of the sun, so that
the children of Israel could not look upon him. Exod. 34:29; 2 Cor. 3:7.
And this was the consequence of only a few days passed in the divine
presence. How great then must that glory be, which will be the result of
our eternal union and converse with him! The lustre of the face of Moses
was terrible to look on, but the glory of Christ was refreshing and
comfortable.

31. Rev. 1:14, 16. The eyes of him that had the seven stars in his hand,
were "as a flame of fire." And the same Jesus Christ, who is the eternal
light, shall so glorify us at the last day, that our whole bodies shall
shine like lightning. Matt. 6:22; Luke 11:36.



Chapter II.


                  Of Heaven, The Work Of The Second Day.


    _See_ GEN. 1:6-8; PS. 104:6; PS. 19:1.


Who can doubt that the admirable and pure structure of heaven, with all
its wonderful properties, is a strong evidence and witness of God? "What
are heaven and all the beauty of nature" (says one of the ancients), "but
an illustrious mirror, in which we view the wonders of their Maker." For
if God created all so pure, so glorious, and so firm, that our weak
understandings cannot comprehend or explain it; how pure, how glorious,
eternal, spiritual, unutterable a Being must that God be who created all?
And if He has made so glorious a heaven over men, during their short abode
here; how much more illustrious a mansion has he not reserved for us
hereafter in the region of life and immortality? Hence St. Paul tells us,
"We know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle were dissolved, we
have a building of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens. For in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with
our house which is from heaven." 2 Cor. 5:1, 2.

2. As to the stupendous height and compass of heaven, to which the earth
is in comparison no more than a single point; how does it suggest to us
the immense and unsearchable power and wisdom of God? "For as the heavens
are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my
thoughts, than your thoughts, saith the Lord." Isa. 55:8, 9. Does not its
circular roundness remind us of the eternity of God? For of both there is
neither beginning nor end. Does it not also tell us of his omnipresence?
For as the heaven surrounds and encompasses all things, so does the God of
heaven support and comprehend all his creatures. "Who hath measured the
waters in the hollow of his hand, and meted out heaven with the span, and
comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure, and weighed the mountains
in scales, and the hills in a balance?" Isa. 40:12.

3. And as, in a circle, no part can be called upper and lower; so God
fills all things equally. Heaven and earth are full of the majesty of his
glory; "He is not far from every one of us; for in him we live, and move,
and have our being." Acts 17:27, 28. For though there are antipodes and
many other creatures under us, as is demonstrable from the figure of the
earth; yet by the wonderful power of God the heaven is everywhere over our
heads, and we look up directly towards it, by reason of its immensity.

4. Does not also the firmament of heaven remind us of the constant,
eternal, and immutable truth of God and his Word? For who is it that
supports the heaven? Where are the pillars that sustain it? Or how does it
hang, but upon the word of God? "The pillars of heaven tremble," saith
Job, "and are astonished at his reproof. He holdeth back the face of his
throne, and spreadeth his cloud upon it." Job 26:9, 11. And if by his word
he has so strongly fixed the heavens, who can doubt that he will keep his
word and promise to us forever and ever? If he support the heavens by the
word of his power, doubt not but he will also support, protect, and
preserve thee forever.

5. But, from this created heaven, learn to raise thy thoughts to the
spiritual heaven (1 Kings 8:27), "where are fulness of joy and pleasures
forever more." Ps. 16:11. This St. Paul calls "paradise, and the third
heaven" (2 Cor. 12:2, 4); and "the glory into which Jesus Christ was
received." 1 Tim. 3:16. This our Lord himself calls "his Father's house,
where he prepares a place for us" (John 14:2); and lastly, it is called,
"the heaven of heavens." 1 Kings 8:27.

6. Moreover, by meditation upon this external, transient heaven, thou
mayest learn to descend into thyself, into thine own heart and soul; for
there also is heaven, and the habitation of God. "For thus saith the high
and lofty One that inhabiteth eternity, I dwell with him that is of a
contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to
revive the heart of the contrite ones." Isaiah 57:15.

7. Let this external heaven lead thee to the new heaven, of which St.
Peter speaks: "We, according to his promise, look for new heavens, and a
new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness." 2 Peter 3:13. For though this
visible heaven was created in such purity, by God, as not to be subject to
corruption; yet "the heavens are not clean in his sight." Job 15:15.
Therefore, "they shall pass away," as St. Peter tells us. 2 Pet. 3:10. And
"they shall perish, and wax old like a garment, and as a vesture shalt
thou change them, and they shall be changed." Ps. 102:27. "I saw a new
heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were
passed away. And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all
things new." Rev. 21:1, 5. "Behold, I create new heavens, and a new earth:
and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind." Isa. 65:17.
How beautiful, how illustrious will be this city of God, this heavenly
Jerusalem, whose builder and maker is God! Or who can declare the glory of
that happy place? "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered
into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that
love him." 1 Cor. 2:9. Hence the Evangelist St. John describes the new and
heavenly city by all the precious and costly things in nature. See Rev.
21:11, 18-21. In a word, this is that heaven in which "God will be all in
all." 1 Cor. 15:28.



Chapter III.


 Of The Separation Of The Waters From The Dry Land, The Work Of The Third
                                   Day.


    _God said, Let the waters under the heaven be gathered together
    unto one place, and let the dry land appear. And God called the
    dry land, earth._--GEN. 1:9, 10. _The earth is full of the goodness
    of the Lord._--PS. 33:5; 104:24.


The earth is a heavy and gross substance, separated from the waters, and
fixed by the power of God to be the receptacle of all the heavenly
influences. This globe hangs in the air by the power of the Almighty, and
is replenished with the vital seeds of all trees, plants, and vegetables.

2. The stupendous structure and foundation of the earth is a most
wonderful witness of the power of God. For by what pillars is the earth
supported? Or where are its foundations?

3. Some have disputed whether the dry land be founded in the waters; or
whether, as being the heavier substance, it sink to the lowest place so as
to be the foundation of the waters.

4. The patrons of the first opinion build upon these testimonies: "He hath
founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the floods." Ps. 24:2.
And, "He stretched out the earth above the waters." Ps. 136:6. To which
may be added the testimony of St. Chrysostom, that "God laid the
foundation of the earth upon the water."

5. Others assert the contrary, 1. Because the earth is heaviest, and
therefore sinks to the lowest place, where it naturally remains fixed and
immovable; for if the earth should move out of its place, it must move
upwards, which is contrary to nature. And for this they quote, "Who laid
the foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed for ever." Ps.
104:5. 2. They allege the experience of seamen, who sound the bottom of
the sea; and explain those passages of the Psalms which mention the
separation of the waters of the dry land, as Moses describes it. Gen. 1:9.

6. But on what does this vast terraqueous globe depend? Who bears it up?
Where are the pillars of it? "He hangeth the earth upon nothing," (Job
26:7), saith Job. For it hangs in the midst of heaven, borne up in the
air, begirt with the waters, "Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a
garment." Ps. 104:6. The air and water support one another; the clouds,
though vast masses of water, are yet supported by the air from falling;
for the power of sustaining is a property of the air. "He bindeth up the
waters in his thick clouds, and the cloud is not rent under them." Job
26:8.

7. The stability of the earth in the waters, and in the centre of the vast
expanse of air, is a very clear argument of the divine omnipotence; "Where
wast thou (saith the Lord to Job), when I laid the foundations of the
earth? Who hath laid the measures thereof? Who laid the corner-stone
thereof?" Job 38:4-6. Thence, we learn, that the foundation of the earth
could not be comprehended by human understanding, but must be counted
among the infinite wonders of Omnipotence. "Therefore," saith the
Psalmist, "will not we fear, though the earth be removed, and though the
mountains be carried into the midst of the sea; though the waters thereof
roar and be troubled; though the mountains shake with the swelling
thereof?" Ps. 46:2, 3. And that this is an argument of the wisdom of God
is plain from Prov. 8: 29, 30; where wisdom says of herself, "When he
appointed the foundations of the earth, I was with him, etc."

8. And this is the earth of which the Psalmist says, "God hath given it to
the children of men." Ps. 115:16. But though, as to its external form, it
appear to be a hard, dead, dry, and cold mass, yet is it in truth,
enriched by God with a wonderful variety of blessings, fruitful energy,
and seminal virtues. These never rest; but are always active to produce
fruits, adorned with agreeable forms, odors, tastes, and colors, with
external signatures of their inward virtues and qualities.

9. So, then, from the earth proceed all the varieties of plants and
vegetables, having exchanged their old attire for a new and delicate
dress. The tattered garments of the preceding year being decayed and dead,
they come forth with exquisite beauty, odor, and color, and, as it were,
preach to mankind in words such as these: "Look upon us, ye unbelieving
sons of men; we were dead, and are now alive again. We have laid aside our
old garments and bodies, and are now renewed. Do ye also imitate us; 'put
off the old man, and put on the new' (Eph. 4:22-24); being renewed in your
eternal fountain and original, which is God, your Creator, in whose image
ye were created. If ye do this, then in the day of the righteous judgment
of God, when ye have lost your old bodies, ye shall, like us, come forth
out of the earth (1 Cor. 15:42), with new bodies, clothed with immortal
glory, of which our new-born beauty is but a faint resemblance. And whilst
ye are in this world, take not too much thought for the body. Matt. 6:25,
etc. Consider us, whom the God of nature has annually, for so many
thousands of years since the first creation to this time, provided with
beautiful clothing, as an argument of his bounty and goodness. Consider
our virtues and qualities, which are given not for our, but for your
benefit; we bloom and blossom, not for our good, but yours; yea, the
blessing of God blossoms through us."

10. Among the vegetables, also, a man may discern many thousands of
witnesses of the goodness and omnipotence of God. Here we have a perfect
collection of drugs and simples, an admirable and complete herbal; yea, a
living one, not furnished with faint draughts and dead pictures; but
graved with living characters and impressions, to be read by every curious
spectator, but not to be fully understood by any, except by Him that made
them. And till we come fully to understand their divine signatures, we
cannot so perfectly know the wonders of Providence contained under them.

11. Every herb and plant has its proper signature, which is nothing less
than the inscription and handwriting of God, whereby he has most
wonderfully and beautifully distinguished them all according to their
virtues and qualities; and in many of them, the outward form is a token of
their inward virtues. The turf we tread upon is furnished both with food
and medicine. Yea, in the smallest grain or seed is manifested the
unsearchable wisdom of God. He has created nothing in vain, and the
minutest part of the creation is not to be overlooked or despised, since
we know not the thousandth part of its virtues.

12. But if from their external forms we descend to their internal, and
extract their spirit by chemical processes, separating that pure essence,
which being full of high medicinal virtue, is lodged by God in the outward
body, as a diamond in a casket, then, indeed, we shall truly taste the
goodness of God in the virtues of his creatures, and bless him with a
grateful heart, for the many comfortable medicines which he has provided
for miserable man.

13. Consider, moreover, how the bountiful Creator has provided not only
for man, but also furnished "food for all flesh." Ps. 136:25; 145: 15. He
causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of men,
"that he may bring forth food out of the earth, and wine that maketh glad
the heart of man." Ps. 104:14, 15. So that we may properly call the earth
the treasury or storehouse of God, in which are laid up a variety of
blessings both for man and beast: upon which account the Psalmist says,
"the earth is full of the goodness of the Lord." Ps. 33:5.

14. A very wonderful effect of this divine goodness is, that _bread_
sustains the whole body, so that in one single morsel is contained the
nourishment of all the members of the body. And because of this nutritive
quality that is in bread, therefore, the eternal Son of God calls himself
the "bread of life" (John 6:35); denoting his power of nourishing and
sustaining the _whole man_, body, soul, and spirit.

15. It is no less wonderful, that the greatest tree, with its root, trunk,
boughs, leaves, seed, flowers, and fruit, should be contained in a very
small seed; and that every year the same plants and trees, with their
respective fruits and seeds, should appear in their proper order and
season. All this must be resolved into the principle of the seed,
containing in it all those powers, which successively display themselves
in so great a variety of size, thickness, height, and breadth.

16. Notice also, how the grass, upon which the cattle feed, becomes food
for man; being converted into the milk and flesh of the creatures that eat
them. Even our beds and clothes grow out of the earth, since both sheep
and birds live upon the fruits of it.

17. I shall not in this place speak particularly of trees and plants:
otherwise, perhaps, I should have taken notice of the fig-tree which was
accursed by our blessed Saviour (Matt. 21:19); of the olive-tree, whose
leaf the dove brought into Noah's ark (Gen. 8:11); of the palm-tree, to
which the flourishing state of the righteous is compared (Ps. 92:12); of
the cedars, and of the spices, of which Moses made the holy ointment
(Exod. 30:23); of the generous spikenard, which is a type of the Holy
Spirit, and of the resurrection of the dead, being used in embalming
bodies, in order to preserve them from putrefaction; of the vine, and
various vegetables; from which the Holy Ghost draws beautiful similitudes,
designed to illustrate and explain to us the mysteries of the kingdom of
God.

18. Of the fruitfulness of the earth, David speaks thus: "Thou visitest
the earth, and waterest it: thou greatly enrichest it with the river of
God which is full of water: thou preparest them corn, when thou hast so
provided for it. Thou waterest the ridges thereof abundantly; thou
settlest the furrows thereof: thou makest it soft with showers: thou
blessest the springing thereof: thou crownest the year with thy goodness,
and thy paths drop fatness." Ps. 65:9-11. That is, every month produces
its peculiar fruit out of its treasury, the bosom of the earth.

19. This natural fertility of the earth has been very much restrained by
the curse of the Almighty; hence the tares which choke the good corn.
"Cursed is the ground," saith God, "thorns and thistles shall it bring
forth to thee." Gen. 3:17, 18. Fruitfulness, therefore, must be regarded
and prayed for, as the gift and blessing of God, without which, a man can
neither plough, sow, nor plant with success: "for it is God that giveth
the increase." 1 Cor. 3:6. Thus we are to understand the words, "A
fruitful land turneth he into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that
dwell therein." Ps. 107:34.

20. Let our meditations on the fruitfulness of the earth, carry our
thoughts to that new earth which we expect, "wherein dwelleth
righteousness." 2 Pet. 3:13. There the curse, to which the present earth
is in bondage, shall have no place; it shall be the region of perfect
blessedness and life eternal. This is the new paradise, full of celestial
sweetness, joy, and pleasure: then shall we truly sing this song, "the
flowers appear on the earth." Cant. 2:12.

21. I come next to the mountains, which by their height and beauty are no
small ornament to the earth. The mountains are, in a more particular
sense, the treasury of God, in which all kinds of metals are prepared.
They are, as it were, so many chemical furnaces, in which the matter of
all metals and minerals is separated and matured. It has been observed,
that the best simples grow upon high mountains; and whensoever they are
transplanted into gardens, they degenerate and lose their virtue. Hence it
was said of Hippocrates that the herbs which he used in the practice of
medicine, were generally gathered from hills and mountainous places.

22. The mountains ought to remind us both of the protection of God (and so
the expression is used in Scripture--"I will lift up mine eyes unto the
hills, from whence cometh my help;" Ps. 121:1); and also of the Church of
God. "The mountains shall bring peace, and the little hills by
righteousness." Ps. 72:3.

23. Under this head, also, we may consider the springs and rivers of
waters that run through the valleys, adorning, enriching, and beautifying
the earth. For though, in strict propriety, the fountains belong to the
work of the fifth day; yet the royal Prophet couples the mountains and
springs together, because the rivers arise from the hills. Ps. 104:10.

24. Solomon tells us, "All the rivers run into the sea; yet the sea is not
full; unto the place from whence the rivers come, thither they return
again." Eccles. 1:7. Though the waters, passing out of the sea through the
earth, are sweetened by percolation; yet they do not everywhere break
forth, nor form springs in all places, but according to the order and
appointment of God. So saith the Psalmist, "He sendeth the springs into
the valleys." Ps. 104:10. And their continual streams are not only a great
blessing, and a miracle of divine power, but are also an apt
representation of eternal life.

25. If God take so much care of the beasts of the earth, shall he not much
more take care of us? If "the beasts of the field cry unto him, when the
rivers of waters are dried up" (Joel 1:20), how much more ought we to call
upon him in all our distresses? And, whereas, those places are generally
most pleasant, where there is the greatest plenty of springs and rivulets:
so thither the birds generally resort, and "sing among the branches." Ps.
104:12. It is as if God had taken care to fill even the forests with their
music, that so every place might resound with his praises, and that man
might learn, even from the animals, that not only himself, but all
creatures were made to praise and glorify God.

26. Natural fountains, of which some are well known as possessing healing
virtues, should remind us of the fountain of grace and salvation, the
water of life, even Jesus Christ. "With joy shall ye draw water out of the
wells of salvation." Isa. 12:3. "With thee is the fountain of life; in thy
light shall we see light." Ps. 36:9. "Ho! every one that thirsteth, come
ye to the waters." Isa. 55:1. "The Lamb which is in the midst of the
throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living fountains of
waters, and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes." Rev. 7:17.

27. The 104th Psalm, which gives us a beautiful account of the work of the
third day, takes particular notice of seven illustrious creatures of God,
all proceeding from the earth, and all capable of a spiritual sense.
First, he speaks of the earth in general; that God laid its foundations,
divided it from the waters, adorned it with mountains, and watered it with
springs. Thence descending to particulars, he takes notice of its
remarkable productions. 1. The dew, wherewith He waters the mountains. 2.
The grass. 3. Bread. 4. Wine. 5. Oil, or balsam. 6. The fruits of trees.
7. Birds and beasts: all which are plainly expressed in the 104th Psalm.

28. Thus he speaks: "He watereth the hills from his chambers: the earth is
satisfied with the fruit of thy works." Ps. 104:13. Thus we often see with
admiration, the clouds hovering upon the mountains, and dropping showers
of plenty upon the hills, as "the bottles of heaven" (Job 38:37); and then
God doth truly water the hills from above. Sometimes, also, he sends his
dew, refreshing them with great plenty. Thus were continually watered
little Hermon, in Judea, and the mountains of Gilboa, where Saul and
Jonathan, his son, were slain. Therefore David said, "Ye mountains of
Gilboa, let there be no dew, neither let there be rain upon you." 2 Sam.
1:21.

29. It is the property of dew to make the ground rich and fruitful, and to
refresh the flowers scorched with excessive heat; whence, at last, the
bees by wonderful art draw their honey. Sometimes we see a sort of
honey-dew lying upon the leaves, as did the manna heretofore. Just so the
Gospel is like a spiritual honey, the dew of the Holy Spirit.

30. It is not without reason that peace is compared to dew. Ps. 133:1, 3.
For as the dew is generated by the morning, so peace proceeds from Jesus
Christ, who is himself the morning star, and the Prince of peace. Where
Christ liveth, reigneth, and worketh, there is perpetual peace. "The
kingdom of God is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost."
Rom. 14:17. "Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be called the
children of God." Matt. 5:9. Such are begotten of God, as the dew is of
the morning; and as the dew makes all things lively, fresh, and
flourishing, so also does peace; which, therefore, every good man ought to
beg of God, the Father of peace.

31. And whereas, in the last place, it is said that "the earth is
satisfied with the fruit of God's works," it suggests that the Word of God
the Creator, is still as powerful and efficacious as formerly it was, when
he spake the word, saying, "Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb
yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit." So that all things,
from the beginning of the world to this day, spring from the Word of God,
as from an eternal root of divine blessing.

32. Secondly, the Psalmist says, "He causeth the grass to grow for the
cattle." Verse 14. Nor is that the least of God's blessings; for how could
so many wild as well as tame beasts, that minister to the necessities of
man, subsist, were the grass to fail? And it is wonderful that when, in
very dry weather, one would not think there could be grass enough to
support the beasts that are to eat it, yet they still live upon it. Thus
it seems to grow as much by night as it is eaten by day.

33. Hence, we learn how merciful God is to mankind, and how liberally he
provides for our necessities; and, though the grass may seem to be the
least and meanest of all the blessings of God, yet we cannot be
sufficiently thankful for it. So true is it that the least of God's
blessings exceeds our highest gratitude.

34. The grass may also furnish us with proofs of the Divine Providence. 1.
He that considers that God takes care of the grass of the ground, cannot
question, but that he takes much more care of him and his affairs,
according to Matt. 6:30. 2. It may put us in mind of our own vanity. For
"all flesh is grass, and all the goodliness thereof is as the flower of
the field." Isa. 40:6. 3. It may also minister comfort under afflictions
and persecutions, according to Psalm 37:1, 2. "Fret not thyself because of
evil-doers, neither be thou envious against the workers of iniquity; for
they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb."

35. Thirdly, "Herb for the service of man: that he may bring forth food
out of the earth: and bread, which strengtheneth man's heart." Ps. 104:14,
15. Now the very notion of bread implies in it a great variety of divine
blessings. First, it reminds us of God's paternal affection towards us;
for a father naturally cares and provides for his children. So Matt. 7:9,
"What man is there of you, whom if his son ask bread will he give him a
stone?" Let us remember, then, that God is our Father; and that we are
needy and indigent creatures, subject to infirmities and necessities. So
that our very hunger and thirst are so many monitors to lead us unto God;
and every morsel of bread we eat, should put us in mind of the paternal
affection and goodness of God.

36. (2) Let us admire and reverence the wise dispensation of Providence,
which assigns to every man his convenient portion of bread, so that no man
has reason to complain that he is forgotten before God. Heb. 13:5.

37. (3) From bread we may learn the wisdom of God. In Psalm 104:14, God is
said "to bring forth herb for the service of man, that he may bring forth
food (or bread) out of the earth." The bread which we eat is, at first,
nothing but grass, which, growing up into ears, and into the perfect
grain, supplies us with bread, which at last is converted into our body
and blood. This miraculous operation gives us an image of our creation;
forasmuch as even to this day he makes the flesh and blood of man out of
the earth; so that we may properly call it our mother, and say that "in
God we live, and move, and have our being." Acts 17:28. The nutritive
virtue of bread is the Word of God. If God should withdraw it, then all
flesh and blood would wither and decay as a flower, or as the grass of the
field. Therefore, man doth not live by bread alone. Matt. 4:4; Deut. 8:3.

38. The specific property of bread is indicated in these words; "Bread,
which strengtheneth man's heart." Ps. 104:17. Every other kind of food, by
being daily eaten, becomes unwelcome to us; but bread never does. So that
bread is a universal food, and seems to contain in it all the nutritive
qualities of every other sort of food, all of which borrow their virtues
from it; as the planets derive their light from the universal luminary,
the sun. And this we may conceive to be the reason of the great virtue
there is in bread, that, being the most common and ordinary food, every
man might find in it wherewithal to support life, though he should have
nothing else. In a word, whatever we eat or drink, ought to be looked upon
as a miracle of divine wisdom and goodness.

39. Lastly, the strengthening faculty of bread, puts us in mind of "the
bread of life," which is Christ. So we read in John 6:35. "I am the bread
of life: he that cometh to me shall never hunger; and he that believeth on
me shall never thirst." For in this bread of life, all the power of God is
contained; because "it pleased God that in him all fulness should dwell"
(Col. 1:19); "and that of his fulness have all we received, and grace for
grace" (John 1:16); and by him, "we might be filled with all the fulness
of God." Eph. 3:19. Blessed is he that eateth this bread! Earthly bread
cannot save us from death, but he that eateth of Christ, the bread of
life, shall never die.

40. The fourth thing mentioned is "wine, that maketh glad the heart of
man." Ps. 104:15. How wonderful is the love of God towards us, who is so
far from desiring to have us oppressed with sorrow, that he has provided
even natural means to refresh and comfort us! And as for the dejected and
broken spirit, he refreshes that by the generous wine of the Holy Spirit,
drawn from the living vine, the Lord Jesus Christ. This is the wine
mentioned in the Song of Solomon, "He brought me to the banqueting-house"
(Cant. 2:5); (or _house of wine_, as the margin reads it.) This was the
spiritual wine the holy prophets drank of (Isa. 12:2; 61:10; and Ps. 34:1;
63:11), which made them break forth into songs of joy and exultation.

41. Wine again was given by God to strengthen the sick. For wine has a
spirit in it adapted to quicken the vital motions of the heart. This is
another instance of the wonderful love of God; yet it serves to put us in
mind of a greater; namely, of that most generous wine which was pressed
from the bloody wounds of the true vine, the Lord Jesus Christ, and which
is the only sovereign remedy for the diseased soul. "He washed his
garments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of grapes." Gen. 49:11.

42. Lastly, it was also given that the aged, whose lamp of life is almost
spent, might invigorate the languid flame, and make it burn the brighter.
This may put us in mind of the spiritual old age of the Church. For as the
sight, hearing, and all the other powers of nature, are broken by age; so
now faith is extinguished, charity is cold, hope languishes, and the whole
spiritual body of Christ decays every day more and more. "When the Son of
man cometh, shall he find faith on the earth?" Luke 18:8. But God promises
the faithful, that he will "renew their strength, that they may mount up
as eagles" (Isa. 40:31): and he declares, that he will "carry them even to
old age." Isa. 46:4. To which also belongs that promise, "They shall still
bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat and flourishing." Ps.
92:14.

43. The fifth thing is, "Oil to make his face to shine." Verse 15. By this
we are to understand, the precious ointment used among the Jews, and other
Eastern nations, when they were more than commonly joyful, or intended to
treat their guests after the best fashion; and which diffused a wonderful
vigor through their whole bodies. In this sense we are to understand Psalm
23:5. "Thou anointest my head with oil." So our blessed Saviour, when he
was entertained by Simon, was anointed with oil. Matt. 26:7. He upbraids
another of that name, a Pharisee, that he had not shown him the same
respect. "My head with oil (saith he) thou didst not anoint; but this
woman hath anointed my feet with ointment." Luke 7:46.

44. So great was the virtue of these Eastern unguents, that they used them
in embalming the dead; and by that means preserved them many hundred years
from corruption; as appeared in the body of Alexander the Great, which was
found in the time of Augustus, as fresh as if it had been interred but
yesterday, though it had lain above three hundred years. And this balsam
is a proper representation of that oil, with which the Son of God,
according to his human nature, was anointed without measure. Hence the
Psalmist says, "Therefore God, thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows" (Ps. 45:7): and "Of his fulness have all we
received" (John 1:16); which is nothing else but that unction by which he
teacheth us all things (1 John 2:20), and by which our souls shall be
presented before God wholly beautiful, and adorned with the gifts of the
Holy Spirit: "when this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this
mortal shall put on immortality." 1 Cor. 15:53.

45. The sixth thing mentioned is this, "The trees of the Lord are full of
sap: the cedars of Lebanon which he hath planted." Ps. 104:16. There are
many remarkable things to be considered in trees; of which, two are more
particularly noticed in Holy Scripture. The first is, that, whereas, they
seem to be dead all the winter, yet upon the return of the spring, they
are full of sap, and produce, first, leaves, and afterwards, fruit, in a
manner truly wonderful, and such as no art can imitate. For where is the
artist, who from the juice of any vine, can form a grape? The birch-trees
so overflow with sap in spring-time, that men can tap them like a cask. In
Ferro, one of the Canary Islands, as it is said, there is no spring,
river, or rain; but there are certain trees, from the leaves of which
there drops so great a quantity of water, as is sufficient for the
inhabitants.

46. And whereas it is said that "the Lord hath planted them," we must
understand it of his creating word (Gen. 1:12), by the power of which new
trees daily arise to supply the place of those that die or are cut down.
This blessing will abide in the earth as long as it lasts, because the
power of the Lord is the universal source of all things that arise out of
the earth. Now the trees, with their fruits, may remind us of that divine
charity which ought to be in us. For as these freely bestow their several
fruits upon man; so ought we to be affected towards God and towards one
another; "that we may be trees of righteousness, the planting of the Lord,
that he may be glorified." Ps. 92:13. Lastly, they remind us of the tree
of life, with its fruits, even Jesus Christ crucified; of which, whosoever
eateth, shall live forever. Rev. 22:2.

47. Seventhly, the birds are a very great ornament of the earth. They
build upon the trees and help to furnish our tables. "There the birds make
their nests; as for the stork, the fir-trees are her house." Psalm 104:17.
And "Knowest thou the time when the wild goats of the rock bring forth?
Who hath sent out the wild ass free? or who hath loosed the bands of the
wild ass? Gavest thou wings and feathers unto the ostrich? what time she
lifteth up herself on high, she scorneth the horse and his rider. Doth the
hawk fly by thy wisdom? Doth the eagle mount up at thy command, and make
her nest on high?" Job 39:1, 5, 13, 18, 26, 27.

48. From all this we may learn that God made not the earth to be desolate,
but has allotted its deserts and wildernesses to be inhabited by birds and
wild beasts, that his bounty to man, and his magnificence might be made
known by the multitude of his creatures; his omnipotence, by his works;
and his wisdom, by that infinite variety of distinct properties which he
has bestowed upon the creatures. "Every beast of the forest is mine, and
the cattle upon a thousand hills. I know all the fowls of the mountains;
and the wild beasts of the field are mine. If I were hungry I would not
tell thee; for the world is mine, and the fulness thereof. Will I eat the
flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats?" Ps. 50:10-13. What then is
the sacrifice that God expects? "Offer unto God thanksgiving; and pay thy
vows unto the Most High; and call upon me in the day of trouble; I will
deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me." Ver. 14, 15.



Chapter IV.


         Of The Sun, Moon, And Stars, The Work Of The Fourth Day.


    _See_ GEN. 1:14; PS. 104:19.


The stars are bright heavenly bodies, fixed in the firmament of heaven by
the word of the Most High. They enlighten the earth, distinguish the night
from the day, and adorn the heavens; and they are signs and tokens of
nature, of judgment, of mercy, of seasons, days, and years. 1 Cor. 15:41;
Gen. 1:14.

2. "Lift up your eyes on high," saith God, "and behold who hath created
these things, that bringeth out their host by number: he calleth them all
by names." Isa. 41:26. We ought, therefore, according to his command, to
contemplate these glorious works of his hands, and learn thence to admire
and adore the power and wisdom of him who made them. For "the heavens
declare the glory of God; and the firmament showeth his handywork." Ps.
19:1.

3. With regard to the magnitude of the sun and moon, St. Basil thus speaks
in his sixth Homily upon the works of the six days: "I conceive that the
sun and moon are styled by Moses great lights, not only because they
exceed the lesser stars in magnitude; but because they are so exceedingly
large that they can fill not only the whole heaven, but even the earth and
seas with their light. And as they always appear equally large, both in
their rising and setting, it follows that they must be incredibly large;
because notwithstanding the whole breadth of the earth, they always appear
of equal size."

4. If a man were to see a globe of fire as large as a vast mountain, or a
large city in flames, moving to and fro in the air, he would look upon it
with astonishment and terror. Now it is demonstrable that the globe of the
sun is many times greater than the earth; whence we may conjecture how
great and inconceivable a space in the heavens the sun must take up. Yea,
the least of the stars in the firmament of heaven are very vast in
compass, and are greater than the earth; and yet in the firmament there
are many thousands of these stars, which by reason of their vast distance
cannot be discerned by us with the naked eye.

5. Here human reason is at a stand; for no created mind can conceive of
the dimensions of heaven. Hence it is that the Holy Scripture, speaking of
God's infinite compassion, compares it to the greatness of heaven. "For as
the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy toward them that
fear him. As far as the east is from the west, so far hath he removed our
transgressions from us." Ps. 103:11, 12. For though "the earth is full of
the goodness of the Lord" (Ps. 33:5), yet is the compass of it too small
to be compared with the infinite goodness of God. Hence the Holy Spirit
bids us look up to the height of heaven, furnished with innumerable
glorious bodies, all full of the goodness of God, and vastly larger than
this lower world.

6. Moreover, the incomprehensible greatness of the divine power is
manifested, not only in the bulk of the heavenly bodies, but also in their
constant and regular revolutions; for who can observe without wonder and
admiration, such prodigious bodies, not only pendent in the air, but
moving up and down in it with constant regularity? And how great and
incomprehensible a space must they have to perform their courses in, and
at the same time so determined and settled, that they never exceed their
appointed limits, nor interfere with each other in their revolutions?
David truly pronounces, that God "by wisdom made the heavens." Ps. 136:5.
How excellent, how transcendently excellent must that wisdom be, which can
guide and govern the infinite host of heaven with such admirable order,
and call them all by their names?

7. It is wonderful also, that these vast shining bodies should have, as it
were, a motion in themselves, so that they cannot for one moment, stand
still in their courses; for the whole heavenly order would then be
disturbed, and the stars themselves, together with their motion, would
lose their vital power, even as men die, when the motion of their lungs
fails. The least star never stands still, but is perpetually in quick and
inconceivable motion.

8. If the motion of one planet only be so stupendous, what shall we say of
that innumerable multitude of stars, each of which has its particular
course and revolution? And if any man could but for an hour take a view of
all their distinct motions, he would be able to unfold to us very
surprising things.

9. The consideration of the motions and multitude of these stars may
remind us of those bright and invisible stars, the angels of God. This
seems to be hinted in the Revelation of St. John, where the Son of God
appears with seven stars in his hand (Rev. 1:16), which are the seven
spirits or angels sent forth into all the earth. To this the Book of Job
alludes, "When the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God
shouted for joy" (Job 38:7): by which the writer leads us from the natural
stars to the holy angels. For if God has created so great a multitude of
stars, who can doubt that he has a much greater multitude of celestial
spirits, who praise him without ceasing?--"Praise ye him, sun and moon;
praise him, all ye stars of light." Ps. 148:3.

10. The revolution of the heavens is, by the all-wise Creator, appointed
as the measure of time; in which appear the stupendous providence,
economy, and wisdom of God. To this head we are to refer the ages of the
world, and their distinct epochs, the ending of monarchies, the seventy
years of the Babylonish captivity, Daniel's seventy weeks, the periods of
kingdoms, and the times of Antichrist, both in the book of Daniel and the
Revelation, with other things of the same nature, which wonderfully
confirm and illustrate the providence and wisdom of God. And whereas our
Saviour tells us, that "it is not for us to know the times or the seasons
which the Father hath put in his own power" (Acts 1:7); this is to be
understood of such a knowledge only as was foreign to the duty of an
apostle, not serving either to the edification of the church, or the
propagation of the Gospel. The words also may mean that no time or place
ought to be prescribed to our blessed Lord for the erecting and
establishing of his kingdom; of which he himself is the only proper judge.
Our business is only to be witnesses of his kingdom, and to do our best to
promote it, leaving the times and seasons to God alone. Moreover, the
disciples at that time, had wrong views of the nature and design of his
kingdom, and those words may be looked upon as a proper rebuke of their
erroneous opinions about a temporal kingdom.

11. And as for the times and seasons of our worldly affairs, even these
are under the disposal and direction of God, whensoever we devoutly submit
our concerns to him, begging his direction and assistance; as plainly
appears in the case of Abraham's servant, who prayed to God, that he would
"send him good speed that day." Gen. 24:12.

12. Our blessed Saviour argues with the Jews from those signs in the
heavens, which the common experience of the times had remarked (Matt.
16:2, 3; Luke 12:54-56), thereby leading them to observations of a higher
nature, and putting them in mind of those signs which were to usher in and
attend the appearance of the Messiah. The words in St. Matthew are these:
"When it is evening, ye say, It will be fair weather; for the sky is red.
And in the morning, It will be foul weather to-day, for the sky is red and
lowering. O ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky; but can ye
not discern the signs of the times?" So that our Saviour's conclusion runs
thus: If ye attend to the natural signs, and by the face of the sky can
judge rightly of the weather, why do ye not attend to the signs of the
present period, and conclude that the times of the Messiah are come?

13. The words in St. Luke run thus: "When ye see a cloud rise out of the
west, straightway ye say, There cometh a shower; and so it is. And when ye
see the south wind blow, ye say, There will be heat; and it cometh to
pass. Ye hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the sky and of the earth;
but how is it that ye do not discern this time?" So that our Lord
concludes thus: As by the natural signs of heaven, ye judge rightly of the
weather, because ye see the effect follow; so by the signs and miracles
which ye see, ye ought to be convinced, that the Messiah is really come.
But, hypocrites as ye are, ye retain the one, and neglect the other,
though of the highest importance to you.

14. As to the operations of heaven, we must first observe, that they have
nothing in their own nature hurtful to mankind, as some pretenders would
persuade us; but that our sins and wickedness are the true cause why God
arms the creatures unto vengeance, and makes use of them to punish a
rebellious world. Thus he punished the sins of the old world by a rain of
forty days, which caused the flood. Gen. 7:12. And thus the sin of Sodom
drew down fire and brimstone from heaven. Gen. 19:24.

15. In the same manner we are punished even at this day; sometimes by
excessive heats; at other times by violent cold, rains, or drought; at
other times by thunder, hail, fire, insects, or infected air, which like
the fire that destroyed Sodom and Gomorrah, fall from heaven. But as the
Egyptian plagues had no power over the children of Israel (Exod. 8:22), so
these punishments never hurt the children of God, if they live in his
faith and fear. Thus it is said, "The Lord is thy shade upon thy right
hand; the sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night." Ps.
121:5, 6. The same Psalm advises us, to "lift up our eyes unto the hills,
from whence cometh our help," that by the grace and favor of God we may
escape these evils.

16. And as God makes use of the heavens and heavenly bodies, as
instruments of vengeance against the wicked, so he employs them sometimes
as means of protection and blessing to the righteous. Thus we read, "They
fought from heaven; the stars in their courses fought against Sisera"
(Judg. 5:20): not unlike to which, is the story of the Emperor Theodosius,
whose enemies were routed by a sudden tempest of wind and rain.

17. The productions of heaven God in his due time dispenses out of his
treasures, for the benefit and advantage of this lower world; God so
disposing and ordering things, that the inferior creatures receive of the
superior, and all nature hangs together, as it were, in one chain. And
this connection of nature and providence is finely described by the
prophet Hosea, "It shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord, I will
hear the heavens, and they shall hear the earth; and the earth shall hear
the corn, and the wine, and the oil, and they shall hear Jezreel." Hosea
2:21, 22. In this place the prophet presents us with the entire order of
nature, beginning at the first cause, which is God. "I (saith he) will
hear the heavens," namely, when, in the great drought, the heaven shall
scorch with excessive heat, and the channel of the heavenly influences
shall, as it were, be dried up, so that they cannot convey fruitful
seasons to the earth: then I will hear the distress of the heavens, I will
cover them with clouds.

18. And whereas the prophet adds, "The heavens shall hear the earth," that
has relation to the secondary causes. For as the earth depends on the
heavens, it follows, that when the operations of the heavens are, as it
were, hindered, the earth can produce nothing that is good. And when the
earth is broken or chapped by excessive heat, it, as it were, opens its
mouth and entreats for rain. "And the earth shall hear the corn, and wine,
and oil;" that is, forasmuch as the vegetables depend upon the earth for
their moisture; therefore, whensoever the earth is dry and cannot supply
them with nourishment, the vegetables solicit moisture of it, as a thirsty
infant would appeal to its mother.

19. I proceed, next, to the benefits which God bestows upon us by the
light of the sun and moon. And these we must consider in the fear of God,
and show how we may enjoy and use them, both in a natural and spiritual
sense. "Tell me (saith God to Job), where is the way where light dwelleth?
and as for darkness, where is the place thereof? Canst thou bind the sweet
influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion? Canst thou bring
forth Mazzaroth in his season, or canst thou guide Arcturus with his sons?
Knowest thou the ordinances of heaven? Canst thou set the dominion thereof
in the earth? Canst thou lift up thy voice to the clouds, that abundance
of waters may cover thee?" Job 38:19, 31-34. In these words God represents
to us his infinite power and wisdom, such as no mortal can search out or
account for, much less imitate. For so unable is the wisest man to form
light or darkness, that he cannot so much as produce a blade of grass.
"Not unto us (then), O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name give glory"
(Ps. 115:1); for thou hast made all these things, and thy hand hath formed
them. "He appointed the moon for seasons; the sun knoweth his going down"
(Ps. 104:19); alluding to the work of the fourth day, when God said, "Let
there be lights in the firmament of heaven, to divide the day from the
night: and let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and for
years. And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the day,
and the lesser light to rule the night; he made the stars also." Gen.
1:14-16.

20. How wonderful is the increase and decrease of the moon; sometimes it
seems to be shut up in darkness, and again, in its season, to emerge by
degrees into a fulness of light. And these varieties God hath appointed
for a regular distinction of the times and seasons of the year, and of the
affairs and business of mankind. Without this distinction of the months
and other divisions of time, there could be no order in the church of God,
or in civil governments, or in the economy of private families; but all
would be disorder and confusion.

21. And how abundantly is the wisdom of God displayed, even in this
certain course of the moon, and distinction of seasons! In all states and
conditions, the chief part of prudence is to preserve good order, and to
observe the proper opportunities of acting; these are the distinguishing
accomplishments of a wise ruler, and of a prudent head of a family. This,
indeed, is the principal thing to be regarded in every action; he that
acts unseasonably, acts to little or no purpose. God himself hath ordered
all things in measure, and number, and weight; and every season has its
proper opportunities and blessings attending it. "To every thing there is
a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven." Eccles. 3:1. And
as the choosing of the proper season is truly a happiness, so it is also a
blessing from God, of whom, therefore, we ought to ask it by prayer.

22. By the words, "The sun knoweth his going down" (Ps. 104:19); the royal
prophet suggests to us the seasons of the year, spring, summer, autumn,
winter, and the distinguishing of days, being some longer, and some
shorter; all which are of very great use to mankind.

23. And who can consider these amazing acts of divine power and wisdom,
without admiration and praise to the Author of nature? This astonishing
order of nature appeared so glorious to the ancient heathens, that they
worshipped even the sun for their God, as being the greatest and most
splendid of all objects, and as enlightening all the world. This was a
conclusion for blind, corrupt reason to draw, though every part of the
creation, to pure and right reason, fully manifests and discovers the
being and excellencies of the Creator. A certain Indian king having heard
of Jesus Christ, and the necessity of believing in him, because he died
for us, gave this answer: "For my part, I had rather believe in the sun
that never dies, than in a mortal God." This was the effect of human
blindness, against the corrupt influences and prejudices of which, God has
taken particular care to warn us: "Lest thou lift up thine eyes unto
heaven, and when thou seest the sun, and the moon, and the stars, even all
the host of heaven, shouldest be driven to worship them, and serve them,
which the Lord thy God hath divided unto all nations under the whole
heaven." Deut. 4:19.

24. As to the magnitude of the sun, moon, and stars, it is an error to
imagine that they are really no larger than they appear to us. For though
the moon and some of the planets are less than the earth, yet the sun may
be plainly and infallibly demonstrated to be many times larger; and that
it appears so small to us, is owing to the immensity of its distance.
Ocular demonstration convinces every man of this, that the more remote any
object is, the less it appears. A nice disquisition of these matters the
unlearned must leave to astronomers, and be content religiously to admire
what they do not understand.

25. And, here, how ought we to magnify and adore the omnipotence and
wisdom of God, who appointed the sun to be the light and ornament of the
day, and the moon of the night. For light is the highest beauty of all
things. If we highly admire a well-built house with a fair prospect,
furnished with good statues and pictures, and painted with great variety
of colors, how much more ought we to look up with gratitude and
astonishment to heaven, adorned with lights so many, and so stupendous.

26. How profound is the wisdom of God, who "telleth the number of the
stars, and calleth them all by their names" (Ps. 147:4, 5); to which is
immediately subjoined, "Great is our Lord, and of great power; his
understanding is infinite." How ought we then to depend upon this wisdom,
and be satisfied with all its determinations concerning us, and not charge
him with folly, by pretending to be wiser than He is! "For the foolishness
of God is wiser than men." 1 Cor. 1:25.

27. The certain and regular course of the sun and moon, reminds us of the
truth of God, and the certainty of his promises: such are those of sending
the Messiah, of the revolutions of certain states and kingdoms, and other
deliverances of mankind; all which appeared in their time. Thus saith the
Lord by the prophet Jeremiah, "If my covenant be not with day and night,
and if I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and earth; and if ye
can break my covenant, that there should not be day and night in their
season; then may also my covenant be broken with David my servant." Jer.
33:20, 21, 25.

28. At our blessed Saviour's passion, the darkness that overspread the
world did, as it were, represent the terrors of his death, and all those
barbarous impieties that were acted against him (Matt. 27:45); for the sun
and moon were then as mirrors, in which might be read the sins and
iniquities of mankind; which, like the sin of Sodom, mounted up to heaven,
and drew down vengeance upon the world. Gen. 18:20. So every eclipse of
the sun points out to us that internal and spiritual blindness of heart
which reigns in every one of us; and that as plainly as if a voice should
call to us, saying, "Look upon me, for you yourselves are in the same
condition." And when the heaven is red as blood, and seems to be on fire,
it appears to speak to us in words like these: "Look up to me, and think
on that day when I shall burn with real flames." So, in short, we may
consider all things as upbraiding us with our iniquities, and warning us
to repent. What is the thunder, but the terrible voice of heaven, at which
the earth trembles, and by which God speaks to the impenitent world? What
is an earthquake, but a lecture of repentance? The same may be said of
storms and tempests at sea, and of all disorders in the inanimate
creation.

29. The sun, moon, and stars, are witnesses of the divine goodness, and of
that eternal light which enlightens, comforts, and refreshes every man
that cometh into the world. For as God is in himself invisible and
incomprehensible, we should, by the direction of the natural light, aspire
to the knowledge of Him that made it; and by the beauty of the created, be
drawn to the love of the uncreated light. And as we naturally take
pleasure in the outward light, as the most beautiful object in the
creation; so ought we, with our whole hearts, to love Him who is light
eternal, and to walk and rejoice in his light, by withdrawing ourselves
from the darkness of sin. "For what fellowship hath righteousness with
unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness? and what
concord hath Christ with Belial?" 2 Cor. 6:14, 15.

