his daughter-in-law. Ye heroes of features perfectly faultless, king
Drupada hath all along cherished this desire in his heart that Arjuna of
strong and long arms might wed this daughter of his according to the
ordinance. If that hath become possible, nothing could be better; nothing
more beneficial; nothing more conducive to fame and virtue, so far as
Drupada is concerned."

"'Having said this, the priest remained silent and humbly waited for an
answer. Beholding him sitting thus, the king Yudhishthira commanded Bhima
who sat near, saying, "Let water to wash his feet with and the Arghya be
offered unto this Brahmana. He is king Drupada's priest and, therefore,
worthy of great respect. We should worship him with more than ordinary
reverence." Then, O monarch, Bhima did as directed. Accepting the worship
thus offered unto him, the Brahmana with a joyous heart sat at his ease.
Then Yudhishthira addressed him and said, "The king of the Panchalas hath,
by fixing a special kind of dower, given away his daughter according to
the practice of his order and not freely. This hero hath, by satisfying
that demand, won the princess. King Drupada, therefore, hath nothing now
to say in regard to the race, tribe, family and disposition of him who
hath performed that feat. Indeed, all his queries have been answered by
the stringing of the bow and the shooting down of the mark. It is by doing
what he had directed that this illustrious hero hath brought away Krishna
from among the assembled monarchs. In these circumstances, the king of the
Lunar race should not indulge in any regrets which can only make him
unhappy without mending matters in the least. The desire that king Drupada
hath all along cherished will be accomplished for his handsome princess
who beareth, I think, every auspicious mark. None that is weak in strength
could string that bow, and none of mean birth and unaccomplished in arms
could have shot down the mark. It behoveth not, therefore, the king of the
Panchalas to grieve for his daughter today. Nor can anybody in the world
undo that act of shooting down the mark. Therefore the king should not
grieve for what must take its course."

"'While Yudhishthira was saying all this, another messenger from the king
of the Panchalas, coming thither in haste, said, "The (nuptial) feast is
ready."'"


SECTION CLXLVI

(Vaivahika Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana continued, 'The messenger said, "King Drupada hath, in view
of his daughter's nuptials prepared a good feast for the bride-groom's
party. Come ye thither after finishing your daily rites. Krishna's wedding
will take place there. Delay ye not. These cars adorned with golden
lotuses drawn by excellent horses are worthy of kings. Riding on them,
come ye into the abode of the king of the Panchalas."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then those bulls among the Kurus, dismissing the
priest and causing Kunti and Krishna to ride together on one of those cars,
themselves ascended those splendid vehicles and proceeded towards
Drupada's palace. Meanwhile, O Bharata, hearing from his priest the words
that Yudhishthira had said, king Drupada, in order to ascertain the order
to which those heroes belonged, kept ready a large collection of articles
(required by the ordinance for the wedding of each of the four orders).
And he kept ready fruits, sanctified garlands, and coats of mail, and
shields, and carpets, and kine, and seeds, and various other articles and
implements of agriculture. And the king also collected, O monarch, every
article appertaining to other arts, and various implements and apparatus
of every kind of sport. And he also collected excellent coats of mail and
shining shields, and swords and scimitars, of fine temper, and beautiful
chariots and horses, and first-class bows and well-adorned arrows, and
various kinds of missiles ornamented with gold. And he also kept ready
darts and rockets and battle-axes and various utensils of war. And there
were in that collection beds and carpets and various fine things, and
cloths of various sorts. When the party went to Drupada's abode, Kunti
taking with her the virtuous Krishna entered the inner apartments of the
king. The ladies of the king's household with joyous hearts worshipped the
queen of the Kurus. Beholding, O monarch, those foremost of men, each
possessing the sportive gait of the lion, with deer-skins for their upper
garments, eyes like unto those of mighty bulls, broad shoulders, and long-
hanging arms like unto the bodies of mighty snakes, the king, and the
king's ministers, and the king's son, and the king's friends and
attendants, all became exceedingly glad. Those heroes sat on excellent
seats, furnished with footstools without any awkwardness and hesitation.
And those foremost of men sat with perfect fearlessness on those costly
seats one after another according to the order of their ages. After those
heroes were seated, well-dressed servants male and female, and skilful
cooks brought excellent and costly viands worthy of kings on gold and
silver plates. Then those foremost of men dined on those dishes and became
well-pleased. And after the dinner was over, those heroes among men,
passing over all other articles, began to observe with interest the
various utensils of war. Beholding this, Drupada's son and Drupada himself,
along with all his chief ministers of state, understanding the sons of
Kunti to be all of royal blood became exceedingly glad.'"


SECTION CLXLVII

(Vaivahika Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Then the illustrious king of Panchala, addressing
prince Yudhishthira in the form applicable to Brahmanas, cheerfully
enquired of that illustrious son of Kunti, saying, "Are we to know you as
Kshatriyas, or Brahamanas, or are we to know you as celestials who
disguising themselves as Brahmanas are ranging the earth and come hither
for the hand of Krishna? O tell us truly, for we have great doubts! Shall
we not be glad when our doubts have been removed? O chastiser of enemies,
have the fates been propitious unto us? Tell us the truth willingly! Truth
becometh monarchs better than sacrifices and dedications of tanks.
Therefore, tell us not what is untrue. O thou of the beauty of a celestial,
O chastiser of foes, hearing thy reply I shall make arrangements for my
daughter's wedding according to the order to which ye belong."

"'Hearing these words of Drupada, Yudhishthira answered, saying "Be not
cheerless, O king; let joy fill thy heart! The desire cherished by thee
hath certainly been accomplished. We are Kshatriyas, O king, and sons of
the illustrious Pandu. Know me to be the eldest of the sons of Kunti and
these to be Bhima and Arjuna. By these, O king, was thy daughter won amid
the concourse of monarchs. The twins (Nakula and Sahadeva) and Kunti wait
where Krishna is. O bull amongst men, let grief be driven from thy heart,
for we are Kshatriyas. Thy daughter, O monarch, hath like a lotus been
transferred only from one lake into another. O king, thou art our revered
superior and chief refuge. I have told thee the whole truth."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing those words, the king Drupada's eyes
rolled in ecstasy. And filled with delight the king could not, for some
moments answer Yudhishthira. Checking his emotion with great effort, that
chastiser of foes at last replied unto Yudhishthira in proper words. The
virtuous monarch enquired how the Pandavas had escaped from the town of
Varanavata. The son of Pandu told the monarch every particular in detail
of their escape from the burning palace of lac. Hearing everything that
the son of Kunti said, king Drupada censured Dhritarashtra, that ruler of
men. And the monarch gave every assurance unto Yudhishthira, the son of
Kunti. And that foremost of eloquent men then and there vowed to restore
Yudhishthira to his paternal throne.

"'Then Kunti and Krishna and Bhima and Arjuna and the twins, commanded by
the king, to reside there, treated by Yajnasena with due respect. Then
king Drupada with his sons, assured by all that had happened, approaching
Yudhishthira, said, "O thou of mighty arms, let the Kuru prince Arjuna
take with due rites, the hand of my daughter on this auspicious day, and
let him, therefore, perform the usual initiatory rites of marriage."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of Drupada, the virtuous
king Yudhishthira replied, saying, "O great king, I also shall have to
marry." Hearing him, Drupada said, "If it pleaseth thee, take thou the
hand of my daughter thyself with due rites. Or, give Krishna in marriage
unto whomsoever of thy brothers thou likest." Yudhishthira said, "Thy
daughter, O king, shall be the common wife of us all! Even thus it hath
been ordered, O monarch, by our mother. I am unmarried still, and Bhima
also is so amongst the sons of Pandu. This thy jewel of a daughter hath
been won by Arjuna. This, O king, is the rule with us; to ever enjoy
equally a jewel that we may obtain. O best of monarchs, that rule of
conduct we cannot now abandon. Krishna, therefore, shall become the wedded
wife of us all. Let her take our hands, one after another before the
fire."

"'Drupada answered, "O scion of Kuru's race, it hath been directed that one
man may have many wives. But it hath never been heard that one woman may
have many husbands! O son of Kunti, as thou art pure and acquainted with
the rules of morality, it behoveth thee not to commit an act that is
sinful and opposed both to usage and the Vedas. Why, O prince, hath thy
understanding become so?" Yudhishthira said in reply, "O monarch, morality
is subtle. We do not know its course. Let us follow the way trodden by the
illustrious ones of former ages. My tongue never uttered an untruth. My
heart also never turneth to what is sinful. My mother commandeth so; and
my heart also approveth of it. Therefore, O king, that is quite
conformable to virtue. Act according to it, without any scruples.
Entertain no fear, O king, about this matter."

"'Drupada said, "O son of Kunti, thy mother, and my son Dhrishtadyumna and
thyself, settle amongst yourselves as to what should be done. Tell me the
result of your deliberations and tomorrow I will do what is proper."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'After this, O Bharata, Yudhishthira, Kunti and
Dhrishtadyumna discoursed upon this matter. Just at that time, however,
the island-born (Vyasa), O monarch, came there in course of his
wanderings.'"


SECTION CLXLVIII

(Vaivahika Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Then all the Pandavas and the illustrious king of the
Panchalas and all others there present stood up and saluted with reverence
the illustrious Rishi Krishna (Dwaipayana). The high-souled Rishi,
saluting them in return and enquiring after their welfare, sat down on a
carpet of gold. And commanded by Krishna (Dwaipayana) of immeasurable
energy, those foremost of men all sat down on costly seats. A little after,
O monarch, the son of Prishata in sweet accents asked the illustrious
Rishi about the wedding of his daughter. And he said, "How, O illustrious
one, can one woman become the wife of many men without being defiled by
sin? O, tell me truly all about this." Hearing these words Vyasa replied,
"This practice, O king, being opposed to usage and the Vedas, hath become
obsolete. I desire, however, to hear what the opinion of each of you is
upon this matter."

"'Hearing these words of the Rishi, Drupada spoke first, saying, "The
practice is sinful in my opinion, being opposed to both usage and the
Vedas. O best of Brahmanas, nowhere have I seen many men having one wife.
The illustrious ones also of former ages never had such a usage amongst
them. The wise should never commit a sin. I, therefore, can never make up
mind to act in this way. This practice always appeareth to me to be of
doubtful morality."

"'After Drupada had ceased, Dhrishtadyumna spoke, saying "O bull amongst
Brahmanas, O thou of ascetic wealth, how can, O Brahmana, the elder
brother, if he is of a good disposition, approach the wife of his younger
brother? The ways of morality are ever subtle, and, therefore, we know
them not. We cannot, therefore, say what is conformable to morality and
what not. We cannot do such a deed, therefore, with a safe conscience.
Indeed, O Brahmana, I cannot say, 'Let Draupadi become the common wife of
five brothers.'"

"'Yudhishthira then spoke, saying, "My tongue never uttereth an untruth and
my heart never inclineth to what is sinful. When my heart approveth of it,
it can never be sinful. I have heard in the Purana that a lady of name
Jatila, the foremost of all virtuous women belonging to the race of Gotama
had married seven Rishis. So also an ascetic's daughter, born of a tree,
had in former times united herself in marriage with ten brothers all
bearing the same name of Prachetas and who were all of souls exalted by
asceticism. O foremost of all that are acquainted with the rules of
morality, it is said that obedience to superior is ever meritorious.
Amongst all superiors, it is well-known that the mother is the foremost.
Even she hath commanded us to enjoy Draupadi as we do anything obtained as
alms. It is for this, O best of Brahmanas, that I regard the (proposed)
act as virtuous."

"'Kunti then said, "The act is even so as the virtuous Yudhishthira hath
said. I greatly fear, O Brahmana, lest my speech should become untrue. How
shall I be saved from untruth?"

"'When they had all finished speaking, Vyasa said, "O amiable one, how
shall thou be saved from the consequence of untruth? Even this is eternal
virtue! I will not, O king of the Panchalas, discourse on this before you
all. But thou alone shalt listen to me when I disclose how this practice
hath been established and why it is to be regarded as old and eternal.
There is no doubt that what Yudhishthira hath said is quite conformable to
virtue."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then the illustrious Vyasa--the master
Dwaipayana--rose, and taking hold of Drupada's hand led him to a private
apartment. The Pandavas and Kunti and Dhrishtadyumna of Prishata's race
sat there, waiting for the return of Vyasa and Drupada. Meanwhile,
Dwaipayana began his discourse with illustrious monarch for explaining how
the practice of polyandry could not be regarded as sinful.'"


SECTION CLXLIX

(Vaivahika Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Vyasa continued, "In days of yore, the celestials had
once commenced a grand sacrifice in the forest of Naimisha. At that
sacrifice, O king, Yama, the son of Vivaswat, became the slayer of the
devoted animals. Yama, thus employed in that sacrifice, did not (during
that period), O king, kill a single human being. Death being suspended in
the world, the number of human beings increased very greatly. Then Soma
and Sakra and Varuna and Kuvera, the Sadhyas, the Rudras, the Vasus, the
twin Aswins,--these and other celestials went unto Prajapati, the Creator
of the universe. Struck with fear for the increase of the human population
of the world they addressed the Master of creation and said, 'Alarmed, O
lord, at the increase of human beings on earth, we come to thee for relief.
Indeed, we crave thy protection.' Hearing those words the Grandsire said,
'Ye have little cause to be frightened at this increase of human beings.
Ye all are immortal. It behoveth you not to take fright at human beings.'
The celestials replied, 'The mortals have all become immortal. There is no
distinction now between us and them. Vexed at the disappearance of all
distinction, we have come to thee in order that thou mayest distinguish us
from them.' The Creator then said, 'The son of Vivaswat is even now
engaged in the grand sacrifice. It is for this that men are not dying. But
when Yama's work in connection with the sacrifice terminates, men will
again begin to die as before. Strengthened by your respective energies,
Yama will, when that time comes, sweep away by thousands the inhabitants
on earth who will scarcely have then any energy left in them.'"

"'Vyasa continued, "Hearing these words of the first-born deity, the
celestials returned to the spot where the grand sacrifice was being
performed. And the mighty one sitting by the side of the Bhagirathi saw a
(golden) lotus being carried along by the current. And beholding that
(golden) lotus, they wondered much. And amongst them, that foremost of
celestials, viz., Indra, desirous of ascertaining whence it came,
proceeded up along the course of the Bhagirathi. And reaching that spot
whence the goddess Ganga issues perennially, Indra beheld a woman
possessing the splendour of fire. The woman who had come there to take
water was washing in the stream, weeping all the while. The tear-drops
she shed, falling on the stream, were being transformed into golden
lotuses. The wielder of the thunderbolt, beholding that wonderful sight,
approached the woman and asked her, 'Who art thou, amiable lady? Why dost
thou weep? I desire to know the truth. O, tell me everything.'"

"'Vyasa continued, "The woman thereupon answered, 'O Sakra, thou mayest
know who I am and why, unfortunate that I am, I weep, if only, O chief of
the celestials, thou comest with me as I lead the way. Thou shall then see
what it is I weep for.' Hearing these words of the lady, Indra followed
her as she led the way. And soon he saw, not far off from where he was, a
handsome youth with a young lady seated on a throne placed on one of the
peaks of Himavat and playing at dice. Beholding that youth, the chief of
the celestials said, 'Know, intelligent youth, that this universe is under
my sway.' Seeing, however, that the person addressed was so engrossed in
dice that he took no notice of what he said, Indra was possessed by anger
and repeated, 'I am the lord of the universe.' The youth who was none else
than the god Mahadeva (the god of the gods), seeing Indra filled with
wrath, only smiled, having cast a glance at him. At that glance, however,
the chief of the celestials was at once paralysed and stood there like a
stake. When the game at dice was over, Isana addressing the weeping woman
said, 'Bring Sakra hither, for I shall soon so deal with him that pride
may not again enter his heart.' As soon as Sakra was touched by that woman,
the chief of the celestials with limbs paralysed by that touch, fell down
on the earth. The illustrious Isana of fierce energy then said unto him,
'Act not, O Sakra, ever again in this way. Remove this huge stone, for thy
strength and energy are immeasurable, and enter the hole (it will
disclose) where await some others possessing the splendour of the sun and
who are all like unto thee.' Indra, then, on removing that stone, beheld a
cave in the breast of that king of mountains, within which were four
others resembling himself. Beholding their plight, Sakra became seized
with grief and exclaimed, 'Shall I be even like these?' Then the god
Girisha, looking full at Indra with expanded eyes, said in anger, 'O thou
of a hundred sacrifices, enter this cave without loss of time, for thou
hast from folly insulted me.' Thus addressed by the lord Isana, the chief
of the celestials, in consequence of that terrible imprecation, was deeply
pained, and with limbs weakened by fear trembled like the wind-shaken leaf
of a Himalayan fig. And cursed unexpectedly by the god owning a bull for
his vehicle, Indra, with joined hands and shaking from head to foot,
addressed that fierce god of multi-form manifestations, saying, 'Thou art,
O Bhava, the over-looker of the infinite Universe!' Hearing these words
the god of fiery energy smiled and said, 'Those that are of disposition
like thine never obtain my grace. These others (within the cave) had at
one time been like thee. Enter thou this cave, therefore, and lie there
for some time. The fate of you all shall certainly be the same. All of you
shall have to take your birth in the world of men, where, having achieved
many difficult feats and slaying a large number of men, ye shall again by
the merits of your respective deeds, regain the valued region of Indra. Ye
shall accomplish all I have said and much more besides, of other kinds of
work.' Then those Indras, of their shorn glory said, 'We shall go from our
celestial regions even unto the region of men where salvation is ordained
to be difficult of acquisition. But let the gods Dharma, Vayu, Maghavat,
and the twin Aswins beget us upon our would-be mother. Fighting with men
by means of both celestial and human weapons, we shall again come back
into the region of Indra.'"

"'Vyasa continued, "Hearing these words of the former Indras, the wielder
of the thunderbolt once more addressed that foremost of gods, saying,
'Instead of going myself, I shall, with a portion of my energy, create
from myself a person for the accomplishment of the task (thou assignest)
to form the fifth among these!' Vishwabhuk, Bhutadhaman, Sivi of great
energy, Santi the fourth, and Tejaswin, these it is said were the five
Indras of old. And the illustrious god of the formidable bow, from his
kindness, granted unto the five Indras the desire they cherished. And he
also appointed that woman of extraordinary beauty, who was none else than
celestial Sri (goddess of grace) herself, to be their common wife in the
world of men. Accompanied by all those Indras, the god Isana then went
unto Narayana of immeasurable energy, the Infinite, the Immaterial, the
Uncreate, the Old, the Eternal, and the Spirit of these universes without
limits. Narayana approved of everything. Those Indras then were born in
the world of men. And Hari (Narayana) took up two hairs from his body, one
of which hairs was black and the other white. And those two hairs entered
the wombs of two of the Yadu race, by name Devaki and Rohini. And one of
these hairs viz., that which was white, became Valadeva. And the hair that
was black was born as Kesava's self, Krishna. And those Indras of old who
had been confined in the cave on the Himavat are none else than the sons
of Pandu, endued with great energy. And Arjuna amongst the Pandavas,
called also Savyasachin (using both hands with equal dexterity) is a
portion of Sakra."

"'Vyasa continued, "Thus, O king, they who have been born as the Pandavas
are none else than those Indras of old. And the celestial Sri herself who
had been appointed as their wife is this Draupadi of extraordinary beauty.
How could she whose effulgence is like that of the sun or the moon, whose
fragrance spreads for two miles around, take her birth in any other than
an extraordinary way, viz., from within the earth, by virtue of the
sacrificial rites? Unto thee, O king, I cheerfully grant this other boon
in the form of spiritual sight. Behold now the sons of Kunti endued with
their sacred and celestial bodies of old!"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Saying this, that sacred Brahmana Vyasa of
generous deeds, by means of his ascetic power, granted celestial sight
unto the king. Thereupon the king beheld all the Pandavas endued with
their former bodies. And the king saw them possessed of celestial bodies,
with golden crowns and celestial garlands, and each resembling Indra
himself, with complexions radiant as fire or the sun, and decked with
every ornament, and handsome, and youthful, with broad chests and statures
measuring about five cubits. Endued with every accomplishment, and decked
with celestial robes of great beauty and fragrant garlands of excellent
making the king beheld them as so many three-eyed gods (Mahadeva), or
Vasus, or Rudras, or Adityas themselves. And observing the Pandavas in the
forms of those Indras of old, and Arjuna also in the form of Indra sprung
from Sakra himself, king Drupada was highly pleased. And the monarch
wondered much on beholding that manifestation of celestial power under
deep disguise. The king looking at his daughter, that foremost of women
endued with great beauty, like unto a celestial damsel and possessed of
the splendour of fire or the moon, regarded her as the worthy wife of
those celestial beings, for her beauty, splendour and fame. And beholding
that wonderful sight, the monarch touched the feet of Satyavati's son,
exclaiming, "O great Rishi, nothing is miraculous in thee!" The Rishi then
cheerfully continued, "In a certain hermitage there was an illustrious
Rishi's daughter, who, though handsome and chaste, obtained not a husband.
The maiden gratified, by severe ascetic penances, the god Sankara
(Mahadeva). The lord Sankara, gratified at her penances, told her himself,
'Ask thou the boon thou desirest.' Thus addressed, the maiden repeatedly
said unto the boon-giving Supreme Lord, 'I desire to obtain a husband
possessed of every accomplishment.' Sankara, the chief of the gods,
gratified with her, gave her the boon she asked, saying, 'Thou shall have,
amiable maiden, five husbands.' The maiden, who had succeeded in
gratifying the god, said again, 'O Sankara, I desire to have from thee
only one husband possessed of every virtue.' The god of gods, well-pleased
with her, spake again, saying, 'Thou hast, O maiden, addressed me five
full times, repeating, "Give me a husband." Therefore, O amiable one, it
shall even be as thou hast asked. Blessed be thou. All this, however, will
happen in a future life of thine!'"

"'Vyasa continued, "O Drupada, this thy daughter of celestial beauty is
that maiden. Indeed, the faultless Krishna sprung from Prishata's race
hath been pre-ordained to become the common wife of five husbands. The
celestial Sri, having undergone severe ascetic penances, hath, for the
sake of the Pandavas, had her birth as thy daughter, in the course of thy
grand sacrifice. That handsome goddess, waited upon by all the celestials,
as a consequence of her own acts becomes the (common) wife of five
husbands. It is for this that the self-create had created her. Having
listened to all this, O king Drupada, do what thou desirest."'"


SECTION CC

(Vaivahika Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Drupada, on hearing this, observed, "O great Rishi, it
was only when I had not heard this from thee that I had sought to act in
the way I told thee of. Now, however, that I know all, I cannot be
indifferent to what hath been ordained by the gods. Therefore do I resolve
to accomplish what thou hast said. The knot of destiny cannot be untied.
Nothing in this world is the result of our own acts. That which had been
appointed by us in view of securing one only bridegroom hath now
terminated in favour of many. As Krishna (in a former life) had repeatedly
said, 'O, give me a husband!' the great god himself even gave her the boon
she had asked. The god himself knows the right or wrong of this. As
regards myself, when Sankara hath ordained so, right or wrong, no sin can
attach to me. Let these with happy hearts take, as ordained, the hand of
Krishna with the rites."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then the illustrious Vyasa, addressing
Yudhishthira the just, said, "This day is an auspicious day, O son of
Pandu! This day the moon has entered the constellation called Pushya. Take
thou the hand of Krishna today, thyself first before thy brothers!" When
Vyasa had said so, king Yajnasena and his son made preparations for the
wedding. And the monarch kept ready various costly articles as marriage
presents. Then he brought out his daughter Krishna, decked, after a bath,
with many jewels and pearls. Then there came to witness the wedding all
the friends and relatives of the king, ministers of state, and many
Brahmanas and citizens. And they all took their seats according to their
respective ranks. Adorned with that concourse of principal men, with its
yard decked with lotuses and lilies scattered thereupon, and beautified
with lines of troops, king Drupada's palace, festooned around with
diamonds and precious stones, looked like the firmament studded with
brilliant stars. Then those princes of the Kuru line, endued with youth
and adorned with ear-rings, attired in costly robes and perfumed with
sandal-paste, bathed and performed the usual religious rites and
accompanied by their priest Dhaumya who was possessed of the splendour of
fire, entered the wedding hall one after another in due order, and with
glad hearts, like mighty bulls entering a cow-pen. Then Dhaumya, well-
conversant with the Vedas, igniting the sacred fire, poured with due
mantras libations of clarified butter into that blazing element. And
calling Yudhishthira there, Dhaumya, acquainted with mantras, united him
with Krishna. Walking round the fire the bridegroom and the bride took
each other's hand. After their union was complete, the priest Dhaumya,
taking leave of Yudhishthira, that ornament of battles, went out of the
palace. Then those mighty car-warriors,--those perpetuators of the Kuru
line,--those princes attired in gorgeous dresses, took the hand of that
best of women, day by day in succession, aided by that priest. O king, the
celestial Rishi told me of a very wonderful and extraordinary thing in
connection with these marriages, viz., that the illustrious princess of
slender waist regained her virginity every day after a previous marriage.
After the weddings were over, king Drupada gave unto those mighty car-
warriors diverse kinds of excellent wealth. And the king gave unto them
one hundred cars with golden standards, each drawn by four steeds with
golden bridles. And he gave them one hundred elephants all possessing
auspicious marks on their temples and faces and like unto a hundred
mountains with golden peaks. He also gave them a hundred female servants
all in the prime of youth and clad in costly robes and ornaments and
floral wreaths. And the illustrious monarch of the Lunar race gave unto
each of those princes of celestial beauty, making the sacred fire a
witness of his gifts, much wealth and many costly robes and ornaments of
great splendour. The sons of Pandu endued with great strength, after their
wedding were over, and after they had obtained Krishna like unto a second
Sri along with great wealth, passed their days in joy and happiness, like
so many Indras, in the capital of the king of the Panchalas.'"


SECTION CCI

(Vaivahika Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'King Drupada, after his alliance with the Pandavas,
had all his fears dispelled. Indeed, the monarch no longer stood in fear
even of the gods. The ladies of the illustrious Drupada's household
approached Kunti and introduced themselves unto her, mentioning their
respective names, and worshipped her feet with heads touching the ground.
Krishna also, attired in red silk and her wrists still encircled with the
auspicious thread, saluting her mother-in-law with reverence, stood
contentedly before her with joined palms. Pritha, out of affection,
pronounced a blessing upon her daughter-in-law endued with great beauty
and every auspicious mark and possessed of a sweet disposition and good
character, saying, "Be thou unto thy husband as Sachi unto Indra, Swaha
unto Vibhavasu, Rohini unto Soma, Damayanti unto Nala, Bhadra unto
Vaisravana, Arundhati unto Vasishtha, Lakshmi unto Narayana! O amiable one,
be thou the mother of long-lived and heroic children, and possessed of
everything that can make thee happy! Let luck and prosperity ever wait on
thee! Wait thou ever on husbands engaged in the performance of grand
sacrifices. Be thou devoted to thy husbands. And let thy days be ever
passed in duly entertaining and reverencing guests and strangers arrived
at thy abode, and the pious and the old; children and superiors. Be thou
installed as the Queen of the kingdom and the capital of Kurujangala, with
thy husband Yudhishthira the just! O daughter, let the whole earth,
conquered by the prowess of thy husbands endued with great strength, be
given away by thee unto Brahmanas at horse-sacrifice! O accomplished one
whatever gems there are on earth possessed of superior virtues, obtain
them, O lucky one, and be thou happy for a full hundred years! And, O
daughter-in-law, as I rejoice today beholding thee attired in red silk, so
shall I rejoice again, when, O accomplished one, I behold thee become the
mother of a son!"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'After the sons of Pandu had been married, Hari
(Krishna) sent unto them (as presents) various gold ornaments set with
pearls and black gems (lapis lazuli). And Madhava (Krishna) also sent unto
them costly robes manufactured in various countries, and many beautiful
and soft blankets and hides of great value, and many costly beds and
carpets and vehicles. He also sent them vessels by hundreds, set with gems
and diamonds. And Krishna also gave them female servants by thousands,
brought from various countries, and endued with beauty, youth and
accomplishments and decked with every ornament. He also gave them many
well-trained elephants brought from the country of Madra, and many
excellent horses in costly harness, cars drawn by horses of excellent
colours and large teeth. The slayer of Madhu, of immeasurable soul, also
sent them coins of pure gold by crores upon crores in separate heaps. And
Yudhishthira the just, desirous of gratifying Govinda, accepted all those
presents with great joy.'"


SECTION CCII

(Viduragamana Parva)

"Vaisampayana said, 'The news was carried unto all the monarchs (who had
come to the Self-choice of Draupadi) by their trusted spies that the
handsome Draupadi had been united in marriage with the sons of Pandu. And
they were also informed that the illustrious hero who had bent the bow and
shot the mark was none else than Arjuna, that foremost of victorious
warriors and first of all wielders of the bow and arrows. And it became
known that the mighty warrior who had dashed Salya, the king of Madra, on
the ground, and who in wrath had terrified the assembled monarchs by means
of the tree (he had uprooted), and who had taken his stand before all foes
in perfect fearlessness, was none else than Bhima, that feller of hostile
ranks, whose touch alone was sufficient to take the lives out of all foes.
The monarchs, upon being informed that the Pandavas had assumed the guise
of peaceful Brahmanas, wondered much. They even heard that Kunti with all
her sons had been burnt to death in the conflagration of the house of lac.
They, therefore, now regarded the Pandavas in the light of persons who had
come back from the region of the dead. And recollecting the cruel scheme
contrived by Purochana, they began to say, "O, fie on Bhishma, fie on
Dhritarashtra of the Kuru race!"

"'After the Self-choice was over, all the monarchs (who had come thither),
hearing that Draupadi had been united with the Pandavas, set out for their
own dominions. And Duryodhana, hearing that Draupadi had selected the
owner of white steeds (Arjuna) as her lord, became greatly depressed.
Accompanied by his brothers, Aswatthaman, his uncle (Sakuni), Karna and
Kripa the prince set out with a heavy heart for his capital. Then
Duhsasana, blushing with shame, addressed his brother softly and said, "If
Arjuna had not disguised himself as a Brahmana, he could never have
succeeded in obtaining Draupadi. It was for this disguise, O king, that no
one could recognise him as Dhananjaya. Fate, I ween, is ever supreme.
Exertion is fruitless; fie on our exertions, O brother! The Pandavas are
still alive!" Speaking unto one another thus and blaming Purochana (for
his carelessness), they then entered the city of Hastinapura, with
cheerless and sorrowful hearts. Beholding the mighty sons of Pritha,
escaped from the burning house of lac and allied with Drupada, and
thinking of Dhrishtadyumna and Sikhandin and the other sons of Drupada all
accomplished in fight, they were struck with fear and overcome with
despair.

"'Then Vidura, having learnt that Draupadi had been won by the Pandavas and
that the sons of Dhritarashtra had come back (to Hastinapura) in shame,
their pride humiliated, became filled with joy. And, O king, approaching
Dhritarashtra, Kshattri said, "The Kurus are prospering by good luck!"
Hearing those words of Vidura, the son of Vichitravirya, wondering, said
in great glee, "What good luck, O Vidura! What good luck!" From ignorance,
the blind monarch understood that his eldest son Duryodhana had been
chosen by Drupada's daughter as her lord. And the king immediately ordered
various ornaments to be made for Draupadi. And he commanded that both
Draupadi and his son Duryodhana should be brought with pomp to Hastinapura.
It was then that Vidura told the monarch that Draupadi had chosen the
Pandavas for her lords, and that those heroes were all alive and at peace,
and that they had been received with great respect by king Drupada. And he
also informed Dhritarashtra that the Pandavas had been united with the
many relatives and friends of Drupada, each owning large armies, and with
many others who had come to that self-choice.

"'Hearing these words of Vidura, Dhritarashtra said, "Those children are to
me as dear as they were to Pandu. Nay, more. O listen to me why my
affection for them now is even greater! The heroic sons of Pandu are well
and at ease. They have obtained many friends. Their relatives, and others
whom they have gained as allies, are all endued with great strength. Who
amongst monarchs in prosperity or adversity would not like to have Drupada
with his relatives as an ally?"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having heard these words of the monarch, Vidura
said, "O king, let thy understanding remain so without change for a
hundred years!" Having said this Vidura returned to his own abode. Then, O
monarch, there came unto Dhritarashtra, Duryodhana and the son of Radha,
Karna. Addressing the monarch, they said, "We cannot, O king, speak of any
transgression in the presence of Vidura! We have now found thee alone, and
will, therefore, say all we like! What is this that thou hast, O monarch,
desired to do? Dost thou regard the prosperity of thy foes as if it were
thy own, that thou hast been applauding the Pandavas, O foremost of men,
in the presence of Vidura? O sinless one, thou actest not, O king, in the
way thou shouldst! O father, we should now act every day in such a way as
to weaken (the strength of) the Pandavas. The time hath come, O father,
for us to take counsel together, so that the Pandavas may not swallow us
all with our children and friends and relatives."'"


SECTION CCIII

(Viduragamana Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Dhritarashtra replied saying, "I desire to do exactly
what you would recommend. But I do not wish to inform Vidura of it even by
a change of muscle. It was, therefore, O son, that I was applauding the
Pandavas in Vidura's presence, so that he might not know even by a sign
what is in my mind. Now that Vidura hath gone away, this is the time, O
Suyodhana (Duryodhana), for telling me what thou hast hit upon, and what,
O Radheya (Karna), thou too hast hit upon."

"'Duryodhana said. "Let us, O father, by means of trusted and skilful and
adroit Brahmanas, seek to produce dissensions between the sons of Kunti
and Madri. Or, let king Drupada and his sons, and all his ministers of
state, be plied with presents of large wealth, so that they may abandon
the cause of Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti. Or, let our spies induce the
Pandavas to settle in Drupada's dominions, by describing to them,
separately, the inconvenience of residing in Hastinapura, so that,
separated from us, they may permanently settle in Panchala. Or, let some
clever spies, full of resources, sowing the seeds of dissension among the
Pandavas, make them jealous of one another. Or, let them incite Krishna
against her husbands. She has many lords and this will not present any
difficulty. Or, let some seek to make the Pandavas themselves dissatisfied
with Krishna, in which case Krishna also will be dissatisfied with them.
Or, let, O king, some clever spies, repairing thither, secretly compass
the death of Bhimasena. Bhima is the strongest of them all. Relying upon
Bhima alone, the Pandavas used to disregard us, of old. Bhima is fierce
and brave and the (sole) refuge of the Pandavas. If he be slain, the
others will be deprived of strength and energy. Deprived of Bhima who is
their sole refuge, they will no longer strive to regain their kingdom.
Arjuna, O king, is invincible in battle, if Bhima protecteth him from
behind. Without Bhima, Arjuna is not equal to even a fourth part of
Radheya. Indeed, O king, the Pandavas conscious of their own feebleness
without Bhima and of our strength would not really strive to recover the
kingdom. Or, if, O monarch, coming hither, they prove docile and obedient
to us, we would then seek to repress them according to the dictates of
political science (as explained by Kanika). Or, we may tempt them by means
of handsome girls, upon which the princess of Panchala will get annoyed
with them. Or, O Radheya, let messengers be despatched to bring them
hither, so that, when arrived, we may through trusted agents, by some of
the above methods, cause them to be slain. Strive, O father, to employ any
of these (various) methods that may appear to thee faultless. Time passeth.
Before their confidence in king Drupada--that bull amongst kings--is
established we may succeed, O monarch, to encounter them. But after their
confidence hath been established in Drupada, we are sure to fail. These, O
father, are my views for the discomfiture of the Pandavas. Judge whether
they be good or bad. What, O Karna, dost thou think?"'"


SECTION CCIV

(Viduragamana Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus addressed by Duryodhana, Karna said, "It doth
not seem to me, O Duryodhana, that thy reasoning is well-founded. O
perpetuator of the Kuru race, no method will succeed against the Pandavas.
O brave prince, thou hast before, by various subtle means, striven to
carry out thy wishes. But ever hast thou failed to slay thy foes. They
were then living near thee, O king! They were then unfledged and of tender
years, but thou couldst not injure them then. They are now living at a
distance, grown up, full-fledged. The sons of Kunti, O thou of firm
resolution, cannot now be injured by any subtle contrivances of thine.
This is my opinion. As they are aided by the very Fates, and as they are
desirous of regaining their ancestral kingdom, we can never succeed in
injuring them by any means in our power. It is impossible to create
disunion amongst them. They can never be disunited who have all taken to a
common wife. Nor can we succeed in estranging Krishna from the Pandavas by
any spies of ours. She chose them as her lords when they were in adversity.
Will she abandon them now that they are in prosperity? Besides women
always like to have many husbands, Krishna hath obtained her wish. She can
never be estranged from the Pandavas. The king of Panchala is honest and
virtuous; he is not avaricious. Even if we offer him our whole kingdom he
will not abandon the Pandavas. Drupada's son also possesseth every
accomplishment, and is attached to the Pandavas. Therefore, I do not think
that the Pandavas can now be injured by any subtle means in thy power. But,
O bull amongst men, this is what is good and advisable for us now, viz.,
to attack and smite them till they are exterminated. Let this course
recommend itself to thee. As long as our party is strong and that of the
king of the Panchalas is weak, so long strike them without any scruple. O
son of Gandhari, as long as their innumerable vehicles and animals,
friends, and friendly tribes are not mustered together, continue, O king,
to exhibit thy prowess. As long as the king of the Panchalas together with
his sons gifted with great prowess, setteth not his heart upon fighting
with us, so long, O king, exhibit thy prowess. And, O king, exert thy
prowess before he of the Vrishni race (Krishna) cometh with the Yadava
host into the city of Drupada, carrying everything before him, to restore
the Pandavas to their paternal kingdom. Wealth, every article of enjoyment,
kingdom, there is nothing that Krishna may not sacrifice for the sake of
the Pandavas. The illustrious Bharata had acquired the whole earth by his
prowess alone. Indra hath acquired sovereignty of the three worlds by
prowess alone. O king, prowess is always applauded by the Kshatriyas. O
bull amongst Kshatriyas, prowess is the cardinal virtue of the brave. Let
us, therefore, O monarch, with our large army consisting of four kinds of
forces, grind Drupada without loss of time, and bring hither the Pandavas.
Indeed, the Pandavas are incapable of being discomfited by any policy of
conciliation, of gift, of wealth and bribery, or of disunion. Vanquish
them, therefore, by thy prowess. And vanquishing them by thy prowess, rule
thou this wide earth. O monarch, I see not any other means by which we may
accomplish our end."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of Radheya, Dhritarashtra,
endued with great strength, applauded him highly. The monarch then
addressed him and said, "Thou, O son of a Suta, art gifted with great
wisdom and accomplished in arms. This speech, therefore, favouring the
exhibition of prowess suiteth thee well. But let Bhishma, and Drona, and
Vidura, and you two, take counsel together and adopt that proposal which
may lead to our benefit."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then king Dhritarashtra called unto him, all
those celebrated ministers and took counsel with them.'"


SECTION CCV

(Viduragamana Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Asked by Dhritarashtra to give his opinion, Bhishma
