inclination of the circling satellite; day and night come not by reason
of any 'shadow cast by turning' from the sun that revolves not at
all--but by reason of the side that is turned to his life-giving and
quickening beams. We believe that all the clouds and mist that come
between us and God are like the clouds and mist of the sky, not dropped
upon us from the blue empyrean above, but sucked up from the undrained
swamps and poisonous fens of the lower earth. That is to say, if there
be any change in the fulness of our possession of the divine Spirit,
the fault lies wholly within the region of the mutable and of the
human, and not at all in the region of the perennial and divine.

Nor do we believe, I suppose, any of us, that we are to look for any
part of the reason in failure of the adaptation of God's work and God's
ordinances to the great work which they have to do. Other people may
tell us, if they like--it will not shake our confidence--that the fire
that was kindled at Pentecost has all died down to grey ashes, and that
it is of no use trying to cower over the burnt-out embers any more in
order to get heat out of them. They may, and do, tell us that the
'rushing, mighty wind that filled the house' obeys the law of cycles as
the wind of the natural universe, and will calm into stillness after a
while, and then set in and blow from the opposite quarter. They may
tell us, and they do tell us, that the 'river of the water of life that
flows from the Throne of God and of the Lamb' is lost in the sands of
time, like the streams in the great Mongolian plateau. We do not
believe that. Everything stands exactly as it always has been in regard
to the perennial possession of Christ's Spirit as the strength and
resource of His Church; and the fault, dear friends, lies only here: 'O
Lord, our iniquities testify against us; our backslidings are many; we
have sinned against Thee.'

Oh, let me urge upon you, and upon myself, that the first thing which
we have to do is prayerfully and patiently and honestly to search after
this cause, and not look to superficial trifles such as possible
variations and improvements in order and machinery, and polity or
creed, or anything else, as the means of changing and bettering the
condition of things, but to recognise this as being the one sole cause
that hinders--the slackness of our own hold on Christ's hand, and the
feebleness and imperfection of our own spiritual life. Dear brethren,
there is no worse sign of the condition of churches than the calm
indifference and complacency in the present condition of things which
visits very many of us; it is like a deadly malaria wherever it is to
be found, and there is no more certain precursor of a blessed change
than a widespread dissatisfaction with what we are, and an honest,
earnest search after the cause. The sleeper that is restless, and
tosses and turns, is near awakening; and the ice that cracks, and
crumbles, and groans, and heaves, is on the point of breaking up. When
Christian men and women are aroused to this, the startled recognition
of how far beneath the ideal--no, I should not say how far beneath, but
rather how absolutely opposed to, the ideal--so much of our Christian
life and work is, and when further they push the inquiry for the cause,
so as to find that it lies in their own sin, then we shall be near the
time, yea, the 'set time, to favour Zion.'

III. And so let me point you, in the next place--and but a word or two
on that matter--to the consideration that the consciousness of the evil
condition and knowledge of its cause leads on to lowly penitence and
confession.

I dwell upon that for a moment for one reason mainly. I suppose that it
is a very familiar observation with us all that when, by God's mercy,
any of us individually, or as communities, are awakened to a sense of
our own departure from what He would have us be, and the feebleness of
all our Christian work, we are very apt to be led away upon the wrong
scent altogether, and instead of seeking improvement and revivification
in God's order, we set up an order of our own, which is a great deal
more pleasing to our own natural inclinations. For instance, to bring
the thing to a practical illustration, suppose I were, after these
remarks of mine, as a kind of corollary from them, to ask for
volunteers for some new form of Christian work, I believe I should get
twenty for one that I should get if I simply said, 'Brethren, let us go
together and confess our sins before God, and ask Him not to leave us.'
We are always tempted to originate some new kind of work, to
manufacture a revival, to begin by bringing together the outcasts into
the fold, instead of to begin by trying to deepen our own Christian
character, and purifying our own hearts, and getting more and more of
the life of God into our own spirits, and then to let the increase from
without come as it may. The true law for us to follow is to begin with
lowly abasement at His footstool, and when we have purged ourselves
from faults and sins in the very act of confessing them, and of shaking
them from us, then when we are fit for growth, external growth, we
shall get it. But the revival of the Church is not what people fancy it
to be so often nowadays, the gathering in of the unconverted into its
fold--that is the consequence of the revival. The revival comes by the
path of recognition of sin, and confession of sin, and forsaking of
sin, and waiting before Him for His blessing and His Spirit. Let me put
all that I would say about this matter into the one remark, that the
law of the whole process is the old one which was exemplified on the
day of Pentecost. 'Sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly; gather the
people, assemble the elders; let the bridegroom go forth of his
chamber, and the bride out of her closet; let the priests, the
ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch and the altar. Yea, the
Lord will be zealous for His land, and will pity His people; and I will
pour out My Spirit upon all flesh.' Brethren, to our knees and to
confessions! Let us see to it that we are right in our own inmost
hearts.

IV. And so, finally, look at the wonderful way in which in this text of
ours the prophet fuses together into one indistinguishable and yet not
confused whole, confession, and pleading remonstrance and also the
confidence of triumphant prayer.

I cannot touch upon the various points of that as I would gladly do;
but I must suggest one or two of them for your consideration. Look at
the substance of his petition: 'Do Thou it for Thy name's sake.' 'Leave
us not.' That is all he asks. He does not prescribe what is to be done.
He does not ask for the taking away of the calamity, he simply asks for
the continual presence and the operation of the divine hand, sure that
God is in the midst of them, and working all things right. Let us shape
our expectations in like fashion, not being careful to discover paths
for Him to run in; but contented if we can realise the sweetness and
the strength of His calming and purging presence, and willing to leave
the manner of His working in His own hand.

Then, look at what the text suggests as pleas with God, and grounds of
confidence for ourselves. 'Do Thou it for Thy name's sake, the hope of
Israel, the Saviour thereof in time of trouble. Thou art in the midst
of us, we are called by Thy name.' There are three grounds upon which
we may base our firm confidence. The one is the name--all the ancient
manifestations of Thy character, which have been from of old, and
remain for our perpetual strength. 'As we have heard, so have we seen
in the city of the Lord of Hosts.' 'That which is Thy memorial unto all
generations pledges Thee to the constant reiteration and reproduction,
hour by hour, according to our necessity, of all the might, and the
miracles, and the mercies of the past. Do Thou it for Thy name's sake.'

And then Jeremiah turns to the throne of God with another plea--'the
hope of Israel'--and thereby fills his mouth with the argument drawn
from the fact that the confidence of the Church is fixed upon Him, and
that it cannot be that He will disappoint it. 'Because Thou hast given
us Thy name, and because Thy name, by Thy grace, has become, through
our faith, our hope, Thou art doubly bound--bound by what Thou art,
bound by what we expect--to be with us, our strength and our
confidence.'

And the final plea is the appeal to the perennial and essential
relationship of God to His Church. 'We are called by Thy name'--'we
belong to Thee. It were Thy concern and ours that Thy Gospel should
spread in the world, and the honour of our Lord should be advanced.
Thou hast not surely lost Thy hold of Thine own, or Thy care for Thine
own property.' The psalmist said, 'Thou wilt not suffer him that is
devoted to Thee to see corruption.' And what his faith felt to be
impossible in regard to the bodily life is still more unthinkable in
regard to the spiritual. It cannot be that that which belongs to Him
should pass and perish. 'We are called by Thy name, and Thou, Lord, art
in the midst of us'--not a Samson shorn of his locks; not a wayfaring
man turning aside to delay for a night; but the abiding Presence which
makes the Church glad.

Dear brethren, calm and confident expectation should be our attitude,
and lowly repentance should rise to triumphant believing hope, because
God is moving round about us in this day. Thanks be to His name, there
is spread through us all an expectation of great things. That
expectation brings its own fulfilment, and is always God's way of
preparing the path for His own large gifts, like the strange,
indefinable attitude of expectation which we know filled the civilised
world before the birth of Jesus Christ--like the breath of the morning
that springs up before the sun rises, and says, 'The dawn; the dawn,'
and dies away. The expectation is the precursor of the gift, and the
prayer is the guarantee of the acceptance. Take an illustration. Those
great lakes in Central Africa that are said to feed the Nile are filled
with melting snows weeks and weeks before the water rises away down in
Egypt, and brings fertility across the desert that it makes to glisten
with greenness, and to rejoice and blossom as the rose. And so in
silence, high up upon the mountains of God, fed by communion with
Himself, the expectation rises to a flood-tide ere it flows down
through all the channels of Christian organisation and activity, and
blesses the valleys below. It is not for us to hurry the work of God,
nor spasmodically to manufacture revivals. It is not for us, under the
pretence of waiting for Him, to be cold and callous; but it is for us
to question ourselves wherefore these things have come upon us, with
lowly, penitent confession to turn to God, and ask Him to bless us. Oh,
if we were to do this, we should not ask in vain! Let us take the
prayer of our context, and say, 'We acknowledge, O Lord, our
wickedness, and the iniquity of our fathers; for we have sinned against
Thee. Are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause
rain? or can the heavens give showers? art not Thou He, O Lord, our
God?  Therefore we will wait upon Thee.'  Be sure that the old merciful
answer will come to us, 'I will pour rivers of water upon him that is
thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; and I will pour My Spirit upon
thy seed, and My blessing upon thine offspring.'




SIN'S WRITING AND ITS ERASURE

'The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron, and with the point of
a diamond: it is graven upon the table of their heart, and upon the
horns of your altars.'--JER. xvii. 1.

'Ye are manifestly declared to be the epistle of Christ ministered by
us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in
tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart.'-2 COR. iii. 3.

'Blotting out the handwriting that was against us.'---COL .ii. 14.


I have put these verses together because they all deal with
substantially the same metaphor. The first is part of a prophet's
solemn appeal.  It describes the sin of the nation as indelible.  It is
written in two places.  First, on their hearts, which reminds us of the
promise of the new covenant to be written on the heart.  The
'red-leaved tablets of the heart' are like waxen tables on which an
iron stylus makes a deep mark, an ineradicable scar.  So Judah's sin
is, as it were, eaten into their heart, or, if we might so say,
tattooed on it.  It is also written on the stone horns of the altar,
with a diamond which can cut the rock (an illustration of ancient
knowledge of the properties of the diamond).  That sounds a strange
place for the record of sin to appear, but the image has profound
meaning, as we shall see presently.

Then the two New Testament passages deal with other applications of the
same metaphor. Christ is, in the first, represented as writing on the
hearts of the Corinthians, and in the second, as taking away 'the
handwriting contrary to us.' The general thought drawn from all is that
sin's writing on men's hearts is erased by Christ and a new inscription
substituted.

I. The handwriting of sin.

Sin committed is indelibly written on the heart of the doer.

'The heart,' of course, in Hebrew means more than merely the supposed
seat of the affections. It is figuratively the centre of the spiritual
life, just as physically it is the centre of the natural. Thoughts and
affections, purposes and desires are all included, and out of it are
'the issues of life,' the whole outgoings of the being. It is the
fountain and source of all the activity of the man, the central unity
from which all comes. Taken in this wide sense it is really the whole
inner self that is meant, or, as is said in one place, 'the hidden man
of the heart.' And so the thought in this vigorous metaphor may be
otherwise put, that all sin makes indelible marks on the whole inward
nature of the man who does it.

Now to begin with, think for a moment of that truth that everything
which we do reacts on us the doers.

We seldom think of this. Deeds are done, and we fancy that when done,
they are done _with_. They pass, as far as outward seeming goes, and
their distinguishable consequences in the outward world, in the vast
majority of cases, soon apparently pass. All seems evanescent and
irrecoverable as last year's snows, or the water that flowed over the
cataract a century ago. But there is nothing more certain than that all
which we do leaves indelible traces on ourselves. The mightiest effect
of a man's actions is on his own inward life. The recoil of the gun is
more powerful than the blow from its shot. Our actions strike inwards
and there produce their most important effects. The river runs
ceaselessly and its waters pass away, but they bring down soil, which
is deposited and makes firm land, or perhaps they carry down grains of
gold.

This is the true solemnity of life, that in all which we do we are
carrying on a double process, influencing others indeed, but
influencing ourselves far more.

Consider the illustrations of this law in regard to our sins.

Now the last thing people think of when they hear sermons about 'sin'
is that what is meant is the things that they are doing every day. I
can only ask you to try to remember, while I speak, that I mean those
little acts of temper, or triflings with truth, or yieldings to passion
or anger, or indulgence in sensuality, and above all, the living
without God, to which we are all prone.

(a) All wrong-doing makes indelible marks on character. It makes its
own repetition easier. Habit strengthens inclination. Peter found
denying his Lord three times easier than doing it once. It weakens
resistance. In going downhill the first step is the only one that needs
an effort; gravity will do the rest.

It drags after it a tendency to other evil. All wrong things have so
much in common that they lead on to one another. A man with only one
vice is a rare phenomenon. Satan sends his apostles forth two by two.
Sins hunt in couples, or more usually in packs, like wolves, only now
and then do they prey alone like lions. Small thieves open windows for
greater ones. It requires continually increasing draughts, like
indulgence in stimulants. The palate demands cayenne tomorrow, if it
has had black pepper to-day.

So, whatever else we do by our acts, we are making our own characters,
either steadily depraving or steadily improving them. There will come a
slight slow change, almost unnoticed but most certain, as a dim film
will creep over the peach, robbing it of all its bloom, or some
microscopic growth will steal across a clearly cut inscription, or a
breath of mist will dim a polished steel mirror.

(b) All wrong-doing writes indelible records on the memory, that awful
and mysterious power of recalling past things out of the oblivion in
which they seem to lie. How solemn and miserable it is to defile it
with the pictures of things evil! Many a man in his later years has
tried to 'turn over a new leaf,' and has never been able to get the
filth out of his memory, for it has been printed on the old page in
such strong colours that it shines through. I beseech you all, and
especially you young people, to keep yourselves 'innocent of much
transgression,' and 'simple concerning evil'--to make your memories
like an illuminated missal with fair saints and calm angels bordering
the holy words, and not an _Illustrated_  Police News. Probably there
is no real oblivion. Each act sinks in as if forgotten, gets overlaid
with a multitude of others, but it is there, and memory will one day
bring it to us.

And all sin pollutes the imagination. It is a miserable thing to have
one's mind full of ugly foul forms painted on the inner walls of our
chamber of imagery, like the hideous figures in some heathen temple,
where gods of lust and murder look out from every inch of space on the
walls.

(c) All wrong-doing writes indelible records on the conscience. It does
so partly by sophisticating it--the sensibility to right and wrong
being weakened by every evil act, as a cold in the head takes away the
sense of smell. It brings on colour-blindness to some extent. One does
not know how far one may go towards 'Evil! be thou my good'--or how far
towards incapacity of distinguishing evil. But at all events the
tendency of each sin is in that direction. So conscience may become
seared, though perhaps never so completely as that there are no
intervals when it speaks. It may long lie dormant, as Vesuvius did,
till great trees grow on the floor of the crater, but all the while the
communication with the central fires is open, and one day they will
burst out.

The writing may be with invisible ink, but it will be legible one day.
So, then, all this solemn writing on the heart is done by ourselves.
What are you writing? There is a presumption in it of a future
retribution, when you will have to read your autobiography, with
clearer light and power of judging yourselves. At any rate there is
retribution now, which is described by many metaphors, such as sowing
and reaping, drinking as we have brewed, and others--but this one of
indelible writing is not the least striking.

Sin is graven deep on sinful men's worship.

The metaphor here is striking and not altogether clear. The question
rises whether the altars are idolatrous altars, or Jehovah's. If the
former, the expression may mean simply that the Jews' idolatry, which
was their sin, was conspicuously displayed in these altars, and had, as
it were, its most flagrant record in their sacrifices. The altar was
the centre point of all heathen and Old Testament worship, and altars
built by sinners were the most conspicuous evidences of their sins.

So the meaning would be that men's sin shapes and culminates in their
religion; and that is very true, and explains many of the profanations
and abominations of heathenism, and much of the formal worship of
so-called Christianity.

For instance, a popular religion which is a mere Deism, a kind of vague
belief in a providence, and in a future state where everybody is happy,
is but the product of men's sin, striking out of Christianity all which
their sin makes unwelcome in it. The justice of God, punishment,
sinfulness of sin, high moral tone, are all gone. And the very horns of
their altars are marked with the signs of the worshippers' sin.

But the 'altars' may be God's altars, and then another idea will come
in. The horns of the altar were the places where the blood of the
sacrifice was smeared, as token of its offering to God. They were then
a part of the ritual of propitiation. They had, no doubt, the same
meaning in the heathen ritual. And so regarded, the metaphor means that
a sense of the reality of sin shapes sacrificial religion.

There can be no doubt that a very real conviction of sin lies at the
foundation of much, if not all, of the system of sacrifices. And it is
a question well worth considering whether a conviction so widespread is
not valid, and whether we should not see in it the expression of a true
human need which no mere culture, or the like, will supply.

At all events, altars stand as witnesses to the consciousness of sin.
And the same thought may be applied to much of the popular religion of
this day. It may be ineffectual and shallow but it bears witness to a
consciousness of evil. So its existence may be used in order to urge
profounder realisation of evil on men. You come to worship, you join in
confessions, you say 'miserable sinners'--do you mean anything by it?
If all that be true, should it not produce a deeper impression on you?

But another way of regarding the metaphor is this. The horns of the
altar were to be touched with the blood of propitiation. But look! the
blood flows down, and after it has trickled away, there, deep carven on
the horns, still appears the sin, _i.e._ the sin is not expiated by the
sinner's sacrifice. Jeremiah is then echoing Isaiah's word, 'Bring no
more vain oblations.' The picture gives very strikingly the
hopelessness, so far as men are concerned, of any attempt to blot out
this record. It is like the rock-cut cartouches of Egypt on which time
seems to have no effect. There they abide deep for ever. Nothing that
we can do can efface them. 'What I have written, I have written.'
Pen-knives and detergents that we can use are all in vain.

II. Sin's writing may be erased, and another put in its place.

The work of Christ, made ours by faith, blots it out.

(a) Its influence on conscience and the sense of guilt. The accusations
of conscience are silenced. A red line is drawn across the indictment,
or, as Colossians has it, it is 'nailed to the cross.' There is power
in His death to set us free from the debt we owe.

(b) Its influence on memory. Christ does not bring oblivion, but yet
takes away the remorse of remembrance. Faith in Christ makes memory no
longer a record which we blush to turn over, or upon which we gloat
with imaginative delight in guilty pleasures past, but a record of our
shortcomings that humbles us with a penitence which is not pain, but
serves as a beacon and warning for the time to come. He who has a clear
beam of memory on his backward track, and a bright light of hope on his
forward one, will steer right.

(c) Its influence on character.

We attain new hopes and tastes. 'We become epistles of Christ known and
read of all men,' like palimpsests, Homer or Ovid written over with the
New Testament gospels or epistles.

Christ's work is twofold, erasure and rewriting. For the one, 'I will
blot out as a cloud their transgressions.' None but He can remove
these. For the other, 'I will put My law into their minds and will
write it on their hearts.' He can impress all holy desires on, and can
put His great love and His mighty spirit into, our hearts.

So give your hearts to Him. They are all scrawled over with hideous and
wicked writing that has sunk deep into their substance. Graven as if on
rock are your sins in your character. Your worship and sacrifices will
not remove them, but Jesus Christ can. He died that you might be
forgiven, He lives that you may be purified. Trust yourself to Him, and
lean all your sinfulness on His atonement and sanctifying power, and
the foul words and bad thoughts that have been scored so deep into your
nature will be erased, and His own hand will trace on the page, poor
and thin though it be, which has been whitened by His blood, the fair
letters and shapes of His own likeness. Do not let your hearts be the
devil's copybooks for all evil things to scrawl their names there, as
boys do on the walls, but spread them before Him, and ask Him to make
them clean and write upon them His new name, indicating that you now
belong to another, as a new owner writes his name on a book that he has
bought.




THE HEATH IN THE DESERT AND THE TREE BY THE RIVER

'He shall be like the heath in the desert, and shall not see when good
cometh; but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, a salt
land and not inhabited...He shall be as a tree planted by the waters,
and that spreadeth out her roots by the river, and shall not see when
heat cometh, but her leaf shall be green; and shall not be careful in
the year of drought, neither shall cease from yielding fruit.'--JER.
xvii. 6, 8.


The prophet here puts before us two highly finished pictures. In the
one, the hot desert stretches on all sides. The fierce 'sunbeams like
swords' slay every green thing. The salt particles in the soil glitter
in the light. No living creature breaks the melancholy solitude. It is
a 'waste land where no one came, or hath come since the making of the
world.' Here and there a stunted, grey, prickly shrub struggles to
live, and just manages not to die. But it has no grace of leaf, nor
profitableness of fruit; and it only serves to make the desolation more
desolate.

The other carries us to some brimming river, where everything lives
because water has come. The pictures are coloured by Eastern
experience. For in those lands more than beneath our humid skies and
weaker sunshine, the presence or absence of running water makes the
difference between barrenness and fertility. Dipping their boughs in
the sparkling current, and driving their roots through the moist soil,
the bordering trees lift aloft their pride of foliage and bear fruits
in their season.

So, says Jeremiah, the two pictures represent two sets of men; the one,
he who diverts from their true object his heart-capacities of love and
trust, and clings to creatures and to men, 'making flesh his arm and
departing from the living God'; the other, he who leans the whole
weight of his needs and cares and sins and sorrows upon God. We can
make choice of which shall be the object of our trust, and according as
we choose the one or the other, the experience of these vivid pictures
will be ours.

Let me briefly, then, draw out the points of contrast in these two
companion sketches.

I. The one is in the desert, the other by the river.

Underneath the pictures there lies this thought, that the direction of
a man's trust determines the whole cast of his life, because it
determines, as it were, the soil in which he grows. We can alter our
habitat. The plant is fixed; but 'I saw men as trees--yes! but as
'trees walking.' We can walk, and can settle where we shall be rooted
and whence we shall draw our inspiration, our confidence, our security.
The man that chooses-for it is a matter of choice--to trust in any
creature thereby wills, though he does not know it, that he shall dwell
in a 'salt land and not inhabited.' The man that chooses to cast his
whole self into the arms of God, and in a paroxysm of self-distrust to
realise the divine helpfulness and presence, that man will soon know
that he is 'planted by the river.'

Now, the poor, little dusty shrub in the desert, whose very leaves have
been modified into prickles, is fit for the desert, and is as much at
home there as are the willows by the water-courses with their lush
vegetation in their moist bed. But if a _man_ makes that fatal choice
which so-many of us are making, of shutting out God from his confidence
and his love, and squandering these upon earth and upon creatures, he
is as fatally out of harmony with the place which he has chosen for
himself, and as much away from his natural soil, as a tropical plant
would be amongst the snows of Arctic glaciers, or a water-lily in the
Sahara.

Considering all that I am and need, what and where is my true home and
the soil in which I can grow securely, and fear no evil? Brethren,
there is only one answer to that question. The very make of a man's
spirit points to God, and to God alone, as the natural place for him to
root and grow in. You, I, the poorest and humblest of men, will never
be right, never feel that we are in our native soil, and compassed with
the appropriate surroundings, until we have laid our hearts and our
hands on the breast of God, and rested ourselves on Him. Not more
surely do gills and fins proclaim that the creature that has them is
meant to roam through the boundless ocean, nor the anatomy and wings of
the bird witness more plainly to its destination to soar in the open
heavens than the make of your spirits testifies that God, and none less
or lower, is your portion. We are built for God, and unless we
recognise and act upon that conviction, we are like the prickly shrub
in the desert, whatever good may be around us; and if we do recognise
and act upon it, whatever parched ground may seem to stretch on all
sides, there will be soil moist enough for us to draw refreshment and
vitality from it.

If that be so, brethren, what insanity the lives of multitudes of us
are! As well might bees try to suck honey from a vase of wax flowers as
we to draw what we need from creatures, from ourselves, from visible
and material things.

What would you business men think of some one who went and sold out all
his stock of Government or other sound securities, and then flung the
proceeds down a hole in South Africa, out of which no gold will ever
come? He would be about as wise as are the people who fancy that these
hearts of theirs will ever be at home except they find a home in God.

Where else will you find love that will never fail, nor change, nor
die? Where else will you find an object for the intellect that will
yield inexhaustible material of contemplation and delight? Where else
infallible direction for the will? Where else shall weakness find
unfailing strength, or sorrow, adequate consolation, or hope, certain
fulfilment, or fear, a safe hiding-place? Nowhere besides. Oh! then,
brethren, do, I beseech you, turn away your heart's confidence and love
from earth and creatures; for until the roots of your life go down into
God, and you draw your life from Him, you are not in your right soil.

II. The one can take in no real good; the other can fear no evil.

One verse of our text says, 'He shall not see when good cometh'; the
other one, according to our Authorised Version, 'He shall not see when
heat cometh.' But a very slight alteration of one word in the original
gives a better reading, which is adopted in the Revised Version, where
we have, 'and shall not fear when heat cometh.' That alteration is
obviously correct, because there follows immediately a parallel clause,
'and shall not be careful'--or anxious--'in the year of drought.' In
both these clauses the metaphor of the tree is a little let go; and the
man who is signified by it comes rather more to the front than in the
remainder of the picture. But that is quite natural.

So look at these two simple thoughts for a moment. He whose trust is
set upon creatures is thereby disabled from recognising what is his
highest good. His judgment is perverted. _There_ is the explanation of
the fact that men are contented with the partial and evanescent
blessedness that may be drawn from human loves and companionship and
material things. It is because they have gone blind, and the false
direction of their confidence, has put out their eyes. And if any of my
hearers are living careless about God, and all that comes from Him, and
perfectly contented with that which they find in this visible, diurnal
sphere, that is not because they have the good which they need, but
because they do not know that good when they see it, and have lost the
power of discerning what is really for their benefit and blessedness.

There is nothing sadder in this world than the conspiracy into which
men seem to have entered to ignore the highest good, and to profess
themselves contented with the lowest. I remember a rough parable of
Luther's--the roughness of which may be pardoned for the force and
vividness of it--which bears on this matter. He tells how a company of
swine were offered all manner of dainty and refined foods, and how,
with a unanimous swinish grunt, they answered that they preferred the
warm, reeking 'grains' from the mash-tub. The illustration is coarse,
but it is not an unfair representation of the choice that some of us
are making.

'He cannot see when good cometh.' God comes, and I would rather have
some more money. God comes, and I prefer some woman's love. God comes,
and I would rather have a prosperous business. God comes, and I prefer
beer. So I might go the whole round. The man that cannot see good when
it is there before his face, because the false direction of his
confidence has blinded his eyes, cannot open his heart to it. It comes,
but it does not come in. It surrounds him, but it does not enter into
him. You are plunged, as it were, in a sea of possible felicity, which
will be yours if your heart's direction is towards God, and the
surrounding ocean of blessedness has as little power to fill your heart
as the sea has to enter some hermetically sealed flask, dropped into
the middle of the Atlantic. 'He cannot see when good cometh.' Blind,
blind, blind! are multitudes of us.

Turn to the other side. 'He shall not fear when heat cometh,' which is
evil in those Eastern lands, 'and shall not be careful in the year of
drought.' The tree, that sends its roots towards a river that never
fails, does not suffer when all the land is parched. The man who has
driven his roots into God, and is drawing from that deep source what is
needful for his life and fertility, has no occasion to dread any evil,
nor to gnaw his heart with anxiety as to what he is to do in parched
days. Troubles may come, but they do not go deeper than the surface. It
may be all cracked and caked and dry, 'a thirsty land where no water
is,' and yet deep down there may be moisture and coolness.

Faith, which is trust, and fear are opposite poles. If a man has the
one, he can scarcely have the other in vigorous operation. He that has
his trust set upon God does not need to dread anything except the
weakening or the paralysing of that trust; for so long as it lasts it
is a talisman which changes evil into good, the true philosopher's
stone which transmutes the baser metals into gold; and, so long as it
lasts, God's shield is round him and no evil can befall him.

Brethren, if our trust is in God, it is unworthy of it and of us to
fear, for all things are His, and there is no evil in evil as men call
it, so long as it does not draw away our hearts from our Father and our
Hope. Therefore, he that fears let him trust; he that trusts let him
not be afraid. He that sets his heart and anchors his hopes of safety
on any except God, let him be afraid, for he is in a very stern world,
and if he is not fearful he is a fool.

So the direction of our trust, if it is right, shuts all real evil out
from us, and if it is wrong, shuts us out from all real good.

III. The one is bare, the other clothed with the beauty of foliage.

The word which is translated 'heat' has a close connection with, if it
does not literally mean, 'naked' or 'bare.' Probably, as I have said,
it designates some inconspicuously leaved desert shrub, the particular
species not being ascertainable or a matter of any consequence. Leaves,
in Scripture, have a recognised symbolical meaning. 'Nothing but
leaves' in the story of the fig-tree meant only beautiful outward
appearance, with no corresponding outcome of goodness of heart, in the
shape of fruit. So I may venture here to draw a distinction between
leafage and fruit, and say that the one points rather to a man's
character and conduct as lovely in appearance, and in the other as
morally good and profitable.

This is the lesson of these two clauses--misdirected confidence in
creatures strips a man of much beauty of character, and true faith in
God adorns a soul with a leafy vesture of loveliness. Now, I have no
doubt that there start up in your minds at once two objections to that
statement: first, that a great many godless men do present fair and
attractive features of character; and secondly, that a great many
Christian men do not. I admit both things frankly, and yet I say that,
for the highest good, the perfect crowning beauty of any human
character, this is needed, that it should cling to God. 'Whatsoever
things are lovely and of good report' lack their supreme excellence,
the diamond on the top of the royal crown, the glittering gold on the
summit of the campanile, unless there is in them a distinct reference
to God.

I believe that I am speaking to some who would not profess themselves
to be religious men, and who yet are truly desirous of cultivating in
their character the Fair and the Good. To them I would venture to
say--brethren, you will never be so completely, so refinedly, so truly,
graceful as you might be, unless the roots of your character 'are hid
with Christ in God.'

                     'A servant with this clause
                      Makes drudgery divine,'

said good old George Herbert. And any act, however humble, on which the
light from God falls, will gleam with a lustre else unattainable, like
some piece of broken glass in the furrows of a ploughed field.

Sure I am that if we Christian people had a deeper faith, we should
have fairer lives. And I beseech you, my fellow-believers in Jesus
Christ, not to supply the other side with arguments against
Christianity, by showing that it is possible for a man to say and to
suppose that he sets his heart on God, and yet to bear but little
leafage of beauty or grace of character. Goodness is beauty; beauty is
goodness. Both are to be secured by communion and union with Him who is
fairer than the children of men. Dip your roots into the fountain of
life--it is the fountain of beauty as well as of life, and your lives
will be green.

IV. Lastly, the one is sterile, the other fruitful.

I admit, as before, that this statement often seems to be contradicted,
both by the good works of godless men, and by the bad works of godly
ones. But for all that, I would urge you to consider that the only
works of men worth calling 'fruit,' if regard is had to their
capacities, relations, and obligations, are those done as the outcome
and consequence of hearts trusting in the Lord. The rest of the man's
activities may be busy and multiplied, and, from the point of view of a
godless morality, many may be fair and good; but if we think of him as
being destined, as his chief end, 'to glorify God, and (so) to enjoy
Him for ever,' what correspondence between such a creature and acts
that are done without reference to God can there ever be? They are not
worth calling 'fruit.' At the most they are 'wild grapes,' and there
comes a time when they will be tested and the axe laid to the root of
the trees, and these imperfect deeds will shrivel up and disappear.

Trust will certainly be fruitful. In so saying we are upon Christian
ground, which declares that the outcome of faith is conduct in
conformity with the will of Him in whom we trust, and that the
productive principle of all good in man is confidence in God manifest
to us in Jesus Christ.

So we have not to begin with work; we have to begin with character.
'Make the tree good,' and its fruit will be good. Faith will give power
to bring forth such fruit; and faith will set agoing the motive of love
which will produce it. Thus, dear brethren, we come back to this--the
prime thing about a man is the direction which his trust takes. Is it
to God? Then the tree is good; and its fruit will be good too. If you
will trust yourselves to 'God manifest in the flesh,' to Jesus Christ
and His work for you and in you, then you will be as if 'planted by the
rivers of water,' you will be able to receive into yourselves, and will
receive, all good, and be masters of all evil, will exhibit graces of
character else impossible, and will bring forth 'fruit that shall
remain.' Separated from Him we are nothing, and can bring forth nothing
that will stand the light of that last moment.

Brother, turn your trust to that dear Lord, and then you will have your
'fruit unto holiness, and the end shall be everlasting life,' when the
transplanting season comes, and they that have been 'planted in the
house of the Lord' below shall 'flourish in the courts of our God'
above, and grow more green and fruitful, beside the 'river of the water
of life that proceedeth from the throne of God and of the Lamb.'




A SOUL GAZING ON GOD

'A glorious high throne from the beginning is the place of our
sanctuary.'--JER. xvii. 12.


I must begin by a word or two of explanation as to the language of this
passage. The word 'is' is a supplement, and most probably it ought to
be omitted, and the verse treated as being, not a statement, but a
series of exclamations. The next verse runs thus, 'O Lord! the hope of
Israel, all that forsake Thee shall be ashamed'; and the most natural
and forcible understanding of the words of my text is reached by
connecting them with these following clauses: 'O Lord! the hope of
Israel,' and, regarding the whole as one long exclamation of adoring
contemplation, 'A glorious throne,' or '_Thou_ glorious throne, high
from the beginning; the place of our sanctuary, O Lord! the hope of
Israel.'

I. If we look at the words so, we have here, to begin with, a wonderful
vision of what God is.

'A glorious throne,' or, as the original has it, 'a throne of
glory,'--which is not quite the same thing--' high from the beginning,
the place of our sanctuary.' There are three clauses. Now they all seem
to me to have reference to the Temple in Jerusalem, which is taken, by
a very natural figure of speech, as a kind of suggestive description of
Him who is worshipped there. There is the same kind of use of the name
of a place to stand for the person who occupies or inhabits it, in many
familiar phrases. For instance, 'The Sublime Porte' is properly the
name of a lofty gateway which belonged to the palace in Constantinople,
and so has come to mean the Turkish Government if Government it can be
called. So we talk of the 'Papal See' having done this or that, and
scarcely remember that a 'see' is a bishop's seat, or, again, the
decision of 'the Chair' is final in the House of Commons. Or, if you
will accept a purely municipal parallel, if any one were told that 'the
Town Hall' had issued a certain order, he would know that our
authorities, the Mayor and Corporation, had decreed so and so. So, in
precisely the same way here, the prophet takes the outward facts of the
Temple as symbolising great and blessed spiritual thoughts of the God
that filled the Temple with His own lustre.

'A glorious throne'--that is grand, but that is not what Jeremiah
means--'A throne of glory' is the true rendering. And to what does that
refer? Now, in the greater number of cases, you will find that in the
Old Testament, where 'glory' is ascribed to God, the word has a very
distinct and specific meaning, viz. the light which was afterwards
called the 'Shekinah,' and dwelt between the cherubim, and was the
symbol of the divine presence and the assurance that that presence
would be self-revealing and would manifest Himself to His people. So
here the throne on which glory rests is what we call the _mercy-seat_
