end. It is not so; and you will find that out before long. Better that
you should settle it in your minds at first. When you were born you
were enrolled on the roll-call of the regiment; and now you have to do
a man's part in the battle.

II. Note the boastful temper which is sure to be beaten.

No doubt there is something inspiring in the spectacle of the young
warrior standing there, chafing at the lists, eagerly pulling on his
gauntlets, fitting on his helmet, and longing to be in the thick of the
fight. No doubt, as I have already said, there is something in your
early days which makes such buoyant hopes and anticipations of success
natural, and which gives you, as a great gift, that expectation of
victory. I do not wish to shatter any of your enthusiasms or ideals,
but I do wish to suggest a consideration or two that may calm and sober
them.

So I ask, have you ever estimated, are you now estimating rightly, what
it is that you have to fight for? To make yourselves pure, wise,
strong, self-governing, Christlike men, such as God would have you to
be. That is not a small thing for a man to set himself to do. You may
go into the struggle for lower purposes, for bread and cheese, or
wealth or fame, or love, or the like, with a comparatively light heart;
but if there once has dawned upon a young soul the whole majestic sweep
of possibilities in its opening life, then the battle assumes an aspect
of solemnity and greatness that silences all boasting. Have you
considered what it is that you have to fight for?

Have you considered the forces that are arrayed against you? 'What act
is all its thought had been?' Hand and brain are never paired. There is
always a gap between the conception and its realisation. The painter
stands before his canvas, and, while others may see beauty in it, he
only sees what a small fragment of the radiant vision that floated
before his eye his hand has been able to preserve. The author looks on
his book and thinks what a poor, wretched transcript of the thoughts
that inspired his pen it is. There is ever this same disproportion
between the conception and accomplishment. Therefore, all we old people
feel, more or less, that our lives have been failures. We set out as
you do, thinking that we were going to build a tower whose top should
reach to heaven, and we are contented if, at the last, we have
scrambled together some little wooden shanty in which we can live. We
thought as you do; you will come to think as we do. So you had better
begin now, and not go into the fight boasting, or you will come out of
it conscious of being beaten.

Have you realised how different it is to dream things and to do them?
In our dreams we are, as it were, working _in vacuo_. When we come to
acts, the atmosphere offers resistance. It is easy to imagine ourselves
victorious in circumstances where things are all going rightly and are
bending according to our own desires, but when we come to the grim
world, where there are things that resist and people are not plastic,
it is a very different matter. You do not yet understand, as you will
some day, the fatal limitations of power that hem us all round and the
obstinate way that circumstances have of not falling in with our
wishes. And you have not yet learned how completely and constantly
failure accompanies success, like its shadow. The old Egyptians had no
need to put a skeleton at their tables, nor the Romans to set a mocker
behind the hero as he rode in triumph up to the Capitol. The world
provides the skeleton at the banquet, and circumstances supply the
mocker to add a dash of failure to all our triumphs.

Have you ever realised how certainly, into the brightest and most
buoyant and successful lives, there will come crushing sorrows, blows
as from an unseen hand in the dark, that fell a man? O friend! when one
thinks of the miseries and the misfortunes, the sorrows and the losses,
the broken and bleeding hearts that began life buoyant, elastic,
hopeful, perhaps boasting, like you, there ought to be a sobering tint
cast over our brightest visions.

I suppose that our colleges are full of students who are going, to far
outstrip their professors, that every life-school has a dozen lads who
have just begun to handle brush and easel, and are going to put
Raffaelle in the shade. I suppose that every lawyer's office has a
budding Lord Chancellor or two in it. And I suppose that that sharp
criticism of us fumblers in the field, and half-expressed thought, 'How
much better I could do it!' belong to youth by virtue of its youth. It
is a crude form of undeveloped power, but it wants a great deal of
sobering down, and I am trying now to let out a little of the blood,
and to bring you to a clear conception of the very limited success
which is likely to attend you. All we old people, whose deficiencies
and limitations you see so clearly, had the same dreams, impossible as
it may appear to you, fifty years ago. We were going to be the men, and
wisdom was going to die with us, and you see what we have made of it.
You will not do much better.

Have you ever taken stock honestly of your own resources? 'What king,
going to make war against another king, sitteth not down first, and
counteth the cost, whether with his ten thousand he can meet him that
cometh against him with twenty thousand?' Boast if you like, but
calculate first, and boast after that, if you can.

Your worst enemy is yourself. When you are counting your resources and
saying, 'I have this, that, and the other thing,' do not forget to say,
'I have a part of me, that takes all the rest of me all its time to
keep it down and prevent it from becoming master.' You have traitors in
the fortress who are in communication with the enemy outside, and may
go over to him openly in the very crisis of the fight. You have to take
that fact into account, and it ought to suppress boasting whilst you
are putting on the harness.

You are not old enough to remember, as some of us do, the delirious
enthusiasm with which, in the last Franco-German war, the Emperor and
the troops left Paris, and how, as the train steamed out of the
station, shouts were raised, 'A. Berlin!' Ay! and they never got
farther than Sedan, and there an Emperor and an army were captured. Go
into the fight bragging, and you will come out of it beaten.

III. Note the confidence which is not boasting.

I can fancy some of you saying, 'These gloomy views of yours will lead
to nothing but absolute despair. You have been telling us that success
is impossible; that we are bound to fight, and are sure to be beaten.
What are we to do? Throw up the sponge, and say, "Very well! then I may
as well have my fling, and give up all attempts to be any better than
my passions and my senses would lead me to be."' And if there is
nothing more to be said about the fight than has been already said,
that _is_ the conclusion. 'Let us eat and drink,' not only 'for
to-morrow we die,' but 'for to-day we are sure to be beaten.' But I
have only been speaking about this self-distrust as preliminary to what
is the main thing that I desire to urge upon you now, and it is this:
You do not need to be beaten. There is no room for boasting, but there
is room for absolute confidence. You, young men and women, standing at
the entrance of the amphitheatre where the gladiators fight, may dash
into the arena with the most perfect confidence that you will come out
with your shield preserved and your sword unbroken.

There is one way of doing it. 'Be of good cheer! I have overcome the
world.' That was not the boast of a man putting on the harness, but the
calm utterance of the conquering Christ when He was putting it off. He
has conquered that you may conquer. Remember how the Apostle, who has
preserved for us that note of triumph at the end of Christ's life, has,
like some musician with a favourite phrase, modulated and varied it in
his letter written long after, when he says, 'This is the victory that
overcometh the world, even our faith.' My dear young friends, distrust
yourselves utterly, and trust Jesus Christ absolutely, and give
yourselves to Him, to be His servants and soldiers till your lives'
end. Then you will not be beaten, for it is written of those who move
in the light, wearing the victor's palm: 'These are they who overcame
by the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of His testimony.' That blood
secures our victory in a threefold fashion. By that great death of
Jesus Christ all our past sins may be forgiven, and they no longer have
power to tyrannise over us. In His sacrifice for us there are motives
given to us for noble, grateful, Godlike living, stronger than all the
temptations that can arise from our own hearts, or from the evils
around us. And if we put our humble trust in Him, then that faith opens
the door for the entrance into our hearts, in simple reality, of a
share in His conquering life which will make us victorious over the
world, the flesh, and the devil.

'This is the victory that overcometh the world,' and the youngest,
feeblest Christian who lays his or her hand in Christ's strong hand,
may look out upon all the embattled antagonisms that front them, and
say, 'He will cover my head in the day of battle, and teach my hands to
war and my fingers to fight.'

Dear young friends, people sometimes preach to you that you should be
Christians, because life is uncertain and death is drawing near, and
after death the judgment. I preach that too; but the gospel that I seek
to press upon you now is not merely a thing to die by, but it is _the_
thing to live by; and it is the only power by which we shall be sure of
overcoming the armies of the aliens. This confidence in Christ will
take away from you no shred of your natural, youthful, buoyant
elasticity, but it will save you from much transgression and from
bitter regrets.

One last word. There is possible a triumph which is not boasting, for
him who puts _off_ the harness. The war-worn soldier has little heart
for boasting, but he may be able to say, 'I have not been beaten.' The
best of us, when we come to the end, will have to recognise in
retrospect failures, deficiencies, palterings with evil, yieldings to
temptation, sins of many sorts, that will put all boasting out of our
thoughts. But, whilst that is so, there is sometimes granted to the
man, who has been faithful in his adherence to Jesus Christ, a gleam of
sunshine at eventime, which foretells Heaven's welcome and 'Well
done!', before it is uttered. He was no self-righteous braggart, but a
very rigid judge of himself, who, close by the headsman's block that
ended his life, said: 'I have fought a good fight; I have finished my
course; I have kept the faith.' 'Put on the whole armour of God,' and
when the time comes to put it off, you will have a peaceful assurance
as far removed from despair as it is from boasting. Distrust
yourselves; do not underestimate your enemies; understand that life is
warfare; trust utterly to Jesus Christ, and He will see to it that you
are not conquered, will give you the calm confidence of which we have
been speaking here, and a share hereafter in the throne which He
promises to him that overcometh. If you will trust yourselves to Him,
and take service in His army, you cannot be too certain of victory. If
you fling yourself into the battle in your own strength, with however
high a hope, and fight without the Captain for your ally, you cannot
escape defeat.




ROYAL MURDERERS



'And it came to pass after these things, that Naboth the Jezreelite had
a vineyard, which was in Jezreel, hard by the palace of Ahab king of
Samaria. 2. And Ahab spake unto Naboth, saying, Give me thy vineyard,
that I may have it for a garden of herbs, because it is near unto my
house: and I will give thee for it a better vineyard than it; or, if it
seem good to thee, I will give thee the worth of it in money. 3. And
Naboth said to Ahab, The Lord forbid it me, that I should give the
inheritance of my fathers unto thee. 4. And Ahab came into his house
heavy and displeased because of the word which Naboth the Jezreelite
had spoken to him: for he had said, I will not give thee the
inheritance of my fathers. And he laid him down upon his bed, and
turned away his face, and would eat no bread. 5. But Jezebel his wife
came to him, and said unto him. Why is thy spirit so sad, that thou
eatest no bread? 6. And he said unto her, Because I spake unto Naboth
the Jezreelite, and said unto him, Give me thy vineyard for money: or
else, if it please thee, I will give thee another vineyard for it: and
he answered, I will not give thee my vineyard. 7. And Jezebel his wife
said unto him, Dost thou now govern the kingdom of Israel? arise, and
eat bread, and let thine heart be merry: I will give thee the vineyard
of Naboth the Jezreelite. 8. So she wrote letters in Ahab's name, and
sealed them with his seal, and sent the letters unto the elders and to
the nobles that were in his city, dwelling with Naboth. 9. And she
wrote in the letters, saying, Proclaim a fast, and set Naboth on high
among the people: 10. And set two men, sons of Belial, before him, to
bear witness against him, saying, Thou didst blaspheme God and the
king. And then carry him out, and stone him, that he may die. 11. And
the men of his city, even the elders and the nobles who were the
inhabitants in his city, did as Jezebel had sent unto them, and as it
was written in the letters which she had sent unto them. 12. They
proclaimed a fast, and set Naboth on high among the people. 13. And
there came in two men, children of Belial, and sat before him: and the
men of Belial witnessed against him, even against Naboth, in the
presence of the people, saying, Naboth did blaspheme God and the king.
Then they carried him forth out of the city, and stoned him with
stones, that he died. 14. Then they sent to Jezebel, saying, Naboth is
stoned, and is dead. 15. And it came to pass, when Jezebel heard that
Naboth was stoned, and was dead, that Jezebel said to Ahab, Arise, take
possession of the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, which he refused
to give thee for money; for Naboth is not alive, but dead. 16. And it
came to pass, when Ahab heard that Naboth was dead, that Ahab rose up
to go down to the vineyard of Naboth the Jezreelite, to take possession
of it.'-1 KINGS xxi. 1-16.


There are three types of character in this story, all bad, but in
different ways. Ahab is wicked and weak; Jezebel, wicked and strong;
the elders of Jezreel, wicked and subservient. Amongst them they commit
a great crime, which was the last drop in the full cup of the king's
sins, and brought down God's judgment on him and his house.

I. We have to look at the weakly wicked Ahab. His wish for Naboth's
vineyard was a mere selfish whim. He was willing to give more for it
than it was worth. It suited his convenience for a kitchen-garden. In
the true spirit of an Eastern despot, he expected everything to yield
to his caprice, and did not think that a subject had any rights. What
business has a poor man with sentiment? Naboth is to go, and a handful
of silver will set all right. Samuel's warning of what a king would be
and do was fulfilled. This highhanded interference with private rights
was what Israel's revolt had led to. The sturdy Naboth was influenced
not only by love for the bit of land which his fathers had cultivated
for more years than Ahab had reigned days, but by obedience to the law
of God; and he was not afraid to show himself a Jehovah worshipper, by
his solemn appeal to 'the Lord,' as well as by the fact of his refusal.
The brusque, flat refusal shows that some independence was left in the
nation.

The weak rage and childish sulking of Ahab are very characteristic of a
feeble and selfish nature, accustomed to be humoured and not thwarted.
These fits of temper seem to have been common with him; for he was in
one at the end of the preceding chapter, as he is now. The 'bed' on
which he flung himself is probably the couch for reclining on at table,
and, if so, the picture of his passion is still more vivid. Instead of
partaking of the meal, he turns his face to the wall, and refuses food.
'No meat will down with him for want of a salad, because wanting
Naboth's vineyard for a garden of herbs.' As he lies there, like a
spoiled child, all because he could not get his own way, he may serve
for an example of the misery of unbridled selfishness and unregulated
desires. An acre or two of land was a small matter to get into such a
state about, and there are few things that are worth a wise or a strong
man's being so troubled. Hezekiah might 'turn his face to the wall' in
the extremity of sickness and earnestness of prayer; but Ahab in doing
it is only a poor, feeble creature who has weakly set his heart on what
is not his, and weakly whimpers because he cannot have it.

To be thus at the mercy of our own ravenous desires, and so utterly
miserable when they are thwarted, is unworthy of manhood, and is sure
to bring many a bitter moment; for there are more disappointments than
gratifications in store for such a one. We may learn from Ahab, too,
the certainty that weakness will darken into wickedness. Such a mood as
his always brings some Jezebel or other to suggest evil ways of
succeeding. In this wicked world there are more temptations to sin than
helps to virtue, and the weak man will soon fall into some of the
abundant traps laid for him. Unless we have learned to say 'No' with
much emphasis, because we are 'strong in the Lord,' we shall fall.
'This did not I because of the fear of the Lord.' To be weak is to be
miserable, and any sin may come from it.

II. Jezebel is a type of a different sort of wickedness. She is wicked
and strong. Notice how she takes the upper hand at once, in her abrupt
question, not without a spice of scorn; and note how Ahab answers,
bemoaning himself, putting in the forefront his fair proposal, and
making Naboth's refusal ruder than it really had been, by suppressing
its reason. Then out flashes the imperious will of this masterful
princess, who had come from a land where royalty was all-powerful, and
who had no restraints of conscience. She darts a half-contemptuous
question at Ahab, to stir him to action; for nothing moves a weak man
so much as the fear of being thought weak. 'Dost thou govern?' implies,
'If thou dost, thou mayest trample on a subject.' It should mean, 'If
thou dost, thou must jealously guard the subject's rights.' What a
proud consciousness of her power speaks in that 'I will give thee the
vineyard'! It is like Lady Macbeth's 'Give me the dagger!' No more is
said. She can keep her own counsel, and Ahab suspects that some
violence is to be used, which he had better not know. So, again, his
weakness leads him astray. He does not wish to hear what he is willing
should be done, if only he has not to do it. So feeble men hoodwink
conscience by conniving at evils which they dare not perpetrate, and
then enjoying their fruits, and saying, 'Thou canst not say I did it.'

Jezebel had Ahab's signet, the badge of authority, which she probably
got from him for her unspoken purpose. Her letter to the elders of
Jezreel speaks out, with cynical disregard of decency, the whole ugly
conspiracy. It is direct, horribly plain, and imperative. There is a
perfect nest of sins hissing and coiled together in it. Hypocrisy
calling religion in to attest a lie, subornation of evidence, contempt
for the poor tools who are to perjure themselves, consciousness that
such work will only be done by worthless men, cool lying, ferocity, and
murder,--these are a pretty company to crowd into half a dozen lines.
Most detestable of all is the plain speaking which shows her hardened
audacity and conscious defiance of all right. To name sin by its true
name, and then to do it without a quiver, is a depth of evil reached by
few men, and perhaps fewer women.

The plot gives a colour of legality, which is probably often unobserved
by readers. Naboth was to be accused of treason: 'renouncing God and
the king'; and that was, according to the law of Moses, a charge which,
if proved, merited capital punishment. But it is Satan accusing sin for
Jezebel, the Baal worshipper, who had done her best to root out the
name of Jehovah, to accuse Naboth of departing from God. Much
highhanded oppression must have gone before such outspoken contempt of
justice; and, if Ahab represents the fatal connection of weakness and
wickedness, Jezebel is an instance of the fatal audacity with which a
strong character may come, by long indulgence in self-willed
gratification of its own desires, to trample down all obstacles and go
crashing through all laws, human and divine. The climax of sin is to
see a deed to be sinful, and to do it all the same. Such a pre-eminence
in evil is not reached at a bound, but it can be reached; and every
indulgence in passion, and every gratifying of desire against which
conscience protests, is a step toward it. Therefore, if we shrink from
such a goal, let us turn away from the paths that lead to it. 'No
mortal man is supremely foul all at once.' Therefore resist the
beginnings of evil. Elijah was strong by natural temperament, and so
was Jezebel. But the strength of the prophet was hallowed by obedience,
and, like some great river, poured blessings where it flowed. Jezebel's
strength was lawless, and foamed itself away in fury, like some
devastating torrent that spreads ruin whithersoever it bursts out. 'Be
strong' is good advice, but it needs the supplement, 'Let all your
deeds be done in charity,' and the foundation,' Be strong in the Lord,
and in the power of His might.'

III. The last set of actors in this pitiful tragedy are the
subserviently wicked elders. The narrative sets their slavish
compliance in a strong light. It puts emphasis on the tie between them
and Naboth, in that they 'dwelt in his city,' and so should have had
neighbourly feeling. It lays stress on their cowardly motive and their
complete execution of orders, both by reiterating that they acted 'as
Jezebel had sent' and 'as it was written,' and by taking the letter
clause by clause, in the narrative of the shameful parody of justice
which they acted. It suggests both their eagerness to do her pleasure,
and her impatient waiting, in her palace, by the message sent in hot
haste as soon as the brave peasant proprietor was dead. 'It is ill
sitting at Rome and striving with the Pope,' as the proverb has it. No
doubt these cowards were afraid for their own necks, and were too near
the royal tigress to venture disobedience. But their swift,
unremonstrating, and complete obedience indicates the depth of
degradation and corruption to which they and the nation had sunk, and
the terror exercised by their upstart king and his Sidonian wife.

Cowardice is always contemptible, and wickedness is always odious; but
when the two come together, and a man has no other reason for his sin
than 'I was afraid,' each makes the other blacker. Israel had cast off
the fear of the Lord, which would have preserved it from the ignoble
terror of men, and the consequence was that it trembled before an
angry, unscrupulous woman. It had revolted from Rehoboam and his
foolish bluster about whips and scorpions, and the consequence was a
worse slavery. If we fear God, we need have no other fear. The sun puts
out a fire. If we rebel against Him, we do not become free, but fall
under a heavy yoke. It is never prudent to do wrong. The worst
consequences of resistance to powerful evil are easier to bear than
those of compliance, though it may seem the safer. Better be lying dead
beneath a heap of stones, like the sturdy Naboth, who could say 'No' to
a king, than be one of his stoners, who killed their innocent neighbour
to pleasure Jezebel!

Her indecent triumph at the success of the plot, and her utter
callousness, are expressed in her words to Ahab, in which the main
point is the taking possession of the vineyard. The death of its owner
is told with exultation, as being nothing but the sweeping aside of an
obstacle. Ahab asks no questions as to how this opportune clearing away
of hindrance came about. He knew, no doubt, well enough that there had
been foul play; but that does not matter to him, and such a trifle as
murder does not slacken his glad haste to get his new toy. There was
other red on the vines than their clustering grapes, as he soon found
out, when Elijah's grim figure, like an embodied conscience, met him
there. Whoever reaches out to grasp a fancied good by breaking God's
law, may get his good, but he will get more than he expected along with
it,--even an accusing voice that prophesies evil. Elijah strides among
the leafy vines in the field bought by crime. Ahab meant to make it a
garden of pot-herbs. 'Surely the bitter wormwood of divine revenge grew
abundantly therein.'




AHAB AND ELIJAH

'And Ahab said to Elijah, Hast thou found me, O mine enemy!'--1 KINGS
xxi. 20.


The keynote of Elijah's character is force-the force of righteousness.
The New Testament, you remember, speaks of the 'power of Elias.' The
outward appearance of the man corresponds to his function and his
character. Gaunt and sinewy, dwelling in the desert, feeding on locusts
and wild honey, with a girdle of camel's skin about his loins, he
bursts into the history, amongst all that corrupt state of society,
with the force of a hammer that God's hand wields. The whole of his
career is marked by this one thing,--the strength of a righteous man.
And then, on the other hand, this Ahab;--the keynote of _his_ character
is the weakness of wickedness, and the wickedness of weakness. Think of
him. Weakly longing--as idle and weak minds in lofty places always
do--after something that belongs to somebody else; with all his
gardens, coveting the one little herb-plot of the poor Naboth; weak and
worse than womanly, turning his face to the wall and weeping when he
cannot get it; weakly desiring to have it, and yet not knowing how to
set about accomplishing his wish; and then--as is always the case, for
there are always tempters everywhere for weak people--that beautiful
fiend by his side, like the other queen in our great drama, ready to
screw the feeble man that she is wedded to, to the sticking-place, and
to dare anything to grasp that on which the heart was set. And so the
deed is done: Naboth safe stoned out of the way; and Ahab goes down to
take possession! The lesson of that is, my friend,--Weak dallying with
forbidden desires is sure to end in wicked clutching at them. Young
men, take care! You stand upon the beetling edge of a great precipice,
when you look over, from your fancied security, at a wrong thing; and
to strain too far, and to look too fixedly, leads to a perilous danger
of toppling over and being lost! If you know that a thing cannot be won
without transgression, do not tamper with hankerings for it. Keep away
from the edge, and '_shut_ your eyes from beholding vanity.'

But my business now is rather with the consequences of this apparently
successful sin, than with what went before it. The king gets the crime
done, shuffles it off himself on to the shoulders of his ready tools in
the little village, goes down to get his toy, and gets it--but he gets
Elijah along with it, which was more than he reckoned on. When, all
full of impatience and hot haste to solace himself with his new
possession, he rushes down to seize the vineyard, he finds there,
standing at the gate, waiting for him--black-browed, motionless, grim,
an incarnate conscience--the prophet whom he had not seen for years,
the prophet that he had last seen on Carmel, bearding alone the
servants of Baal, and executing on them the solemn judgment of death;
and there leaps at once to his lip, 'Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?'

I. I find here, in the first place, this broad principle: Pleasure won
by sin is peace lost.

It does not need that there should be a rebuking prophet standing by to
work out that law. God commits the execution of it to the natural
operations of our own consciences and our own spirits. Here is the fact
in men's natures on which it partly depends: when sin is yet tempting
us, it is loved; when sin in done, it is loathed. Action and reaction,
as the mechanicians tell us, are equal and contrary. The more violent
the blow with which we strike upon the forbidden pleasure, the further
back the rebound after the stroke. When sin tempts--when there hangs
glittering before a man the golden fruit which he knows that he ought
not to touch--then, amidst the noise of passion or the sophistry of
desire, conscience is silenced for a little while. No man sins without
knowing that it is wrong, without knowing that in the long run it is a
mistake; but at the instant, in the delirium of yielding, as in moments
of high physical excitement, he is blind and deaf, deaf to the voice of
reason, blind to the sight of consequences. Conscience and consequence
are alike lost sight of. Like a mad bull, the man that is tempted
lowers his head and shuts his eyes, and rushes right on. The moment
that the sin is done, that moment the passion or desire which tempted
to it is satiated, and ceases to exist for the time. It is gone as a
motive. Like some savage beast, being fed full, it lies down to sleep.
There is a vacuum left in the heart, the noise is stilled, and
then--and then--conscience begins to speak. Or, to take another image,
the passion, the desires, the impulses that lead us to do wrong
things--they are like a crew that mutiny, and take for a moment the
wheel from the steersman and the command from the captain, but then,
having driven the ship on the rocks, the mutineers get intoxicated, and
lie down and sleep. Passion fulfils itself, and expires. The desire is
satisfied, and it turns into a loathing. The tempter draws us to him,
and then unveils the horrid face that lies beneath the mask. When the
deed is done and cannot be undone, then comes satiety; then comes the
reaction of the fierce excitement, the hot blood begins to flow more
slowly; then rises up in the heart conscience; then rises up in majesty
in the soul reason; then flashes and flares before the eye the vivid
picture of the consequences. His 'enemy' has found the sinner. He has
got the vineyard--ay, but Elijah is there, and his dark and stern
presence sucks all the brightness and the sunniness out of the
landscape; and Naboth's blood stains the leaves of Naboth's garden!
There is no sin which is not the purchase of pleasure at the price of
peace.

Now, you will say that all that is true in regard to the grosser forms
of transgression, but that it is not true in regard to the less vulgar
and sensual kinds of crime. Of course it is most markedly observable
with regard to the coarsest kind of sins; but it is as true, though
perhaps not in the same degree--not in the same prominent, manifest way
at any rate--in regard to every sin that a man does. There is never an
evil thing which--knowing it to be evil--we commit, which does not rise
up to testify against us. As surely as (in the words of our great
philosopher poet) 'lust dwells hard by hate,' and as surely as
to-night's debauch is followed by to-morrow's headache, so surely--each
after its kind, and each in its own region--every sin lodges in the
human heart the seed of a quick-springing punishment, yea, is its own
punishment. When we come to grasp the sweet thing that we have been
tempted to seize, there is a serpent that starts up amongst all the
flowers. When the evil act is done--opposite of the prophet's roll--it
is sweet in the lips, but oh! it is bitter afterwards. 'At the last it
biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an adder!'

Then, you may say again, 'All that is very much exaggerated. That is
not the sort of feeling which men that go on persistently doing wrong
things, cherish. They live quietly and contentedly enough. "There are
no bands in their death, and their strength is firm."' All that would
be true if men's consciences kept sensitive in the midst of men's sins,
but they do not; and so it cannot be that every transgression has thus
its quick result in loss of peace. I grant you at once that it is quite
possible for men to sin away the delicacy and susceptibility of their
consciences. I dare say there are people here now who, after they have
done a wrong thing, go on very quietly, with no knowledge of those
agonies that I have been speaking about, with scarcely ever a prick of
conscience for their sin. But what then? I did not say that all sin
purchased pleasure by inflictions of agony; but I do say, that all sin
purchases pleasure by loss of peace. The silence of a seared conscience
is not peace. For peace you want something more than that a conscience
shall be dumb. For peace you want something more than that you shall be
able to live without the daily sense and sting of sin. You want not
only the negative absence of pain, but the positive presence of a
tranquillising guest in your heart--that conscience of yours testifying
with you, blessing you in its witness, and shedding abroad rest and
comfort. It is easy to kill a conscience--after a fashion at least. It
is easy to stifle it. It is easy to come to that depth of wrongdoing
that one gets used to it, and does it without caring. But oh! that cold
vacuum, that dead absence in such a spirit of all healthy
self-communing, that painful suspicion, 'If I look into myself, and be
quiet for a little while, and take stock of my own character, and see
what I am, the balance will be on the wrong side,'--that is _not_
peace. As the old historian says about the Roman armies that marched
through a country, burning and destroying every living thing, 'They
make a solitude, and they call it peace.' And so men do with their
consciences. They stifle them, sear them, forcibly silence them,
somehow or other; and then, when there is a dead stillness in the
heart, broken by no voice of either approbation or blame, but doleful
like the unnatural quiet of a deserted city, then they call that peace,
and the man's uncontrolled passions and unbridled desires dwell
solitary in the fortress of his own spirit! You _may_ almost attain to
that. Do you think it is a goal to be set before you as an ideal of
human nature? The loss of peace is certain--the presence of agony is
most likely--from every act of sin.

And so, it is not only a _crime_ that men commit when they do wrong,
but it is a _blunder_. Sin is not only guilt, but it is a mistake. 'The
game is not worth the candle,' according to the French proverb. The
thing that you buy is not worth the price you pay for it. Sin is like a
great forest-tree that we may sometimes see standing up green in its
leafy beauty, and spreading a broad shadow over half a field; but when
we get round on the other side, there is a great dark hollow in the
very heart of it, and corruption is at work there. It is like the
poison-tree in travellers' stories, tempting weary men to rest beneath
its thick foliage, and insinuating death into the limbs that relax in
the fatal coolness of its shade. It is like the apples of Sodom, fair
to look upon, but turning to acrid ashes on the unwary lips. It is like
the magician's rod that we read about in old books. There it lies; and
if, tempted by its glitter, or fascinated by the power that it proffers
you, you take it in your hand, the thing starts into a serpent with
erected crest and sparkling eye, and plunges its quick barb into the
hand that holds it, and sends poison through all the veins. Do not
touch it, my brother! Every sin buys pleasure at the price of peace.
Elijah is always waiting at the gate of the ill-gotten possession.

II. In the second place, Sin is blind to its true friends and its real
foes.

'Hast thou found me, _O mine enemy?'_ Elijah was the best friend that
Ahab had in his kingdom. And that Jezebel there, the wife of his bosom,
whom he loved and thanked for this new toy, she was the worst foe that
hell could have sent him. Ay, and so it is always. The faithful
rebuker, the merciful inflicter of pain, is the truest friend of the
wrongdoer. The worst enemy of the sinful heart is the voice that either
tempts it into sin, or lulls it into self-complacency. And this is one
of the most certain workings of evil desires in our spirits, that they
pervert for us all the relations of things, that they make us blind to
all the moral truths of God's universe. Sin is blind as to itself,
blind as to its own consequences, blind as to who are its friends and
who are its foes, blind as to earth, blind as to another world, blind
as to God. The man who walks in the 'vain show' of transgression, whose
heart is set upon evil,--he fancies that ashes are bread, and stones
gold (as in the old fairy story); and, on the other hand, he thinks
that the true sweet is the bitter, and turns away from God's angels and
God's prophets, with, 'Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?' That is the
reason, my friend, of not a little of the infidelity that haunts this
world--that sin, perverted and blinded, stumbles about in its darkness,
and mistakes the face of the friend for the face of the foe. God sends
you in mercy a conscience to prick and sting you that you may be kept
right; and you think that _it_ is your enemy. God sends in His mercy
the discipline of life, pains and sorrows, to draw us away from the
wrong, to make us believe that the right in this world and the next is
life, and that holiness is happiness for evermore. And then, when,
having done wrong, God's merciful messenger of a sharp sorrow finds us
out, we say, 'Hast thou found me, O mine enemy?' and begin to wonder
about the mysteries of Providence, and how it comes that there is evil
in the creation of a good God. Why, physical evil is the best friend of
the man that is subject to moral evil. Sorrow is the truest blessing to
a sinner. The best thing that can befall any of us is that God shall
not let us alone in any wrong course, without making us feel His rod,
without hedging up our way with thorns, and sending us by His grace
into a better one. There is no mystery in sorrow. There is a mystery in
sin; but sorrow following on the back of sin is the true friend, and
not the enemy, of the wrong-doing spirit.

And then, again, God sends us a gospel full of dark words about evil.
It deals with that fact of sin, as no other system ever did. There is
no book like the Bible for these two things,--for the lofty notion that
it has about what man may be and ought to be; and for the low notion
that it has of what man is. It does not degrade human nature, because
it tells us the truth about human nature as it is. Its darkest and
bitterest sayings about transgression, they are veiled promises, my
brother. It does not make the consequences of sin which it writes down.
You and I make them for ourselves, and it tells us of them. Did the
lighthouse make the rock that it stands on? Is it to be blamed for the
shipwreck? If a man _will_ go full tilt against the thing that he knows
will ruin him, what is the right name for him who hedges it up with a
prickly fence of thorns, and puts a great light above it, and writes
below, 'If thou comest here thou diest'? Is that the work of an enemy?
And yet that is why people talk about the gloomy views of the gospel,
about the narrow spirit of Christianity, about the harsh things that
are here! The Bible did not make hell. The Bible did not make sin the
parent of sorrow. The Bible did not make it certain that 'every
transgression and disobedience' should reap its 'just recompense of
reward.' We are the causes of their coming upon ourselves; and the
Bible but proclaims the end to which the paths of sin must lead, and
beseechingly calls to us all, 'Turn ye, turn ye! why will ye die?' And
yet when it comes to you, how many of you turn away from it, and say,
'It is mine enemy'! How many shrink from its merciful knife, that cuts
into all the wounds of the festering spirit! How many of you feel as if
'the truth that is in Jesus' was a hard and bitter truth; when all the
while its very heart's blood is love, and the very secret of its
message is the tenderest compassion, the most yearning sympathy, for
every soul amongst us!

Ay, and more than that:--sin makes us fancy that God Himself is our
enemy; and sin makes that thought of God that ought to be most blessed
and most sweet to us, the terror of our souls. You have the power, my
friend, by your own wrongdoing, of perverting the whole universe, and,
worst of all, of distorting the image of the merciful Father, of the
loving God. God loves. God is the Father. God watches over us. God will
not let us alone when we transgress, God in His love has appointed that
sin shall breed sorrow. But _we_--we do wrong; and then, for God's
Providence, and God's Gospel, and God's Son, and God Himself, there
rises up in our hearts a hostile feeling, and we think that He is
turned to be our enemy, and fights against us! But oh! He only fights
against us that we may submit to, and love, Him. Will you, then, have
it that God's highest mercy should be your greatest sorrow, that your
truest friend should be your worst foe? You can make the choice. To you
God and His truth are like that ark of His covenant which to Dagon and
the Philistines was a curse, but to the house of Obededom was a
blessing. He and His gospel are to you like that pillar that was
darkness and trouble to the hosts of the Egyptians, but light by night
to His children. To you, my brother, the gospel may be either 'the
savour of life unto life, or the savour of death unto death!' If He
comes to you with rebuke, and meets you when you are at the very door
of your sin, and busy with your transgression,--usher Him in, and thank
Him, and bless Him for words of threatening, for merciful severity, for
conviction of sin;--because conviction of sin is the work of the
Comforter; and all the threatenings and all the pains that follow and
track, like swift hounds, the committer of evil, are sent by Him who
loves too wisely not to punish transgression, and loves too well to
punish without warning, and desires only when He punishes that we
should turn from our evil way, and escape the condemnation. An enemy,
or a friend,--which is God in His truth to you?

III. Lastly, the sin which mistakes the friendly appeal for an enemy,
lays up for itself a terrible retribution. Elijah comes to Jezreel and
prophesies the fall of Ahab. The next peal, the next flash, fulfil the
prediction. There, where he did the wrong, he suffered. In Jezreel,
Ahab died. In Jezreel, Jezebel died. That plain was the battlefield for
the subsequent discomfiture of Israel. Over and over again there
encamped upon it the hosts of the spoilers. Over and over again its
soil ran red with the blood of the children of Israel; and at last, in
the destruction of the kingdom, Naboth was avenged and God's word
fulfilled. The threatened evil was foretold that it might lead the king
to repentance, and that thus it might never need to be more than a
threat. But, though Ahab was partially penitent, and partially listened
to the prophet's voice, yet for all that, he went on in his evil way.
Therefore the merciful threatening becomes a stern prophecy, and is
fulfilled to the very letter.

So, when God's message comes to us, friends, if we listen not to it,
and turn not to its gentle rebuke, Oh! then we gather up for ourselves
an awful futurity of judgment, when threatening will darken into
punishment, and the voice that rebuked will swell into the voice of
final condemnation. When a man fancies that God's prophet is his enemy,
and dreams that his finding him out is a calamity and a loss, that man
may be certain that something worse will find him out some day. His
sins will find him out, and that is worse than the prophet's coming. My
friend, picture to yourself this--a human spirit shut up, with the
companionship of its forgotten and dead transgressions. There is a
resurrection of acts as well as of bodies. Think what it will be for a
man to sit surrounded by that ghastly company, the ghosts of his own
sins!--and as each forgotten fault and buried badness comes, silent and
sheeted, into that awful society, and sits itself down there, think of
him greeting each with the question, 'Thou too? What! are ye all here?
Hast _thou_ found me, O mine enemy?' and from each bloodless spectral
lip there tolls out the answer, the knell of his life, 'I _have_ found
thee, because thou hast sold thyself to work evil in the sight of the
Lord.' Ah, my friend! if that were all we had to say, it might well
stiffen us into stony despair. Thank God--thank God! such an issue is
not inevitable. Christ speaks to you. Christ is your _Friend_. He loves
you, and He speaks to you now--speaks to you of your danger, but in
order that you may never rush into it and be engulfed by it; speaks to
you of your sin, but in order that you may say to Him, 'Take Thou it
away, O merciful Lord'; speaks to you of justice, but in order that you
may never sink beneath the weight of His stroke; speaks to you of love,
in order that you may know, and fully know, the depth of His
graciousness. When He says to you, 'I love thee; love thou Me: I have
died for thee; trust Me, live _by_ Me, and live _for_ Me, 'will you not
say to Him, 'My Friend, my Brother, my Lord, and my God'?




UNPOSSESSED POSSESSIONS

'And the king of Israel said unto his servants, Know ye that Ramoth in
Gilead is ours, and we be still, and take it not out of the hand of the
king of Syria?'--1 KINGS xxii. 3.


This city of Ramoth in Gilead was an important fortified place on the
eastern side of the Jordan, and had, many years before the date of our
text, been captured by its northern neighbours in the kingdom of Syria.
A treaty had subsequently been concluded and broken a war followed
thereafter, in which Ben-hadad, King of Syria, had bound himself to
restore all his conquests. He had not observed that article of peace,
and the people of Israel had not been strong enough to enforce it until
the date of our text; but then, backed up by a powerful alliance with
Jehoshaphat of Judah, they determined to make a dash to get back what
was theirs, but whilst theirs was also not theirs.

Now, I have nothing more to do with Ahab and Jehoshaphat, but I wish to
turn the words of my test, and the thoughts that may come from them,
into a direction profitable to ourselves. 'Know ye that Ramoth in
Gilead is ours?' and yet it had to be got out of the hands of the King
of Syria.

I. What is ours and not ours.

Every Christian man has large tracts of unannexed territory, unattained
possibilities, unenjoyed blessings, things that are his and yet not
his. How much more of God you and I have a right to than we have the
possession of! The ocean is ours, but only the little pailful that we
carry away home to our own houses is of use to us. The whole of God is
mine if I am Christ's, and a dribble of God is all that comes into the
lives of most of us.

How much inward peace is ours? It is meant that there should never pass
across a Christian's soul more than a ripple of agitation, which may
indeed ruffle and curl the surface; but deep down there should be the
tranquillity of the fathomless ocean, unbroken by any tempests, and yet
not stagnant, because there is a vital current running through it, and
every drop is being drawn upward to the surface and the sunlight. There
may be a peace in our hearts deep as life; a tranquillity which may be
superficially disturbed, but is never thoroughly, and down in its
depths, broken. And yet, let some little petty annoyance come into our
daily life, and what a pucker we are in! Then we forget all about the
still depths in which we ought to be living; and fears and hopes and
loves and ambitions disturb our souls, just as they do the spirits of
the men that do not profess to have any holdfast in God. The peace of
God is ours; but, ah! in how sad a sense it is true that the peace of
God is _not_ ours!

What 'heights'--for Ramoth means 'high places'--what heights of
consecration there are which are ours according to the divine purpose
and according to the fulness of God's gift! It is meant, and it is
possible, and well within the reach of every Christian soul, that he or
she should live, day by day, in the continual and utter surrender of
himself or herself to the will of God, and should say, 'I do the little
I can do, and leave the rest with Thee'; and should say again, 'All is
right that seems most wrong, If it be His sweet will.' But instead of
this absolute submission and completeness and joyfulness of surrender
of ourselves to Him, what do we find? Reluctance to obey, regret at
providences, Self dominant or struggling hard against the partial
domination of the will of God in our hearts. The mind which was in
Jesus Christ, who was able to say, 'It is written of Me, lo! I come to
do Thy will, O Lord!' is ours by virtue of our being Christians; but,
alas! in practical realisation how sadly it is not ours!

What noble possibilities of service, what power in the world, are
bestowed on Christ's people!' All power is given unto Me in heaven and
in earth,' says He. 'And He breathed on them, and said, As My Father
hath sent Me, even so send I you.' The divine gift to the Christian
community, and to the individuals that compose it--for there are no
gifts given to the community, but to the individuals that make it
up--is of fulness of power for all their work. And yet look how, all
through the ages, the Church has been beaten by the corruption of the
world; and how to-day many of us are standing, either utterly careless
and callous about the diseases that we have the medicine to cure, or in
desperation looking about for other healing for the social and moral
condition of the community than that which is granted to us in Jesus
Christ. 'Know ye that Ramoth in Gilead is ours, and we be still, and
take it not out of the hands of the King of Syria?'

There is ever so much in the world which belongs to our Master, and
therefore belongs to us, and which the Church is bound to lay its hand
upon and claim for its own and for its Lord's. For remember, brethren,
that all the gifts at which I have been glancing--and I might have
largely increased the catalogue--all these spiritual endowments of
peace, and safety, and purity, and joy, of religious elevation, and
consecration, and power for service, and the like--are ours by a
threefold title and charter. God's purpose, which is nothing less for
every one of us than that we should be 'filled with all the fulness of
God,' and that He should 'supply all our need, according to His riches
in glory,'--that is the first of the parchments on which our title
depends. And the second title-deed is Christ's purchase; for the
efficacy of His death and the power of His triumphant life have secured
for all who trust Him the whole fulness of this divine gift. And the
third of our claims and titles is the influence of that Holy Spirit
whom Jesus Christ gives to every one of His children to dwell in him.
There is in you, working in you, if you have any faith in that Lord, a
power that is capable of making you perfectly pure, perfectly blessed,
strong with an immortal strength, and glad with a 'joy that is
unspeakable and full of glory.'

Oh! then, let us think of the awful contrast between what is ours and
what we have. It is ours by the divine intention, by the divine gift in
