the most beautiful sights on earth.  How she finds time for it, wit for 
it, patience for it, courage for it, I cannot conceive.  I have wondered 
often why many a woman does not lie down and die, for sheer weariness of 
body and soul.  I have fancied often that God must give some special 
grace to all good mothers, to enable them to do all that they do, and 
bear all they bear.  But still, the women who do most, who bring up their 
families best, are surely those who obey their Lord's command, who give 
their whole souls to each day's work, and think as little as they can of 
to-morrow.  With them, surely, the true wisdom is, not to fret, not to 
plot, to do the duty which lies nearest them, and leave the rest to God; 
to get each week's bill paid, trusting to God to send money for the week 
to come; to get their children every day to school; to correct in them 
each fault as it shews itself, without looking forward too much to how 
the child will turn out at last.  For them, and for parents of all ranks, 
the wisest plan, I believe, is to make no far-fetched plans for their 
children's future, certainly no ambitious intrigues for their marriage:  
but simply to educate them--that is, to bring out in them, day by day, 
all that is purest and best, wisest and ablest, and leave the rest to 
God; sure that if they are worth anything, their Father in heaven will 
find them work to do, and a place at His table, in this life and in the 
life to come.

Yes, my dear friends, this is the true philosophy, the philosophy which 
Christ preaches to us all--to old and young, rich and poor, ploughman and 
scholar, maid, wife, and widow, all alike.

Fret not.  Plot not.  Look not too far ahead.

Fret not--lest you lose temper, and be moved to do evil.  Plot not--lest 
you lose faith in God, and be moved to be dishonest.  Look not too far 
ahead--So far only, as to keep yourselves out of open and certain danger-
-lest you see what is coming before you are ready for the sight.  If we 
foresaw the troubles which may be coming, perhaps it would break our 
hearts; and if we foresaw the happiness which is coming, perhaps it would 
turn our heads.  Let us not meddle with the future, and matters which are 
too high for us, but refrain our souls, and keep them low, like little 
children, content with the day's food, and the day's schooling, and the 
day's play-hours, sure that the Divine Master knows that all is right, 
and how to train us, and whither to lead us, though we know not, and need 
not know, save this--that the path by which He is leading each of us--if 
we will but obey and follow, step by step--leads up to Everlasting Life.



SERMON XL.  THE LESSON OF LIFE



Fifth Sunday in Lent.

Chester Training College, 1870.  Windsor Castle, 1871.

Hebrews v. 7, 8.  "Who in the days of His flesh, when He had offered up 
prayers and supplications with strong crying and tears, unto Him that was 
able to save Him from death, and was heard in that He feared; though He 
were a Son, yet learned He obedience by the things which He suffered."

This is the lesson of life.  This is God's way of educating us, of making 
us men and women worthy of the name of men and women, worthy of the name 
of children of God.  As Christ learnt, so must we.  If it was necessary 
for Him who know no sin, how much more for us who have sins enough and to 
spare.  Though He was the eternal Son of God, yet He learnt obedience by 
the things which He suffered.  Though we are God's adopted children, we 
must learn obedience by what we suffer.  He had to offer up prayer with 
strong crying.  So shall we have to do again and again before we die.  He 
was heard in that He feared God, and said, "Father not my will, but Thine 
be done."  And so shall we.  He was perfected by sufferings.  God grant 
that we may be so likewise.  He had to do like us.  God grant that we may 
do like Him.

God grant it.  That is all I can say.  I cannot be sure of it, for myself 
or for any of you.  I can only hope, and trust in God.  Life is hard 
work--any life at least which is worth being called life, which is not 
the life of a swine, who thinks of nothing but feeding himself, or of a 
butterfly which thinks of nothing but enjoying itself.  Those are easy 
lives enough:  but the end thereof is death.  The swine goes to the 
slaughter.  The butterfly dies of the frost--and there is an end of them.  
But the manly life, the life of good deeds and noble thoughts, and 
usefulness, and purity, the life which is discontented with itself, and 
which the better it is, longs the more to be better still; the life which 
will endure through this world into the world to come, and on and upward 
for ever and for ever.--That life is not an easy life to live; it is very 
often not a pleasant life; very often a sad life--so sad that that is 
true of it which the great poet says--


"Who ne'er his bread in sorrow ate,
Who never in the midnight hours
Sat weeping on his lonely bed,
He knows you not, you Heavenly Powers."


You may say this is bad news.  I do not believe it is.  I believe it is 
good news, and the very best of news:  but if it is bad news, I cannot 
help it.  I did not make it so.  God made it so.  And God must know best.  
God is love.  And we are His children, and He loves us.  And therefore 
His ways with us must be good and loving ways, and any news about them 
must be good news, and a gospel, though we cannot see it so at first.

In any case, if it is so, it is better to remember that it is so.  And 
Lent, and Passion Week, and Good Friday are meant to put us in mind of it 
year by year, because we are all of us only too ready to forget it, and 
shut our eyes to it.  Lent and Passion Week, I say, are meant to put us 
in mind.  And the preacher is bound to put you in mind of it now and 
then.  He is bound, not too often perhaps, lest he should discourage 
young hearts, but now and then, to put you in mind of the old Greek 
proverb, the very words of which St. Paul uses in the text, that ta 
pa??æata æa??æata--sorrows are lessons; and that the most truly pitiable 
people often are those who have no sorrows, and ask for no man's pity.

For so it is.  The very worst calamity, I should say, which could befall 
any human being would be this--To have his own way from his cradle to his 
grave; to have everything he liked for the asking, or even for the 
buying; never to be forced to say, "I should like that:  but I cannot 
afford it.  I should like this:  but I must not do it"--Never to deny 
himself, never to exert himself, never to work, and never to want.  That 
man's soul would be in as great danger as if he were committing great 
crimes.  Indeed, he would very probably before he died commit great 
crimes--like certain negroes whom I have seen abroad, who live a life of 
such lazy comfort and safety, and superabundance of food, that they are 
beginning more and more to live the life of animals rather than men.  
They are like those of whom the Psalmist says, "Their eyes swell out with 
fatness, and they do even what they lust."  So do they, and indulge in 
gross vices, which, if not checked in some way, will end in destroying 
them off the face of the earth in a few generations more.  I had rather, 
for the sake of my character, my manhood, my immortal soul, I had rather, 
I say, a hundred times over, be an English labourer, struggling on on 
twelve shillings a week, and learning obedience, self-denial, self-
respect, and trust in God, by the things suffered in that hard life here 
at home, than be a Negro in Tropic islands, fattening himself in sloth 
under that perpetual sunshine, and thinking nought of God, because, poor 
fool, he can get all he wants without God's help.

No, my dear young friends, this is good for a man.  It is necessary for a 
man, if he is to be a man and a child of God, and not a mere animal, to 
have to work hard whether he likes or not.  It is good for a man to bear 
the yoke in his youth, as Jeremiah told the Jews, when, because they 
would not bear God's light yoke in their youth, but ran riot into luxury 
and wantonness, and superstition and idolatry which come thereof, they 
had to bear the heavy yoke of the Babylonish captivity in their old age.  
It is good for a man to be checked, crossed, disappointed, made to feel 
his own ignorance, weakness, folly; made to feel his need of God; to feel 
that, in spite of all his cunning and self-confidence, he is no better 
off in this world than a lost child in a dark forest, unless he has a 
Father in Heaven, who loves him with an eternal love, and a Holy Spirit 
in Heaven, who will give him a right judgment in all things; who will put 
into his mind good desires, and enable him to bring those desires to good 
effect; and a Saviour in Heaven who can be touched with the feeling of 
his infirmities, because He too was made perfect by sufferings; He too 
was tempted in all points like as we are, yet without sin.

And, therefore, my dear friends, those words which we read in the 
Visitation of the Sick about this matter are not mere kind words, meant 
to give comfort for the moment.  They are truth and fact and sound 
philosophy.  They are as true for the young lad in health and spirits as 
for the old folk crawling towards their graves.  It is true, and you will 
find it true, that sickness and all sorts of troubles, are sent to 
correct and amend in us whatever doth offend the eyes of our Heavenly 
Father.  It is true, and you will find it true, that whom the Lord loveth 
He chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom He receiveth.  It is true, 
and you will find it true (though God knows it is a difficult lesson 
enough to learn), that there should be no greater comfort to Christian 
persons, than to be made like Christ, by suffering patiently not only the 
hard work of every-day life, but adversities, troubles, and sicknesses, 
and our Heavenly Father's correction, whensoever, by any manner of 
adversity, it shall please His gracious goodness to visit them.  For 
Christ Himself went not up to joy, but first He suffered pain; He entered 
not into His glory, before He was crucified.

So truly our way to eternal joy is to labour and to suffer here with 
Christ.  It is true, and you will find it true, when years hence you look 
back, as I trust you all will, calmly and intelligently, on the events of 
your own lives--you will find, I say, that the very events in your lives 
which seemed at the time most trying, most vexing, most disastrous, have 
been those which wore most necessary for you, to call out what was good 
in you, and to purge out what was bad; that by those very troubles your 
Lord, who knows the value of suffering, because He has suffered Himself, 
was making true men, true women of you; hardening your heads, while He 
softened your hearts; teaching you to obey Him, while He taught you not 
to obey your own fancies and your own passions; refining and tempering 
your characters in the furnace of trial, as the smith refines soft iron 
into trusty steel; teaching you, as the great poet says--


   "That life is not as idle ore,
But heated hot with burning fears,
And bathed in baths of hissing tears,
   And battered with the strokes of doom,
   To shape and use."


Yes, you will learn that, and more than that, and say in peace--"Before I 
was troubled I went wrong, but now have I kept thy commandments."  And to 
such an old age may our Lord Jesus Christ bring you and me and all we 
love.  Amen.



SERMON XLI.  SACRIFICE TO CAESAR OR TO GOD



Eversley, 1869.  Chester Cathedral, 1872.

Matthew xxii. 21.  "Render therefore unto Caesar the things which are 
Caesar's; and unto God the things that are God's."

Many a sermon has been preached, and many a pamphlet written, on this 
text, and (as too often has happened to Holy Scripture), it has been made 
to mean the most opposite doctrines, and twisted in every direction, to 
suit men's opinions and superstitions.  Some have found in it a command 
to obey tyrants, invaders, any and every government, just or unjust.  
Others have found in it rules for drawing a line between the authority of 
the State and of the Church, i.e., between what the Government have a 
right to command, and what the Clergy have a right to demand; and many 
more matters have they fancied that they discovered in the text which I 
do not believe are in it at all.

For to understand the original question--Is it lawful to pay tribute to 
Caesar or no? we must imagine to ourselves a state of things in Judea 
utterly different, thank God, from anything which has been in these 
realms for now eight hundred years.  The Caesar, or Emperor of Rome, had 
obtained by conquest an authority over the Jews very like that which we 
have over the Hindoos in India.  And what was working in the mind of the 
Jews was very like that which was working in the minds of the Hindoos in 
the Sepoy Rebellion--whether it was not a sacred and religious duty to 
rise against their conquerors and drive them out.  We know from the New 
Testament that both our Lord and His apostles again and again warned them 
not to rebel, warned them that they would not succeed:  but ruin 
themselves thereby; for that those who took the sword would perish by the 
sword.  And we know, too, that the Jews would not take our Lord's advice, 
nor the apostles', but did rise again and again, both in Judea and 
elsewhere, gallantly and desperately enough, poor creatures, in mad 
useless rebellion, till the Romans all but destroyed them off the face of 
the earth.  But what has that to do with us, free self-governed 
Englishmen, in this peaceful and prosperous land?  In the early middle 
age, when the clergy represented and defended Roman pure Christianity and 
civilization against the half-heathen and half-barbaric Teutons who had 
conquered the Roman Empire, then doubtless the text became once more full 
of meaning, and the clergy had again and again to defend the things which 
belonged to God against the rapacity or the wilfulness of many a barbaric 
Caesar.  But what has that, again, to do with us?  Those who apply the 
text to any questions which can at present arise between the Church and 
the State, mistake alike, it seems to me, the nature and functions of an 
Established Church, and the nature and functions of a free Government.

Do I mean, then, that the text has nothing to do with us?  God forbid!  I 
believe that every word of our Lord's has to do with us, and with every 
human being, for their meaning is infinite, eternal, and inexhaustible.  
And what the latter half of the text has to do with us, I will try to 
show you, while I tell you openly, that the first half of it, about 
rendering to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, has nothing to do with 
us, and never need, save through our own cowardice and effeminacy, or 
folly.

We have no Caesar over us in free England, and shall not have, while 
Queen Victoria, and her children after her reign; but if ever one, or 
many (which God forbid!), should arise and try to set themselves up as 
despots over us, I trust we shall know how to render them their due, be 
they native or foreigner, in the same coin in which our forefathers have 
always paid tyrants and invaders.  No.  The only Caesar which we have to 
fear--and he is a tyrant who seems ready, nowadays, to oppose and exalt 
himself above all that is called God, or is worshipped,--patronizing, of 
course, Religion, as a harmless sanction for order and respectability, 
but dictating morality, while telling us all day long, with a thousand 
voices and a thousand pens--"Right is not the eternal law of God.  
Whatever profits me, whatever I like, whatever I vote--that and that 
alone is right, and you must do it at your peril."  Do you know who that 
Caesar is, my friends?  He is called Public Opinion--the huge anonymous 
idol which we ourselves help to make, and then tremble before the 
creation of our own cowardice; whereas, if we will but face him, in the 
fear of God and the faith of Christ, determined to say the thing which is 
true, and do the thing which is right, we shall find the modern Caesar 
but a phantom of our own imagination; a tyrant, indeed, as long as he is 
feared, but a coward as soon as he is defied.

To that Caesar let us never bow the knee.  Render to him all that he 
deserves--the homage of common courtesy, common respectability, common 
charity--not in reverence for his wisdom and strength, but in pity for 
his ignorance and weakness.  But render always to God the things which 
are God's.  That duty, my good friends, lies on us, as on all mankind 
still, from our cradle to our grave, and after that through all eternity.  
Let us go back, or rather, let us go home to the eternal laws of God, 
which were, ages before we were born, and will be, ages after we are 
dead--to the everlasting Rock on which we all stand, which is the will 
and mind of our Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, to whom all power is 
given (as He said Himself) in heaven and on earth.  And we have need to 
do so, for in such times of change as these are, there will always be too 
many who fancy that changes in society and government change their duty 
about religion, and are, some of them, sorely puzzled as to their duty to 
God:  and others ready to take advantage of the change to throw off their 
duty to God, and run into licence and schism and fanaticism.

Now let all people clearly understand, and settle it in their hearts, 
that no change in Church or in State can change in the least their duty 
to God and to man.  If the world were turned upside down, God would still 
be where He is, and we where we are--in His presence.  Right would still 
be right, my friends, and wrong wrong, though all the loud voices in the 
world shouted that wrong is right and right wrong.  No change of time, 
place, society, government, circumstance of any kind, can alter our duty 
to God, and our power of doing that duty.  Whatever the Caesar of the 
hour may require us to render to him, what we are bound to render to God 
remains the same.  The two things are different IN KIND, so different, 
that they never need interfere with each other.

Even if, which God forbid, the connection between Church and State were 
dissolved; even if, which God forbid, the Church of England were 
destroyed for a while--if all Churches were destroyed--yea, if not a 
place of worship were left for a while in this or any other land; yet 
even then, I say, we could still render to God the things which are 
God's, and offer to Him spiritual sacrifices, more pleasing to Him than 
the most gorgeous ceremonies which the devotion, and art, and wealth of 
man ever devised--sacrifices, by virtue of which the Church would arise 
out of her ruins, like the Jewish Church after the captivity, more pure, 
more glorious, and more triumphant than ever.

What do I mean?  I mean this--that there are three sacrifices which every 
man, woman, and child can offer, and should offer, however lowly, however 
uneducated in what the world calls education nowadays.  Those they can 
offer to God, and with them they can worship God, and render to God the 
things which are God's, wherever they are, whatever they are doing, 
whatever be the laws of their country, or the state of society round 
them.  For of these sacrifices our Lord Himself said, The true 
worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth:  for the 
Father seeketh such to worship Him.

Now what are these spiritual sacrifices?

First and foremost, surely, the sacrifice of repentance, of which it is 
written, "The sacrifice of God is a broken spirit.  A broken and a 
contrite heart, oh God, Thou wilt not despise."  Surely when we--even the 
best of us--look back on our past lives; when we recollect, if not great 
and positive sins and crimes, yet the opportunities which we have 
neglected; the time, and often the money which we have wasted; the 
meannesses, the tempers, the spite, the vanity, the selfishness, which we 
have too often indulged--When we think of what we have been, and what we 
might have been, what we are, and what we might be; when we measure 
ourselves, not by the paltry, low, and often impure standard of the world 
around us, but by the pure, lofty, truly heroical standard of our Lord 
Jesus Christ--what can we say, but that we are miserable--that is, 
pitiful and pitiable sinners, who have left undone what we ought to have 
done, and done that which we ought not to have done, till there is no 
health in us?

And if you ask me, How is it a sacrifice to God to confess to Him that we 
are sinners? the answer is simple.  It is a sacrifice to God, and a 
sacrifice well-pleasing to Him, simply because it is The Truth.  God 
wants nothing from us; we can give Him nothing.  The wild beasts of the 
forest are His, and so are the cattle on a thousand hills.  If He be 
hungry He will not tell us for the whole world is His and all that is 
therein.  But what He asks is, that for our own sakes we should see the 
