SECTION CXXXI

"'The hawk said, "All the kings of the earth represent thee as a pious
ruler. Wherefore, O prince, has thou then stopped to perpetrate a deed
not sanctioned by the ordinance? I have been sore afflicted with hunger.
Do thou not withhold from me that which hath been appointed by the Diety
for my food,--under the impression that thereby thou servest the
interests of virtue, whereas in reality, thou wilt forsake it, (by
committing thyself to this act)." Thereupon, the king said, "O best of
the feathered race, afflicted with fear of thee, and desirous of
escaping from thy hands, this bird, all in a hurry, hath come up to me
asking for life. When this pigeon hath in such a manner sought my
protection, why dost thou not see that the highest merit is even in my
not surrendering it unto thee? And it is trembling with fear, and is
agitated, and is seeking its life from me. It is therefore certainly
blameworthy to forsake it. He that slayeth a Brahmana, he that
slaughtered a cow--the common mother of all the worlds--and he that
forsaketh one seeking for protection are equally sinful." Thereat the
hawk replied, "O lord of earth, it is from food that all beings derive
their life, and it is food also that nourisheth and sustaineth them. A
man can live long even after forsaking what is dearest to him, but he
cannot do so, after abstaining from food. Being deprived of food, my
life, O ruler of men, will surely leave this body, and will attain to
regions unknown to such troubles. But at my death, O pious king, my wife
and children will surely perish, and by protecting this single pigeon, O
prince, thou dost not protect many lives. The virtue that standeth in
the way of another virtue, is certainly no virtue at all, but in reality
is unrighteousness. But O king, whose prowess consisteth in truth, that
virtue is worthy of the name, which is not conflicting. After
instituting a comparison between opposing virtues, and weighing their
comparative merits, one, O great prince, ought to espouse that which is
not opposing. Do thou, therefore, O king, striking a balance between
virtues, adopt that which preponderates." At this the king said, "O best
of birds, as thou speakest words fraught with much good, I suspect thee
to be _Suparna_, the monarch of birds. I have not the least hesitation
to declare that thou art fully conversant with the ways of virtue. As
thou speakest wonders about virtue, I think that there is nothing
connected with it, that is unknown to thee. How canst thou then consider
the forsaking of one, seeking for help, as virtuous? Thy efforts in this
matter, O ranger of the skies, have been in quest of food. Thou canst,
however, appease thy hunger with some other sort of food, even more
copious. I am perfectly willing to procure for thee any sort of food
that to thee may seem most tasteful, even if it be an ox, or a boar, or
a deer, or a buffalo." Thereupon the hawk said, "O great king, I am not
desirous of eating (the flesh of) a boar or an ox or the various species
of beasts. What have I to do with any other sort of food? Therefore, O
bull among the Kshatriyas, leave to me this pigeon, whom Heaven hath
today ordained for my food. O ruler of earth, that hawks eat pigeons is
the eternal provision. O prince, do not for support embrace a plantain
tree, not knowing its want of strength." The king said, "Ranger of the
skies, I am willing to bestow on thee this rich province of my race, or
any other thing that to thee may seem desirable. With the sole exception
of this pigeon, which hath approached me craving my protection, I shall
be glad to give unto thee anything that thou mayst like. Let me know
what I shall have to do for the deliverance of this bird. But this I
shall not return to thee on any condition whatever."

"'The hawk said, "O great ruler of men, if thou hast conceived an
affection for this pigeon, then cut off a portion of thine own flesh,
and weigh it in a balance, against this pigeon. And when thou hast found
it equal (in weight) to the pigeon, then do thou give it unto me, and
that will be to my satisfaction." Then the king replied, "This request
of thine, O hawk, I consider as a favour unto me, and, therefore, I will
give unto thee even my own flesh, after weighing it in a balance."'

"Lomasa said, 'Saying this, O mighty son of Kunti, the highly virtuous
king cut off a portion of his own flesh, and placed it in a balance,
against the pigeon. But when he found that pigeon exceeded his flesh in
weight, he once more cut off another portion of his flesh, and added it
to the former. When portion after portion had been repeatedly added to
weigh against the pigeon, and no more flesh was left on his body, he
mounted the scale himself, utterly devoid of flesh.

"'The hawk then said, "I am Indra, O virtuous king, and this pigeon is
Agni, the carrier of the sacrificial clarified butter. We had come unto
thy sacrificial ground, desirous of testing thy merit. Since thou hast
cut off thy own flesh from thy body, thy glory shall be resplendent, and
shall surpass that of all others in the world. As long as men, O king,
shall speak of thee, so long shall thy glory endure, and thou shalt
inhabit the holy regions." Saying this to the king, Indra ascended to
heaven. And the virtuous king Usinara, after having filled heaven and
earth with the merit of his pious deeds, ascended to heaven in a radiant
shape. Behold, O king, the residence of that noble-hearted monarch.
Here, O king, are seen holy sages and gods, together with virtuous and
highsouled Brahmanas.'"


SECTION CXXXII

"Lomasa said, 'See here, O lord of men, the sacred hermitage of
Swetaketu, son of Uddalaka, whose fame as an expert in the sacred
_mantras_ is so widely spread on earth. This hermitage is graced with
cocoanut trees. Here Swetaketu beheld the goddess Saraswati in her human
shape, and spake unto her, saying, "May I be endowed with the gift of
speech!" In that _yuga_, Swetaketu, the son of Uddalaka, and Ashtavakra,
the son of Kahoda, who stood to each other in the relation of uncle and
nephew, were the best of those conversant with the sacred lore. Those
two Brahmanas, of matchless energy, who bore unto each other the
relationship of uncle and nephew, went into the sacrificial ground of
king Janaka and there defeated Vandin in a controversy. Worship, O son
of Kunti, with thy brothers, the sacred hermitage of him who had for his
grandson Ashtavakra, who, even when a mere child, had caused Vandin to
be drowned in a river, after having defeated him in a (literary)
contest."'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O Lomasa, all about the power of this man,
who had in that way defeated Vandin. Why was he born as _Ashtavakra_
(crooked in eight parts in his body)?'

"Lomasa said, 'The sage Uddalaka had a disciple named Kahoda of subdued
passions, and entirely devoted to the service of his preceptor and who
had continued his studies long. The Brahmana had served his tutor long,
and his preceptor, recognising his service, gave him his own daughter,
Sujata, in marriage, as well as a mastery over the Shastras. And she
became with child, radiant as fire. And the embryo addressed his father
while employed in reading, "O father, thou hast been reading the whole
night, but (of all that) thy reading doth not seem to me correct. Even
in my fetal state I have, by thy favour, become versed in the Shastras
and the Vedas with their several branches. I say, O father, that what
proceeds from thy mouth, is not correct." Thus insulted in the presence
of his disciples, the great sage in anger cursed his child in the womb,
saying, "Because thou speakest thus even while in the womb, therefore
thou shalt be crooked in eight parts of the body." The child was
accordingly born crooked, and the great sage was ever after known by the
name of Ashtavakra. Now, he had an uncle named Swetaketu who was the
same age with himself. Afflicted by the growth of the child in the womb,
Sujata, desirous of riches, conciliating her husband who had no wealth
told him in private: "How shall I manage, O great sage, the tenth month
of my pregnancy having come? Thou hast no substance whereby I may
extricate myself from the exigencies, after I have been delivered." Thus
addressed by his wife, Kahoda went unto king Janaka for riches. He was
there defeated in a controversy by Vandin, well versed in the science of
arguments, and (in consequence) was immersed into water. And hearing
that his son-in-law had been defeated in a controversy by Vandin and
caused to be drowned by him, Uddalaka spake unto his daughter Sujata,
saying, "Thou shall keep it a secret from Ashtavakra." She accordingly
kept her counsel--so that Ashtavakra, when born, had heard nothing about
the matter. And he regarded Uddalaka as his father and Swetaketu as his
brother. And when Ashtavakra was in his twelfth year, Swetaketu one day
saw the former seated on his father's lap. And thereat he pulled him by
the hand, and on Ashtavakra's beginning to cry, he told him, "It is not
the lap of thy father." This cruel communication went direct into
Ashtavakra's heart and it pained him sorely. And he went home and asked
his mother saying, "Where is my father?" Thereupon Sujata who was
greatly afflicted (by his question), and apprehending a curse told him
all that had happened. And having heard all, the Brahmana at night said
unto his uncle Swetaketu, "Let us go unto the sacrifice of king Janaka,
wherein many wonderful things are to be seen. There we shall listen to
the controversy between the Brahmanas and shall partake of excellent
food. Our knowledge also will increase. The recitation of the sacred
Vedas is sweet to hear and is fraught with blessings." Then they
both--uncle and nephew--went unto the splendid sacrifice of king Janaka.
And on being driven from the entrance, Ashtavakra met the king and
addressed him in the following words.'"


SECTION CXXXIII

"'Ashtavakra said, "When no Brahmana is met with on the way, the way
belongeth to the blind, the deaf, the women, carriers of burden, and the
king respectively. But when a Brahmana is met with on the way, it
belongeth to him alone." Thereupon the king said, "I give the privilege
to enter. Do thou, therefore, go in by whatever way thou likest. No fire
ever so small is to be slighted. Even Indra himself boweth unto the
Brahmanas." At this Ashtavakra said, "We have come, O ruler of men, to
witness thy sacrificial ceremony and our curiosity, O king, is very
great. And we have come here as guests. We want the permission of thy
order (to enter). And, O son of Indradyumna, we have come, desirous of
seeing the sacrifice, and to meet king Janaka and speak to him. But thy
warder obstructs us and for this our anger burneth us like fever." The
warder said, "We carry out the orders of Vandin. Listen to what I have
to say. Lads are not permitted to enter here and it is only the learned
old Brahmanas that are allowed to enter." Ashtavakra said. "If this be
the condition, O warder, that the door is open to those only that are
old, then we have a right to enter. We are old and we have observed
sacred vows and are in possession of energy proceeding from the Vedic
lore. And we have served our superiors and subdued our passions--and
have also won proficiency in knowledge. It is said that even boys are
not to be slighted,--for a fire, small though it be, burneth on being
touched." The warder replied, "O young Brahmana, I consider you a boy,
and therefore recite, if you know, the verse demonstrating the existence
of the Supreme Being, and adored by the divine sages, and which,
although composed of one letter, is yet multifarious. Make no vain
boast. Learned men are really very rare." Ashtavakra said, "True growth
cannot be inferred from the mere development of the body, as the growth
of the knots of the Salmali tree cannot signify its age. That tree is
called full-grown which although slender and short, beareth fruits. But
that which doth not bear fruits, is not considered as grown." The warder
said, "Boys receive instruction from the old and they also in time grow
old. Knowledge certainly is not attainable in a short time. Wherefore
then being a child, dost thou talk like an old man?" Then Ashtavakra
said, "One is not old because his head is gray. But the gods regard him
as old who, although a child in years, is yet possessed of knowledge.
The sages have not laid down that a man's merit consists in years, or
gray hair, or wealth, or friends. To us he is great who is versed in the
Vedas. I have come here, O porter, desirous of seeing Vandin in the
court. Go and inform king Janaka, who hath a garland of lotuses on his
neck, that I am here. Thou shalt to-day see me enter into a dispute with
the learned men, and defeat Vandin in a controversy. And when others
have been silenced, the Brahmanas of matured learning and the king also
with his principal priests, bear witness to the superior or the inferior
quality of his attainments." The warder said, "How canst thou, who art but
in thy tenth year, hope to enter into this sacrifice, into which learned
and educated men only are admitted? I shall, however, try some means for
thy admittance. Do thou also try thyself." Ashtavakra then addressing
the king said, "O king, O foremost of Janaka's race, thou art the
paramount sovereign and all power reposeth in thee. In times of old,
king Yayati was the celebrator of sacrifices. And in the present age,
thou it is that art performer thereof. We have heard that the learned
Vandin, after defeating (in controversy) men expert in discussion,
causeth them to be drowned by faithful servants employed by thee.
Hearing this, I have come before these Brahmanas, to expound the
doctrine of the unity of the Supreme Being. Where is now Vandin? Tell me
so that I may approach him, and destroy him, even as the sun destroyeth
the stars." Thereupon the king said, "Thou hopest, O Brahmana, to defeat
Vandin, not knowing his power of speech. Can those who are familiar with
his power, speak as thou dost? He hath been sounded by Brahmanas versed
in the Vedas. Thou hopest to defeat Vandin, only because thou knowest
not his powers (of speech). Many a Brahmana hath waned before him, even
as the stars before the sun. Desirous of defeating him, people proud of
their learning, have lost their glory on appearing before him, and have
retired from his presence, without even venturing to speak with the
members of the assembly." Ashtavakra said, "Vandin hath never entered
into disputation with a man like myself, and it is for this only that he
looketh upon himself as a lion, and goeth about roaring like one. But
to-day meeting me he will lie down dead, even like a cart on the
highway, of which the wheels have been deranged." The king said, "He
alone is a truly learned man who understandeth the significance of the
thing that hath thirty divisions, twelve parts twenty-four joints, and
three hundred and sixty spokes." Ashtavakra said, "May that ever-moving
wheel that hath twenty-four joints, six naves, twelve peripheries, and
sixty spokes protect thee!"[19] The king said, "Who amongst the gods
beareth those two which go together like two mares (yoked to a car), and
sweep like a hawk, and to what also do they give birth?" Ashtavakra
said, "May God, O king, forfend the presence of these two[20] in thy
house; aye, even in the house of thine enemies. He who appeareth, having
for his charioteer the wind,[21] begetteth them, and they also produce
him." Thereupon the king said, "What is that doth not close its eyes
even while sleeping; what is it that doth not move, even when born; what
is it that hath no heart; and what doth increase even in its own speed?"
Ashtavakra said, "It is a fish[22] that doth not close its eye-lids,
while sleeping; and it is an a egg[23] that doth not move when
produced; it is stone[24] that hath no heart; and it is a river[25]
that increase in its own speed."

    [19] This wheel is the wheel of Time--i.e., measured according
    to the solar, lunar and astral revolutions. The importance of
    Ashtavakra's reply is this: May the meritorious deeds performed
    at proper times, during the revolution of this wheel of Time
    protect thee.

    [20] Thunder and lightning or misery and death.

    [21] Cloud or the mind.

    [22] The male being that is ever conscious.

    [23] The mundane egg.

    [24] The soul that has renounced connection with the body.

    [25] The heart of a _Yogi_.

"'The king said, "It seemeth, O possessor of divine energy, that thou
art no human being. I consider thee not a boy, but a matured man; there
is no other man who can compare with thee in the art of speech. I
therefore give thee admittance. There is Vandin."'"


SECTION CXXXIV

"'Ashtavakra said, "O king, O leader of fierce legions, in this assembly
of monarchs of unrivalled power who have met together, I am unable to
find out Vandin, chief of the controversialists. But I am searching for
him, even as one doth for a swan on a vast expanse of water. O Vandin,
thou regardest thyself as the foremost of controversialists. When though
wilt engage with me in staking, thou wilt not be able to flow like the
current of a river. I am like a full-flaming fire. Be silent before me,
O Vandin! Do not awaken a sleeping tiger. Know that thou shalt not
escape unstung, after trampling on the head of a venomous snake, licking
the corners of its mouth with its tongue, and who hath been hurt by thy
foot. That weak man who, in pride of strength, attempts to strike a blow
at a mountain, only gets his hands and nails hurt, but no wound is left
on the mountain itself. As the other mountains are inferior to the
Mainaka, and as calves are inferior to the ox, so are all other kings of
the earth inferior to the lord of Mithila. And as Indra is the foremost
of celestials, and as the Ganga is the best of rivers, so thou alone
art, O king, the greatest of monarchs. O king, cause Vandin to be
brought to my presence."'

"Lomasa said, 'Saying this, O Yudhishthira, wroth with Vandin,
Ashtavakra thus thundered in the assembly, and addressed him in these
words, "Do thou answer my questions, and I shall answer thine." Thereat
Vandin said, "One only fire blazeth forth in various shapes; one only
sun illumineth this whole world; one only hero, Indra, the lord of
celestials, destroyeth enemies; and one only Yama is the sole lord of
the Pitris."[26] Ashtavakra said, "The two friends, Indra and Agni, ever
move together; the two celestial sages are Narada and Parvata; twins are
the Aswinikumaras; two is the number of the wheels of a car; and it is
as a couple that husband and wife live together, as ordained by the
deity."[27] Vandin said, "Three kinds of born beings are produced by
acts; the three Vedas together perform the sacrifice, Vajapeya; at three
different times, the Adhwaryus commence sacrificial rites; three is the
number of words: and three also are the divine lights."[28] Ashtavakra
said, "Four are the Asramas of the Brahmanas; the four orders perform
sacrifices; four are the cardinal points; four is the number of letters;
and four also, as is ever known, are the legs of a cow."[29] Vandin
said, "Five is the number of fires; five are the feet of the metre
called _Punki_; five are the sacrifices; five locks, it is said in the
Vedas, are on the heads of the Apsaras; and five sacred rivers are known
in the world."[30] Ashtavakra said, "Six cows, it is asserted by some,
are paid as a gratuity on the occasion of establishing the sacred fire;
six are the seasons belonging to the wheel of time; six is the number of
the senses; six stars constitute the constellation _Kirtika_; and six,
it is found in all the Vedas, is the number of the Sadyaska
sacrifice."[31] Vandin said, "Seven is the number of the domesticated
animals; seven are the wild animals; seven metres are used in completing
a sacrifice; seven are the _Rishis_, seven forms of paying homage are
extant (in the world); and seven, it is known, are the strings of the
Vina."[32] Ashtavakra said, "Eight are the bags containing a hundred
fold; eight is the number of the legs of the Sarabha, which preyeth upon
lions; eight Vasus, as we hear, are amongst the celestials; and eight
are the angles of _yupa_ (stake), in all sacrificial rites."[33] Vandin
said, "Nine is the number of the mantras used in kindling the fire in
sacrifices to the _Pitris_; nine are the appointed functions in the
processes of creation; nine letters compose the foot of the metre,
Vrihati; and nine also is ever the number of the figures (in
calculation)."[34] Ashtavakra said, "Ten is said to be the number of
cardinal points, entering into the cognition of men in this world; ten
times hundred make up a thousand; ten is the number of months, during
which women bear; and ten are the teachers of true knowledge, and ten,
the haters thereof, and ten again are those capable of learning it."[35]
Vandin said, "Eleven are the objects enjoyable by beings; eleven is the
number of the _yupas_; eleven are the changes of the natural state
pertaining to those having life; and eleven are the Rudras among the
gods in heaven."[36] Ashtavakra said, "Twelve months compose the year;
twelve letters go to the composition of a foot of the metre called
_Jagati_; twelve are the minor sacrifices; and twelve, according to the
learned, is the number of the Adityas."[37] Vandin said, "The
thirteenth lunar day is considered the most auspicious; thirteen islands
exist on earth."'[38]

    [26] Ashtavakra comes to Janaka's sacrifice with the object of
    proving the unity of the Supreme Being. Vandin avails himself of
    various system of Philosophy to combat his opponent. He begins
    with the Buddhistic system. The form of the dialogue is unique
    in literature being that of enigmas and the latent meaning is in
    a queer way hid under the appearance of puerile and
    heterogeneous combinations of things.

    Vandin opens the controversy by saying that as the number of
    each of these is one, so one only intellect is the lord, leader
    and guide of the senses.

    [27] There is a Vedic revelation that two birds live together on
    a tree as friends--one of these eats the fruits and the other
    looks at the former. From this it is manifest that _two_ are the
    lords, leaders, and guides of the senses. That there is a second
    faculty besides the intellect is also proved by the fact that in
    sleep when the intellect is inactive that faculty continues in
    action, for if it were not so we could not remember having
    slept, nor connect the state after awaking with that preceding
    sleep. Accordingly by citing the number _two_ Ashtavakra asserts
    that besides intellect there is another faculty--consciousness
    that these _two_ are jointly the lords, leaders and guides of
    the senses and that they act together as Indra and Agni, etc.

    [28] By citing the number _three_ Vandin means to say that as it
    is Acts that produce the _three_ kinds of born beings, etc., so
    Acts are supreme and that everything else be it intellect alone,
    or intellect and consciousness together is subservient to Acts.

    [29] Ashtavakra here advances the thesis that even if Acts be
    supreme still when the (_fourth_) or Supreme Being becomes
    manifest to the soul, it stands in no further needs to Acts.

    [30] By bringing in the _quinquennial_ series, Vandin wishes to
    assert that the _five_ senses are competent to cognise there
    respective objects and that besides these senses and their
    objects there is neither any other sense to perceive nor any
    other object of perception. He also cites the authority of the
    Veda according to which the _Apsaras_ (or consciousness) have
    _five_ "locks" on their hands--i.e., _five_ objects of
    perception.

    [31] Besides the five senses Ashtavakra contends for an
    additional sense namely the Mind and accordingly cites the
    number _six_.

    [32] Vandin admits the existence of the six senses but says that
    the soul experiences happiness and misery through those as well
    as through the _intellect_.

    [33] Ashtavakra advances an eighth element, namely, the
    _knowledge of the ego_.

    [34] Each of the three qualities (existence, foulness and
    ignorance) of _prakriti_ (the passive or material cause of the
    world) mixing with each of the three corresponding qualities of
    _pradhana_ (the active or spiritual cause of the world) in
    various proportions produces the mundane order of things. Thus
    is proved the eternity of _prakriti_ or nature and is also
    established the doctrine of duality.

    [35] Prakriti does not really create. It is the Supreme Being
    who through the medium of illusion in contract with the _ten_
    organs (viz., the five locomotive organs and the five organs of
    sense) makes manifest the system of things. Prakriti therefore
    has no real existence--her existence is only apparent in the
    real existence of the soul.

    [36] Yupas (stakes) mean here, _feelings_, etc, which keep men
    bound to the world. _Rudras_ are those who makes others cry.

    Vandin means to say that the soul is not essentially free from
    the fetters of happiness and misery arising from the eleven
    objects of perception. In this world all men are subject to
    happiness and misery. We also hear that there are Rudras in
    heaven.

    [37] The supreme soul unaffected by happiness and misery really
    exists--but His existence is not susceptible of being
    proved--nor can the ignorant ever perceive Him. Men attain that
    condition through these _twelve_, viz., virtue, truth,
    self-restraint, penances, good-will, modesty, forgiveness,
    exemption from envy, sacrifice, charity, concentration and
    control over the senses.

    [38] According to some, endeavours to attain emancipation can be
    successful not in this world but in the world of Brahma. Others
    say that to that end a special _yoga_ is necessary. By bringing
    forward the objects numbering _thirteen_, Vandin advances the
    opinion that, virtue, etc., are not sufficient for purposes of
    emancipation but that suitable time and place are also
    essential.

"Lomasa said, 'Having proceeded thus far, Vandin stopped. Thereupon
Ashtavakra supplied the latter half of the _sloka_. Ashtavakra said,
"Thirteen sacrifices are presided over by Kesi; and thirteen are
devoured by _Atichhandas_, (the longer metres) of the Veda."[39] And
seeing Ashtavakra speaking and the Suta's son silent, and pensive, and
with head downcast, the assembly broke into a long uproar. And when the
tumult thus arose in the splendid sacrifice performed by king Janaka,
the Brahmanas well pleased, and with joined hands, approached
Ashtavakra, and began to pay him homage.

    [39] Ashtavakra concludes by citing the same number _thirteen_.
    The soul which is essentially unaffected, becomes subject to
    happiness and misery through the _thirteen_, viz., the ten
    organs of locomotion and sense, and intellect mind and egoism.
    But Atichhanadas, i.e., those that have surmounted ignorance,
    namely, the twelve, virtue, etc. destroy those thirteen and that
    is emancipation.

"'Thereupon Ashtavakra said, "Before this, this man, defeating the
Brahmanas in controversy, used to cast them into water. Let Vandin today
meet with the same fate. Seize him and drown him in water." Vandin said,
"O Janaka, I am the son of king Varuna. Simultaneously with thy
sacrifice, there also hath commenced a sacrifice extending over twelve
years. It is for this that I have despatched the principal Brahmanas
thither. They have gone to witness Varuna's sacrifice. Lo! there they
are returning. I pay homage to the worshipful Ashtavakra, by whose grace
to-day I shall join him who hath begot me."

"'Ashtavakra said, "Defeating the Brahmanas either by words or subtlety,
Vandin had cast them into the waters of the sea. (That Vedic truth which
he had suppressed by false arguments), have I to-day rescued by dint of
my intellect. Now let candid men judge. As Agni, who knoweth the
character of both the good and the bad, leaveth unscorched by his heat
the bodies of those whose designs are honest, and is thus partial to
