
Sir 39:22
His blessing covered the dry land as a river, and watered it
as a flood.

Sir 39:23
As he hath turned the waters into saltness: so shall the
heathen inherit his wrath.

Sir 39:24
As his ways are plain unto the holy; so are they
stumblingblocks unto the wicked.

Sir 39:25
For the good are good things created from the beginning: so
evil things for sinners.

Sir 39:26
The principal things for the whole use of man's life are
water, fire, iron, and salt, flour of wheat, honey, milk, and
the blood of the grape, and oil, and clothing.

Sir 39:27
All these things are for good to the godly: so to the sinners
they are turned into evil.

Sir 39:28
There be spirits that are created for vengeance, which in
their fury lay on sore strokes; in the time of destruction they
pour out their force, and appease the wrath of him that made
them.

Sir 39:29
Fire, and hail, and famine, and death, all these were created
for vengeance;

Sir 39:30
Teeth of wild beasts, and scorpions, serpents, and the sword
punishing the wicked to destruction.

Sir 39:31
They shall rejoice in his commandment, and they shall be
ready upon earth, when need is; and when their time is come,
they shall not transgress his word.

Sir 39:32
Therefore from the beginning I was resolved, and thought upon
these things, and have left them in writing.

Sir 39:33
All the works of the Lord are good: and he will give every
needful thing in due season.

Sir 39:34
So that a man cannot say, This is worse than that: for in
time they shall all be well approved.

Sir 39:35
And therefore praise ye the Lord with the whole heart and
mouth, and bless the name of the Lord.

Sir 40:1
Great travail is created for every man, and an heavy yoke is
upon the sons of Adam, from the day that they go out of their
mother's womb, till the day that they return to the mother of
all things.

Sir 40:2
Their imagination of things to come, and the day of death,
[trouble] their thoughts, and [cause] fear of heart;

Sir 40:3
From him that sitteth on a throne of glory, unto him that is
humbled in earth and ashes;

Sir 40:4
From him that weareth purple and a crown, unto him that is
clothed with a linen frock.

Sir 40:5
Wrath, and envy, trouble, and unquietness, fear of death, and
anger, and strife, and in the time of rest upon his bed his
night sleep, do change his knowledge.

Sir 40:6
A little or nothing is his rest, and afterward he is in his
sleep, as in a day of keeping watch, troubled in the vision of
his heart, as if he were escaped out of a battle.

Sir 40:7
When all is safe, he awaketh, and marvelleth that the fear
was nothing.

Sir 40:8
[Such things happen] unto all flesh, both man and beast, and
that is sevenfold more upon sinners.

Sir 40:9
Death, and bloodshed, strife, and sword, calamities, famine,
tribulation, and the scourge;

Sir 40:10
These things are created for the wicked, and for their sakes
came the flood.

Sir 40:11
All things that are of the earth shall turn to the earth
again: and that which is of the waters doth return into the sea.

Sir 40:12
All bribery and injustice shall be blotted out: but true
dealing shall endure for ever.

Sir 40:13
The goods of the unjust shall be dried up like a river, and
shall vanish with noise, like a great thunder in rain.

Sir 40:14
While he openeth his hand he shall rejoice: so shall
transgressors come to nought.

Sir 40:15
The children of the ungodly shall not bring forth many
branches: but are as unclean roots upon a hard rock.

Sir 40:16
The weed growing upon every water and bank of a river shall
be pulled up before all grass.

Sir 40:17
Bountifulness is as a most fruitful garden, and mercifulness
endureth for ever.

Sir 40:18
To labour, and to be content with that a man hath, is a sweet
life: but he that findeth a treasure is above them both.

Sir 40:19
Children and the building of a city continue a man's name:
but a blameless wife is counted above them both.

Sir 40:20
Wine and musick rejoice the heart: but the love of wisdom is
above them both.

Sir 40:21
The pipe and the psaltery make sweet melody: but a pleasant
tongue is above them both.

Sir 40:22
Thine eye desireth favour and beauty: but more than both corn
while it is green.

Sir 40:23
A friend and companion never meet amiss: but above both is a
wife with her husband.

Sir 40:24
Brethren and help are against time of trouble: but alms shall
deliver more than them both.

Sir 40:25
Gold and silver make the foot stand sure: but counsel is
esteemed above them both.

Sir 40:26
Riches and strength lift up the heart: but the fear of the
Lord is above them both: there is no want in the fear of the
Lord, and it needeth not to seek help.

Sir 40:27
The fear of the Lord is a fruitful garden, and covereth him
above all glory.

Sir 40:28
My son, lead not a beggar's life; for better it is to die
than to beg.

Sir 40:29
The life of him that dependeth on another man's table is not
to be counted for a life; for he polluteth himself with other
men's meat: but a wise man well nurtured will beware thereof.

Sir 40:30
Begging is sweet in the mouth of the shameless: but in his
belly there shall burn a fire.

Sir 41:1
O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that
liveth at rest in his possessions, unto the man that hath
nothing to vex him, and that hath prosperity in all things: yea,
unto him that is yet able to receive meat!

Sir 41:2
O death, acceptable is thy sentence unto the needy, and unto
him whose strength faileth, that is now in the last age, and is
vexed with all things, and to him that despaireth, and hath lost
patience!

Sir 41:3
Fear not the sentence of death, remember them that have been
before thee, and that come after; for this is the sentence of
the Lord over all flesh.

Sir 41:4
And why art thou against the pleasure of the most High? there
is no inquisition in the grave, whether thou have lived ten, or
an hundred, or a thousand years.

Sir 41:5
The children of sinners are abominable children, and they
that are conversant in the dwelling of the ungodly.

Sir 41:6
The inheritance of sinners' children shall perish, and their
posterity shall have a perpetual reproach.

Sir 41:7
The children will complain of an ungodly father, because they
shall be reproached for his sake.

Sir 41:8
Woe be unto you, ungodly men, which have forsaken the law of
the most high God! for if ye increase, it shall be to your
destruction:

Sir 41:9
And if ye be born, ye shall be born to a curse: and if ye
die, a curse shall be your portion.

Sir 41:10
All that are of the earth shall turn to earth again: so the
ungodly shall go from a curse to destruction.

Sir 41:11
The mourning of men is about their bodies: but an ill name of
sinners shall be blotted out.

Sir 41:12
Have regard to thy name; for that shall continue with thee
above a thousand great treasures of gold.

Sir 41:13
A good life hath but few days: but a good name endureth for
ever.

Sir 41:14
My children, keep discipline in peace: for wisdom that is
hid, and a treasure that is not seen, what profit is in them
both?

Sir 41:15
A man that hideth his foolishness is better than a man that
hideth his wisdom.

Sir 41:16
Therefore be shamefaced according to my word: for it is not
good to retain all shamefacedness; neither is it altogether
approved in every thing.

Sir 41:17
Be ashamed of whoredom before father and mother: and of a lie
before a prince and a mighty man;

Sir 41:18
Of an offence before a judge and ruler; of iniquity before a
congregation and people; of unjust dealing before thy partner
and friend;

Sir 41:19
And of theft in regard of the place where thou sojournest,
and in regard of the truth of God and his covenant; and to lean
with thine elbow upon the meat; and of scorning to give and
take;

Sir 41:20
And of silence before them that salute thee; and to look upon
an harlot;

Sir 41:21
And to turn away thy face from thy kinsman; or to take away a
portion or a gift; or to gaze upon another man's wife.

Sir 41:22
Or to be overbusy with his maid, and come not near her bed;
or of upbraiding speeches before friends; and after thou hast
given, upbraid not;

Sir 41:23
Or of iterating and speaking again that which thou hast
heard; and of revealing of secrets.

Sir 41:24
So shalt thou be truly shamefaced and find favour before all
men.

Sir 42:1
Of these things be not thou ashamed, and accept no person to
sin thereby:

Sir 42:2
Of the law of the most High, and his covenant; and of
judgment to justify the ungodly;

Sir 42:3
Of reckoning with thy partners and travellers; or of the gift
of the heritage of friends;

Sir 42:4
Of exactness of balance and weights; or of getting much or
little;

Sir 42:5
And of merchants' indifferent selling; of much correction of
children; and to make the side of an evil servant to bleed.

Sir 42:6
Sure keeping is good, where an evil wife is; and shut up,
where many hands are.

Sir 42:7
Deliver all things in number and weight; and put all in
writing that thou givest out, or receivest in.

Sir 42:8
Be not ashamed to inform the unwise and foolish, and the
extreme aged that contendeth with those that are young: thus
shalt thou be truly learned, and approved of all men living.

Sir 42:9
The father waketh for the daughter, when no man knoweth; and
the care for her taketh away sleep: when she is young, lest she
pass away the flower of her age; and being married, lest she
should be hated:

Sir 42:10
In her virginity, lest she should be defiled and gotten with
child in her father's house; and having an husband, lest she
should misbehave herself; and when she is married, lest she
should be barren.

Sir 42:11
Keep a sure watch over a shameless daughter, lest she make
thee a laughingstock to thine enemies, and a byword in the city,
and a reproach among the people, and make thee ashamed before
the multitude.

Sir 42:12
Behold not every body's beauty, and sit not in the midst of
women.

Sir 42:13
For from garments cometh a moth, and from women wickedness.

Sir 42:14
Better is the churlishness of a man than a courteous woman, a
woman, I say, which bringeth shame and reproach.

Sir 42:15
I will now remember the works of the Lord, and declare the
things that I have seen: In the words of the Lord are his works.

Sir 42:16
The sun that giveth light looketh upon all things, and the
work thereof is full of the glory of the Lord.

Sir 42:17
The Lord hath not given power to the saints to declare all
his marvellous works, which the Almighty Lord firmly settled,
that whatsoever is might be established for his glory.

Sir 42:18
He seeketh out the deep, and the heart, and considereth their
crafty devices: for the Lord knoweth all that may be known, and
he beholdeth the signs of the world.

Sir 42:19
He declareth the things that are past, and for to come, and
revealeth the steps of hidden things.

Sir 42:20
No thought escapeth him, neither any word is hidden from him.

Sir 42:21
He hath garnished the excellent works of his wisdom, and he
is from everlasting to everlasting: unto him may nothing be
added, neither can he be diminished, and he hath no need of any
counsellor.

Sir 42:22
Oh how desirable are all his works! and that a man may see
even to a spark.

Sir 42:23
All these things live and remain for ever for all uses, and
they are all obedient.

Sir 42:24
All things are double one against another: and he hath made
nothing imperfect.

Sir 42:25
One thing establisheth the good or another: and who shall be
filled with beholding his glory?

Sir 43:1
The pride of the height, the clear firmament, the beauty of
heaven, with his glorious shew;

Sir 43:2
The sun when it appeareth, declaring at his rising a
marvellous instrument, the work of the most High:

Sir 43:3
At noon it parcheth the country, and who can abide the
burning heat thereof?

Sir 43:4
A man blowing a furnace is in works of heat, but the sun
burneth the mountains three times more; breathing out fiery
vapours, and sending forth bright beams, it dimmeth the eyes.

Sir 43:5
Great is the Lord that made it; and at his commandment
runneth hastily.

Sir 43:6
He made the moon also to serve in her season for a
declaration of times, and a sign of the world.

Sir 43:7
From the moon is the sign of feasts, a light that decreaseth
in her perfection.

Sir 43:8
The month is called after her name, increasing wonderfully in
her changing, being an instrument of the armies above, shining
in the firmament of heaven;

Sir 43:9
The beauty of heaven, the glory of the stars, an ornament
giving light in the highest places of the Lord.

Sir 43:10
At the commandment of the Holy One they will stand in their
order, and never faint in their watches.

Sir 43:11
Look upon the rainbow, and praise him that made it; very
beautiful it is in the brightness thereof.

Sir 43:12
It compasseth the heaven about with a glorious circle, and
the hands of the most High have bended it.

Sir 43:13
By his commandment he maketh the snow to fall aplace, and
sendeth swiftly the lightnings of his judgment.

Sir 43:14
Through this the treasures are opened: and clouds fly forth
as fowls.

Sir 43:15
By his great power he maketh the clouds firm, and the
hailstones are broken small.

Sir 43:16
At his sight the mountains are shaken, and at his will the
south wind bloweth.

Sir 43:17
The noise of the thunder maketh the earth to tremble: so doth
the northern storm and the whirlwind: as birds flying he
scattereth the snow, and the falling down thereof is as the
lighting of grasshoppers:

Sir 43:18
The eye marvelleth at the beauty of the whiteness thereof,
and the heart is astonished at the raining of it.

Sir 43:19
The hoarfrost also as salt he poureth on the earth, and being
congealed, it lieth on the top of sharp stakes.

Sir 43:20
When the cold north wind bloweth, and the water is congealed
into ice, it abideth upon every gathering together of water, and
clotheth the water as with a breastplate.

Sir 43:21
It devoureth the mountains, and burneth the wilderness, and
consumeth the grass as fire.

Sir 43:22
A present remedy of all is a mist coming speedily, a dew
coming after heat refresheth.

Sir 43:23
By his counsel he appeaseth the deep, and planteth islands
therein.

Sir 43:24
They that sail on the sea tell of the danger thereof; and
when we hear it with our ears, we marvel thereat.

Sir 43:25
For therein be strange and wondrous works, variety of all
kinds of beasts and whales created.

Sir 43:26
By him the end of them hath prosperous success, and by his
word all things consist.

Sir 43:27
We may speak much, and yet come short: wherefore in sum, he
is all.

Sir 43:28
How shall we be able to magnify him? for he is great above
all his works.

Sir 43:29
The Lord is terrible and very great, and marvellous is his
power.

Sir 43:30
When ye glorify the Lord, exalt him as much as ye can; for
even yet will he far exceed: and when ye exalt him, put forth
all your strength, and be not weary; for ye can never go far
enough.

Sir 43:31
Who hath seen him, that he might tell us? and who can magnify
him as he is?

Sir 43:32
There are yet hid greater things than these be, for we have
seen but a few of his works.

Sir 43:33
For the Lord hath made all things; and to the godly hath he
given wisdom.

Sir 44:1
Let us now praise famous men, and our fathers that begat us.

Sir 44:2
The Lord hath wrought great glory by them through his great
power from the beginning.

Sir 44:3
Such as did bear rule in their kingdoms, men renowned for
their power, giving counsel by their understanding, and
declaring prophecies:

Sir 44:4
Leaders of the people by their counsels, and by their
knowledge of learning meet for the people, wise and eloquent are
their instructions:

Sir 44:5
Such as found out musical tunes, and recited verses in
writing:

Sir 44:6
Rich men furnished with ability, living peaceably in their
habitations:

Sir 44:7
All these were honoured in their generations, and were the
glory of their times.

Sir 44:8
There be of them, that have left a name behind them, that
their praises might be reported.

Sir 44:9
And some there be, which have no memorial; who are perished,
as though they had never been; and are become as though they had
never been born; and their children after them.

Sir 44:10
But these were merciful men, whose righteousness hath not
been forgotten.

Sir 44:11
With their seed shall continually remain a good inheritance,
and their children are within the covenant.

Sir 44:12
Their seed standeth fast, and their children for their sakes.

Sir 44:13
Their seed shall remain for ever, and their glory shall not
be blotted out.

Sir 44:14
Their bodies are buried in peace; but their name liveth for
evermore.

Sir 44:15
The people will tell of their wisdom, and the congregation
will shew forth their praise.

Sir 44:16
Enoch pleased the Lord, and was translated, being an example
of repentance to all generations.

Sir 44:17
Noah was found perfect and righteous; in the time of wrath he
was taken in exchange [for the world;] therefore was he left as
a remnant unto the earth, when the flood came.

Sir 44:18
An everlasting covenant was made with him, that all flesh
should perish no more by the flood.

Sir 44:19
Abraham was a great father of many people: in glory was there
none like unto him;

Sir 44:20
Who kept the law of the most High, and was in covenant with
him: he established the covenant in his flesh; and when he was
proved, he was found faithful.

Sir 44:21
Therefore he assured him by an oath, that he would bless the
nations in his seed, and that he would multiply him as the dust
of the earth, and exalt his seed as the stars, and cause them to
inherit from sea to sea, and from the river unto the utmost part
of the land.

Sir 44:22
With Isaac did he establish likewise [for Abraham his
father's sake] the blessing of all men, and the covenant, And
made it rest upon the head of Jacob. He acknowledged him in his
blessing, and gave him an heritage, and divided his portions;
among the twelve tribes did he part them.

Sir 45:1
And he brought out of him a merciful man, which found favour
in the sight of all flesh, even Moses, beloved of God and men,
whose memorial is blessed.

Sir 45:2
He made him like to the glorious saints, and magnified him,
so that his enemies stood in fear of him.

Sir 45:3
By his words he caused the wonders to cease, and he made him
glorious in the sight of kings, and gave him a commandment for
his people, and shewed him part of his glory.

Sir 45:4
He sanctified him in his faithfuless and meekness, and chose
him out of all men.

Sir 45:5
He made him to hear his voice, and brought him into the dark
cloud, and gave him commandments before his face, even the law
of life and knowledge, that he might teach Jacob his covenants,
and Israel his judgments.

Sir 45:6
He exalted Aaron, an holy man like unto him, even his
brother, of the tribe of Levi.

Sir 45:7
An everlasting covenant he made with him and gave him the
priesthood among the people; he beautified him with comely
ornaments, and clothed him with a robe of glory.

Sir 45:8
He put upon him perfect glory; and strengthened him with rich
garments, with breeches, with a long robe, and the ephod.

Sir 45:9
And he compassed him with pomegranates, and with many golden
bells round about, that as he went there might be a sound, and a
noise made that might be heard in the temple, for a memorial to
the children of his people;

Sir 45:10
With an holy garment, with gold, and blue silk, and purple,
the work of the embroidere, with a breastplate of judgment, and
with Urim and Thummim;

Sir 45:11
With twisted scarlet, the work of the cunning workman, with
precious stones graven like seals, and set in gold, the work of
the jeweller, with a writing engraved for a memorial, after the
number of the tribes of Israel.

Sir 45:12
He set a crown of gold upon the mitre, wherein was engraved
Holiness, an ornament of honour, a costly work, the desires of
the eyes, goodly and beautiful.

Sir 45:13
Before him there were none such, neither did ever any
stranger put them on, but only his children and his children's
children perpetually.

Sir 45:14
Their sacrifices shall be wholly consumed every day twice
continually.

Sir 45:15
Moses consecrated him, and anointed him with holy oil: this
was appointed unto him by an everlasting covenant, and to his
seed, so long as the heavens should remain, that they should
minister unto him, and execute the office of the priesthood, and
bless the people in his name.

Sir 45:16
He chose him out of all men living to offer sacrifices to the
Lord, incense, and a sweet savour, for a memorial, to make
reconciliation for his people.

Sir 45:17
He gave unto him his commandments, and authority in the
statutes of judgments, that he should teach Jacob the
testimonies, and inform Israel in his laws.

Sir 45:18
Strangers conspired together against him, and maligned him in
the wilderness, even the men that were of Dathan's and Abiron's
side, and the congregation of Core, with fury and wrath.

Sir 45:19
This the Lord saw, and it displeased him, and in his wrathful
indignation were they consumed: he did wonders upon them, to
consume them with the fiery flame.

Sir 45:20
But he made Aaron more honourable, and gave him an heritage,
and divided unto him the firstfruits of the increase; especially
he prepared bread in abundance:

Sir 45:21
For they eat of the sacrifices of the Lord, which he gave
unto him and his seed.

Sir 45:22
Howbeit in the land of the people he had no inheritance,
neither had he any portion among the people: for the Lord
himself is his portion and inheritance.

Sir 45:23
The third in glory is Phinees the son of Eleazar, because he
had zeal in the fear of the Lord, and stood up with good courage
of heart: when the people were turned back, and made
reconciliation for Israel.

Sir 45:24
Therefore was there a covenant of peace made with him, that
he should be the chief of the sanctuary and of his people, and
that he and his posterity should have the dignity of the
priesthood for ever:

Sir 45:25
According to the covenant made with David son of Jesse, of
the tribe of Juda, that the inheritance of the king should be to
his posterity alone: so the inheritance of Aaron should also be
unto his seed.

Sir 45:26
God give you wisdom in your heart to judge his people in
righteousness, that their good things be not abolished, and that
their glory may endure for ever.

Sir 46:1
Jesus the son a Nave was valiant in the wars, and was the
successor of Moses in prophecies, who according to his name was
made great for the saving of the elect of God, and taking
vengeance of the enemies that rose up against them, that he
might set Israel in their inheritance.

Sir 46:2
How great glory gat he, when he did lift up his hands, and
stretched out his sword against the cities!

Sir 46:3
Who before him so stood to it? for the Lord himself brought
his enemies unto him.

Sir 46:4
Did not the sun go back by his means? and was not one day as
long as two?

Sir 46:5
He called upon the most high Lord, when the enemies pressed
upon him on every side; and the great Lord heard him.

Sir 46:6
And with hailstones of mighty power he made the battle to
fall violently upon the nations, and in the descent [of
Beth-horon] he destroyed them that resisted, that the nations
might know all their strength, because he fought in the sight of
the Lord, and he followed the Mighty One.

Sir 46:7
In the time of Moses also he did a work of mercy, he and
Caleb the son of Jephunne, in that they withstood the
congregation, and withheld the people from sin, and appeased the
wicked murmuring.

Sir 46:8
And of six hundred thousand people on foot, they two were
preserved to bring them in to the heritage, even unto the land
that floweth with milk and honey.

Sir 46:9
The Lord gave strength also unto Caleb, which remained with
him unto his old age: so that he entered upon the high places of
the land, and his seed obtained it for an heritage:

Sir 46:10
That all the children of Israel might see that it is good to
follow the Lord.

Sir 46:11
And concerning the judges, every one by name, whose heart
went not a whoring, nor departed from the Lord, let their memory
be blessed.

Sir 46:12
Let their bones flourish out of their place, and let the name
of them that were honoured be continued upon their children.

Sir 46:13
Samuel, the prophet of the Lord, beloved of his Lord,
established a kingdom, and anointed princes over his people.

Sir 46:14
By the law of the Lord he judged the congregation, and the
Lord had respect unto Jacob.

Sir 46:15
By his faithfulness he was found a true prophet, and by his
word he was known to be faithful in vision.

Sir 46:16
He called upon the mighty Lord, when his enemies pressed upon
him on every side, when he offered the sucking lamb.

Sir 46:17
And the Lord thundered from heaven, and with a great noise
made his voice to be heard.

Sir 46:18
And he destroyed the rulers of the Tyrians, and all the
princes cf the Philistines.

Sir 46:19
And before his long sleep he made protestations in the sight
of the Lord and his anointed, I have not taken any man's goods,
so much as a shoe: and no man did accuse him.

Sir 46:20
And after his death he prophesied, and shewed the king his
end, and lifted up his voice from the earth in prophecy, to blot
out the wickedness of the people.

Sir 47:1
And after him rose up Nathan to prophesy in the time of
David.

Sir 47:2
As is the fat taken away from the peace offering, so was
David chosen out of the children of Israel.

Sir 47:3
He played with lions as with kids, and with bears as with
lambs.

Sir 47:4
Slew he not a giant, when he was yet but young? and did he
not take away reproach from the people, when he lifted up his
hand with the stone in the sling, and beat down the boasting of
Goliath?

Sir 47:5
For he called upon the most high Lord; and he gave him
strength in his right hand to slay that mighty warrior, and set
up the horn of his people.

Sir 47:6
So the people honoured him with ten thousands, and praised
him in the blessings of the Lord, in that he gave him a crown of
glory.

Sir 47:7
For he destroyed the enemies on every side, and brought to
nought the Philistines his adversaries, and brake their horn in
sunder unto this day.

