with us, blind as moles to beauties and goodness, but lynx-eyed for
failings, and finding meat and drink in proclaiming them in tones of
affected sorrow. How flagrant a breach of the laws of the kingdom this
temper implies, and how grave an evil it is, though thought little of,
or even admired as cleverness and a mark of a very superior person,
Christ shows us by this earnest warning, embedded among His fundamental
moral teachings.

He points out first how certainly that disposition provokes retaliation.
Who is the Judge that judges us as we do others? Perhaps it is best to
say that both the divine and the human estimates are included in the
purposely undefined expression. Certainly both are included in fact. For
a carping spirit of eager fault-finding necessarily tinges people's
feelings towards its possessor, and he cannot complain if the severe
tests which he applied to others are used on his own conduct. A cynical
critic cannot expect his victims to be profoundly attached to him, or
ready to be lenient to his failings. If he chooses to fight with a
tomahawk, he will be scalped some day, and the bystanders will not
lament profusely. But a more righteous tribunal than that of his victims
condemns him. For in God's eyes the man who covers not his neighbour's
faults with the mantle of charity has not his own blotted out by divine
forgiveness.

This spirit is always accompanied by ignorance of one's own faults,
which makes him who indulges in it ludicrous. So our Lord would seem to
intend by the figure of the mote and the beam. It takes a great deal of
close peering to see a mote; but the censorious man sees only the mote,
and sees it out of scale. No matter how bright the eye, though it be
clear as a hawk's, its beauty is of no moment to him. The mote
magnified, and nothing but the mote, is his object; and he calls this
one-sided exaggeration 'criticism,' and prides himself on the accuracy
of his judgment. He makes just the opposite mistake in his estimate of
his own faults, if he sees them at all. We look at our neighbour's
errors with a microscope, and at our own through the wrong end of a
telescope. We see neither in their real magnitude, and the former
mistake is sure to lead to the latter. We have two sets of weights and
measures: one for home use, the other for foreign. Every vice has two
names; and we call it by its flattering and minimising one when we
commit it, and by its ugly one when our neighbour does it. Everybody can
see the hump on his friend's shoulders, but it takes some effort to see
our own. David was angry enough at the man who stole his neighbour's ewe
lamb, but quite unaware that he was guilty of a meaner, crueller theft.
The mote can be seen; but the beam, big though it is, needs to be
'considered.' So it often escapes notice, and will surely do so, if we
are yielding to the temptation of harsh judgment of others. Every one
may be aware of faults of his own very much bigger than any that he can
see in another, for each of us may fathom the depth of our own
sinfulness in motive and unspoken, unacted thought, while we can see
only the surface acts of others.

Our Lord points out, in verse 4, a still more subtle form of this harsh
judgment, when it assumes the appearance of solicitude for the
improvement of others, and He thus teaches us that all honest desire to
help in the moral reformation of our neighbours must be preceded by
earnest efforts at mending our own conduct. If we have grave faults of
our own undetected and unconquered, we are incapable either of judging
or of helping our brethren. Such efforts will be hypocritical, for they
pretend to come from genuine zeal for righteousness and care for
another's good, whereas their real root is simply censorious
exaggeration of a neighbour's faults; they imply that the person
affected with such a tender care for another's eyes has his own in good
condition. A blind guide is bad enough, but a blind oculist is a still
more ridiculous anomaly. Note, too, that the result of clearing our own
vision is beautifully put as being, not ability to see, but ability to
cure, our fellows. It is only the experience of the pain of casting out
a darling evil, and the consciousness of God's pitying mercy as given
to us, that makes the eye keen enough, and the hand steady and gentle
enough, to pull out the mote. It is a delicate operation, and one which
a clumsy operator may make very painful, and useless, after all. A rough
finger or a harsh spirit makes success impossible.

II. Verse 6 comes in singular juxtaposition with the preceding warning
against uncharitable judgments. Christ's calling men dogs and swine does
not sound like obeying His own precept. But the very shock which the
words give at first hearing is part of their value. There are men whom
Jesus, for all His gentleness, has to estimate thus. His pitying eyes
were not blind to truth. It was no breach of infinite charity in Him to
see facts, and to give them their right names; and His previous precept
does not bid us shut our eyes, or give up the use of common sense. This
verse limits the application of the preceding one, and inculcates
prudence, tact, and discernment of character, as no less essential to
His servants than the sweet charity, slow to suspect and sorrowful to
expose a brother's fault. The fact that His gentle lips used such words
may well make us shudder as we think of the deforming of human nature
into pure animalism which some men achieve, and which is possible for
all.

The inculcation of discretion in the presentation of the truth may
easily be exaggerated into a doctrine of reserve which is more
Jesuitical than Christian. Even when guarded and limited, it may seem
scarcely in harmony with the commission to preach the gospel to every
creature, or with the sublime confidence that God's word finds something
to appeal to in every heart, and has power to subdue the animal in every
man. But the divergence is only apparent. The most expansive zeal is to
be guided by prudence, and the most enthusiastic confidence in the
universal power of the gospel does not take leave of common sense. There
are people who will certainly be repelled, and perhaps stirred to
furious antagonism to the gospel and its messengers, if they are not
approached with discretion. It is bad to hide the treasure in a napkin;
it is quite as bad to fling it down before some people without
preparation. Jesus Himself locked His lips before Herod, although the
curious ruler asked many questions; and we have sometimes to remember
that there are people who 'will not hear the word,' and who must first
'be won without the word.' Heavy rains run off hard-baked earth. It must
first be softened by a gentle drizzle. Luther once told this fable: 'The
lion made a great feast, and he invited all the beasts, and among the
rest, a sow. When all manner of costly dishes were set before the
guests, the sow asked, "Have you no bran?" Even so, said he, we
preachers set forth the most dainty dishes,--the forgiveness of sins,
and the grace of God; but they turn up their snouts, and grub for
guilders.'

This precept is one side of the truth. The other is the adaptation of
the gospel to all men, and the obligation on us to preach it to all. We
can only tell most men's disposition towards it by offering it to them,
and we are not to be in a hurry to conclude that men are dogs and swine.

III. It may be a question whether, in verse 8, the emphasis is to be
laid on 'every one' or on 'that asketh,' or, in other words, whether the
saying is an assurance that the universal law will be followed in our
case, or a statement of the universal condition without which no
receiving is possible, and, least of all, the receiving of the gifts of
the kingdom by its subjects. In either case, this verse gives the reason
for the preceding exhortation. Then follows the tender illustration in
which the dim-sighted love of earthly fathers is taken as a parable of
the all-wise tenderness and desire to bestow which move the hand of the
giving God. There is some resemblance between an Eastern loaf and a
stone, and some between a fish and a serpent. However imperfect a
father's love, he will neither be cruel enough to cheat his unsuspecting
child with what looks like an answer to his wish but is useless or
hurtful, nor foolish enough to make a mistake. All human relationships
are in some measure marred by the faults of those who sustain them. What
a solemn attestation of universal sinfulness is in these words of
Christ's, and how calmly He separates Himself by His sinlessness from
us! I do not know that there is anywhere a stronger scriptural proof of
these two truths than this one incidental clause, 'ye, being evil.' I
wonder whether the people who pit the Sermon on the Mount against
evangelical Christianity are ready to take this part of it into their
creeds. It is noteworthy, also, that the emphasis is laid, not on the
earthly father's willingness, but on his knowing how to give good gifts.
Our Lord seems to think that He need not assure us of the plain truth
that of course our Father in heaven is willing, just because He is our
Father, to give us all good; but He heartens us with the assurance that
His love is wisdom, and that He cannot make any mistakes. There are no
stones mingled with our bread, nor any serpents among the fish. He gives
good, and nothing but good.

IV. The great precept which closes the section is not only to be taken
as an inference from the immediately preceding context, but as the
summing up of all the duties to our neighbours, in which Christ has
been laying down the law of the kingdom from Matthew v. 17. This general
reference of the 'therefore' is confirmed by the subsequent clause,
'this is the law and the prophets'; the summing up of the whole past
revelation of the divine will, and therefore in accordance with our
Lord's previous exposition of the relation between His new law and that
former one. As Luther puts it in his vigorous, homely way, 'With these
words He now closes His instructions given in these three chapters, and
ties it all up in a little bundle.'

But a connection may also be traced with the preceding paragraph. There
our desires were treated as securing God's corresponding gifts. Here our
desires, when turned to men, are regarded, not as securing their
corresponding conduct, but as obliging us to action. By taking our
wishes as the rule of our dealings with others, we shall be like God,
who in regard to His best gifts takes our wishes as the rule of His
dealings with us. Our desires sent heavenward procure blessings for us;
sent earthward, they prescribe our blessing of others. That is a
startling turn to give to our claims on our fellows. It rests on the
principle that every man has equal rights, therefore we ought not to
look for anything from others which we are not prepared to extend to
others. A. should give B. whatever A. thinks B. should give him. Our
error is in making ourselves our own centre, and thinking more of our
claims on others than of our obligations to them. Christ teaches us that
these are one. Such a principle applied to our lives would wonderfully
pull down our expectations and lift up our obligations. It is really but
another way of putting the law of loving our neighbours as ourselves. If
observed, it would revolutionise society. Nothing short of it is the law
of the kingdom, and the duty of all who call themselves Christ's
subjects.

This is the inmost meaning, says Jesus, of the law and the prophets. All
former revelations of the divine will in regard to men's relations to
men are summed in this. Of course, this does not mean, as some people
would like to make it mean, that morality is to take the place of
religion, but simply that all the precepts touching conduct to men are
gathered up, for the subjects of the kingdom, in this one. 'Love worketh
no ill to his neighbour: therefore love is the fulfilling of the law.'


OUR KNOCKING

     'Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock,
     and it shall be opened unto you.'--MATT, vii. 7.

In the letter to the church at Laodicea, we read, 'Behold, I stand at
the door and knock.' The image is there employed to set forth the
tenderness and patience of the exalted Christ, who condescends to sue
for entrance into every human heart, and comes in with His hands full of
blessing. Now, it is very striking, I think, that the same symbol is
employed in this text in reference to _our_ duty. There is such a thing
as our knocking at some door for entrance and blessing. What is that
knocking?

The answer which is popularly given, I suppose, is that all these three
injunctions in our text, 'Ask--seek--knock,' are but diverse aspects of
the one exhortation to prayerfulness. And that may, perhaps, exhaust
their meaning; but I am rather disposed to think that it is possible to
trace a difference and a climax in them. _To ask_ is obviously to apply
to a person who can give, and that is prayer. _To seek_ is not, as I
think, quite the same thing, but rather expresses the idea of effort,
the personal effort which ought to accompany and will accompany all real
prayer. And _to knock_ possibly adds to the conception of prayer and of
effort, the idea, as common to both of them, of a certain persistency
and continuity born of earnestness. So that we have here, as I think, a
threefold statement of the conditions under which certain great
blessings are given, and a threefold exhortation as to our Christian
duty.

I. In considering these words I would first inquire to whom such
exhortations are rightly addressed.

Now, it is to be remembered that these words occur in that great
discourse of our Lord's which is called the Sermon on the Mount. And for
the right understanding of that great embodiment of Christian morality,
and of its relations to the whole body of Christian truth, it is, I
think, very needful to remember that the Sermon on the Mount is
addressed to Christ's disciples, that it is the promulgation of the laws
of the kingdom by the King for His subjects; that it presupposes
discipleship and entrance into the kingdom, and has not a word to say
about the method of entrance. So that, though very many of its
exhortations are but the republication in nobler form of the common laws
of morality which are binding upon all men, and may be addressed to all
men, the form in which they appear in that Sermon, the connection in
which they stand, the height to which they are elevated, and the
motives by which they are enforced, all limit their application to men
who are truly followers and disciples of Jesus Christ. And this
consideration especially bears on these words of our text.

The first exhortation which Christianity addresses to a man is not
'ask.' The first duty that a man has to discharge in regard to Christ
and His grace, and the revelation that is in Him, is neither to seek nor
to knock, but it is to take and to open. Christ knocks first, and when
He knocks we should say, 'Come in, Thou blessed of the Lord.'

To bid a man pray, when he should be exhorted to believe, is to darken
the clearness of the divine counsel, and to narrow the fulness of the
divine grace. God does not wait to be asked for His mercy and His
pardon. Like the dew on the grass, He 'tarrieth not for man, nor waiteth
for the sons of men.' Before we call, He answers; and to say to people,
'Pray!' 'Seek!' 'Knock!' when the one thing to say is 'Take the gifts
that God sent you before you asked for them,' is folly, and has often
led to a course of painful and profitless struggling, which was all
unnecessary and wide of the mark. It is like telling a man to pray for
rain when the reservoirs at his side are full, and every flower is
bending its chalice, charged with the blessing. It is needless to tell a
man to seek for the treasure that is lying there at his side, and to
which he has only to turn his eyes and stretch out his hands. It is
folly to exhort a man to beat at a door that is standing wide open. The
door of God's grace is thus wide open, and the treasure of God's mercy
has come down, and the rain of God's forgiving love has dropped upon all
of us, and made the wilderness to rejoice.

And so my message to some of you, dear brethren, is to say that you
have nothing whatever to do, primarily, with this text. You have neither
to ask, nor to seek, nor to knock, but to listen to Him, whose gentle
hand knocks at your hearts, and to open the door and let Him come in
with His grace and mercy.

II. And now, in the next place, let me ask you to consider in what
region of life these promises are true.

They sound at first as if they were dead in the teeth of the facts of
life. Is there any region of experience in which to ask is to receive,
to seek is to find, and in which every door flies open at our touch? If
there be, it is not in the ordinary work-a-day world in which you and I
live, where we all have to put up with a great many bitter
disappointments and refused requests, where we have all searched long
and sorely for some things that we have not found, and the search has
aged and saddened us.

It seems to be perfectly certain that the distinct purpose which our
Lord here has in view, is to assert that the law of His Kingdom is the
direct opposite of the law of earthly life, and that the sad discrepancy
between desire and possession, between wish and fact, is done away with
for His followers. 'Be it unto thee even as thou wilt,' is the charter
of His Kingdom.

Now, dear brethren, it does not want much wisdom to know that that would
be a very questionable blessing indeed, if it were taken to apply to the
outward circumstances of our lives. There are a good many people, in all
ages, and there are some people in this day, who set themselves up for
very lofty and spiritual Christians who have made deep discoveries as
to the power of prayer, and who seem to understand by it just exactly
this, that if a man will only pray for what he wishes instead of working
for it, he will get what he wishes. And I make bold to say that all
forms of so-called higher experience which involve anything like that
thought are, instead of being an exaltation, a degradation, of the very
idea of Christian prayer. For the meaning of prayer is not that I shall
force my will upon God, but that I shall bend my will to His.

There is one region, and one only, in which it is true, absolutely,
unconditionally, without limitation, and always, that what we ask we
get, what we seek we find, and that the door at which we knock shall be
opened unto us; and that is not the region of outward, questionable, and
changeful good.

Why, the very context of these words shows us that. It dwells upon the
discrimination of an earthly father in answering his child's requests;
and says: 'he knows how to give good gifts,' and 'so will your heavenly
Father.' And it takes an illustration which we may extend in that same
direction when it says, 'If a child ask a loaf, will the father give him
a stone? or if he ask for a fish, will he give him a serpent?' We may
turn the question and say: If the child ask for a serpent because he
fancies that it is a fish, will his father give him that? Or if he cast
his eye upon a thing which he imagines to be a loaf when it is only a
stone, will his father let him break his teeth upon that? Surely no! He
knows how to give good gifts, and an essential condition of that divine
knowledge of how to give good gifts is the knowledge of how to refuse
mistaken and foolish wishes.

So let us be thankful that His divine providence does not spoil His
children, and make them, as all spoiled children are, a curse and a
misery to themselves and to everybody round about them; but He
disciplines them by a gracious 'No' as well as by a frank, glad 'Yes,'
and often refuses the petition and grants the deeper-lying meaning of
the same.

Therefore, I say that the region in which this great and liberal charter
of entire response to our desires has force is simply and only the
spiritual region in which the highest good is. You may grow as Christian
men just as fast and just as far as you choose. A fuller knowledge of
God's truth, a more entire conformity to Christ's pattern, a deeper
communion with God--they are all possible for every one of us in any
measure to which we choose to set our expectations, and to shape our
desires and our actions. 'Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it.' The
stretch of the jaws determines the size of the portion that is put into
them; and He Himself who is the only real limit of His gifts, in His
endless fulness, always imparts to you and me just as much of Himself as
we like and wish to take. 'Ye are not straitened in Me, ye are
straitened in yourselves.'

And oh! brethren, what a solemn light such thoughts as that throw on the
low attainments of our average Christianity! So many of us, like
Gideon's fleece, dry in the midst of the dew that comes down from
heaven! So many of us in the midst of the blessed sunshine of His grace,
standing like deep gorges on a mountain in cold shadow! How much you
have lying at hand; how little of it you take for your own!

Suppose one of those old Spanish explorers in the sixteenth century had
been led into some of those rich Mexican treasure-houses, where all
round him were massive bars of gold and gleaming diamonds and precious
stones, and had come out from the abundance with sixpence-worth in His
palm, when he might have loaded himself with ingots of pure and
priceless metal. That is what some of you do, when Jesus Christ puts the
key of His storehouse in your hands and says to you, 'Go in and help
yourselves,' You stop as soon as you are within the threshold. You do
little more than take some insignificant corner nibbled off the great
solid mass of riches that might belong to you, and bear that away. The
only conclusion is that you do not care much about His wealth. Dear
brethren, you professing Christian people that are listening to me, if
life is scant in your veins, if your faith is, as it is with many of
you, all but dead, if your Christian character is very little better
than the character of the people round you, if your religion does not
give you any happiness, nor do other people much good, if your love is
so cold that it has almost expired, and your hopes dim, there is no
creature in heaven or earth or hell that is to blame for it but
yourselves. 'Ye have not because ye ask not; ye ask and have not because
ye ask amiss.'

III. And that brings me to the last question, namely, on what conditions
these promises depend.

'Ask, and it shall be given you; seek, and ye shall find; knock, and it
shall be opened.' I said at the beginning of these remarks that I traced
a difference between these three commands, and I take that difference
for granted now as the basis of the few words I have to say. The first
condition is--desires presented to Him who can grant them. To ask
implies the will of a person that will hear and respond and has the
power to bestow. That Person is God in Christ. Go and ask Him. We all
know that prayer is essential, and so I do not need to dwell upon it; go
and ask Him, and you will get what you need.

Do you ever pray, you professing Christian people? I do not mean with
your mouths, but with your hearts; do you ever pray to be made less
worldly? Do you ever wish to be so? Do you ever really desire that your
love of this present should be diminished? Have you any appetite for
righteousness? Does it seem to you to be a good thing that you should
have less pleasure in the present and more joys in the future? Would you
like to be a devouter Christian than you are? I very much question it
about many of you. I am not hitting at individuals, but I am speaking
about the average type of professing Christians in this generation.

If you desire it you will ask it. Is there any place in any of your
rooms where there is a little bit of carpet worn white by your knees? Or
do you pray when you are half asleep at night, and before you are well
awake in the morning, and scramble through a prayer as the necessary
preliminary to going to the work that really interests you, the work of
your trade or business? 'Ask, and ye shall receive.'

The second condition is effort. 'Seek, and ye shall find.' There are a
great many things in this world that cannot be given to a wish. There
are a great many things in the Kingdom of Grace that Jesus Christ cannot
give to a mere wish. There must be my own personal effort if I am to
secure that which I desire. That is the reason why so many prayers seem
to go unanswered. Think of the thousands of supplications that will go
up in churches and chapels to-day for spiritual blessings. How comes it
that such an enormous proportion of these prayers will never be answered
at all? Well, if a man stand at the butts and shoot his arrow at a
target, and does not care enough for its fate to stand there long enough
to see whether it hits the bull's eye, the probability is that it will
never reach its aim. And if men pray, and pray, and pray, in public, and
then come out of their churches and chapels and not only forget all
about their prayers but never expect an answer to them, and do nothing
in their lives in accordance therewith, is there any wonder that they
are not answered? Men repeat the Lord's Prayer every morning, and ask
God day by day 'lead us not into temptation,' and then go out into daily
life, and are willing to fling themselves into temptation, and go
through the very thick of the fire of it, if there is a ten pound note
on the other side of the flame. And men ask God that He will help them
to 'grow in grace' and Christian character, and seldom do a single thing
that they know will promote that growth. All such prayer is vain and
unresponded to. With prayer there must go effort.

And then, lastly, the third condition is continuity or persistence.
'Knock, and it shall be opened unto you,' 'Then there is such a thing as
a delay in these answers that you have been speaking about,' you say.
No! there is no delay, but there is such a thing as the beginning of a
long task; and therefore there is such a thing as the necessity for
persistent and continuous perseverance even in the offering of the
desires, which to express is to have satisfied; and in putting forth of
the efforts in which to seek is to find. ''Tis a lifelong task ere the
lump be leavened.' Eternal life is a gift, but the building of a
Christian character is the result of patient, continuous, well-directed
efforts to the appropriation and employment of the gift that we have
received. 'Forty-and-six years was this temple in building,' they said,
and it was not finished then. It will take more than forty-and-six years
to build up in my poor heart, full of rubbish and of evil, a temple to
the Holy Ghost.

I need not insist upon the virtue of perseverance; that is a commonplace
written on the head of all copybooks, but let me remind you that in the
Christian life, as much as in any other, that virtue is needful, and
unless a man is content to do as Abraham Lincoln said, 'Keep pegging
away' at the duties of Christian life with continual effort, there is no
promise and no possibility that that man shall grow in grace.

Now, two last words: one is, we want nothing more for the largest and
most blessed possession of the true riches and eternal joys of the
kingdom than the application to our Christian life of the very same
qualities, virtues, excellences, which we need for the successful
prosecution of our daily business. Dear brethren, draw for yourselves
the contrast between the eagerness with which you pursue that, and the
tepidity with which you pursue this. You know that effort and
perseverance are wanted there, and you do not grudge them; they are
wanted just as much here. Do you put them forth? Some of you are all
fire in the one place, and are all frost in the other. You Christian men
and women, give the kingdom as much as you give the world, and you will
be strong and growing Christians; but if you will not, do not wonder
that you are so feeble as you are.

And the last remark I make is--this great symbol of my text which is
used in reference to our Lord's condescending beseechings for the
entrance into our hearts, and is also used, as we have seen, in
reference to our own continuity of prayerful effort, is used in another
and very solemn application, in words of His 'Many will seek to enter
in, and shall not be able, when once the Master of the house is risen
up, and hath shut to the door; and will begin to stand without and to
knock at the door, saying, Lord! Lord! open to us; and He'--He who said
'Knock, and it shall be opened'--'He shall answer and say to you, I know
you not whence ye are.' That you may escape that repulse, oh my friend!
do you open your heart now to the knocking Christ, and then, then, and
not till then, 'Ask!' that you may be filled with the treasures of His
love, 'seek!' that you may find the rich provision He has laid up for us
all, 'knock!' that door after door in the many mansions of the Father's
House may be opened unto you; until at last an entrance is ministered
abundantly into the everlasting kingdom, and you go in with the King to
the eternal feast.


THE TWO PATHS

     'Enter ye in at the strait gate: for wide is the gate, and broad is
     the way, that leadeth to destruction, and many there be which go in
     thereat: 14. Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way,
     which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.'--MATT.
     vii. 13-14.

A frank statement of the hardships and difficulties involved in a course
of conduct does not seem a very likely way to induce men to adopt it,
but it often proves so. There is something in human nature which
responds to the bracing tonic of the exhortation: 'By doing thus you
will have to face many hardships and many difficulties which you may
avoid by leaving it alone; but do it, because it is best in the long
run, being right from the beginning.' So the story of the martyrs' fires
has lighted many a man to the faith for which the martyr was burned.
Many a youth has been led to take the shilling and enlist by reading
accounts of wounds and battles and sufferings.

Our Lord will have no soldiers in His army on false pretences. They
shall know exactly what they have to reckon on if they take service with
Him. And thus, in the solemn and familiar words of my text, He enjoins
each of us to become His disciples; and that not only because--as is
sometimes supposed--of the blessing that lies at the end for His
servants, but because of the very things on the road to the end which,
at first sight, seemed difficulties. For you will observe that in my
text the exhortation, 'Enter ye in at the strait gate,' is followed by
two clauses, each of which begins with a 'for'; the one being a
description of the road that is to be shunned; the other, an account of
the path that is to be followed. In each description there are four
contrasted particulars: the gate, strait or wide; the road, narrow or
broad; the travellers, many or few; and the ends, life or destruction.

Now, people generally read these words as if our Lord was saying,
'_Though_ the one path is narrow and rugged and steep and unfrequented,
yet walk on it, because it leads to life; and _though_ the other
presents the opposite of all these characteristics, yet avoid it,
because pleasant and popular as it is, its end is destruction.' But that
is not what He says. All four things are reasons for avoiding the one
and following the other; which, being turned into plain English, is just
this, that we ought to be Christian people precisely because there are
difficulties and pains and sacrifices in being so, which we may ignobly
shirk if we like. It is not, _Though_ the road be narrow it leads to
life, therefore enter it; but _Because_ it is narrow, and leads to life,
therefore blessed are the feet that are set upon it.

Let us, then, look at these four characteristics, and note how they all
enforce the merciful summons which our Lord is addressing to each of us,
as truly as He did to the hearers gathered around Him on the mountain:
'Enter ye in at the strait gate.'

I. The gates.

The gate is in view here merely as a means of access to the road, and
the metaphor simply comes to this, that it is more difficult to be a
Christian man than not to be one, and therefore you ought to be one.

Now, what makes a Christian? We do not need to go further than this
Sermon on the Mount for answer. The two first of our Lord's Beatitudes,
as they are called, are 'Blessed are the poor in spirit,' and 'Blessed
are they that mourn.' These two carry the conditions of entrance on the
Christian life. There must be consciousness of our own emptiness,
weakness, and need; there must be penitent recognition of our own
ill-desert and lamentation over that. These two things, the
consciousness of emptiness, and the sorrow for sin, make--I was going to
say--the two door-posts of the narrow gate through which a man has to
press. It is too narrow for any of his dignities or honours. A camel
cannot go through the eye of a needle, not only because of its own bulk,
but because of the burdens which flap on either side of it, and catch
against the jambs. All my self-confidence, and reputation, and
righteousness, will be rubbed off when I try to press through that
narrow aperture. You may find on a lonely moor low, contracted openings
that lead into tortuous passages--the approaches to some of the ancient
'Picts' houses,' where a feeble folk dwelt, and secured themselves from
their enemies. The only way to get into them is to go down upon your
knees; and the only way to get into this road--the way of
righteousness--is by taking the same attitude. No man can enter
unless--like that German Emperor whom a Pope kept standing in the snow
for three days outside the gate of Canossa--he is stripped of
everything, down to the hair-shirt of penitence. And that is not easy.
Naaman wanted to be healed as a great man in the court of Damascus. He
had to strip himself of his offices, and dignities, and pride, and to
come down to the level of any other leper. You and I, dear brother, have
to go through the same process of stripping ourselves of all the
adventitious accretions that have clung to us, and to know ourselves
naked and helpless, before we can pass through the gate.

Further, we have to go in one by one. Two cannot pass the turnstile at
the same time. We have to enter singly, as we shall have to pass through
the other 'dark gates, across the wild which no man knows,' at the end
of life.

Because it is strait, it is a great deal easier to stop outside, as so
many of those to whom I speak are doing. For that, you have nothing to
do but to drift and let things drift. No decision nor effort is needed;
no coming out of yourselves. It is all as easy as it is for a wild
animal to enter in between the broadly extending palisades that converge
as they come nearer the trap, so that the creature is snared before he
knows. The gate is wide: that is the sure condemnation of it. It is
always easy to begin bad and unworthy things, of all sorts. And there is
nothing easier than to keep in the negative position which so many of my
audience, I fear me, are in, of not being a Christian.

But, on the other side, it is not so hard as it looks to go in, and it
is not so easy as it seems to stop out. For there are two men in every
man--a better and a worse; and what pleases the one disgusts the other.
The choice which each of us has to make is whether we shall do the
things that are easiest to our worst self, or those that are easiest to
our best self. For in either case there will be difficulties; in either
case there will be antagonisms.

But it is good for us to make the effort, apart altogether from the end.
If there were no life eternal at the far end of the road which at this
end has the narrow gate, it would contribute to all that is noblest and
best in our characters, and to the repression of all that is ignoble and
worst, that we should take that lowly position which Christ requires,
and by the heroism of a self-abandoning faith, fling ourselves into His
arms.

Remember, too, that the strait gate, by reason of its very straitness,
is in the noblest sense wide. If there were anything else required of a
man than simply self-distrust and reliance on Jesus Christ, then this
great Gospel that I am feebly trying to preach would be a more
sectional and narrower thing than it is. But its glory is that it
requires nothing which any man is unable to bring, that it has no
invitation for sections, classes, grades of culture or intelligence or
morality, but that in its great cosmopolitanism and universality it
comes to every man; because it treats all as on one level, and requires
from each only what all can bring--knowledge of themselves as sinners,
and humble trust in Jesus Christ as a Saviour. It is narrow because
there is no room for sin or self-righteousness to go in; it is wide as
the world, and, like the capacious portals of some vast cathedral, ample
enough to receive without hustling, and to accommodate without
inconvenience, every soul of man.

II. Notice the contrast of the two roads, which, in like manner, points
the exhortation to choose the better.

The one is broad; the other is narrow. Which, being turned into plain
English, is just this--that the Christian course has limitations which
do not hamper the godless man; and that on the path of godlessness or
Christlessness there is a deceptive appearance of freedom and
independence which attracts many.

'Narrow is the road.' Yes, if you are to be a Christian, you must have
your whole life concentrated on, and consecrated to, one thing; and,
just as the vagrant rays of sunshine have to be collected into a focus
before they burn, so the wandering manifoldnesses of our aims and
purposes have all to be brought to a point, 'This one thing I do,' and
whatsoever we do we have to do it as in God, and for God, and by God,
and with God. Therefore the road is narrow because, being directed to
one aim, it has to exclude great tracts on either side, in which people
that have a less absorbing and lofty purpose wander and expatiate at
will. As on some narrow path in Eastern lands, with high, prickly-pear
hedges on either side, and vineyards stretching beyond them, with
luscious grapes in abundance, a traveller has to keep on the road,
within the prickly fences, dusty though it may be, and though his
thirsty lips may be cracking.

I remember once going to that strange island-fortress off the Normandy
coast, which stands on an isolated rock in the midst of a wide bay. One
narrow causeway leads across the sands. Does a traveller complain of
having to keep it? It is safety and life, for on either side stretches
the tremulous sand, on which, if a foot is planted, the pedestrian is
engulfed. So the narrow way on which we have to journey is a highway
cast up, on which no evil will befall us, while on each hand away out
to the horizon lie the treacherous quicksands. Narrowness is sometimes
safety. If the road is narrow it is the better guide, and they who
travel along it travel safely. Restrictions and limitations are of the
essence of all nobleness and virtue. 'So did not I because of the fear
of the Lord.'

Set side by side with that the competing path. Wide? Yes! 'Do as you
like'--that is sufficiently wide. And even where that gospel of the
animal has not become the guide to a man, there are many occupations,
pursuits, recreations which men who lack the supreme concentration and
consecration that come through over mastering love to Jesus Christ who
has redeemed them, may legitimately in their own estimation do, but
which no Christian man should do.

But, as I said before about the gates, it is not so easy as it looks to
walk the broad road, nor so hard as it seems to tread the narrow one.
For 'her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace';
and, on the other hand, licentiousness and liberty are not the same
thing, and true freedom is not to do as you like, but to like to do as
you ought. Besides, the path which looks attractive, and tempts to the
indulgence of many appetites and habits which a Christian man must
rigidly subdue, does not continue so attractive. Earthly pleasures have
a strange knack of losing their charm, and, at the same time, increasing
their hold, with familiarity. Many a man who has plunged into some kind
of dissipation because of the titillation of his senses which he found
in it, discovers that the titillation diminishes and the tyranny grows;
and that when he thought that he had bought a joy, he has sold himself
slave to a master.

So, dear friends, and especially you young people, let me beseech you
to be suspicious of courses of conduct which come to you with the
whisper, 'pleasant, sweet.' If you have two things before you, one of
which is easy and the other hard, ninety times out of a hundred it will
be safe for you to choose the hard one, and the odd ten times it will be
at least as well for you to choose it. 'Thus we travel to the stars.' As
one of our poets has it, 'the path of duty is the way of glory,' and
those that 'scorn delights and live laborious days,' and listen not to
the voices that say 'Come and enjoy this,' but to the sterner voice that
says 'Come and bear this'--these will

    'Find the stubborn thistles bursting
       Into glossy purples that outredden
     All voluptuous garden roses.'

So, because the road is narrow, therefore choose it. Because the other
path is wide, I beseech you to avoid it.

III. Note the travellers.

On the one road there are 'few,' on the other, by comparison,'many.'
That was true in Christ's time, and although the world is better since,
and many feet have trodden the narrow way, and have found that it leads
to life, yet I am afraid it is so still.

Now, did you ever think, or do you believe, that the fact of a course of
conduct, or of an opinion, being the conduct or the opinion of a
majority, is _pro tanto_ against it? 'What _every_body says must be
true,' says the old proverb, and I do not dispute it. What _most_
people say is, I think, most often false. And that is true about
conduct, as well as about opinion. It is very unsafe to take the general
sense of a community for your direction. It is unsafe in regard to
matters of opinion, it is even more unsafe in regard to matters of
conduct. That there are many on a road is no sign that the road is a
right one; but it is rather an argument the other way; looking at the
gregariousness of human nature, and how much people like to save
themselves the trouble of thinking and decision, and to run in ruts;
just as a cab-driver will get upon the tram-lines when he can, because
his vehicle runs easier there. So the fact that, if you are going to be
Christ-like Christians, you will be in the minority, is a reason for
being such.

You young men in warehouses, and all of you in your different spheres
and circles, do not be afraid of being singular. And remember that Jesus
Christ, and one man with Him, though it is _Athanasius contra
mundum_, are always in the majority.

Now that is good, bracing teaching, apart altogether from Christianity.
But I wish to bring it to bear especially in that direction. And so I
would remind you that after all, the solitude in which a man may have to
walk, if he sets Christ before him, and tries to follow Him with His
cross upon his shoulders, is only an apparent solitude. For, look, whose
footsteps are these on my path, not without spots of blood, where the
tender feet have trod upon thorns and briars? There has been Somebody
here before me. Who? 'Let him take up his cross and follow _Me_.'
And if we follow Him, the solitude will be like that in which the two
sad disciples walked on the Resurrection day, when a third came and
joined Himself to them. So a second will come to each of us, if we are
alone, and our hearts will burn within us. Nor shall we need to wait
till the repose of the evening and the breaking of bread, before we know
that 'it is the Lord'; nor, known and recognised, will He vanish from
our sides.

Dear brethren, because 'few there be that go in thereat,' and walk
thereon, I beseech _you_ to go in through the door of faith, and to
walk in the way of Christ, who has left us an ensample that we should
follow in His steps. If of thee it can be said, as the great Puritan
poet said of one virgin pure, that thou

    '--Wisely hast shunned the broad way and the green,
     And with those few art eminently seen
     That labour up the hill of heavenly truth,'--

his assurance to her will be applicable to thee, and

    '--Thou, when the Bridegroom, with His feastful friends,
     Passes to bliss at the mid-hour of night,
     Hast gained thy entrance.'

IV. That leads me to the last point--viz. the contrasted ends of these
two paths.

Christ assumes the right to speak decisively and authoritatively with
regard to the ultimate issues of human conduct, in a way which, as I
believe, marks His divinity, and which no man can venture upon without
presumption. Of the one path He declares without hesitation that it
leads to life; of the other He affirms uncompromisingly that it 'leads
to destruction.' Now, I dare not dwell upon these solemn thoughts with
any enfeebling expansion by my own words, but I beseech you to lay them
to heart--only take the simple remark, as a commentary and an exposition
of the solemn meaning of these issues, that life does not mean mere
continuous existence, but, as it generally does upon His lips, means
that which alone He recognises as being the true life of such a creature
as man--viz. existence in union with Himself, the Source of life; and
that, conversely, destruction does not mean merely the cessation of
being, or what we call the destruction of consciousness and the
annihilation of a soul, but that it means the continued consciousness of
a soul rent away from Him in whom alone is life, and which therefore has
made shipwreck of everything, and has destroyed itself.

There are the issues, then, before us, and I dare not blur the clear
distinction which Jesus Christ draws. I listen to Him, and accept His
word, and I press upon you, dear brethren, that the main thing about a
road is, after all, where it leads us; and I ask you to remember that
your life-path--as I try to remember that mine--is tending to one or
other of these two issues. The one path may be, and is, rough and steep
though its delights are nobler, more poignant, and more permanent than
any that can be found elsewhere. Steadily climbing like some mountain
railway, it reaches at last the short tunnel on the summit level, and
then dashes out into the blinding blaze of a new sunshine. The other
goes merrily enough, at first, downhill, but at last it comes to the
