 tenderness which there is in a rugged, true nature, if we think that.
 John's whole life was an iron determination to crush self in
 everything.

 Take a single instance. John's ministry was gradually superseded by
 the ministry of Christ. It was the moon waning before the Sun. They
 came and told him that, "Rabbi, He to whom thou barest witness beyond
 Jordan baptizeth, and all men come unto Him." Two of his own personal
 friends, apparently some of the last he had left, deserted him, and
 went to the new teacher.

 And now let us estimate the keenness of that trial. Remember John was
 a man: he had tasted the sweets of influence; that influence was dying
 away, and just in the prime of life he was to become _nothing_. Who
 cannot conceive the keenness of that trial? Bearing that in mind--what
 is the prophet's answer? One of the most touching sentences in all
 Scripture--calmly, meekly, the hero recognises his destiny--"He must
 increase, but I must decrease." He does more than recognise it--he
 rejoices in it, rejoices to be nothing, to be forgotten, despised, so
 as only Christ can be everything. "The friend of the bridegroom
 rejoiceth because he heareth the bridegroom's voice, this my joy is
 fulfilled." And it is _this_ man, with self so thoroughly crushed--the
 outward self by bodily austerities, the inward self by Christian
 humbleness--it is this man who speaks so sternly to his sovereign. "It
 is not lawful." Was there any gratification of human feeling there? Or
 was not the rebuke unselfish? Meant for God's honour, dictated by the
 uncontrollable hatred of all evil, careless altogether of personal
 consequences?

 Now it is this, my brethren, that _we_ want. The world-spirit can
 rebuke as sharply as the Spirit which was in John; the world-spirit
 can be severe upon the great when it is jealous. The worldly man
 cannot bear to hear of another's success, he cannot endure to hear
 another praised for accomplishments, or another succeeding in a
 profession, and the world can fasten very bitterly upon a neighbour's
 faults, and say, "It is not lawful." We expect that in the world. But
 that this should creep among religious men, that _we_ should be
 bitter--that we, _Christians_, should suffer jealousy to enthrone
 itself in our hearts--that we should find fault from spleen, and not
 from love--that we should not be able to be calm and gentle, and
 sweet-tempered, when we decrease, when our powers fail--_that_ is the
 shame. The love of Christ is intended to make such men as John, such
 high and heavenly characters. What is our Christianity worth if it
 cannot teach us a truthfulness, an unselfishness, and a generosity
 beyond the world's?

 We are to say something in the second place of the apparent failure of
 Christian life.

 The concluding sentence of this verse informs us that John was shut up
 in prison. And the first thought which suggests itself is, that a
 magnificent career is cut short too soon. At the very outset of ripe
 and experienced manhood the whole thing ends in failure. John's day of
 active usefulness is over; at thirty years of age his work is done;
 and what permanent effect have all his labours left? The crowds that
 listened to his voice, awed into silence by Jordan's side, we hear of
 them no more. Herod heard John gladly, did much good by reason of his
 influence. What was all that worth? The prophet comes to himself in a
 dungeon, and wakes to the bitter conviction, that his influence had
 told much in the way of commanding attention, and even winning
 reverence, but very little in the way of gaining souls; the bitterest,
 the most crushing discovery in the whole circle of ministerial
 experience. All this was seeming failure.

 And this, brethren, is the picture of almost all human life. To some
 moods, and under some aspects, it seems, as it seemed to the psalmist,
 "Man walketh in a vain shadow and disquieteth himself in vain." Go to
 any churchyard, and stand ten minutes among the grave-stones; read
 inscription after inscription recording the date of birth, and the
 date of death, of him who lies below, all the trace which myriads have
 left behind, of their having done their day's work on God's
 earth,--that is failure or--seems so. Cast the eye down the columns of
 any commander's despatch after a general action. The men fell by
 thousands; the officers by hundreds. Courage, high hope,
 self-devotion, ended in smoke--forgotten by the time of the next list
 of slain: that is the failure of life once more. Cast your eye over
 the shelves of a public library--there is the hard toil of years, the
 product of a life of thought; all that remains of it is there in a
 worm-eaten folio, taken down once in a century. Failure of human life
 again. Stand by the most enduring of all human labours, the pyramids
 of Egypt. One hundred thousand men, year by year, raised those
 enormous piles to protect the corpses of the buried from rude
 inspection. The spoiler's hand has been there, and the bodies have
 been rifled from their mausoleum, and three thousand years have
 written "failure" upon that. In all that, my Christian brethren, if we
 look no deeper than the surface, we read the grave of human hope, the
 apparent nothingness of human labour.

 And then look at this history once more. In the isolation of John's
 dying hour, there appears failure again. When a great man dies we
 listen to hear what he has to say, we turn to the last page of his
 biography first, to see what he had to bequeath to the world as his
 experience of life. We expect that the wisdom, which he has been
 hiving up for years, will distil in honeyed sweetness then. It is
 generally not so. There is stupor and silence at the last. "How dieth
 the wise man?" asks Solomon: and he answers bitterly, "As the fool."
 The martyr of truth dies privately in Herod's dungeon. We have no
 record of his last words. There were no crowds to look on. We cannot
 describe how he received his sentence. Was he calm? Was he agitated?
 Did he bless his murderer? Did he give utterance to any deep
 reflections on human life? All that is shrouded in silence. He bowed
 his head, and the sharp stroke fell flashing down. We know that, we
 know no more--apparently a noble life abortive.

 And now let us ask the question distinctly, Was all this indeed
 failure? No, my Christian brethren, it was sublimest victory. John's
 work was no failure; he left behind him no sect to which he had given
 his name, but his disciples passed into the service of Christ, and
 were absorbed in the Christian church. Words from John had made
 impressions, and men forgot in after years _where_ the impressions
 first came from, but the day of judgment will not forget. John laid
 the foundations of a temple, and others built upon it He laid it in
 struggle, in martyrdom. It was covered up like the rough masonry below
 ground, but when we look round on the vast Christian Church, we are
 looking at the superstructure of John's toil.

 There is a lesson for us in all that, if we will learn it. Work, true
 work, done honestly and manfully for Christ, _never_ can be a failure.
 Your own work, my brethren, which God has given you to do, whatever
 that is, let it be done truly. Leave eternity to show that it has not
 been in vain in the Lord. Let it but be work, it will tell. True
 Christian life is like the march of a conquering army into a fortress
 which has been breached; men fall by hundreds in the ditch. Was their
 fall a failure? Nay, for their bodies bridge over the hollow, and over
 them the rest pass on to victory. The quiet religious worship that we
 have this day--how comes it to be ours? It was purchased for us by the
 constancy of such men as John, who freely gave their lives. We are
 treading upon a bridge of martyrs. The suffering was theirs--the
 victory is ours. John's career was no failure.

 Yet we have one more circumstance which _seems_ to tell of failure. In
 John's prison, solitude, misgiving, black doubt, seem for a time to
 have taken possession of the prophet's soul. All that we know of those
 feelings is this:--John while in confinement sent two of his disciples
 to Christ, to say to Him, "Art thou He that should come, or do we look
 for another?" Here is the language of painful uncertainty. We shall
 not marvel at this, if we look steadily at the circumstances. Let us
 conceive John's feelings. The enthusiastic child of Nature, who had
 roved in the desert, free as the air he breathed, is now suddenly
 arrested, and his strong restless heart limited to the four walls of a
 narrow dungeon. And there he lay startled. An eagle cleaving the air
 with motionless wing, and in the midst of his career brought from the
 black cloud by an arrow to the ground, and looking round with his
 wild, large eye, stunned, and startled there; just such was the free
 prophet of the wilderness, when Herod's guards had curbed his noble
 flight, and left him alone in his dungeon.

 Now there is apparent failure here, brethren; it is not the thing
 which we should have expected. We should have expected that a man who
 had lived so close to God all his life, would have no misgivings in
 his last hours. But, my brethren, it is not so. It is the strange
 truth that some of the highest of God's servants are tried with
 darkness on the dying bed. Theory would say, when a religious man is
 laid up for his last struggles, now he is alone for deep communion
 with his God. Fact very often says, "No--now he is alone, as his
 Master was before him, in the wilderness to be tempted of the devil."
 Look at John in imagination, and you would say, "Now his rough
 pilgrimage is done. He is quiet, out of the world, with the rapt
 foretaste of heaven in his soul." Look at John in fact. He is
 agitated, sending to Christ, not able to rest, grim doubt wrestling
 with his soul, misgiving for one last black hour whether all his hope
 has not been delusion.

 There is one thing we remark here by the way. Doubt often comes from
 inactivity. We cannot give the philosophy of it, but this is the fact,
 Christians who have nothing to do but to sit thinking of themselves,
 meditating, sentimentalising, are almost sure to become the prey of
 dark, black misgivings. John struggling in the desert needs no proof
 that Jesus is the Christ. John shut up became morbid and doubtful
 immediately. Brethren all this is very marvellous. The history of a
 human soul _is_ marvellous. We are mysteries, but here is the
 practical lesson of it all. For sadness, for suffering, for misgiving,
 there is no remedy but stirring and doing.

 Now look once more at these doubts of John's. All his life long John
 had been wishing and expecting that the kingdom of God would come. The
 kingdom of God is Right triumphant over Wrong, moral evil crushed,
 goodness set up in its place, the true man recognised, the false man
 put down and forgotten. All his life long John had panted for that;
 his hope was to make men better. He tried to make the soldiers
 merciful, and the publicans honest, and the Pharisees sincere. His
 complaint was, Why is the world the thing it is? All his life long he
 had been appealing to the invisible justice of Heaven against the
 visible brute force which he saw around him. Christ had appeared, and
 his hopes were straining to the utmost. "Here is the Man!" And now
 behold, here is no Kingdom of Heaven at all, but one of darkness
 still, oppression and cruelty triumphant, Herod putting God's prophet
 in prison, and the Messiah quietly letting things take their course.
 Can that be indeed Messiah? All this was exceedingly startling. And it
 seems that then John began to feel the horrible doubt whether the
 whole thing were not a mistake, and whether all that which he had
 taken for inspiration were not, after all, only the excited hopes of
 an enthusiastic temperament. Brethren, the prophet was well nigh on
 the brink of failure.

 But let us mark--that a man has doubts--_that_ is not the evil; all
 earnest men must expect to be tried with doubts. All men who feel,
 with their whole souls, the value of the truth which is at stake,
 cannot be satisfied with a "perhaps." Why, when all that is true and
 excellent in this world, all that is worth living for, is in that
 question of questions, it is no marvel if we sometimes wish, like
 Thomas, to see the prints of the nails, to know whether Christ be
 indeed our Lord or not. Cold hearts are not anxious enough to doubt.
 Men who love will have their misgivings at times; that is not the
 evil. But the evil is, when men go on in that languid, doubting way,
 content to doubt, proud of their doubts, morbidly glad to talk about
 them, liking the romantic gloom of twilight, without the manliness to
 say--I must and will know the truth. That did not John. Brethren, John
 appealed to Christ. He did exactly what we do when we pray--and he got
 his answer. Our Master said to his disciples, Go to my suffering
 servant, and give him proof. Tell John the things ye see and
 hear--"The blind see, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, to the poor
 the Gospel is preached." There is a deep lesson wrapped up in this. We
 get a firm grasp of truth by prayer. Communion with Christ is the best
 proof of Christ's existence and Christ's love. It is so even in human
 life. Misgivings gather darkly round our heart about our friend in his
 absence; but we seek his frank smile, we feel his affectionate grasp:
 our suspicions go to sleep again. It is just so in religion. No man is
 in the habit of praying to God in Christ, and then doubts whether
 Christ is He "that should come." It is in the power of prayer to
 realize Christ, to bring him near, to make you feel His life stirring
 like a pulse within you. Jacob could not doubt whether he had been
 with God when his sinew shrunk. John could not doubt whether Jesus was
 the Christ when the things He had done were pictured out so vividly in
 answer to his prayer. Let but a man live with Christ anxious to have
 his own life destroyed, and Christ's life established in its place,
 losing himself in Christ, that man will have all his misgivings
 silenced. These are the two remedies for doubt--Activity and Prayer.
 He who works, and _feels_ he works--he who prays, and _knows_ he
 prays, has got the secret of transforming life-failure into
 life-victory.

 In conclusion brethren, we make three remarks which could not be
 introduced into the body of this subject. The first is--Let young and
 ardent minds, under the first impressions of religion, beware how they
 pledge themselves by any open profession to more than they can
 perform. Herod warmly took up religion at first, courted the prophet
 of religion, and then when the hot fit of enthusiasm had passed away,
 he found that he had a clog round his life from which he could only
 disengage himself by a rough, rude effort. Brethren whom God has
 touched, it is good to count the cost before you begin. If you give up
 present pursuits _impetuously_, are you sure that present impulses
 will last? Are you quite certain that a day will not come when you
 will curse the hour in which you broke altogether with the world? Are
 you quite sure that the revulsion back again, will not be as impetuous
 as Herod's, and your hatred of the religion which has become a clog,
 as intense as it is now ardent?

 Many things doubtless there are to be given up--amusements that are
 dangerous, society that is questionable. What we give up, let us give
 up, not from quick feeling, but from principle. Enthusiasm is a lovely
 thing, but let us be calm in what we do. In that solemn, grand
 thing--Christian life--one step backward is religious death.

 Once more we get from this subject the doctrine of a resurrection.
 John's life was hardness, his end was agony. That is frequently
 Christian life. Therefore, says the apostle, if there be no
 resurrection the Christian's choice is wrong; "If in this life only we
 have hope in Christ, then are we of all men most miserable." Christian
 life is not visible success--very often it is the apparent opposite of
 success. It is the resurrection of Christ working itself out _in_ us;
 but it is very often the Cross of Christ imprinting itself on us very
 sharply. The highest prize which God has to give here is martyrdom.
 The highest style of life is the Baptist's--heroic, enduring, manly
 love. The noblest coronet which any son of man can wear is a crown of
 thorns. Christian, _this_ is not your rest. Be content to feel that
 this world is not your home. Homeless upon earth, try more and more to
 make your home in heaven, above with Christ.

 Lastly we have to learn from this, that devotedness to Christ is our
 only blessedness. It is surely a strange thing to see the way in which
 men crowded round the austere prophet, all saying, "Guide us, we
 cannot guide ourselves." Publicans, Pharisees, Sadducees, Herod,
 whenever John appears, all bend before him, offering him homage and
 leadership. How do we account for this? The truth is, the spirit of
 man groans beneath the weight of its own freedom. When a man has no
 guide, no master but himself, he is miserable; we want guidance, and
 if we find a man nobler, wiser than ourselves, it is almost our
 instinct to prostrate our affections before that man, as the crowds
 did by Jordan, and say, "Be my example, my guide, my soul's
 sovereign." That passionate need of worship--hero-worship it has been
 called--is a primal, universal instinct of the heart. Christ is the
 answer to it. Men will not do; we try to find men to reverence
 thoroughly, and we cannot do it. We go through life, finding guides,
 rejecting them one after another, expecting nobleness and finding
 meanness; and we turn away with a recoil of disappointment.

 There is no disappointment in Christ. Christ can be our souls'
 sovereign. Christ can be our guide. Christ can absorb all the
 admiration which our hearts long to give. We want to worship men.
 These Jews wanted to worship man. They were right--man is the rightful
 object of our worship; but in the roll of ages there has been but one
 man whom we can adore without idolatry,--the Man Christ Jesus.


 THE END.

 _Spottiswoode & Co., Printers, New-street Square, London_




                     A SELECTION FROM THE NOTICES

                                  OF

                       MR. ROBERTSON'S SERMONS,

                              AND OF THE

                 LIFE AND LETTERS OF F.W. ROBERTSON.

                 BY THE REV. STOPFORD A. BROOKE, M.A.




 [BLACKWOOD'S MAGAZINE, August, 1862.]

   "For while hapless Englishmen complain in the papers, and in
    private, in many a varied wail, over the sermons they have to
