imposes on the mind but a faint comprehension of the vastness of the
universe in space, time, and size; but imposes a deep conviction of the
infinitesimal meaning of our planet Earth, both as to size and its
relation to the millions of related heavenly bodies. The evolution of
man on our planet in this broad conception of space and time is most
infinitesimal. It has been just a few hours ago in this widened
conception of time that Halley's comet was excommunicated from the skies
by Pope Calixitus III, who looked upon this comet as one of unheard-of
magnitude and from the tail of which was flung down upon the earth,
disease, pestilence, and war.

Most certainly the minds of Jeans and Eddington carry in their recesses
a vast amount of knowledge that was not common to men living in 1456,
the year in which the above-mentioned comet caused such consternation.
Much as one admires the superiority of the minds of these present-day
physicists, yet one cannot help but think that if our present rate of
progress meets no serious obstacle, then in another five hundred years,
the attitude of awe of Jeans and Eddington towards the vastness of our
universe will be held in some similar position to which Jeans and
Eddington now hold the misguided conception of Halley's comet in the
year 1456. The mind of man is just beginning to emerge from its
swaddling clothes and we cannot assume to judge what its broadest
capabilities may be. Certain great modern minds, therefore, when they
contemplate this vastness of astrophysics are apt to dwell a bit too
literally on the "music of the heavenly spheres," and under the
influence of these celestial harmonies fall into the trance of
scientific asceticism. Men who can no longer seriously hold to a belief
in an anthropomorphic god, the soul and immortality are apt to allow
themselves when in this mood to emotionalize their knowledge; and these
same men are the ones who would in their scientific endeavors be the
first to eliminate all emotions from their reasoning efforts in their
laboratories. One seems justified, therefore, in stating that this
conception of "cosmic consciousness" is but another instance of the mere
illusions of a craving heart.

Discussing the question as to whether science and religion conflict, the
physicist Professor Bazzoni, of the University of Pennsylvania, in a
recent work "Energy and Matter," makes the following pointed comment:
"Some scientists resort to metaphysics and make contact with a kind of
mysticism which may be taken for a religious belief at precisely that
point where ignorance prevents further progress along sound scientific
lines. The primitive medicine man appealed to the gods to explain the
precipitation of rain and the phase changes of the moon, and some modern
scientists appeal to metaphysics and mysticism to explain the limits of
the infinite and the nature of electricity."

He further cautions theologians against placing undue emphasis on the
opinions of scientists when they express their minds on religious
topics, and he remarks: "They (the laity) should realize that in the
spiritual field the opinion of an eminent scientist has exactly the
same weight as the opinion of any other cultivated and thoughtful
individual."

When the scientist examines with the impartial mind of the laboratory
the science of the origin of religious beliefs and delves into the
complicated intricacies of religious history, he becomes as convinced as
any other thoughtful individual that the facts of science and history
are deadly to religion. Moreover, as man contemplates the construction
and forces at work in the universe he still must exclaim, "end,
beginning, or purpose, it knows not of."

The theologians are devoting a great deal of their time to the writings
of physicists who venture into the field of theology. It may be that in
this manner they can divert attention from the drastic findings
concerning all religious beliefs that the anthropologists and
psychologists are patiently accumulating. "Many physicists and
biologists like Pupin, Millikan, Oliver Lodge, J. Arthur Thomson, and
Henry Fairfield Osborn, have recently blossomed forth as liberal
theologians. They are still emotionally attached to the older religious
faith. They are aware that modern physics and biology have abandoned
doctrines that once were hostile to religious claims. They, therefore,
proclaim that there is no further conflict between religion and science.
In so doing, however, they show themselves abysmally ignorant of all
that anthropology and psychology have done to study religion and
religious man scientifically. They show their ignorance of the
philosophy that has built upon such data. They do not realize that the
present-day conflict between religious faith and science is no longer
with a scientific explanation of the world, but with a scientific
explanation of religion." (_J. H. Randall and J. H. Randall, Jr.:
"Religion and the Modern World."_)

The cultured Greeks and Romans had their omnipotent gods and these have
long ago died a death of ridicule. At a time when beauty and sculpture
were at their height the religion of these ancient artists was absurd.
Similarly, with some of our modern scientists, their religion has not
kept pace with their intellect. Their emotions have overbalanced their
reason in this field. Professor H. Levy, of the University of London,
tersely remarks: "The assertion of contemporary scientists, who state
that the universe is a fickle collection of indeterminate happenings,
and a great thought in the Mind of its Architect, a Pure Mathematician,
serves merely to divert the activity of the scientific brain from its
concentration on the contradictions and confusions of the all too real
outward world to a state of passive and unreal contemplation."
(_Professor H. Levy: "The Universe of Science."_)

Among the theologians, some at least have learned the futility of waxing
indignant at each new scientific hypothesis that encroached, as they
thought, within their domain. A great many liberal theologians have as
yet not learned the extreme danger to their theology in grasping at some
concept of science that for the present moment does not appear to be
detrimental to their theology, or, as they think, seems to bolster up
their particular creed. "The enthusiasm aroused in certain theological
circles by recent developments in mathematical physics," states Dr. M.
C. Otto, "seems to me to indicate just one thing, that these theologians
felt themselves to be in so desperate a state that a floating straw
assumed the appearance of a verdure-clad island. I am of the opinion
that all persons who would work for a more decent and happy existence
for themselves and for their fellows must turn their backs upon religion
just to the extent that religious leadership seeks spiritual renewal in
these hallucinations of despair." (_Drs. Wieman, Macintosh, and Otto:
"Is There a God?"_)

It is only proper to point out that what certain emancipated minds are
trying to reconstruct as a basis of religious belief is not what is held
by the masses as their conception of religion. In a recent clear and
frank statement of the religious revolution, John Herman Randall and
John Herman Randall, Jr., state: "Such beliefs, even so fundamental a
one as belief in God, must stand their chances with the philosophic
interpretation men give their experience.... The really revolutionary
effect of the scientific faith, so far as religion is concerned, has
been not its new view of the world, but its new view of religion.
Reinterpretations of religious belief have been unimportant compared
with reinterpretations of religion itself. For those who have come to
share the scientific world-view, even more for those who have absorbed
the spirit of scientific inquiry, it has been impossible to view
religion as a divine revelation entrusted to man. It has even been
impossible to see it as a relation between man and a cosmic deity.
Religion has rather appeared a human enterprise, an organization of
human life, an experience, a social bond, and an inspiration." (_J. H.
Randall and J. H. Randall, Jr.: "Religion and the Modern World."_) To
the man who literally entreats his deity, "Our Father, who art in
Heaven, grant us our daily bread," the above reinterpretation of what is
meant by religion can have no meaning. To the cultivated mind that
comprehends what is meant, the above interpretation is what he conceives
of as his social secular activities for the betterment of his fellowmen.
A living philosophy of life is a much better name for this attitude than
is the misnomer "religion," and avoids a great deal of confusion.

Some of our "scientists on a holiday," as they have been facetiously
called when they stepped into a field in which they had not become well
acquainted with the ground, have proceeded to lend assurance that God
_is_ by subtracting so drastically from what is generally attributed to
the conception of God, that there is nothing much left to what they
conceive as what God _means_. They have stripped the conception of what
has been heretofore regarded as fundamental, namely, the conception that
God is a superhuman personality or mind.

In Mr. Whitehead's philosophy, God is spoken of as, "God is not
concrete, but He is the ground for concrete actuality." I believe such
confusion of language may have been in the mind of Dr. M. C. Otto when
he remarked: "Some persons endeavor more than ever to make necessary
distinctions to keep meanings as clear as possible; and to have an eye
on the tendency of language to become its own object. Other persons
repudiate these obligations. They act as if it were a virtue to love
darkness rather than light if your intentions are good. Under their
manipulations conceptions are dimmed or replaced by vague intimations.
One boundary line after another is obliterated until the whole substance
of things swims in mists."

History has illustrated that the greatest source of evil on this planet
has arisen from the fact that physical phenomena for which our limited
mental capacities were not able to formulate a logical solution, were
ascribed to preternatural causes.

From this original stem arose religion and the Church, the two greatest
obstacles which have been a burden to mankind for 2000 years and a
barrier to all progress which has made life endurable and desirable.

The lower man is in the scale of civilization, the more does he call in
the supernatural to explain all the happenings and experiences of his
life. When he had been beset by an intellectual failure he had been
thrown back to religion. Lacking the courage and mental capacity to
proceed further against obstacles he succumbed to the drug of religious
explanations. The need was not for a narcotic, but for a stimulant.

The mental stimulant was provided for man in the form of science.
Science is but organized knowledge, and it is this knowledge that has
elevated man to the position where he is now, his own god. When
difficulties confront him in this age, he blames them upon his own
ignorance and incompetence. And, when he sets about to overcome these
difficulties, he does not rely on divine revelation or supernatural aid
or on miracles; he relies on his reason. He knows that when a problem
eludes his mental capacity, it is not the supernatural which eludes him
but some natural force, some law which he has not been able to grasp as
yet. There is no resignation in this attitude; only resolute, peaceful
patience. The problem that he cannot solve at present will yield to his
reason eventually. The ecclesiastic is well aware that science is his
natural and implacable enemy. He knows that every time the bounds of
exact knowledge are widened, the domain of religion is narrowed.

Man's knowledge of the universe is still incomplete, but it is certainly
more complete than it was fifty years ago; and when we consider what
that knowledge was a few thousand years ago, it is no breach of logic to
state that all natural processes, in the course of time, will be brought
into the confines of invariable laws.

Sir Arthur Keith clearly states: "The ancient seeker, to explain the
kingdom of life, with man as its Regent, had to call in the miracle of
creation. The modern seeker finds that although life has the appearance
of the miraculous, yet all its manifestations can be studied and
measured, and that there is a machinery at work in every living thing
which shapes, evolves, and creates. His inquiries have led him to
replace the miracle of creation by the laws of evolution.

"Whichever department of the realm of Nature the man of science has
chosen for investigation, the result has always been the same; the
supernatural has given place to the natural, superstition is succeeded
by reason. The world has never had such armies of truth seekers as it
now has. Those equipped with ladders of science have so often scaled the
walls which surround cities of ignorance that they march forward in the
sure faith that none of Nature's battlements are impregnable."

In the last analysis, if we reach a point in thinking where we cannot
proceed further, a fathomless landmark, must we revert to the
theological error of "thinking," and assume it must be of supernatural
character? Because the unknown in the past has been assigned to the
supernatural is no indication for us also, in the present age, to
relegate the unknown to divine cause. It is unseemly that minds that
have emancipated themselves should go just so far--as far as _their own
reason_ can explain the unknown--and when their limited reason can go no
further to revert back to the primitive stage where solution is
considered impossible to man save it be "revealed to him by God." If
man's mind is free, if no coercion of any kind is placed on its
exercise, it will expand and unravel what at present is still
fathomless. Give man endless centuries and ample opportunities and he
will unravel the miracles of development and growth just as he has done
other miracles which at first seemed impossible of rational solution.

For how much longer will man be a slave to his inferiority complex with
regard to his own rational capacities? If faith is vital to man, why not
relate it to that which at least holds a promise of solution? Man's mind
has not as yet arrived at the point which might give even the slightest
indication of its ultimate exhaustion. We cannot assume the knowledge of
what man's fullest capacities are. All things must unravel themselves
with the progress of his mind, those things that he cannot explain now,
he must not assign to a superhuman force; man must use his reasoning
faculties to investigate and search for the truth so that these unknown
may become part of the known.

Again to quote Sir Arthur Keith: "Only eighty years have come and gone
since the anatomist obtained his first glimpse of the structural
complexity of the human brain; it will take him eight thousand years and
more to find out the exact part played by every departmental unit of
this colossal system of government which carries on the mental life of a
human being. _We have no reason to think there is anything supernatural
in its manifestation._ As our knowledge of the brain accumulates, the
names and terms we now use will give place to others which have a more
precise meaning. In our present state of ignorance we have to use
familiar and loose terms to explain the workings of the brain--such
words as "soul," "spirit," "heart," "superstition," and "prejudice."
These manifestations of the mind will be dissected and made
understandable."

Science has as yet not fully explained the origin of life on earth, but
there is reason to believe that it will do so in the future. The laws
governing the production of life itself are under investigation in the
laboratories and it is highly probable that this law will be unraveled
at some future date. It will be interesting for our posterity to witness
the confusion of the ecclesiastics and their attempted confirmation of
this fact in the Bible; their finding of some obscure phrase that will
be interpreted by them as a prediction of the fact in the Bible.

The theists have maintained, as we have seen, many false beliefs that
have cost the lives of innumerable men and suffering incalculable;
beliefs which they themselves have subsequently recognized as false but
relinquished only by the onslaught of rising secular knowledge. It was
the ecclesiastic who pointed to the God-dictated phrase, "Thou shalt not
suffer a witch to live," and the various precepts that have been
enumerated in the preceding chapters. Surely sufficient evidence has
been noted to convince a thinking being that reason is a better guide
than theism. Belief is the antithesis of reason; reason is rationality;
religious belief is clearly mental abnormality.

If a religionist is asked what he thinks of a secular institution which
vigorously condemns and persecutes inquiry, experiment, and truth, he
will reply with the logical answer. When it is pointed out to him that
religion has done and still is doing this, he will hem and haw until he
manufactures some illogical answer. It has been stated that the more we
think, the less we believe; and that the less we think, the more we
believe. The Christian will analyze the creed of the Mohammedan and find
it ridiculous; the Mohammedan analyzes the creed of the Christian and in
turn finds it ridiculous. That is thinking. But does the Mohammedan or
the Christian analyze as critically each his own belief? Will he
endeavor to analyze it at all? That is believing. The ecclesiastic
concerns himself not with truth or knowledge; it is creed which is his
shrine. He definitely is at war with knowledge and he wants to learn
only such things as fit in with his preconceived notions and prejudices.
When the minds of men are from infancy perverted with these ideals, how
can mankind build a virile race?

It is often asserted that the alleged universality of the belief in God
is an argument for its truth. But what of the fact that men had
everywhere come to the conclusion that the earth was flat, and yet a
wider and truer knowledge proved that universal belief to be false! In
the discussion of witchcraft, it has been shown that a delusion may be
as widespread as a truth. During the tenth and eleventh centuries, the
Spanish Moors had recognized the sphericity of the earth and were
teaching geography from globes in their common schools. Rome, during the
same ages, was asserting in all its absurdity the flatness of the earth.
It was not until almost five hundred years later that Rome was forced to
see its absurdity and then only when the enlightened world mocked at its
error.

In this twentieth century, certain enlightened men are teaching the
absurdity and harmfulness of a belief in a deity. Must it take five
hundred years for all mankind to come to a similar conclusion? May it
not well be that in a few centuries our posterity will view belief in a
deity in the same light that we in this age view the Church's insistence
that the earth was flat?

The God idea has been one of the most divisive and anti-social notions
cherished by mankind. In fact it has been asserted that the idea of God
has been the enemy of man. It has driven multitudes of men and women
into the unnatural asceticisms and wasted lives of the convent and
abbey. It has taxed the economic resources of every nation. Every
church, no matter of what creed, is a pathetic monument of God-ridden
humanity which has been built by the pennies sweated by the poor, and
wrested from them by fraudulent promises of reward, appeals to fear, and
the pathetic human tendency to sacrifice.

The theologians have in their arguments resorted to philosophy. The
consequence of this transference of the idea of God to the sphere of
philosophy is the curious position that the god in which people believe
is not the god whose existence is made the product of an experimental
argument, and the god of the argument is not the god of belief.

