
After some days' reading I was affected with drowsiness, followed by
vomiting. This lasted several hours; when I fell into a sleep, and awoke
healed. The good I have received, and that I have been able to do in
healing others, has all come from Science and Health. I received some
instructions from teachers; but they did me more harm than good: I asked
for bread, but they gave me a stone. I held to what I could understand of
Science and Health; and the truth does not forsake me, but enables me to
heal others.

Last February, I was called to treat a child that the M. D.'s said was
dying from lung fever; after the third treatment the child got up and ran
about, completely healed. Another child was brought to me, with rupture;
after the second treatment the truss was thrown away. An aged lady was
healed of heart disease and chills, in one treatment. These cases brought
me many more, that were also healed.

The husband of a lady in the State Lunatic Asylum asked me to treat her;
she had been for two years and a half in the asylum, and though taken home
in this time once or twice, she had had to be taken back. After two weeks
of absent treatment, the husband visited her, and the doctor reported
great improvement during the preceding two weeks. At the end of another
two weeks I went with the husband to the asylum, and the doctor told us
that she was well enough to go home. The husband asked the doctor how it
was that she had improved so rapidly, and he said that he could not
account for it. We said nothing about the Christian Science treatment, and
took the lady home. This was about a year ago, and she has remained
perfectly well.

Many cases as striking as this can be referred to in this town, as
evidence that Truth is the healer of sickness as well as of sin.--J. B. H.

                  -------------------------------------

No. 1. A lady friend, who was found to have a severe attack of dysentery,
was assured that such attacks could be cured without medicine, and advised
to take no more. She was more than astonished at the result; for in less
than an hour all pain and other symptoms of the trouble ceased, and she
felt perfectly well the next day.

No. 2. While she was visiting relatives in the country, an infant of
theirs was attacked severely with croup, and appeared to be on the verge
of suffocation, giving its parents much alarm. The infant was taken in the
arms of the lady, in thirty minutes was completely relieved, went to
sleep, and awoke in good health the next morning.

No. 3. The mother of this child was subsequently attacked with a
scrofulous swelling on the neck, just under the ear, which was very
painful and disfiguring; the side of the face, also, being badly swollen.
It was feared that this would develop into and undergo the usual
phenomenon of abscess, as other similar swellings had done previously. She
had great faith in the metaphysical treatment, because of the experience
which she had had with her baby, and wrote a letter describing her case.
This was immediately answered, and absent treatment was begun. In
twenty-four hours after receipt of the letter, to the astonishment of
herself and family, the tumor had entirely disappeared: there was not a
trace of it left; although the day before it was fully as large as a hen's
egg; red, and tender to the touch.

These instances are only a few of the many cures which have been performed
in this way, and they are mentioned simply to show what good work may be
done by any earnest, conscientious person who has gained by reading my
works the proper understanding of the Principle of Christian Science.

What a wonderful field for enlightenment and profit lies open to those who
seek after Truth. Alas, that the feet of so few enter it!

                  -------------------------------------

_Rev. M. B. G. Eddy_:--Will you kindly spare me a few moments for the
perusal of these lines from a stranger,-- one who feels under a debt of
gratitude to you,--for, through the divine Science brought to light by you,
I have been "made whole." I have been cured of a malignant cancer since I
began to study Christian Science, and have _demonstrated the truth_ of it
in a number of cases. I have only studied your good books, having been
_unable_ to take the lectures for want of means. I dare not think of
these, for there is no prospect that I shall be in a position to take the
course at all. I do not allow myself to complain, but cheerfully take up
my books and study, and feel thankful for this light.

M. E. W., Canon City, Col.

                  -------------------------------------

_Dear Madam_:--May I thank you for your book, "Science and Health with Key
to the Scriptures," and say how much I owe to it--almost my very life--at a
most critical time....

If it were not for the heat of your American summers (I had nine attacks
of dysentery in the last one), and the expense, I should dearly like to
learn from you personally; but I must forego this,--at any rate, for the
present. If you would write me what the cost would be for a course on
divine metaphysics, I would try to manage it later on.

Meanwhile, I should be grateful if you would refer me to any one in this
country who is interested similarly, for I get more kicks than halfpence
in discussing it.

Your obliged friend,

(REV.) I. G. W. BISHOP,
Bovington Vicarage, Hemel Hempstead,
Herts, England

                  -------------------------------------

Extract from a letter to Rev. M. B. G. Eddy

A gentleman here had hired all the most skilled doctors in the United
States--nothing helped him. He was a ghost to look upon. I told him just to
read my copies of your books. I talked to him, told him what he could do
for himself if he but tried. He laughed at me. I was willing he should
laugh, for it was very unusual for him to do this. He had your books two
months, and last Sunday he returned them. I wish you could see him: _he is
well_. He is happy, and told me he was going to write to you for the books
for himself this week.--E. E. B.

                  -------------------------------------

_Dear Madam_:--I have been a sickly person all my life, until a few months
ago, and was confined to my bed every little while. It was during one of
many attacks that your book, "Science and Health with Key to the
Scriptures," was handed me. I read it only a very short time, when I
arose, well, went out into the kitchen, prepared a large dinner, and ate
heartily of it.

I have been up and well ever since,--a marvel to my friends and family, and
sometimes they can hardly believe it is I; and feeling so grateful, I must
tell you of it. I wish everybody in the world would read your book, for
all would be benefited by it.

Gratefully yours,  ANNA M. SMITH

                  -------------------------------------

_Dear Madam_:--About seven years ago I was compelled to go to an oculist
and have an operation performed upon my eyes. He fitted me with glasses,
which I wore for a considerable time, and then removed; but the pain and
difficulty returned, and I was obliged to go again to the oculist, who
advised me never to take my glasses off again.

I continued wearing them for fully five years longer, until some time in
last January, when, upon reading your book, "Science and Health with Key
to the Scriptures," I again took them off. Since that time, though I have
been in the courts reporting, and reading fine notes frequently, I have
experienced no difficulty with my eyes.

Very respectfully,
William A. Smith, Wilmington, Del.

                  -------------------------------------

_Dear Mrs. Eddy_:--We have been studying "Science and Health with Key to
the Scriptures" for a year, and I cannot tell you how much it has done for
us; giving us health instead of sickness, and giving us such an
understanding of God as we never had before. Christian Science was our
only help two weeks ago, when our baby was born. My husband and myself
were alone. I dressed myself the next day; commenced doing my work the
third day, and am well and strong. It must be pleasing to you to know how
much good your work is doing.

KITTIE BECK, Elmwood, Cass Co., Neb.

                  -------------------------------------

I was a helpless sufferer in August, 1883, and had been so for many years.
The physicians said I had cancer of the uterus. I heard of your book,
"Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures," bought a copy, began
reading it, and a great light seemed to break through the darkness. I
cried aloud in joy, "This is what I have been hungering for, these many
years!" I studied it closely, and healed myself and several of my friends
before I had taken instruction of any teacher.

MRS. S. A. MCMAHON, Wyandotte, Kans.

                  -------------------------------------

I was healed thoroughly of the belief of chronic hepatitis and kidney
disease, by reading "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures." I
have never, to this day, had the slightest return of it.

J. P. FILBERT, Council Bluffs, Iowa

                  -------------------------------------

You, dear Mrs. Eddy, have saved my life, through Science and Health; and I
feel that the patients healed through me should give the first thanks to
God and to you.--MRS. D. S. HARRIMAN, Kansas City, Mo.

                  -------------------------------------

How grand your book, "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures," is!
It is a translation of Truth. No amount of money could buy the book of me,
if I could not get another. No matter what suffering comes, physical or
mental, I have only to take Science and Health, and almost invariably the
first sentence brings relief. It seems to steady the thought. I do not
think any student old enough to neglect reading it. When we think we are
advanced far enough to let that book alone, then are we in danger.

MRS. ELLEN P. CLARK, Dorchester, Mass.

                  -------------------------------------

Many thanks for the good received from your books. When I commenced
reading them, I was carrying about a very sick body. Your books have
healed me. I am now in perfect health. People look at me with surprise,
and say they do not understand it; but when they see the sick ones made
well, they are not always willing to believe it.

MRS. JOSEPH TILLSON, South Hanson, Mass.

                  -------------------------------------

_Rev. M. B. G. Eddy:_--I add one more testimony of a cure from reading your
book, "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures." Five years ago I
lay prostrate with piles and inflammation of the bowels. All the coating
came off, apparently. A stricture was formed, beyond medical reach. I then
lived in Chicago; one of the best physicians, who made a specialty of
treating piles, attended me. The pain was relieved, but my bowels were
inactive, and remained so until New Year's eve.

I determined to trust all to God, or die before I would take any more
medicine, as I never had an action unless I took a free dose of some
laxative. If I forgot to take the medicine one night, or allowed myself to
be without it, I had a terrible sick headache for two or three days, and
terrible backache. I never had backache at any other time, and the piles
would be so much inflamed, in two days' time, that I could hardly tell
where I suffered the worst.

Since I have learned to trust all to God, I have not had the least trouble
with the piles, nor one twinge of the backache. I have an easy action of
the bowels each morning. It was five days after I resolved to leave
medicine alone, before a natural movement took place; and ever since I
have been perfectly regular. It was a great effort for me to take that
step, for I knew I was running the risk of throwing myself back into all
misery, and perhaps into a worse state than before. By reading Science and
Health, I learned that God was able to save the body as well as the soul,
and I believed His promises were for me.

MATTIE E. MAYFIELD, Des Moines, Iowa

                  -------------------------------------

For the Cause of Truth, I submit the following testimonial for
publication; may it bring _one_ more, at least, into the fold of divine
Science! The truth, as it is stated in "Science and Health with Key to the
Scriptures," has done much towards making our home the abiding-place of
peace and harmony. I now write of the wonderful demonstration of Truth
over the birth of my baby boy, two weeks ago. Sunday, September 23, we
went for a long drive of three hours; at night I retired at the usual
hour; toward morning I was given a little warning; when I awoke at seven
o'clock, the birth took place. Not more than ten minutes after, I ate a
hearty breakfast, and then had a refreshing sleep; at ten o'clock walked
across the room while my bed was dressed; at twelve took a substantial
dinner; most of the afternoon sat up in bed, without any support but
Truth; at six in the evening dressed myself and walked to the dining-room,
and remained up for two hours. Next morning I arose at the usual hour, and
have kept it up ever since,--was not confined to my bed one whole day. The
second day was out walking in the yard, and the third day went for a drive
in the morning and received callers in the afternoon. If it had not been
for the presence of my young hopeful, it would have been hard to believe
that there had so recently been a belief of a birth in the house; but
then, I was sustained by Love, and had no belief of suffering to take my
strength away. Before baby was two weeks old, I cooked, swept, ran the
sewing machine, etc., assisting with the housework generally. How grateful
I am for the obstetrics of this grand Science! Mothers need no longer
listen to the whispering lies of the old serpent, for the law of mortal
mind is broken by Truth.

MRS. DORA HOSSICK, Carrolton, Mo.

                  -------------------------------------

My wife and I have been healed by reading your book, "Science and Health
with Key to the Scriptures." We both feel very grateful to you.

Five months ago my wife gave birth to a child, without pain or
inconvenience, has done all the housework since, and has been every minute
perfectly well. Neither she nor the child have been ill,--as was constantly
the case with former children,--so we have thought it right to name the
child Glover Eddy.

We have been reading Science and Health nearly two years, and have sold
several copies to others. We are reading the _Journal_ also this year.

Yours respectfully, JOHN B. HOUSEL, Lincoln, Neb.

                  -------------------------------------

_Dear Mother:_--The most blessed of women! Oh, how I long to sit within
range of your voice and hear the truth that comes to you from on high! for
none could speak such wondrous thoughts as have come from your pen, except
it be the Spirit that speaketh in you.

Two years ago last October, while laboring under a great strain of care
and anxiety in regard to financial affairs, I heard of Christian Science.
I borrowed "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures," and began to
read. I bless God that I was driven to it by such an extremity. After
reading some one hundred and fifty pages, I was convinced that it was the
truth for which I had searched during twenty years. While I was reading
the chapter on Imposition and Demonstration,(9) I was healed of
endometritis and prolapsus uteri of over twenty years' standing,
pronounced incurable by eminent physicians. Professor Ludlam, the dean of
Hahnemann Medical College, of Chicago, Ill., was one of my doctors.

Before I was healed, to walk seven or eight blocks would so fatigue me
that it would take me a week to recover. I now started out and walked, and
was on my feet all day and for several succeeding days, but felt no
weariness from my labors.

I felt, after being healed, I must have a Science and Health of my own. I
had no money to buy it, so earned it by getting subscribers for the
_Journal_. It has gone with me everywhere I have been. I have been well
ever since.

I had suffered from bodily ailments, but they were nothing compared to my
mental trials. Grief, hatred, jealousy, and revenge had well-nigh bereft
me of reason. I had lost a home of plenty, been reduced to almost abject
poverty, and had become a cheerless woman,--could not smile without feeling
I had sinned.

All my griefs and sorrows are now turned to joy, and my hatred is changed
to love. "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will
toward men." I read Science and Health, and all your other books, together
with the New Testament, every minute I can get.--E. B. C., Omaha, Neb.

                  -------------------------------------

I must add one more to your great pile of letters, to tell you what your
book, "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures," has done for me and
my family. More than a year ago, my husband was suffering from an injury
received about a year previous, and he went to Mrs. B. for treatment. His
shoulder had been fractured, his collarbone broken, and he had sustained
internal injuries. Several M. D.'s had attended him, but had given him
very little relief. Mrs. B. treated him a short time, and he received much
benefit. He bought Science and Health. From reading it, I was cured of a
belief of chronic liver complaint. I suffered so much from headaches and
constipation, and other beliefs, that I seldom ever saw a well day; but,
thanks to you and divine Principle, I now seldom ever have a belief of
feeling badly.

November 4th, last, I was confined. I was alone, because I knew no one
whose thought was in harmony with Science. I thought I could get along
without help, and I did. My little girl was sleeping in the same room with
me, and after the birth she called a woman who was asleep upstairs, to
take care of the baby. This woman was much frightened; but, on seeing how
composed I was, she got over her fright. I was sitting up in bed, holding
the child, and feeling as well as I ever did in my life. I never had seen
a Scientist nor been treated, but got all my ideas from Science and
Health. My baby was born on Sunday morning, and I got up Monday at noon,
and stayed up. I never got along so well with a baby as I did with this
one.

I am very thankful for the knowledge of Science I have gained through your
book. I want so much to be a Scientist; but we are very poor. My husband
is a brakeman on the railroad; and I have very little education. There is
comfort in the thought that, if I can't be a Scientist, my children may
be.

Yours with much love, C. A. W., Lexington, Mo.

                  -------------------------------------

In the February _Journal_ it appears there is some one who says that
"Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures" is hard to understand, and
who thinks she can explain it. Perhaps my experience with Science and
Health may help some one who might otherwise take up this thought, and so
be led away from the truth. After reading and studying it for some time,
and talking to the Scientists I met in my travels, the thought came to me,
"Why not try these truths on yourself?" I did so, and to my surprise and
great joy I found immediate relief. Dyspepsia (the trouble of most
commercial travellers), catarrh, and many lesser beliefs, left me, so that
in a short time I was a _well man_, and by no other means than trusting to
the Saviour's promises as explained in Science and Health. This took place
while I was travelling about the country.

On my return home, I gave my wife treatments. In many instances the
blessing came before the treatment was finished, and often we proved that
only a thought of the power of Truth was sufficient to give relief.

One Sunday morning, soon after my return, a friend called and asked if I
could give him anything to relieve his wife, who, he said, had been
suffering for some days with rheumatism in her shoulder, so severely that
she could neither dress alone nor comb her hair. I told him that the only
medicine we had in the house was Christian Science. He laughed at the
idea; but before he left, he asked if I would give his wife a treatment. I
told him I was very young in Science, but if she wished it, I would. He
went home, but returned immediately, saying she wished me to come. Then I
asked help from the fountain of Truth, and started for my first treatment
to be given away from home. When I left their room fifteen minutes later,
she was shaking her hand high above her head, and exclaiming, "I am all
right; I am well!" That was in November, 1887, and she has had no return
of the belief since.

A friend told me that his son, twelve years old, had catarrh so badly that
his breath was very offensive, his throat troubled him all the time, and
that he had been deaf since he had the measles. In less than three weeks
both beliefs vanished. This was a case of absent treatment. I could give
you other cases, but I think I have said enough to prove that Science and
Health _is not hard to understand_, for my work has all been done without
my ever attending class.

H. H. B., New York City

                  -------------------------------------

A lady, with no other instructor than "Science and Health with Key to the
Scriptures," has demonstrated beyond many who have taken numerous lessons.
Persuaded, through her reading, of the allness of God,--and the perfectness
of idea,--she would know nothing else. A daughter, so badly affected by
poison oak (ivy) that for weeks death was feared from blood-poisoning, had
recovered with a terrible dread of that plant. As the next season's picnic
time drew near, she was regretting that she dared not go again. The
mother, with her new-born faith in the Science of being, said, "Certainly
you can go, for nothing can harm you." Assured by these words, the
daughter went, and in her rambles fell into a mass of the dreaded plant;
but trusting to the word of Truth, she thought nothing of it till one who
knew of her previous trouble said, in her mother's presence, "See, her
face is showing red already." But the mother was prompt in denial and
assurance. Next morning, old symptoms were out in force, but they yielded
at once and finally to the positive and uncompromising hold on Truth.
Another daughter, that was thought too delicate to raise, from bronchial
and nervous troubles, always dosed with medicine and wrapped in flannels,
now runs free and well without either of these, winter and summer. The
mother was recently attacked by mesmerism from the church that believed
she was influencing her daughter to leave. She overcame by the same
unwavering trust in God, seeing Truth clearer than ever before. Her
demonstrations come through no form of treatment, but by letting the
Spirit bear witness,--by the positive recognition and realization of no
reality but ever-present good.

The other night her husband was attacked with an old belief, similar to
one that some time before had ended in a congestive chill which the doctor
thought very serious, and from which he had been a long time in
recovering. The wife simply recognized no reality in the belief, and,
seeing only perfect being, felt no fear. She did nothing,--no "treating" in
the usual sense. There is nothing to do but to understand that all is
harmony, always. He felt the presence that destroys the sense of evil, and
next morning--there was nothing left to recover from.

A lady, while doing some starching, thoughtlessly put her hand into the
scalding starch to wring out a collar. Recalled to mortal sense by the
stinging pain, she immediately realized the all-power of God. At once the
pain began to subside; and as she brushed off the scalding starch, she
could see the blister-swelling go down till there was but a little redness
to show for the accident; absorbed in her thankfulness, she mechanically
wrung out the collar with the same hand, and with no sense of pain, thus
verifying the demonstration. This woman (not reading English) only knows
Science as she has received it from her practitioner during the treatments
received within the last month. So much has come to her from Spirit
through her loyalty to Christ, in so far as she could understand.

A case of ulcerated tooth and neuralgic belief would only partially yield
after repeated treatments, till it was discovered that the patient was
antagonizing Truth by holding the thought that her old remedy, laudanum,
would give relief; treated from this standpoint, relief was immediate and
final.

One morning after Rev. ---- had been preaching to thousands for several
days, he told them that he had never felt such a sense of depression nor
had so little showing of results. Some Scientists hearing this, at once
saw his trouble. He had been fearlessly exposing and denouncing evil; and
it had turned on him, till the mesmerism was likely to overcome him
entirely, for he did not understand the seeming power. The effect of the
silent word to uplift and sustain, was very manifest that evening in his
preaching, and was a beautiful demonstration of Science. He probably only
felt Spirit-inspiration as he had not before, without a thought as to what
had broken the evil spell; but we never know the what, or when, or where,
of the harvest we can sow--"God giveth the increase."--E. H. B., Sacramento

                  -------------------------------------

I had two German patients who were anxious to have you publish "Science
and Health with Key to the Scriptures" in their language. I advised them
to buy it and try to read it. They commenced reading, and now can read all
of Science and Health, but do not read well any other book or paper, and
they do not need to. With great love.--M. H. P.

                  -------------------------------------

I sold three copies of "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures" to
friends, not long ago. One of them, fifty years of age, said to me, "I
never had one day's sickness in my life; but after reading Science and
Health I found that I was bruised and mangled, from the crown of my head
to the soles of my feet. I have been reaching after something that, before
reading Science and Health, seemed to me unattainable;" and with tears in
her eyes, she rejoiced in the God of her salvation. Did not Jesus say, "If
these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry out"?

P. L., Lexington, Ky.

                  -------------------------------------

For eight years I suffered terribly with my eyes; I could not read fifteen
minutes without the most agonizing sick headache. Oculists called it a
case of double vision, and said that the only chance for a cure lay in
cutting the muscles of the eyes. This was done, but the pain was worse
than before. One of the most famous oculists of New York said I would
simply have to endure it for life, as it was a case of severe astigmatism.

I suffered so that my health gave way. A friend spoke to me of Christian
Science, but I scoffed at the idea. Later on, in desperation, I asked her
to lend me "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures," thinking I
might be able to read five minutes a day in it. I opened the book at the
chapter on Physiology, and began. Time passed unnoticed: every page seemed
illuminated. I said, "This is everything or nothing; if everything, then
you need no glasses." I took off the heavy ground glasses, and went on.
What a terrible headache I had the next morning! but I fought it with the
truth laid down in the book. I said again, "This is everything or
nothing," and the truth triumphed. The headache ceased, but I felt
miserably. I recalled what was said about chemicalization, and persevered.

In four days my eyes were well; I read as many hours a day as I pleased;
my strength returned. I conquered one belief after another, until now,
strong and well, I meet every belief with confidence. "I will fear _no_
evil: for _Thou_ art with me." For two years I have realized the peace and
confidence which the knowledge that God is all-powerful and always present
alone can give. Feeling a great desire to spread Christian Science, that
it may do the good to others that it has to me, not only physically but
spiritually, I ask if you have any missionaries in the work. Being a
member of the Episcopal Church, I have always sent what I could to help
foreign missions through that church. Will it do the most good to continue
so doing, as our foreign missionaries are devoted men, or have you
Christian Science missionaries who devote their lives to the work?

An answer addressed to me, or published in the _Journal_, would help one
who is seeking to do right.

Yours sincerely, K. L. T.

                  -------------------------------------

I do wish to add my testimony of being healed by reading "Science and
Health with Key to the Scriptures." I had been an invalid for over twenty
years, and had given up all hope of ever being well again. I had read the
book about six weeks, when it seemed I was made all over new, and I could
"run, and not be weary; and ... walk, and not faint." I did not understand
it, but it was the savior from death unto life with me; I have remained
well ever since I was healed,--more than five years ago. I commenced to
treat others as soon as I was born anew into the kingdom of Truth. My
patients were healed right along, before I had taken lessons in a class,
and they have remained well to this day.

Christian Science has made me as young as a girl of sixteen. If this
should meet the eye of any sufferers who may be led to go and do as I did,
they will be healed.--N. A. E.

                  -------------------------------------

Language is inadequate when bearing grateful testimony to the book
"Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures." By its simple reading, I
was healed of ills which baffled the skill of specialists and all
curatives that love and money could command. After eighteen years of
invalidism, and eight years of scepticism, without hope, with no
God,--except a First Cause,--I was given up to die.

A loving friend told me of this book, which was soon brought; and
thirty-five pages of the first chapter were read to me that evening. The
next morning I got up, walked, and read the book for myself.

I mention the chapter, for the reason that nearly two years have passed
since those wonderful words of Life were first read to me, and _still_
their sacred sweetness is ever the same. Now I exclaim, _God is_ All!

MRS. MARY A. R.

                  -------------------------------------

It is impossible for me to keep still any longer. In 1885, when I had not
known a well day in five years, "Science and Health with Key to the
Scriptures" was placed in my hands by a dear lady who insisted upon my
reading it, saying she believed it would heal me. Like many, I was afraid
of it,--until I learned what it really was. The friend's words were
verified. I _was_ healed by the reading of the book, and for one year
continued to read nothing whatever but the Bible and Science and Health.
They were my constant study. Through the understanding gained, that _God_
is _All_, I came to demonstrate with great success, and with but one
thought,--for I knew nothing about giving a "treatment;" I wish I knew as
little now, for I believe that healing in Christian Science is to be done
in a moment. I became anxious to learn more, to study with the teacher,
but funds would not allow,--and I thought to substitute a course in
Chicago, perhaps. Every time I would speak of it, however, my dear mother
would say, "You have Science and Health and the Bible, and God for your
teacher--what more do you need? If I could not go to the teacher, I would
not go to any one."

If I had only heeded the blessed counsel of Truth!

I went to Chicago, however, so full of confidence in Christian Science
that I supposed every one who had studied with Mrs. Eddy must be right.
Unfortunately, I took my course with a spiritualist who had been through
two of her classes; discovered my mistake, and went to a mind-cure,--only
to find the mistake repeated. Being an earnest seeker for Truth, I tried
again to go to the Massachusetts Metaphysical College; but it was
uncertain when there would be a class, so I took a course with one of Mrs.
Eddy's students in Boston. The darkness now rolled away. Science and
Health once more revealed the light to me as of old.

All this time, the mind-curers had me in view, and were sending me
reading-matter; but, _praise the Lord!_ Truth is victorious.

My dear brothers and sisters, let us be safely guided by the counsels of
our Mother, in Science and Health! I, for one, am astounded that I was so
led astray; but I did it all through ignorance,--and the _sincere_ desire
to know the truth and to _do_ it, saved me.

Your sister in truth, R. D.

                  -------------------------------------

I have been reading Science and Health for one year and a half, and have
had some wonderful demonstrations. People here are antagonistic to the
Science, and tell me that I am a "fit subject for the asylum." Physicians
threaten me with arrest, also, but I walk straight on, knowing _well in
whom I trust_.

E. I. R., Wauseon, Ohio
