it, consider what would be the necessary and inevitable effects of
adding to that system new stars equal in number and dimensions to those
visible from the earth, or even one other solar system, equal to that to
which the earth belongs. Undoubtedly, if our mathematics, our inductive
philosophy, and our astronomy are to be relied on, the addition to the
existing orbs of one globe like the earth would more or less disturb and
derange the whole, or require an infinite miracle to prevent
disturbance.

Closely connected with the supposition of worlds created longer ago than
the earth, is that of successive creations of plants and animals to
supply the defect of new or remote continents and islands. Many who,
conformably to the Scriptures, hold to the identity of the human race as
descended from one primitive pair, though distributed over all the
continents and islands, and exhibiting in many respects extreme
diversity, profess nevertheless to believe that there have been many
successive creations of brute animals since, if not prior to the deluge.
Though pairs of the inferior races as well as of the human race were
preserved in the ark, and for the same reason--"to keep seed alive _upon
the face of all_ the earth," and though no greater obstacles existed, so
far as we know, to the dispersion of the inferior animals to all
quarters of the globe than to that of man, they indulge the notion,
without any authority from Scripture, or any demonstrable necessity, or
any better reason than the exigency of a geological theory, that the
Creator of the universe, in the course of his providence over this
apostate and blighted world, has, from time to time, exercised his power
in creating races of brutes to be subject to the conditions of those who
shared in the consequences of the apostasy of man.

Such a notion seems in every view incongruous and preposterous, without
reason or necessity, inconsistent with the law of creation in respect to
man, and unworthy of the perfections and of the moral purposes and
administration of the Creator. It seems to imply the further notion,
that the same providence which dispersed and preserved the human race in
all quarters and climates of the world, was inadequate to the same
results in the case of the lower animals, and that it was of such moment
to keep every locality stocked with savage and carnivorous beasts as to
call, from time to time, for the interposition of creative power.

The object of the works of creation, as the scene of the moral and
providential administration of the Creator, would, in harmony with the
announcements of Scripture, seem to imply that they were brought into
existence at one epoch. That administration had a beginning: at the
beginning he created the scene and subjects of it. It extends to all
worlds. It is one comprehensive, universal, perfect system, involving
the rights and prerogatives of the Supreme Ruler, which are founded on
the fact of his being the Creator of all; and the obligations and duties
of intelligent creatures, which arise from the fact of their owing their
existence to him.

Now, since there could be no conceivable obstruction to his bringing all
the worlds and creatures throughout the realms of space into being at
one epoch; and since the administration of which they were to be the
scene was to comprehend them all, it would seem better to comport with
the admitted object of them and with his infinite perfections, to
believe that he created them all at once, than to suppose that he laid
the foundation of his empire in part at one and in part at a later
epoch. On the latter supposition, it would be easy, at least, to suggest
very plausible objections and difficulties, for which, on the former,
there is no room.

The passage in Job xxviii., "Whereupon are the foundations of the earth
fastened? or who laid the corner-stone thereof, when the morning stars
sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" is by some
supposed to imply, that when the earth was created, there were
preexisting worlds and intelligent creatures to witness and celebrate
the event. But if such were the meaning of this poetical description,
those morning stars must have been such as were visible from the earth,
or else the earth could not be supposed to be visible from them. The
Scriptures, however, refer to the visible stars as being created at the
same time with the earth. In the narrative of the fourth day it is said,
"And God made two great lights; ... he made the stars also; and set them
in the firmament of heaven, to give light upon the earth, and to rule
over the day and over the night," &c. Gen. i. It is not conceivable that
the reference in Job should have been meant to exclude the visible
stars; and if it included them, then it included celestial worlds which
were created simultaneously with the earth. The phrase, "morning stars,"
doubtless signifies stars visible in the morning. The terms employed in
Job may, perhaps, be better rendered, "The stars burst forth together as
light, or as the morning."

From the narrative of the temptation in Eden, some imagine that Satan
had existed and fallen before the creation of Adam. But there is no
reference to that evil being till after Adam and Eve were placed in the
garden. How long they were there before the temptation, we know not. It
was long enough, however, for them to receive instruction as to the
prohibited tree, and for Adam "to give names to all cattle, and to the
fowl of the air, and to every beast of the field;" long enough for them
to become familiar with the place, and with the voice and other tokens
of the Creator's presence. Now, on the supposition that all the angelic
hosts were created simultaneously with the heavens and the earth, what
was there to hinder the apostasy of Satan between the date of that
creation and his assault upon Adam, which would not equally have
hindered the apostasy of man so soon after his creation? Is it not, from
the nature of the case, more probable that Satan revolted very soon
after his creation, than at a remote period? As in the case of Adam,
who, had he continued holy for scores or thousands of years, would, we
may well presume, have been less likely to fall than at the outset of
his career, before he had formed habits of obedience, or had the benefit
of experience.

It is remarkable with what facility the most preposterous assumptions
have been adopted and perpetuated respecting the Creator, the works of
creation, providence, moral government, &c., to aid in support of
preconceived religious, philosophical, physical, and social theories.
The principal religious heresies, whether propounded under the garb of
theology or that of philosophy and science, falsely so called, have
rested upon false assumptions respecting the character and condition of
man as a fallen creature, and the one only Deliverer and way of
deliverance, and respecting the character, prerogatives, and rights of
the Creator and Ruler of the world, and the nature, epoch, and object of
the work of creation. Witness the Gnostic, Arian, Pelagian, Socinian,
and other ancient religious heresies, on the one hand; and on the other,
the theory of our modern geologists, in its relation to the inspiration,
authority, and meaning of the Scriptures, the nature, date and purpose
of the creation of the world, and the causes and reasons of the physical
changes it has undergone.

The fact that all the great heresies and false systems by which the
post-diluvian world has been deceived and held in the bondage of
corruption, have risen from false assumptions and erroneous theories
concerning the Creator and the work of creation; and from those
assumptions and theories, as starting-points, have diverged from the truth
as revealed in Scripture; this fact, and the consideration that the rights
and prerogatives of Jehovah, in relation to his creatures and their
obligations and duties towards him, are founded in the fact of his being
the Creator, demonstrate that the account which he has given of his works
is of equal authority with the other contents of his Word. It lies at the
foundation of his moral law and government, and of his providential
administration over all worlds, and is essential to his claim of supreme
allegiance and homage from all intelligent creatures. It lies at the
foundation of all scriptural faith in God and in the doctrines of his
Word, and is the basis of the true, in contradistinction to all false
religion.




CHAPTER XXV.

    The great Antagonism--in what manner will it terminate?


The great peculiarity in the history of the human race took its rise in
the apostasy of man, and is exhibited in the antagonism between the
rightful Sovereign of the world and the instigator of that apostasy, and
in the agency, relations and destiny of their respective followers. In
the progress of the conflict between the righteous and the wicked,
holiness and sin, happiness and misery, light and darkness, truth and
falsehood, the desperate malevolence of the Evil One, and the guilt and
ruin of his followers, are made manifest to all observers; and on the
other hand, the infinite riches of the wisdom, goodness, righteousness
and mercy of the great Deliverer towards his followers, in their renewed
allegiance and recovery to holiness and happiness, are equally made
public. In the announcements of his Word, and in the administration of
his moral and providential government over them, the wrath of God is
revealed against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of man. The angels
who kept not their first estate were reserved to an inevitable doom. The
early descendants of the first human pair wholly corrupted their way and
filled the earth with violence, and "the world that then was, being
overflowed with water, perished." The immediate successors of those who
were preserved in the ark, when, from the works of creation, the
teachings of Noah, and the institutions of revealed religion, they knew
God, glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in
their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing
themselves to be wise, they became fools, and changed the glory of the
incorruptible God--misrepresented his invisible attributes, eternal
power and Godhead, and the glory of his perfections, visibly displayed
in his works of creation and providence--by an image made like to
corruptible men, and to birds, and four-footed beasts and creeping
things; and changed the truth concerning God into a lie, and worshipped
and served the creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed for
ever. Therefore, even as they did not like to retain the true God in
their knowledge, he gave them over, in his righteous judgment, to a
reprobate mind, to the indulgence of their evil propensities under the
instigation of their chosen leader, "the Devil, who deceiveth the whole
world;" assuming to be, and usurping the place of, God; leading his
deluded followers "captive at his will," and foreshowing, by their
condition and conduct on earth, their ultimate doom, as the final
destiny of the angels who kept not their first estate is manifested by
their conduct while under sentence of condemnation prior to the final
judgment.

Throughout the history of this antagonism as recorded in the Old
Testament, the great question was, Who is the true God, the Creator,
Ruler, Benefactor, to whom all creatures owe allegiance--Jehovah or
_the_ Baal? This question was specially and publicly tried on various
occasions, as in the plagues of Egypt, in the controversy conducted by
Elijah, in that relating to the image erected by Nebuchadnezzar, and
many others of less notoriety. In several scores of instances it is the
declared purpose of particular dispensations and events that those to
whom they referred might be made to know that He, the true God, in
opposition to _the_ Baal, was Jehovah. And such, at the final
termination of the conflict, will be the resistless and universal
conviction: "every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father." Having, in his official
character and complex Person, maintained the conflict throughout all the
periods and in all the forms of its exhibition, vanquished the great
Adversary, redressed the consequences of the fall, and destroyed even
death itself, his triumph is complete and final; vindicating all his
offices and agency, establishing the facts and doctrines, prerogatives
and rights upon which his government is founded, securing for ever the
loyalty and bliss of the unfallen and ransomed portions of his empire,
and filling the universe with the glory of his person and his name, and
with the boundless riches of his wisdom, grace and love. Then will be
displayed the vastness and grandeur of the scheme purposed in Christ
Jesus before the foundation of the world, and involving this conflict
between the Divine Mediator and the Arch-rebel and his party, that
through the redemption, resurrection, and final exaltation and glory of
the Church, the Divine perfections might be made known to the unfallen,
the principalities and powers in heavenly places.

The chief question which remains concerning this antagonism, relates to
the manner of its termination--the means and agencies by which it is to
be ended. That it is to end, there is no doubt. That it is to terminate
in such a manner as to fill the universe with new and previously
inconceivable demonstrations of the majesty, power, and glory of the
Messiah, and his people with unprecedented exultation, joy, and praise,
the Scriptures abundantly testify. But from a period shortly subsequent
to that of his ascension, there has been a difference of opinion in the
Church--more or less conspicuous at all times, but never, perhaps, more
marked than at present--concerning this great question. That difference
of opinion, on the part of the great majority even in the Protestant
churches, is believed to be founded in the Rabbinical and figurative
interpretations of the Old Testament, formerly referred to; and to
include among its principal elements a very defective estimate of those
sacred oracles, and an inadequate and erroneous view of their teachings
concerning the Person, titles, prerogatives, manifestations, works and
purposes of Christ.

On a point of this nature and importance, one might safely infer from
the analogy of the past, whether arguing from the history of the Jewish
or that of the _nominally_ Christian Church, that the party composing
the great majority were not in the right. It is presumed to be quite
safe to say, that at every period of any considerable extent of the
Jewish Church, after its establishment in Canaan, and more especially
after the reign of Solomon, the majority, notwithstanding the writings
of Moses and the instructions of the prophets, were under great delusion
and error respecting the Messiah and his kingdom; and at the Advent,
those who were in the right were few in number compared with the busy
scribes, the ostentatious Pharisees, and those doctors of the law who,
sitting in Moses' seat, taught the traditions and commandments of men.
And of what considerable division of the nominally Christian Church,
from the second century to the Reformation, will any one affirm that a
great majority were not under deep delusion and error in respect to
important points of doctrine and practice? Or of the Romish Church
before or since the Reformation, will any one, not a Papist, say that it
has not held flagrant and astounding errors concerning the offices and
prerogatives of Christ, as Prophet, Priest, and King, the one only
Mediator, Lawgiver, and Head of his people?

Can it be presumptuous, then, to suppose that the great majority in the
Protestant churches are in error in holding that this antagonism is to
terminate without any further visible personal manifestations of
Jehovah, the Messenger incarnate; that the usurping Adversary, whose
domination over the race prior to the deluge was checked by that
catastrophe only till fitting subjects of his delusions reaeppeared, and
whose sway over the Pagan, Mohammedan and Roman world has, with
occasional change of forms and names, continued substantially intact, is
to be vanquished and driven from the scene solely by moral and spiritual
influence; that the system of idolatry which has, from the call of
Abraham to the present hour, subjected most of the race to all the evils
and miseries of sin which are possible to human beings in the present
life; which has been the organized medium and embodiment of rebellion
against their rightful Sovereign, of denial of his claims, and of
studied provocation and affront; and which has withstood so many public
and visible shocks and terrors of his wrath and power, is at length to
yield and quietly disappear without any further visible demonstrations
of his supremacy, or public vindications of his righteousness?

Is there any thing more unlikely in the supposition that a misconstruction
of the prophecies relating to the period and objects of the second advent
should prevail and be pertinaciously adhered to by many, than in the
historical fact that the Jews and Jewish doctors misconstrued those
prophecies relating to the period and objects of the first advent, which,
to the faithful in the Gentile Church, have ever appeared unmistakably
plain and definitive?

If such misconstruction and error do not prevail with the generality of
Protestants, it is the first time in the history of the world that the
multitude, in opposition to the few on such a question, have held the
true meaning of the Scriptures. If they do prevail, they will assuredly
be renounced at least by the true worshippers. Their teachers and guides
will cease to be of those who regard the Old Testament as a shadowy
myth, all figurative with reference to the future, all obsolete in
relation to the past--creation resolved into primordial elements and
physical laws, or superseded by the chronology of sediment and fossil
bones--and miracles explained away as inconsistent with rationalism and
with the course of nature. On the other hand, the descendants of Israel
will recognize the Messiah in Jesus of Nazareth; the veil which, on
their reading of Moses, is on their hearts, will be taken away, and the
tabernacle of David, which is fallen down, will be reerected; and Jesus
the Messiah, Adonai, Jehovah the Messenger, will come and reign as
Priest and King upon his throne for ever and ever.

In their defection to idolatry, the Messiah, the Messenger Jehovah, became
an offense to Israel. They ceased to seek salvation, righteousness,
justification by faith in him, and trusted to the works of the law. They
stumbled at him as a stumbling-stone and rock of offense. But have they so
stumbled and fallen as to be utterly cut off? Far be it! Rather, through
their fall salvation came to the Gentiles. And if their Fall was followed
and counteracted by such benefits, what shall their recovery be but life
from the dead? If on their stock, decayed and rejected through unbelief,
the Gentiles as a wild olive were engrafted, God is able to engraft them
again into their own olive tree. If blindness of heart hath befallen
Israel, it is only till the fulness of the Gentiles be come in; and then
all Israel will be saved. "As it is written, There shall come out of Zion
the Deliverer, and shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob: For this is my
covenant unto them when I shall take away their sins. As concerning the
gospel, they are enemies for the Gentiles' sake; but as touching the
election, they are beloved for the fathers' sakes. For the gifts and
calling of God are without repentance. For as in times past [before the
Messiah came] the Gentiles believed not, but on his coming obtained mercy
because of the unbelief of Israel; so Israel now continues disobedient to
the mercy shown to the Gentiles, that through their mercy Israel also may
obtain mercy; that God may have mercy upon all. O the depth of the riches
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his
judgments, and his ways past finding out! For who hath known the mind of
the Lord? or who hath been his counsellor? or who hath first given to him,
and it shall be recompensed unto him again? For of him, and through him,
