30. Lastly, the visible sun should put us in mind of Jesus Christ, the
spiritual and eternal "Sun of righteousness." Mal. 4:2. For as that shines
equally upon all men; so Christ freely bestows himself, and the light of
his grace, upon all that will receive him. Thus he saith, "I am the light
of the world; he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall
have the light of life." John 8:12.



Chapter V.


     Of The Waters, And Their Productions, The Work Of The Fifth Day.


    _See_ GEN. 1:20-22; PS. 104:25.


That is unquestionably the best philosophy which gives the best account of
the works of God. And this knowledge every true lover of God ought to
seek, that he may thereby know how many glorious creatures God has created
for our use and benefit. Let the pretenders to philosophy look to it, that
they spend not their time in inquiries, which, instead of teaching them
true knowledge, lead them into ignorance and forgetfulness of God and his
creatures.

2. The first thing to be observed and admired, is the mutual relation
subsisting between the different parts of created nature. Thus the heavens
generate rains, dews, winds, and cooling breezes in the air; and then send
them down to us. So the earth produces its fruits in the air; and they
bud, blossom, and ripen, and are nourished by the air, without which they
would quickly languish and die.

3. Among the productions of the watery element, are the rivers. In one
place springs up the Rhine, in another the Danube; here is the Elbe, there
the Nile. As from one bough of a great and fruitful tree, spring many
little branches, and much fruit; so one great branch of the world of
waters, as the Rhine or the Danube, is connected with rivulets, lakes, and
fountains, which all flow into it.

4. As for the living creatures that arise from the sea, they are without
number, God having blessed it with so great fruitfulness, both for its
vast extent, and the use and benefit of mankind, that out of this vast
repository there arise, at certain seasons, prodigious quantities of fish,
varying in their kinds every month. For such is the nature of sea-fish,
that they are not to be caught except at certain seasons.

5. And here it is observable, that the sea and all its productions, have
their proper order, time, and motion, appointed to them by God. So in the
heavens, the stars have their stated times, regular order, motion, rising,
and setting. The earth at certain seasons produces different fruits and
vegetables; and, in that sense, is in perpetual motion, and never rests
until it has brought forth all its fruits. So likewise the sea has its
laws of motion, flux and reflux, and produces all its fruits at such
appointed seasons as may best serve the use and benefit of man.

6. Let us now take a survey of the wonderful power and wisdom of God in
the sea, and inquire what spiritual inferences may be drawn from it. "Who
hath shut up the sea with doors," saith God to Job, "when it brake forth,
as if it had issued out of the womb? When I made the cloud the garment
thereof, and thick darkness a swaddling band for it, and brake up for it
my decreed place, and set bars and doors, and said, Hitherto shalt thou
come, and no further; and here shall thy proud waves be stayed? Hast thou
entered into the springs of the sea? or hast thou walked in the search of
the depth?" Job 38:8-11, 16. In these words, God points out the great and
dreadful ocean as an obscure image and resemblance of his unsearchable and
incomprehensible power. For it is a very surprising miracle, that God
should by his word alone, as with bars and doors, inclose the sea so
strongly, that it should not be able to overflow its bounds. No less
wonderful is its ebbing and flowing; so that the sea, being, as it were,
conscious and mindful of the divine command, so soon as it touches the
earth, seems to fly back and retire in a fright, as at the presence of God
himself, like Jordan and the Red Sea. Josh. 3:16; Ps. 114:3. "He gathereth
the waters of the sea together, as a heap; he layeth up the deep in
storehouses." Ps. 33:7.

7. God tells Job, that he has "made the clouds to be the garment thereof,
and thick darkness a swaddling band for it" (Job 38:9); which plainly
appears, when its waves roll and toss themselves up to the clouds, that,
as it were, receive them into their embraces, and cover them with darkness
and horror, so that they seem to be blended with each other. Then appear
the mighty wonders of God, which a man cannot behold without fear and
astonishment, as it is described in Psalm 107:25, etc.

8. To this work of the fifth day, belongs also that passage of the
Psalmist: "So is this great and wide sea, wherein are things creeping
innumerable, both small and great beasts. There go the ships; there is
that leviathan whom thou hast made to play therein." Ps. 104:25, 26.

9. As for the greatness of the sea, who can but admire the power of God,
which, notwithstanding that so much water flows into the sea every day,
and has, from the beginning, yet suffers not its waters to exceed their
appointed quantity? And though its waves sometimes rage and swell, and
lift themselves like mountains; yet are they quickly put at rest, and
settled within their proper bounds. These are clear demonstrations of the
mighty power of God.

10. Here too we may not improperly speak of the islands. Who can behold,
without wonder, several large and populous countries, and entire kingdoms,
lying in the midst of the sea, as if they had been planted there? Who can
tell on what foundations they are built, and what it is that keeps them
immovable in the midst of violent storms and tempests? Some of them,
encompassed with vast rocks growing out of the sea, seem to be built and
founded on them. Upon the whole, their fruitfulness, tillage, and the
occasion and manner of their being peopled, are what we may rather admire
than understand. So that the sea is as populous as the earth. For as the
earth is much less than the sea, it is probable that God would not suffer
the greatest part of the globe to be uninhabited, and therefore he planted
it with islands: so that none of the miracles and blessings which he works
in the sea, might escape the observation of mankind. Therefore, to these
islanders also did he send the Gospel of truth, by his holy Apostles,
"shaking both the sea and the dry land, after the Desire of all nations
was come." Hag. 2:6, 7.

11. No less wonderful is the vast multitude of creatures that inhabit the
sea; for some affirm that there is as great abundance and variety of them
in the sea, as on the land. Who can behold without astonishment,
prodigious shoals of fish rising from the depths of the sea, like a flock
of sheep, and offering themselves to the use and necessities of mankind?
So that the sea is a great storehouse of God, out of which he feeds the
greatest part of mankind, and out of which, too, he produces many other
excellent works, such as pearls, amber, and coral.

12. I might here mention the many bold voyages that have been performed
within the memory of us and our fathers, to the most distant parts of the
East and West; and all this chiefly by the assistance of the magnet, which
seems to have nothing in it either of beauty or use, and yet the greatest
things are performed by it. By this the pilot steers his ship, and keeps
his way in the pathless waters; and by constantly pointing to the pole, it
guides the mariner to his intended port. Of these voyages, and of the
islands, countries, people, and other useful discoveries, there are many
volumes extant, to which I refer the reader.

13. The huge whales, mentioned by David (Ps. 104:26), give us a great idea
of the mighty power of God. Of this God himself takes notice when he talks
with Job: "His bones are as strong pieces of brass; his bones are like
bars of iron. He is the chief of the ways of God. He drinketh up a river
and hasteth not: he trusteth that he can draw up Jordan into his mouth. By
his neesings a light doth shine, and his eyes are like the eyelids of the
morning. Out of his mouth go burning lamps, and sparks of fire leap out.
Out of his nostrils goeth smoke, and a flame goeth out of his mouth. When
he raiseth up himself, the mighty are afraid; by reason of breakings they
purify themselves. He maketh the deep to boil like a pot: he maketh the
sea like a pot of ointment." Job 40:18, 19, 23; 41:18-21, 25, 31.

14. Thus much for the greatness of the sea; which is a very striking
illustration of the power of God. "Who hath measured the waters in the
hollow of his hand?" saith Isaiah. Isa. 40:12. To which the Psalmist
answers, "Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven and in the
earth, in the seas and all deep places." Ps. 135:6. All that remains is,
to praise, honor, and glorify the wisdom of God, which is so wonderfully
manifested in the deep; the riches of his goodness in that vast variety of
fishes, and other productions of the sea, for the use and benefit of man;
and in a word, to adore and magnify him in all his works.

15. Let us consider how this doctrine of the sea may bring to our
remembrance that twofold sea mentioned in Scripture: the sea of affliction
and misery, and the sea of grace and comfort; the depths of misery, and
the abyss of divine mercy. For what is this life and world of ours but a
troublesome and tempestuous sea? As the sea is never at rest, but is
perpetually ruffled with winds and waves, so is the life of man. Sometimes
we fancy ourselves safe and out of danger, when suddenly a stormy wind
arises, and the floods swell, to the great danger both of body and soul.
As the sea has its ebb and flow, so has the life of man. Hence we read
that the Lord dries the sea, the waters of the great deep. Isa. 51:10;
Jer. 31:35; Ps. 107:25. Moreover, as the freshest waters when they come
into the sea grow salt, so all the pleasures, glories, honors, and riches
of this mortal life, however sweet and pleasant at first, soon grow bitter
and unsavory. And all that cleave to them, thereby forfeit the sweet
consolations of heaven, and are drowned and overwhelmed in bitter fears
and perplexing sorrows.

16. As the sea has many rocks and quicksands, on which vessels split and
are lost, so in human life, many there are who split upon the rocks of
covetousness, and run foul of the quicksands of worldly pleasures, and are
lost to all eternity. As the sea, after some days, throws up the carcasses
that have been cast into it, so the world vomits us out, after it has
entertained us a little while; so that it is our highest wisdom to look
out betimes for a haven of salvation in the land of the living. As the
mariner sails at random without his compass, and has no certain guide but
his needle, which is continually pointing to the pole, so Jesus Christ is
our loadstone, continually drawing our hearts towards him and heaven, that
we may not float up and down at random, or be lost in the sea of this
world. As the depth of the sea is unsearchable, according to Job, "Hast
thou entered into the springs of the sea? or hast thou walked in the
search of the depth?" (Job 38:16); so is our life an unsearchable abyss of
misery and sorrow. Whence the Psalmist says, "Out of the depths have I
cried unto thee, O Lord." Ps. 130:1. And, "Deep calleth unto deep at the
noise of thy waterspouts; all thy waves and thy billows are gone over me."
Ps. 42:7. So that our life is nothing but a vast sea of calamity and
sorrow.

17. To this abyss of misery and sin we must oppose the abyss of grace and
consolation. And the first comfort is the boundless mercy of God, which is
higher than the heavens, and deeper than the sea. Of this the prophet
Micah speaks, "He will have compassion on us, and cast all our sins into
the depths of the sea." Micah 7:19. As the Egyptians were drowned in the
Red Sea (Exod. 14:28), so must all our sins be drowned and washed away in
the blood of Christ. And though the abyss of our misery be ever so great,
yet the merits of Jesus Christ are greater.

18. A second comfort is, the consideration of the many wonders that God
has wrought in the water; and that the blessed Jesus assisted his
disciples when they were in danger by sea. Matt. 8:26. He stretched out
his hand to Peter when he was afraid of sinking. Matt. 14:31. So, at this
day, he is never nearer to us, than when we are sinking in the floods of
affliction; and we never so fully experience his presence and assistance,
as when we are under the cross. "When thou passest through the waters, I
will be with thee; and through the rivers, they shall not overflow thee."
Isa. 43:2.

19. A third consolation is contained in these words of the prophet
Zechariah: "It shall be in that day, that living waters shall go out from
Jerusalem; half of them toward the former sea, and half of them toward the
hinder sea." Zech. 14:8. So also the prophet Ezekiel (Ezekiel 47:8) saw a
stream of water flowing out of the temple near the altar into the sea,
healing and quickening everything that was touched by it. This signifies
the fountain of grace and consolation opened by the Holy Spirit, by the
preaching of the Gospel, whereby the bitter waters of affliction are to be
refreshed and sweetened; so that the cross shall be no longer a Dead Sea,
but a water of life, and a well of salvation. According as it is said, "In
the multitude of my thoughts within me, thy comforts delight my soul." Ps.
94:19.

20. A fourth consolation against the stormy sea of this world, is
contained in Psalm 65:7. "God stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise of
their waves, and the tumult of the people." As if he had said, When all
things threaten ruin and destruction, when wars rage, and desolation seems
to be at hand; then can God easily still the waves. So did the blessed
Jesus, Matt. 8:26. "The lord on high is mightier than the noise of many
waters." Ps. 93:4.



Chapter VI.


           Of The Living Creatures, The Work Of The Sixth Day.


    _And out of the ground the Lord formed every beast of the field,
    and every fowl of the air; and brought them unto Adam, to see what
    he would call them: and whatsoever Adam called every living
    creature, that was the name thereof. And Adam gave names to all
    cattle, and to the fowl of the air, and to every beast of the
    field._--GEN. 1:24; 2:19, 20.


Here Adam gave an illustrious proof of the divine wisdom implanted in him
by God, to the honor and praise of Him that gave it. He beheld His wisdom
and goodness in the variety of his creatures; he considered the distinct
forms, figures, proportions, and colors of them all; he distinctly viewed,
and understood the nature of the living animals by the light of divine
wisdom; and, upon a full survey of the properties of every creature, he
gave them proper and significant names, expressing their several natures.
From this natural knowledge of all creatures, he called her that was made
out of his rib, _Woman_, because she was taken out of man; afterward,
_Eve_, as being "the mother of all living." Gen. 2:23; 3:20.

2. So, even at this day, God shows to us the natures and properties of all
creatures in his holy Word, that we may thereby be led to praise and
magnify the wisdom and goodness of Him that made them. Thus Job says
(12:7, 8), "Ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls
of the air, and they shall tell thee; or speak to the earth, and it shall
teach thee; and the fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee." See also
Chap. 39. He leads us, as it were, into every part of the brute creation,
putting us in mind of the many wonders of divine power and mercy
manifested in every one of them. So Jeremiah sends us "to the stork and
the crane, the turtle, and the swallow, who know the appointed time of
their coming." Jer. 8:7. Isaiah sends us "to the ox and the ass, who know
their master's crib" (Isa. 1:3); David and Job, "to the young ravens that
call upon God" (Ps. 147:9; Job 38:41); David again, "to the deaf adder
that stoppeth her ear" (Ps. 58:4); Isaiah, "to the cockatrice' eggs and
vipers" (Isa. 59:5); Jeremiah, "to the sea monsters, that draw out the
breast, and give suck to their young ones;" adding, "the daughter of my
people is become cruel like the ostriches in the wilderness." Lam. 4:3. So
the Song of Solomon speaks of the "young hart, the dove, and the foxes"
(Song of Solomon 2:9, 14, 15); David, "of the hart panting after the
water-brooks" (Ps. 42:1); Solomon, "of the ant" (Prov. 6:6); David and
Isaiah, "of the eagles." Ps. 103:5. "They that wait upon the Lord shall
renew their strength," like the eagles. Isa. 40:31. Lastly, Habakkuk and
Jeremiah speak of the wolves, leopards, and lions, sent to be executioners
of divine vengeance. Hab. 1:8; Jer. 5:6.

3. So also in the New Testament, the blessed Jesus speaks of the sparrows,
not one of which falleth to the ground without the knowledge of our
heavenly Father. Matt. 10:29. Thus he speaks "of the wisdom of serpents,
and the harmlessness of doves" (Matt. 10:16); of "the hen gathering her
chickens under her wings" (Matt. 23:37); of "the eagles' following the
carcass" (Matt. 24:28); of "the dogs that eat the crumbs that fall from
their masters' table." Matt. 15:27. So he describes his own sheep, with
their several properties. John 10:27, 28. Lastly, he talks of the scorpion
and serpent, which no father would give to his children when they ask for
an egg or a fish. Luke 11:11, 12.

4. Here it may be considered why the blessed Jesus himself is compared to
a lamb (Isa. 53:7), to express his exemplary meekness and patience. Why
did the blessed Spirit light upon the Son of God in the form of a dove
(Matt. 3:16), but because the mourning of a dove (Isa. 38:14) resembles
the mourning of the spirit in the hearts of the faithful. Hence Hezekiah
says of himself: "I did mourn as a dove." Isa. 38:14. Why had "the four
living creatures the faces of a man, an ox, a lion, and an eagle"? Ezek.
1:10; Rev. 4:7. They express to us the four mediatorial offices of Christ:
his incarnation, sacrifice, resurrection, and ascension.

5. Here also we may consider the wonderful providence of God, whereby he
protects, sustains, and nourishes all his creatures. Thus in Psalm 65
David celebrates the paternal mercies of God towards all creatures. Again,
"O Lord, thou preservest man and beast." Ps. 36:6. This consideration
should strengthen our faith and secure our perseverance in prayer, under
all the wants and necessities of soul and body. And whereas David mentions
the word _flesh_, "to thee shall all flesh come" (Ps. 65:2); this seems to
have a particular regard to our bodily wants and sufferings (as we are
flesh and blood), such as hunger, cold, nakedness, etc.; and should, at
the same time, put us in mind of our own vileness and corruption, which is
frequently in Scripture expressed by the word _flesh_. Isa. 40:6. The
prophet gives us further comfort, by adding, that there is no man so vile
and contemptible as to be despised or forgotten before God. This is
expressed to us in these words: "Thou who art the confidence of all the
ends of the earth, and of them that are afar off upon the sea." Ps. 65:5.
As if he had said: So great is the love of God to mankind, that
wheresoever they are, whether by land or sea, he still takes care to
protect and defend them. And whereas he adds, "Thou makest the outgoings
of the morning and evening to rejoice" (ver. 8); his meaning is, that, as
God feeds and nourishes all creatures, so he comforts and refreshes them,
too, according to the words of St. Paul, "filling our hearts with food and
gladness." Acts 14:17. For it is no small blessing to feed upon his
creatures with a cheerful mind, to begin the labors of the day with devout
prayers and praises, and to conclude them with thanksgiving. Lastly, he
assigns the cause, in these words: "The river of God is full of water"
(ver. 9); that is, the fountain of divine bounty, mercy, and goodness,
overflows to all his creatures, upon which our being and comforts entirely
depend.

6. To this also may be referred that passage of the Psalmist, "All wait
upon thee, that thou mayest give them their meat in due season." Ps.
104:27. And not only so, but he represents also the brute creatures as
sensible of this dependence upon God, "The young lions roar after their
prey, and seek their meat from God" (Ps. 104:21); intimating thereby, that
God, the Preserver of nature, is moved to pity and to assist the
distresses and sufferings of every creature; and that the wants of every
part of his creation, whether animate or inanimate, are a sort of silent
prayer to the great author and preserver of their being. And this is
called by St. Paul, "the earnest expectation of the creature." Rom. 8:19.
Here let us consider likewise what an infinite variety of creatures there
are contained in the air, earth, and sea, and that God has mercifully
provided for the comfortable subsistence of every one, in a way suitable
to their proper natures. And if God takes such care of the meanest of his
creatures, it would be wrong to imagine, that man, created in _his own
image_, should be neglected or forgotten by him.

7. And since there are more creatures in the earth, air, and sea, than
there are men in the whole world; and the providence of God is extended to
the meanest and smallest of his creatures, how is it possible that man
should be forgotten,--_man_, that lives, moves, and has his being in him;
"for in him we live, and move, and have our being," saith St. Paul (Acts
17:28),--_man_, that is sustained by his power: for "he upholdeth all
things by the word of his power" (Heb. 1:3)--_man_, whom he has made with
his own hand; according to Isaiah 64:8. "O Lord, thou art our Father; we
are the clay, and thou art the potter, and we all are the work of thy
hand;"--_man_, whom he has redeemed by the blood of his only begotten Son,
and sealed with his Holy Spirit? In a word, God can no more forget man,
than he can forget Himself. So that we have all the reason in the world to
depend upon him, that he will give us meat in due season.

8. The Psalmist goes on: "That thou givest them, they gather: thou openest
thy hand, they are filled with good." Ps. 104:28. In these words is
expressed that power, whereby the creatures are preserved. And this
consists in a certain natural sagacity or instinct implanted in them by
God, by which every one of them is prompted to look out, and procure such
things as are proper for the support of life and being. And the pleasure
which they receive in this exercise, is a sort of gratitude and
acknowledgment to God whom they seem to look upon and rejoice in, as their
Maker, Preserver, and Benefactor.

9. Now if God takes so much care for the comfortable subsistence of all
his creatures, we cannot think that he made man for perpetual anguish and
sorrow, but must conclude that he is pleased to see us innocently cheerful
in the fear of God. So, in Psalm 90:15, we are directed to pray, that God
would make us glad according to the days wherein he afflicted us; and the
years in which we saw evil. He promises his servants that they shall eat,
drink, and rejoice (Isai. 65:13); and from the words of David, it plainly
appears that he intends to feed his servants, not sparingly, but
plentifully and bountifully; to which end, he maketh his paths drop
fatness. Ps. 65:11. Experience itself also teaches us, that all creatures
are so plentifully fed by God, that, at proper seasons, the birds of the
air, the wild beasts of the forest, the cattle in the fields, and the fish
of the sea, offer themselves, fattened and prepared, for the use and
nourishment of man; and in that sense also "his paths drop fatness." So
wonderful is the providence, so transcendent is the wisdom, so great is
the concern of God, to provide for all the necessities of his children.

10. And then the Psalmist adds, "Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled;
thou takest away their breath, they die, and return to their dust. Thou
sendest forth thy spirit, they are created; and thou renewest the face of
the earth." Ps. 104:29, 30. His meaning is, that the life of all creatures
is nothing else but the breath of God. This quickening virtue and power of
God, is that word by which all things were made. "By the word of the Lord
were the heavens made; and all the host of them by the breath of his
mouth." Ps. 33:6. And this word was not an empty sound, but became the
life of all creatures, resting upon them as a principle of life and power;
as St. Paul tells us, "the Lord upholdeth all things by the word of his
power." Heb. 1:3. So that the life and being of all things as much depend
on God, as the shadow of a tree does upon the substance.

11. Thus when God withdraws this word of life, or vital power, from the
creatures, they immediately sink into their primitive nothingness. The
whole world is full of God, "of whom, and through whom, and to whom are
all things." Rom. 11:36. He is said to be "above all, and through all, and
in us all" (Eph. 4:6): so that "the Lord is the strength of our life." Ps.
27:1; Deut. 30:20. For as men of sorrowful and distressed spirits perceive
a true and vital power in the word of God; so there is in all creatures a
sort of natural and vital power, which is nothing else but the _Word_ of
Creation. By virtue of this Word also, all the creatures are blessed and
do multiply. By this, the face of the earth is every year renewed by a
succession of plants, fruits, and living creatures, as if there were a new
world every year. "While the earth remaineth," saith God to Noah,
"seed-time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day
and night, shall not cease." Gen. 8:22. By the same blessing, the world is
preserved to this day.

12. This wonderful and universal Providence of God, consists chiefly in
three things. First, in his _knowledge_. "Known unto God are all his works
from the beginning of the world." Acts 15:18. By this infinite and
incomprehensible wisdom, he knows, sees, and hears all things; therefore
he is called in Scripture, "the God that liveth and seeth." Gen. 16:14
(margin). No creature is hidden from him, but all things are naked and
open in his sight. Heb. 4:13. And he is called "the Living," not only
because he himself liveth forever, but also because he is the life of all
things.

13. The second head of divine Providence, is the fatherly _goodness_ of
God (Matt. 6:26), by which He taketh care of all things: "He maketh his
sun to rise on the evil, and on the good." Matt. 5:45. So, then, if his
mercy be not only extended to the least, but even to the undeserving parts
of his creation; how ungrateful are we, if we entertain any suspicions of
so indulgent a Father. And if nothing be done upon earth but by his
appointment and direction, we may hence learn to submit with patience to
everything that befalls us, without repining or murmuring against God;
firmly believing that he careth for us, and by his unsearchable wisdom
ordereth all things for our good and his own glory. On the other hand, if
he take from us our riches, honors, health, and other worldly blessings,
we must resign them with cheerfulness, and say with Job, "The Lord gave,
and the Lord hath taken away." Job 1:21. That good man gave thanks to God
for his adversity, as well as for his prosperity; and the former very
often proves the greater blessing of the two.

14. The third head of God's universal providence over all his creatures
is, his _omnipotence_. By this he is always present to his creatures,
governing and preserving them; by this he governs the hearts of all men,
and turneth them which way he pleases. Ps. 33:15. Whence it follows, that
in all our thoughts, words, and actions, we ought to have a lively and
devout sense of the divine omnipresence, and dread to do anything that is
hateful in his sight. For as is the clay in the hand of the potter, so are
men in the hand of God, even as we read in Jeremiah, "Arise and go down to
the potter's house: and I went down, and behold, he wrought a work on the
wheels. And the vessel that he made of clay was marred in the hand of the
potter; so he made it again another vessel, etc." Jer. 18:2. The prophet
intimates thereby that God, who afflicteth and breaketh us to pieces, can
also heal and restore us again.

15. Moreover, as we are assured that God is everywhere present, and
preserves and governs everything, it follows that he is so careful of his
own servants, that not a hair of their heads can fall to the ground (Matt.
10:30; Luke 21:18; Acts 27:34) without his permission; and that he
preserveth and keepeth us in the midst of our enemies, as we have it
frequently expressed in the Psalms. Ps. 23:4; 27:1; 121:5. So when we are
in distress, and there are no apparent hopes of relief, we should support
ourselves with this consideration: that the Lord himself, "great in
counsel, and mighty in work" (Jer. 32:19), who laid our cross upon us, can
easily lighten it, or strengthen us to bear it. Let us "commit our way
unto the Lord" (Ps. 37:5), like Abraham, who was ready to offer up his
only son, without questioning how God could perform his promise to him,
but cast all his care upon God. Gen. 22:8; Rom. 4:18; Heb. 11:19.

16. And then, the consideration of God's providence raises in us faith,
hope, and patience, of which we have examples in Job, David, and Christ
himself. The blessed Jesus, knowing that he was appointed by God to die,
preserved his meekness and patience all the days of his life, yea, even in
the very agonies of death. Phil. 2:8. Thus David patiently endured
banishment for years, attended with injuries, reproaches, poverty, and
contempt; knowing assuredly that it was God that laid it upon him. This
makes him cry out, "Thou, O Lord, art a shield for me; my glory, and the
lifter up of mine head." Ps. 3:3. To which may be referred that passage,
"The Lord killeth, and maketh alive; he bringeth down to the grave, and
bringeth up. The Lord maketh poor, and maketh rich; he bringeth low, and
lifteth up." 1 Sam. 2:6, 7.

17. But before we conclude this subject, we must say something
particularly of man, the crown and masterpiece of the creation, of his
excellence and prerogatives, which must be very great, forasmuch as God
himself has declared, that "his delights are with the sons of men." Prov.
8:31. For if all things were created for the use of man, and he is the end
of this visible creation, it follows that he is the perfection of it.
Reason itself convinces us, that whatsoever is the end and perfection of
all things, must be more excellent than all others. So, then, all the
beauty of fountains, fields, flowers, trees, fruits, and woods, yea, and
all the glittering brightness of heaven, the sun, moon, and stars, are not
to be compared with, the native and original excellence of man, for whose
sake and benefit they were all created. For as Solomon in all his glory
was not to be compared with the flowers of the field (Matt. 6:29); so the
excellence of man, especially as to his soul, far transcends not only the
external glory of Solomon, but all the beauties of this lower world, yea,
and of the sun itself.

18. And as for the soul, we may judge of its excellency and beauty by the
form and comeliness of the body which God has prepared for its reception
and residence. He provided a comely mansion for so excellent a guest. So,
if we should see the spotless beauty of the original human body, we should
easily judge of the beauty of its divine inhabitant. Even now, in this
corrupt and depraved state of nature, we see what attractive charms there
are in beauty. Moreover, we may judge yet farther of the beauty of human
nature, by the glories of the place in which God at first placed man;
which was _Paradise_ itself, a garden full of joy and celestial pleasures,
infinitely exceeding all the glory and beauty of the present world. For if
the place were so glorious, what must the owner of it be, for whose sake
it was created?

19. Another great argument of the dignity of human nature is, that the
angels themselves are appointed to minister unto us (Heb. 1:14); and that
we were created, as it were, by a particular decree of the ever-blessed
Trinity. "Let us make man," saith God, "in our image, after our likeness."
Gen. 1:26. So that how great soever our dignity may be, by that singular
decree and counsel by which we were made, yet that which arises from the
image of God, in which we were created, is much greater. Therefore, when
he created the sun, moon, and all the host of heaven, he but spake the
word, and they were made. But when he was about to make man, the greatest
and noblest of all his works, he ushers it in with a kind of solemnity,
saying, "Let us make man." How wonderful is that counsel! How solemn is
that decree! How transcendent is the dignity of human nature!

20. For though the sun, moon, and stars, and all the lower world, were
made with wonderful wisdom and power; yet that deliberation does not seem
to have been used there as in the creation of _man_; forasmuch as in him,
the glory and majesty of God were more particularly and gloriously to be
manifested. All the other creatures bear upon them certain marks and
signatures of divine goodness and power, but man is the very image and
likeness of God. For it is not said, Let us make man in the image of the
sun, or of the moon, or of the angels; but "in our likeness," that our own
image may be clearly represented in him.

21. Consider, therefore, the beauty and dignity of thy soul, which is
created in the image and likeness of God, so that the glories of the
divine majesty are, in a certain proportion, transferred to thee. How much
reason have we then to avoid all impurity and uncleanness, that we defile
not the beauty of the divine image. For if we are thereby exalted to the
highest glory and honor that our nature is capable of, how unworthy and
ungrateful would it be, to pollute it by any uncleanness, and so forfeit
that glory which God has bestowed on us.

22. How highly is a picture or statue prized, that is well executed by an
eminent hand! Could such a picture or statue be endued with understanding,
how would it esteem its maker, and take all opportunities of showing its
own gratitude, and its maker's glory! How senseless then, how ungrateful
is man, to forget the hand that formed him! to despise that excellent
beauty with which his Maker endued him! to pollute it with all kinds of
impurity! Plato, himself, a pagan, has told us, that "the beauty of the
soul consists in virtue and piety." But did we only consider the union of
our souls with God and Christ, the righteousness of Christ wherewith our
souls are clothed, as with a garment of glory and immortality (Isa.
61:10), we should more easily understand what the true and inward beauty
of our souls is, which depends entirely upon that of Jesus Christ. And if
it be so, who can question but that the soul is most exquisitely
beautiful, since it derives its beauty from Him who is beauty itself?

23. To this belongs that passage of the prophet Ezekiel, "Thy renown went
forth among the heathen for thy beauty; for it was perfect through my
comeliness which I had put upon thee, saith the Lord God." Ezek. 16: 14.
If children partake of the beauty of their parents according to the flesh;
it is reasonable to believe, that our souls, by spiritual regeneration,
receive a spiritual beauty from God. Moreover, it cannot be doubted that
they are the most beautiful of all creatures, since the Son of God himself
does not disdain to betroth himself unto them, and to adorn them with his
own light and beauty. Upon this account, the faithful soul is called, "a
king's daughter, all glorious within, whose clothing is of wrought gold."
Ps. 45:15. If a plebeian woman be ennobled by marriage with a husband of
quality, can we doubt but that the faithful soul, by being married to the
most noble and beautiful spouse, shall also partake, in a high degree, of
His beauty and glory. Upon this Irenaeus has a fine thought. He says, that
"the glory of man is God, but the receptacle of all the operations of
divine wisdom and goodness, is man."

24. Lastly, as it is beyond all controversy, that the most high God
particularly delights to dwell in the soul of man; that he has sanctified
it to be the temple of the Holy Ghost, the habitation of the Father, and
the bride-chamber of the most beautiful spouse, the Lord Jesus Christ, we
may therefore conclude that the soul is the most beautiful of all
creatures. And as Ezekiel tells us that "our soul is perfected by the
comeliness of God" (Ezek. 16:14); how great must that beauty, how rich
must that attire, how transcendent must those ornaments be, which so great
and noble a spouse can bestow upon the bride which he has prepared for
himself? O how wonderful is this grace! How incredible is the beauty which
God bestows upon human souls! Could it but be seen by mortal eyes, it must
charm the most stupid beholder. And this beauty increases every day by our
prayers, and devout approaches to God. So that "we are changed from glory
to glory, as by the Spirit of the Lord." 2 Cor. 3:18. For if the face of
Moses, after conversing a few days with God, shone with the brightness of
divine glory (Exod. 34:35); how much more shall our souls, by the same
conversation, be enlightened and beautified with higher degrees of light
and glory?--Of this subject we shall speak more fully in Part II, of this
Fourth Book, which refers to man in particular.




Part II.


                        Treating Specially Of Man.



Chapter I.


                   God, An Infinite And Eternal Being.


    _Ah, Lord God! behold, thou hast made the heaven and the earth by
    thy great power and stretched out arm, and there is nothing too
    hard for thee._--_The Great, the Mighty God, the Lord of hosts, is
    his name; great in counsel, and mighty in work._--JER. 32:17-19.


God is the origin of the life and being of all creatures: whence it
follows, that he was before all creatures, both an eternal Being, and
eternal Life itself; otherwise he could not have given life and being to
his creatures. But the infinity of God yet more plainly appears from the
mind and thoughts of man. For as the mind of man can in a moment run
through the whole circle of heaven, and comprehend in imagination all the
creatures of the universe; it follows, that God who made him, comprehends
all these things in a more perfect manner, and by consequence must be
infinite.

2. All the attributes of God are essential to him. As therefore he is
infinite, so are his essence and life also infinite. For essence and life
are inseparable from him. Moreover, as he has endued the soul of man with
wisdom and understanding, it follows that the understanding and wisdom of
God must be infinite. For whatsoever is in God, is essentially and
eternally in him. And as the unity of the divine nature is so perfect that
his wisdom cannot be separated from his essence and life, it follows that
both are alike infinite and eternal.

3. But if the wisdom of God be eternal and infinite, it will follow that
He knoweth all things from eternity. Moreover, as his essence is
unchangeable, equally filling all places; so his understanding does not
proceed by way of rational connection, or discursive operation from one
idea to another. He knoweth and understandeth all things in an instant,
and to him there is nothing past or to come, but the whole circle of
eternity is present to him. For as God stands in need of no creature to
add anything to the perfection of his being, so neither does he need any
creature with respect to his understanding. And as he is God,
independently of all creatures; so he penetrates and comprehends all
things in himself. So that the sands of the sea, and the drops of the
rain, and eternity, are alike known to him. And not so much as a bird of
the air, or a hair of our heads, can fall to the ground without him. Matt.
10:29, 30. He knoweth the days of the world, every hour and moment of
time, with its several periods and revolutions; nor is anything under the
heavens hidden from him. For as by his infinite power he created all
things, so by his infinite wisdom he understands and comprehends all
things; even the most secret thoughts of man. Ps. 139:2, &c.

4. Moreover, as his essence, life, and wisdom, so also his power is
infinite, and all are equally incapable of any addition or diminution.
Lastly, forasmuch as no creature can oppose or set bounds to his power,
therefore, he is Almighty. All which must necessarily be, forasmuch as his
essence, life, wisdom, and power, are inseparable.



Chapter II.


                          God, The Supreme Good.


    _For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things._--ROM.
    11:36.


As He must be the chief and only good, in whom all good things are
contained; it follows that glory and praise belong to God alone, because
from him, and by him, and for him, are all things.

2. All the goodness that is found scattered up and down among the
creatures, is in a most perfect and excellent manner and degree contained
in him. So that whosoever turns himself to the creatures, and cleaves unto
them, will always find himself poor, needy, and distressed: whilst he that
turneth unto God with his whole heart, pursues the chief and most perfect
good, and shall be blessed in the enjoyment of it: ever rich, ever at
ease, ever blessed in the fruition of his God. By this it appears that
perfect happiness is not to be found in the enjoyment of the creatures,
and that they who fix their hearts and desires on the world, can expect
nothing but anguish, disquiet, and disappointments, both in life and in
death; for they have not that chief good, which alone can satisfy and make
happy the soul of man.



Chapter III.


  Man, The Most Noble Of All Creatures, And Made For The Service Of God.


    _Know ye that the Lord he is God: it is he that hath made us, and
    not we ourselves; we are his people, and the sheep of his
    pasture._--PS. 100:3.


All the creatures, in their several kinds and orders, were created by God
for the use and benefit of man. Thus we see corn and pasture produced,
these feeding the living creatures, and all serving for food to mankind.
One assists another, the higher wheel setting the lower in motion, and all
in a wonderful harmony concurring to one great end, which is the use and
benefit of man.

2. Now, if all this be for his sake, he is certainly more noble than they
all; and hence he should learn what dependence he has upon God, and what
duty and service he owes to Him who has appointed all the creatures, in
their order, to minister to his necessities.

3. And, as all the creatures seem to aim at no other end than the use and
service of man, and seem to rest and be satisfied in obtaining that end;
so ought man likewise to show the same diligence and faithfulness in the
service of God, that the creatures show to him. All his works and labors
ought to be directed to this one end, namely, to accomplish the will of
God, and do nothing but that which is well-pleasing in his sight. For as
all things are incessantly employed in serving man, the noblest of all
creatures, so there is all the reason in the world that he should be as
constant and assiduous in the service of God, who is perfection itself,
and to whom alone he is indebted for that superiority which he has over
the rest of the creatures.



Chapter IV.


  God Made Man In His Own Image, In Order That He Might Delight In Him.


    _My delights were with the sons of men._--PROV. 8:31.--_The Lord
    shall rejoice in his works._--PS. 104:31.


Every artist has a love for the works of his own hands, and that induces
him to take so much pains about them. "God saw every thing that he had
made, and, behold, it was very good." Gen. 1:31. But if he took so much
delight in the general survey of his works, how much greater pleasure must
he take in man, whom he created after his own image.

2. For the more anything resembles ourselves, the more tenderly do we love
it. A father has a stronger affection for his son, who partakes of his own
nature, than for a house which he himself has builded, though ever so
exact and regular in itself.

3. Moreover, as God takes pleasure in a creature made to resemble himself,
therefore, it was necessary, that after the other creatures were formed,
he should create man in his own image, in whom he might rest and delight
himself. And as similitude is the foundation of friendship and society,
and everything naturally associates with its like, it follows that God, in
making man after his own image, intended to delight and rejoice Himself in
him; so that man ought likewise to cleave unto his God, and to delight and
take pleasure in conversing with Him.

4. Further, as God is the most perfect love, he could not but desire to
communicate himself, and all his blessings, to some other being. That
could not be done, however, without making some being like himself; and as
there was no such being then in nature, capable or worthy of such divine
communications, therefore he created man in his own image, which consists
chiefly in perfect love.

5. And, lastly, as there is naturally a reciprocal love betwixt the giver
and the receiver of any benefit; hence it follows, that it is the duty of
man to worship with the highest affection and most ardent love, his
heavenly Benefactor, who so affectionately desires to communicate himself,
and all the riches of his goodness, to his unworthy creatures.



Chapter V.


              That God By His Love Bestows Himself Upon Us.


    _God is love._--1 JOHN 4:16.


As man devotes himself entirely unto God by love, so God bestows himself
entirely upon man also by love. And as that love of his is in the highest
degree of perfection, he cannot but give us Himself: for the highest
instance of love is to bestow one's self upon the person we love. And as a
consequence of this perfect love, He bestowed himself upon us in his only
begotten Son.

2. This is the true spring of the incarnation, passion, and death of the
Son of God. Thus our blessed Saviour pronounces these words of comfort,
"God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son" (John 3:16);
that is, God loved the world with an entire and perfect love, and
therefore gave us his Son. But as the eternal love of God is the fountain
of eternal life to the world; and that eternal love is manifested by
Christ Jesus, in and by whom we have everlasting life, therefore, our Lord
further adds: "that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life."



Chapter VI.


    Showing How Much Man Is Indebted To God For His Everlasting Love.


    _We love him, because he first loved us._--1 JOHN 4:19.


In every benefit or gift there are three things to be considered: the
giver, the receiver, and the gift itself. As, then, there is a natural
obligation upon the receiver to the giver, it is manifest, that since man
has received all that he has from God, so he owes all to him, and is under
the strictest obligations of love and obedience to his great benefactor.

2. And as man consists of body and soul, so God has abundantly provided
for the comfort and happiness of both.

3. As for his body, it is sustained and refreshed by the various
productions of nature, so that the whole creation seems to call upon him,
and put him in mind of his Creator: "Consider," it saith, "O man, the
benefits which thy Maker has bestowed upon thee, and what returns of
gratitude and service thou owest him for the same. I (saith the heaven),
give thee daylight to work in, and send darkness in which thou mayest
sleep and take thy rest. I give thee the pleasant spring, the warm summer,
the fruitful autumn, and the cold winter, in their proper seasons. I
(saith the air), supply thee with breath, and every kind of birds. By me
(saith the water), art thou washed, and thy thirst is quenched; by me thou
art supplied with all kinds of fish. I bear thee and sustain thee (saith
the earth), and satisfy thee with bread, wine, and flesh; by all which
thou mayest know how much thou art beloved by Him who made thee, and me
for thy use; all of whose favors are as so many bonds and obligations upon
thee."



Chapter VII.


            Of The Things That Instruct And Comfort The Soul.


    _Ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls of
    the air, and they shall tell thee: or speak to the earth, and it
    shall teach thee._--JOB 12:7, 8.


Let us now see what provision God has made for the comfort and instruction
of the _soul_ of man. Here we shall find every creature in one way or
another, subservient to this end. And, first, I shall speak of the
pleasure which man receives from the creatures.

2. Man alone has the privilege of really enjoying what he possesses. Other
creatures, being void of understanding, have no relish of those blessings
from which man receives very great comfort; gold, silver, and precious
stones, have no intelligence. But man, being endowed with an understanding
mind, reflects with gratitude and pleasure upon the goodness of God, who
has provided so many beautiful creatures for his use and benefit. O the
wonderful goodness of God, who has made all the excellencies of the
creatures subservient to the happiness of man; so that they are the
channels of conveying that happiness to us, which they themselves are not
capable of enjoying! Thus the sweetness and goodness of the water, the
fragrance and beauty of flowers, the light and glory of the sun, moon, and
all the host of heaven, yield no pleasure to themselves, but all unite to
promote the happiness of man. Nay, without them, man would have no
enjoyment at all in this world; nor could he have any notion of the
dignity and pre-eminence of his nature above that of other creatures, but
by comparing his condition with theirs. This shows him the transcendent
goodness of God, manifested to him above all the rest of the creation;
this teaches him to be thankful for his beautiful form and stature, his
erect countenance, but above all, for his rational soul, created after the
image of God. From all which it appears, that the knowledge of a man's
self is his highest wisdom, and the want of it, the most deplorable folly.

3. Moreover, the creatures were made, not only for the delight of man, but
also to be his monitors and instructors. For from them we may learn, that
our chief good consists not in worldly and outward enjoyments; such as
eating, drinking, and the gratifying the other bodily appetites, all which
are common to the beasts as well as to us; and this is a convincing
argument, that man, being of a more noble frame and nature than they,
ought to look for other meat and drink, and other pleasures suitable to
the higher nobility of his nature, which the inferior creatures cannot
share with him. I need not here mention, that the greatest part of human
wisdom arises from the contemplation of the creatures. Thus our music came
from the sound of metals; our skill in medicine, from other creatures; and
our astronomy, from the stars; which still farther illustrates my first
observation, that the whole world was created for the sake of man, for
which he owes never-ending thanks to his munificent Creator.



Chapter VIII.


              Of The Obligations Under Which Men Lie To God.


    _O Lord, how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep.
    A brutish man knoweth not; neither doth a fool understand
    this._--PS. 92:5, 6.


The obligations which man lies under to God, are as many and as great, as
are the favors which he has received from him, or the excellencies which
he has bestowed upon all the creatures. For as every creature was made for
his use and benefit, so ought his gratitude to rise in proportion for them
all. If a king should bestow great estates and honors upon a company of
children in the same family, and but one of the number had age and sense
enough to know the greatness of the favor and honor done to them, he alone
is certainly obliged to thank him in the name of all the rest, and would
be guilty of ingratitude if he did not. So in this world, the rest of the
creatures are like children, that know not the worth and value of God's
blessings, as man does; he is, therefore, alone obliged to adore and
praise him in the name and stead of all the rest, and is highly ungrateful
if he does not.



Chapter IX.


  Man Even More Indebted To God For Inward, Than For Outward Blessings.


    _And the fear of you shall be upon every beast of the earth._--GEN.
    9:2.


As man knows himself to be the most excellent of all creatures, so ought
he to be more thankful to God for the perfections of his own being and
nature, than for those of all the rest of the world. For as all things
else were made for his sake, he must of necessity be more perfect and
excellent than they. The sun, the moon, and all the host of heaven, those
glorious bodies, all wait upon man, and do him service. This they do, not
on account of his body, which, considered in this corrupt state, is less
excellent than theirs; but on account of his soul, as to which he is in
every respect superior to them. For the very notion of servitude implies a
superiority in the person to whom the service is paid: so that it would be
unnatural for those glorious bodies to do that service to man, if he had
not an immortal soul, and by consequence, a more excellent nature than
they.

2. And on account of the immortality of the soul, it is an unworthy thing
for a man to fix it upon anything that is mortal and perishing; because it
is incapable of uniting with anything but what is immortal, and
particularly with God himself. The body, indeed, is connected with
corporeal objects, and is capable of terrestrial enjoyments; but the soul
should be united solely with God; so that, as a king, he might be
enthroned and bear rule in her; and in this consists the excellency of man
above all other creatures, that his soul is the throne, the image, and
habitation of God. Greater honor than this no creature is capable of
receiving; therefore man is the most excellent of all, and is infinitely
indebted to the Author and Giver of such inestimable benefits.



Chapter X.

