        of harmony, is ever with men, and they are
        His people. Thus man was no longer regarded as a mis-
573:18  erable sinner, but as the blessed child of God. Why?
        Because St. John's corporeal sense of the heavens and
        earth had vanished, and in place of this false sense was
573:21  the spiritual sense, the subjective state by which he could
        see the new heaven and new earth, which involve the
        spiritual idea and consciousness of reality. This is Scrip-
573:24  tural authority for concluding that such a recognition of
        being is, and has been, possible to men in this present
        state of existence, - that we can become conscious,
573:27  here and now, of a cessation of death, sorrow, and pain.
        This is indeed a foretaste of absolute Christian Science.
        Take heart, dear sufferer, for this reality of being will
573:30  surely appear sometime and in some way. There will
        be no more pain, and all tears will be wiped away. When
        you read this, remember Jesus' words, "The kingdom of
574:1   God is within you." This spiritual consciousness is
        therefore a present possibility.

574:3   The Revelator also takes in another view, adapted to
        console the weary pilgrim, journeying " uphill all the way."

        He writes, in Revelation xxi. 9: -

574:6   And there came unto me one of the seven angels which
        had the seven vials full of the seven last plagues, and talked
        with me, saying, Come hither, I will show thee the bride,
574:9   the Lamb's wife.

                     Vials of wrath and consolation

        This ministry of Truth, this message from divine Love,
        carried John away in spirit. It exalted him till he be-
574:12  came conscious of the spiritual facts of being
        and the "New Jerusalem, coming down from
        God, out of heaven," - the spiritual outpour-
574:15  ing of bliss and glory, which he describes as the city
        which "lieth foursquare." The beauty of this text is,
        that the sum total of human misery, represented by
574:18  the seven angelic vials full of seven plagues, has full
        compensation in the law of Love. Note this, - that the
        very message, or swift-winged thought, which poured
574:21  forth hatred and torment, brought also the experience
        which at last lifted the seer to behold the great city, the
        four equal sides of which were heaven-bestowed and
574:24  heaven-bestowing.

                            Spiritual wedlock

        Think of this, dear reader, for it will lift the sack-
        cloth from your eyes, and you will behold the soft-
574:27  winged dove descending upon you. The very
        circumstance, which your suffering sense
        deems wrathful and afflictive, Love can make an angel
574:30  entertained unawares. Then thought gently whispers:
575:1   "Come hither! Arise from your false consciousness
        into the true sense of Love, and behold the Lamb's
575:3   wife, - Love wedded to its own spiritual idea." Then
        cometh the marriage feast, for this revelation will de-
        stroy forever the physical plagues imposed by material
575:6   sense.

                           The city foursquare

        This sacred city, described in the Apocalypse (xxi. 16)
        as one that "lieth foursquare" and cometh "down from
575:9   God, out of heaven," represents the light and
        glory of divine Science. The builder and
        maker of this New Jerusalem is God, as we read in the
575:12  book of Hebrews; and it is "a city which hath founda-
        tions." The description is metaphoric. Spiritual teach-
        ing must always be by symbols. Did not Jesus illustrate
575:15  the truths he taught by the mustard-seed and the prodi-
        gal? Taken in its allegorical sense, the description of
        the city as foursquare has a profound meaning. The
575:18  four sides of our city are the Word, Christ, Christianity,
        and divine Science; "and the gates of it shall not be shut
        at all by day: for there shall be no night there." This
575:21  city is wholly spiritual, as its four sides indicate.

                        The royally divine gates

        As the Psalmist saith, "Beautiful for situation, the
        joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of
575:24  the north, the city of the great King." It is
        indeed a city of the Spirit, fair, royal, and
        square. Northward, its gates open to the North Star,
575:27  the Word, the polar magnet of Revelation; eastward,
        to the star seen by the Wisemen of the Orient, who fol-
        lowed it to the manger of Jesus; southward, to the
575:30  genial tropics, with the Southern Cross in the skies,
        - the Cross of Calvary, which binds human society
        into solemn union; westward, to the grand realization
576:1   of the Golden Shore of Love and the Peaceful Sea of
        Harmony.

                        Revelation's pure zenith

576:3   This heavenly city, lighted by the Sun of Righteous-
        ness, - this New Jerusalem, this infinite All, which to
        us seems hidden in the mist of remoteness, -
576:6   reached St. John's vision while yet he taber-
        nacled with mortals.

        In Revelation xxi. 22, further describing this holy city,
576:9   the beloved Disciple writes: -

        And I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty
        and the Lamb are the temple of it.

                          The shrine celestial

576:12  There was no temple, - that is, no material structure
        in which to worship God, for He must be worshipped
        in spirit and in love. The word /temple/ also
576:15  means body. The Revelator was familiar
        with Jesus' use of this word, as when Jesus spoke of his
        material body as the temple to be temporarily rebuilt
576:18  (John ii. 21). What further indication need we of the
        real man's incorporeality than this, that John saw
        heaven and earth with "no temple [body] therein"?
576:21  This kingdom of God "is within you," - is within
        reach of man's consciousness here, and the spiritual
        idea reveals it. In divine Science, man possesses this
576:24  recognition of harmony consciously in proportion to his
        understanding of God.

                          Divine sense of Deity

        The term Lord, as used in our version of the Old
576:27  Testament, is often synonymous with Jehovah, and ex-
        presses the Jewish concept, not yet elevated
        to deific apprehension through spiritual trans-
576:30  figuration. Yet the word gradually approaches a higher
        meaning. This human sense of Deity yields to the divine
577:1   sense, even as the material sense of personality yields
        to the incorporeal sense of God and man as the infinite
577:3   Principle and infinite idea, - as one Father with His uni-
        versal family, held in the gospel of Love. The Lamb's
        wife presents the unity of male and female as no longer
577:6   two wedded individuals, but as two individual natures
        in one; and this compounded spiritual individuality re-
        flects God as Father-Mother, not as a corporeal being.
577:9   In this divinely united spiritual consciousness, there is no
        impediment to eternal bliss, - to the perfectibility of
        God's creation.

                           The city of our God

577:12  This spiritual, holy habitation has no boundary
        nor limit, but its four cardinal points are: first, the
        Word of Life, Truth, and Love; second,
577:15  the Christ, the spiritual idea of God; third,
        Christianity, which is the outcome of the divine Prin-
        ciple of the Christ-idea in Christian history; fourth,
577:18  Christian Science, which to-day and forever interprets
        this great example and the great Exemplar. This city
        of our God has no need of sun or satellite, for Love
577:21  is the light of it, and divine Mind is its own interpreter.
        All who are saved must walk in this light. Mighty
        potentates and dynasties will lay down their honors
577:24  within the heavenly city. Its gates open towards light
        and glory both within and without, for all is good, and
        nothing can enter that city, which "defileth. . . . or
577:27  maketh a lie."

        The writer's present feeble sense of Christian Science
        closes with St. John's Revelation as recorded by the
577:30  great apostle, for his vision is the acme of this Science
        as the Bible reveals it.

        In the following Psalm one word shows, though faintly,
578:1   the light which Christian Science throws on the Scriptures
        by substituting for the corporeal sense, the incorporeal
578:3   or spiritual sense of Deity: -

                               PSALM XXIII

        [DIVINE LOVE] is my shepherd; I shall not want.

578:6   [LOVE] maketh me to lie down in green pastures:
        [LOVE] leadeth me beside the still waters.

        [LOVE] restoreth my soul [spiritual sense]: [Love] lead-
578:9   eth me in the paths of righteousness for His name's sake.

        Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
        death, I will fear no evil: for [LOVE] is with me; [LOVE's]
578:12  rod and [LOVE'S] staff they comfort me.

        [LOVE] prepareth a table before me in the presence of
        mine enemies: [LOVE] anointeth my head with oil; my cup
578:15  runneth over.

        Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of
        my life; and I will dwell in the house [the consciousness]
578:18  of [LOVE] for ever.




        CHAPTER XVII - GLOSSARY

        These things saith He that is holy, He that is true, He that
        hath the key of David, He that openeth, and no man shutteth;
        and shutteth, and no man openeth; I know thy works: behold,
        I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it.
        - REVELATION.

579:1   In Christian Science we learn that the substitution of
        the spiritual for the material definition of a Scrip-
579:3   tural word often elucidates the meaning of the inspired
        writer. On this account this chapter is added. It con-
        tains the metaphysical interpretation of Bible terms,
579:6   giving their spiritual sense, which is also their original
        meaning.

        ABEL. Watchfulness; self-offering; surrendering to
579:9   the creator the early fruits of experience.

        ABRAHAM. Fidelity; faith in the divine Life and in the
        eternal Principle of being.
579:12  This patriarch illustrated the purpose of Love to create
        trust in good, and showed the life-preserving power of
        spiritual understanding.

579:15  ADAM. Error; a falsity; the belief in "original sin,"
        sickness, and death; evil; the opposite of good, - of God
        and His creation; a curse; a belief in intelligent matter,
580:1   finiteness, and mortality; "dust to dust;" red sand-
        stone; nothingness; the first god of mythology; not
580:3   God's man, who represents the one God and is His own
        image and likeness; the opposite of Spirit and His crea-
        tions; that which is not the image and likeness of good,
580:6   but a material belief, opposed to the one Mind, or Spirit;
        a so-called finite mind, producing other minds, thus mak-
        ing "gods many and lords many" (I Corinthians viii. 5);
580:9   a product of nothing as the mimicry of something; an
        unreality as opposed to the great reality of spiritual ex-
        istence and creation; a so-called man, whose origin,
580:12  substance, and mind are found to be the antipode of
        God, or Spirit; an inverted image of Spirit; the image
        and likeness of what God has not created, namely, mat-
580:15  ter, sin, sickness, and death; the opposer of Truth,
        termed error; Life's counterfeit, which ultimates in
        death; the opposite of Love, called hate; the usurper
580:18  of Spirit's creation, called self-creative matter; immor-
        tality's opposite, mortality; that of which wisdom saith,
        "Thou shalt surely die."

580:21  The name Adam represents the false supposition that
        Life is not eternal, but has beginning and end; that the
        infinite enters the finite, that intelligence passes into non-
580:24  intelligence, and that Soul dwells in material sense; that
        immortal Mind results in matter, and matter in mortal
        mind; that the one God and creator entered what He cre-
580:27  ated, and then disappeared in the atheism of matter.

        ADVERSARY. An adversary is one who opposes, denies,
        disputes, not one who constructs and sustains reality and
580:30  Truth. Jesus said of the devil, "He was a murderer from
        the beginning, . . . he is a liar and the father of it."
581:1   This view of Satan is confirmed by the name often con-
        ferred upon him in Scripture, the "adversary."

581:3   ALMIGHTY. All-power; infinity; omnipotence.

        ANGELS. God's thoughts passing to man; spiritual
        intuitions, pure and perfect; the inspiration of goodness,
581:6   purity, and immortality, counteracting all evil, sensuality,
        and mortality.

        ARK. Safety; the idea, or reflection, of Truth, proved
581:9   to be as immortal as its Principle; the understanding of
        Spirit, destroying belief in matter.

        God and man coexistent and eternal; Science show-
581:12  ing that the spiritual realities of all things are created
        by Him and exist forever. The ark indicates temptation
        overcome and followed by exaltation.

581:15  ASHER (Jacob's son). Hope and faith; spiritual com-
        pensation; the ills of the flesh rebuked.

        BABEL. Self-destroying error; a kingdom divided
581:18  against itself, which cannot stand; material knowledge.

        The higher false knowledge builds on the basis of evi-
        dence obtained from the five corporeal senses, the more
581:21  confusion ensues, and the more certain is the downfall
        of its structure.

        BAPTISM. Purification by Spirit; submergence in
581:24  Spirit.

        We are "willing rather to be absent from the body,
        and to be present with the Lord." (II Corinthians v. 8.)

582:1   BELIEVING. Firmness and constancy; not a faltering
        nor a blind faith, but the perception of spiritual Truth.
582:3   Mortal thoughts, illusion.

        BENJAMIN (Jacob's son). A physical belief as to life,
        substance, and mind; human knowledge, or so-called
582:6   mortal mind, devoted to matter; pride; envy; fame;
        illusion; a false belief; error masquerading as the pos-
        sessor of life, strength, animation, and power to act.

582:9   Renewal of affections; self-offering; an improved
        state of mortal mind; the introduction of a more spiritual
        origin; a gleam of the infinite idea of the infinite Prin-
582:12  ciple; a spiritual type; that which comforts, consoles,
        and supports.

        BRIDE. Purity and innocence, conceiving man in the
582:15  idea of God; a sense of Soul, which has spiritual bliss
        and enjoys but cannot suffer.

        BRIDEGROOM. Spiritual understanding; the pure con-
582:18  sciousness that God, the divine Principle, creates man
        as His own spiritual idea, and that God is the only crea-
        tive power.

582:21  BURIAL. Corporeality and physical sense put out of
        sight and hearing; annihilation. Submergence in Spirit;
        immortality brought to light.
582:24  CANAAN (the son of Ham). A sensuous belief; the
        testimony of what is termed material sense; the error
        which would make man mortal and would make mortal
582:27  mind a slave to the body.

        CHILDREN. The spiritual thoughts and representa-
        tives of Life, Truth, and Love.

583:1   Sensual and mortal beliefs; counterfeits of creation,
        whose better originals are God's thoughts, not in em-
583:3   bryo, but in maturity; material suppositions of life, sub-
        stance, and intelligence, opposed to the Science of being.

        CHILDREN OF ISRAEL. The representatives of Soul, not
583:6   corporeal sense; the offspring of Spirit, who, having
        wrestled with error, sin, and sense, are governed by divine
        Science; some of the ideas of God beheld as men, casting
583:9   out error and healing the sick; Christ's offspring.

        CHRIST. The divine manifestation of God, which comes
        to the flesh to destroy incarnate error.
583:12  CHURCH. The structure of Truth and Love; what-
        ever rests upon and proceeds from divine Principle.

        The Church is that institution, which affords proof of
583:15  its utility and is found elevating the race, rousing the
        dormant understanding from material beliefs to the ap-
        prehension of spiritual ideas and the demonstration of
583:18  divine Science, thereby casting out devils, or error, and
        healing the sick.

        CREATOR. Spirit; Mind; intelligence; the animating
583:21  divine Principle of all that is real and good; self-existent
        Life, Truth, and Love; that which is perfect and eternal;
        the opposite of matter and evil, which have no Prin-
583:24  ciple; God, who made all that was made and could not
        create an atom or an element the opposite of Himself.

        DAN (Jacob's son). Animal magnetism; so-called mor-
583:27  tal mind controlling mortal mind; error, working out
        the designs of error; one belief preying upon another.

584:1   DAY. The irradiance of Life; light, the spiritual idea
        of Truth and Love.

584:3   "And the evening and the morning were the first day."
        (Genesis i. 5.) The objects of time and sense disappear
        in the illumination of spiritual understanding, and Mind
584:6   measures time according to the good that is unfolded.
        This unfolding is God's day, and "there shall be no night
        there."

584:9   DEATH. An illusion, the lie of life in matter; the un-
        real and untrue; the opposite of Life.

        Matter has no life, hence it has no real existence. Mind
584:12  is immortal. The flesh, warring against Spirit; that
        which frets itself free from one belief only to be fettered
        by another, until every belief of life where Life is not
584:15  yields to eternal Life. Any material evidence of death is
        false, for it contradicts the spiritual facts of being.

        DEVIL. Evil; a lie; error; neither corporeality nor
584:18  mind; the opposite of Truth; a belief in sin, sickness,
        and death; animal magnetism or hypnotism; the lust of
        the flesh, which saith: " I am life and intelligence in
584:21  matter. There is more than one mind, for I am mind, -
        a wicked mind, self-made or created by a tribal god and
        put into the opposite of mind, termed matter, thence to
584:24  reproduce a mortal universe, including man, not after the
        image and likeness of Spirit, but after its own image."

        DOVE. A symbol of divine Science; purity and peace;
584:27  hope and faith.

        DUST. Nothingness; the absence of substance, life, or
        intelligence.

585:1   EARS. Not organs of the so-called corporeal senses,
        but spiritual understanding.

585:3   Jesus said, referring to spiritual perception, "Having
        ears, hear ye not?" (Mark viii. 18.)

        EARTH. A sphere; a type of eternity and immortality,
585:6   which are likewise without beginning or end.

        To material sense, earth is matter; to spiritual sense,
        it is a compound idea.

585:9   ELIAS. Prophecy; spiritual evidence opposed to mate-
        rial sense; Christian Science, with which can be discerned
        the spiritual fact of whatever the material senses behold;
585:12  the basis of immortality.

        "Elias truly shall first come and restore all things."
        (Matthew xvii. 11.)
585:15  ERROR. See chapter on Recapitulation, page 472.

        EUPHRATES (river). Divine Science encompassing
        the universe and man; the true idea of God; a type
585:18  of the glory which is to come; metaphysics taking the
        place of physics; the reign of righteousness. The atmos-
        phere of human belief before it accepts sin, sickness, or
585:21  death; a state of mortal thought, the only error of which
        is limitation; finity; the opposite of infinity.

        EVE. A beginning; mortality; that which does not
585:24  last forever; a finite belief concerning life, substance,
        and intelligence in matter; error; the belief that the hu-
        man race originated materially instead of spiritually, -
585:27  that man started first from dust, second from a rib, and
        third from an egg.

586:1   EVENING. Mistiness of mortal thought; weariness of
        mortal mind; obscured views; peace and rest.

586:3   EYES. Spiritual discernment, - not material but
        mental. Jesus said, thinking of the outward vision, "Having
586:6   eyes, see ye not?" (Mark viii. 18.)

        FAN. Separator of fable from fact; that which gives
        action to thought.

586:9   FATHER. Eternal Life; the one Mind; the divine
        Principle, commonly called God.

        FEAR. Heat; inflammation; anxiety; ignorance; error;
586:12  desire; caution.

        FIRE. Fear; remorse; lust; hatred; destruction; afflic-
        tion purifying and elevating man.

586:15  FIRMAMENT. Spiritual understanding; the scientific
        line of demarcation between Truth and error, between
        Spirit and so-called matter.

586:18  FLESH. An error of physical belief; a supposition that
        life, substance, and intelligence are in matter; an illusion;
        a belief that matter has sensation.

586:21  GAD (Jacob's son). Science; spiritual being under-
        stood; haste towards harmony.

        GETHSEMANE. Patient woe; the human yielding to
586:24  the divine; love meeting no response, but still remaining
        love.

587:1   GHOST. An illusion; a belief that mind is outlined
        and limited; a supposition that spirit is finite.

587:3   GIHON (river). The rights of woman acknowledged
        morally, civilly, and socially.

        GOD. The great I AM; the all-knowing, all-seeing,
587:6   all-acting, all-wise, all-loving, and eternal; Principle;
        Mind; Soul; Spirit; Life; Truth; Love; all substance;
        intelligence.

587:9   GODS. Mythology; a belief that life, substance, and
        intelligence are both mental and material; a supposition
        of sentient physicality; the belief that infinite Mind is in
587:12  finite forms; the various theories that hold mind to be a
        material sense, existing in brain, nerve, matter; supposi-
        titious minds, or souls, going in and out of matter, erring
587:15  and mortal; the serpents of error, which say, "Ye shall
        be as gods."

        God is one God, infinite and perfect, and cannot be-
587:18  come finite and imperfect.

        GOOD. God; Spirit; omnipotence; omniscience; om-
        nipresence; omni-action.

587:21  HAM (Noah's son). Corporeal belief; sensuality;
        slavery; tyranny.

        HEART. Mortal feelings, motives, affections, joys, and
587:24  sorrows.

        HEAVEN. Harmony; the reign of Spirit; government
        by divine Principle; spirituality; bliss; the atmosphere
587:27  of Soul.

588:1   HELL. Mortal belief; error; lust; remorse; hatred;
        revenge; sin; sickness; death; suffering and self-de-
588:3   struction, self-imposed agony; effects of sin; that which
        "worketh abomination or maketh a lie."

        HIDDEKEL (river). Divine Science understood and
588:6   acknowledged.

        HOLY GHOST. Divine Science; the development of
        eternal Life, Truth, and Love.

588:9   I, or EGO. Divine Principle; Spirit; Soul; incor-
        poreal, unerring, immortal, and eternal Mind.

        There is but one I, or Us, but one divine Principle, or
588:12  Mind, governing all existence; man and woman un-
        changed forever in their individual characters, even as
        numbers which never blend with each other, though they
588:15  are governed by one Principle. All the objects of God's
        creation reflect one Mind, and whatever reflects not this
        one Mind, is false and erroneous, even the belief that
588:18  life, substance, and intelligence are both mental and
        material.

        I AM. God; incorporeal and eternal Mind; divine
588:21  Principle; the only Ego.

        IN. A term obsolete in Science if used with reference
        to Spirit, or Deity.

588:24  INTELLIGENCE. Substance; self-existent and eternal
        Mind; that which is never unconscious nor limited.

        See chapter on Recapitulation, page 469.

589:1   ISSACHAR (Jacob's son). A corporeal belief; the
        offspring of error; envy; hatred; selfishness; self-will;
589:3   lust.

        JACOB. A corporeal mortal embracing duplicity, re-
        pentance, sensualism. Inspiration; the revelation of
589:6   Science, in which the so-called material senses yield to
        the spiritual sense of Life and Love.

        JAPHET (Noah's son). A type of spiritual peace, flow-
589:9   ing from the understanding that God is the divine Prin-
        ciple of all existence, and that man is His idea, the child
        of His care.

589:12  JERUSALEM. Mortal belief and knowledge obtained
        from the five corporeal senses; the pride of power and
        the power of pride; sensuality; envy; oppression; tyr-
589:15  anny. Home, heaven.

        JESUS. The highest human corporeal concept of the
        divine idea, rebuking and destroying error and bringing
589:18  to light man's immortality.

        JOSEPH. A corporeal mortal; a higher sense of Truth
        rebuking mortal belief, or error, and showing the immor-
589:21  tality and supremacy of Truth; pure affection blessing
        its enemies.

        JUDAH. A corporeal material belief progressing and
589:24  disappearing; the spiritual understanding of God and
        man appearing.

590:1   KINGDOM OF HEAVEN. The rein of harmony in divine
        Science; the realm of unerring, eternal, and omnipotent
590:3   Mind; the atmosphere of Spirit, where Soul is supreme.

        KNOWLEDGE. Evidence obtained from the five cor-
        poreal senses; mortality; beliefs and opinions; human
590:6   theories, doctrines, hypotheses; that which is not divine
        and is the origin of sin, sickness, and death; the oppo-
        site of spiritual Truth and understanding.

590:9   LAMB OF GOD. The spiritual idea of Love; self-im-
        molation; innocence and purity; sacrifice.

        LEVI (Jacob's son). A corporeal and sensual belief;
590:12  mortal man; denial of the fulness of God's creation;
        ecclesiastical despotism.

        LIFE. See chapter on Recapitulation, page 468.

590:15  LORD. In the Hebrew, this term is sometimes em-
        ployed as a title, which has the inferior sense of master,
        or ruler. In the Greek, the word /kurios/ almost always
590:18  has this lower sense, unless specially coupled with the
        name God. Its higher signification is Supreme Ruler.

        LORD GOD. Jehovah.

590:21  This double term is not used in the first chapter of
        Genesis, the record of spiritual creation. It is intro-
        duced in the second and following chapters, when the
590:24  spiritual sense of God and of infinity is disappearing
        from the recorder's thought, - when the true scientific
        statements of the Scriptures become clouded through a
591:1   physical sense of God as finite and corporeal. From this
        follow idolatry and mythology, - belief in many gods, or
591:3   material intelligences, as the opposite of the one Spirit,
        or intelligence, named Elohim, or God.

        MAN. The compound idea of infinite Spirit; the spirit-
591:6   ual image and likeness of God; the full representation of
        Mind.

        MATTER. Mythology; mortality; another name for
591:9   mortal mind; illusion; intelligence, substance, and life
        in non-intelligence and mortality; life resulting in death,
        and death in life; sensation in the sensationless; mind
591:12  originating in matter; the opposite of Truth; the oppo-
        site of Spirit; the opposite of God; that of which immortal
        Mind takes no cognizance; that which mortal mind sees,
591:15  feels, hears, tastes, and smells only in belief.

        MIND. The only I, or Us; the only Spirit, Soul, divine
        Principle, substance, Life, Truth, Love; the one God;
591:18  not that which is/ in/ man, but the divine Principle, or God,
        of whom man is the full and perfect expression; Deity,
        which outlines but is not outlined.

591:21  MIRACLE. That which is divinely natural, but must
        be learned humanly; a phenomenon of Science.

        MORNING. Light; symbol of Truth; revelation and
591:24  progress.

        MORTAL MIND. Nothing claiming to be something,
        for Mind is immortal; mythology; error creating other
591:27  errors; a suppositional material sense, /alias/ the belief
592:1   that sensation is in matter, which is sensationless; a be-
        lief that life, substance, and intelligence are in and of
592:3   matter; the opposite of Spirit, and therefore the opposite
        of God, or good; the belief that life has a beginning
        and therefore an end; the belief that man is the off-
592:6   spring of mortals; the belief that there can be more than
        one creator; idolatry; the subjective states of error;
        material senses; that which neither exists in Science nor
592:9   can be recognized by the spiritual sense; sin; sickness;
        death.

        MOSES. A corporeal mortal; moral courage; a type
592:12  of moral law and the demonstration thereof; the proof
        that, without the gospel, - the union of justice and affec-
        tion, - there is something spiritually lacking, since justice
592:15  demands penalties under the law.

        MOTHER. God; divine and eternal Principle; Life,
        Truth, and Love.

592:18  NEW JERUSALEM. Divine Science; the spiritual facts
        and harmony of the universe; the kingdom of heaven,
        or reign of harmony.

592:21  NIGHT. Darkness; doubt; fear.

        NOAH. A corporeal mortal; knowledge of the noth-
        ingness of material things and of the immortality of all
592:24  that is spiritual.

        OIL. Consecration; charity; gentleness; prayer; heav-
        enly inspiration.

592:27  PHARISEE. Corporeal and sensuous belief; self-right-
        eousness; vanity; hypocrisy.

593:1   PISON (river). The love of the good and beautiful, and
        their immortality.

593:3   PRINCIPLE. See chapter on Recapitulation, page 465.

        PROPHET. A spiritual seer; disappearance of mate-
        rial sense before the conscious facts of spiritual Truth.

593:6   PURSE. Laying up treasures in matter; error.

        RED DRAGON. Error; fear; inflammation; sensuality;
        subtlety; animal magnetism; envy; revenge.

593:9   RESURRECTION. Spiritualization of thought; a new
        and higher idea of immortality, or spiritual existence;
        material belief yielding to spiritual understanding.

593:12  REUBEN (Jacob's son). Corporeality; sensuality; de-
        lusion; mortality; error.

        RIVER. Channel of thought.

593:15  When smooth and unobstructed, it typifies the course
        of Truth; but muddy, foaming, and dashing, it is a type
        of error.

593:18  ROCK. Spiritual foundation; Truth. Coldness and
        stubbornness.

        SALVATION. Life, Truth, and Love understood and
593:21  demonstrated as supreme over all; sin, sickness, and
        death destroyed.

        SEAL. The signet of error revealed by Truth

594:1   SERPENT (/ophis/, in Greek; /nacash/, in Hebrew).
        Subtlety; a lie; the opposite of Truth, named error;
594:3   the first statement of mythology and idolatry; the belief
        in more than one God; animal magnetism; the first lie
        of limitation; finity; the first claim that there is an oppo-
594:6   site of Spirit, or good, termed matter, or evil; the first
        delusion that error exists as fact; the first claim that sin,
        sickness, and death are the realities of life. The first
594:9   audible claim that God was not omnipotent and that
        there was another power, named /evil/, which was as real
        and eternal as God, good.

594:12  SHEEP. Innocence; inoffensiveness; those who follow
        their leader.

        SHEM (Noah's son). A corporeal mortal; kindly affec-
594:1   tion; love rebuking error; reproof of sensualism.

        SON. The Son of God, the Messiah or Christ. The
        son of man, the offspring of the flesh. " Son of a year."

594:18  SOULS. See chapter on Recapitulation, page 466.

        SPIRIT. Divine substance; Mind; divine Principle;
        all that is good; God; that only which is perfect, ever-
594:21  lasting, omnipresent, omnipotent, infinite.

        SPIRITS. Mortal beliefs; corporeality; evil minds;
        supposed intelligences, or gods; the opposites of God;
594:24  errors; hallucinations. (See page 466.)

        SUBSTANCE. See chapter on Recapitulation, page 468.

595:1   SUN. The symbol of Soul governing man, - of
        Truth, Life, and Love.

595:3   SWORD. The idea of Truth; justice. Revenge;
        anger.

        TARES. Mortality; error; sin; sickness; disease;
595:6   death.

        TEMPLE. Body; the idea of Life, substance, and in-
        telligence; the superstructure of Truth; the shrine of
595:9   Love; a material superstructure, where mortals congre-
        gate for worship.

        THUMMIM. Perfection; the eternal demand of divine
595:12  Science.

        The Urim and Thummim, which were to be on Aaron's
        breast when he went before Jehovah, were holiness and
595:15  purification of thought and deed, which alone can fit us
        for the office of spiritual teaching.

        TIME. Mortal measurements; limits, in which are
595:18  summed tip all human acts, thoughts, beliefs, opinions,
        knowledge; matter; error; that which begins before,
        and continues after, what is termed death, until the mortal
595:21  disappears and spiritual perfection appears.

        TITHE. Contribution; tenth part; homage; gratitude.
        A sacrifice to the gods.

595:24  UNCLEANLINESS. Impure thoughts; error; sin; dirt.

        UNGODLINESS. Opposition to the divine Principle and
        its spiritual idea.

596:1   UNKNOWN. That which spiritual sense alone compre-
        hends, and which is unknown to the material senses.

596:3   Paganism and agnosticism may define Deity as "the
        great unknowable;" but Christian Science brings God
        much nearer to man, and makes Him better known as
596:6   the All-in-all, forever near.

        Paul saw in Athens an altar dedicated "to the unknown
        God." Referring to it, he said to the Athenians: "Whom
596:9   therefore ye ignorantly worship, Him declare I unto you."
        (Acts xvii. 23.)

        URIM. Light.

596:12  The rabbins believed that the stones in the breast-
        plate of the high-priest had supernatural illumination,
        but Christian Science reveals Spirit, not matter, as the
596:15  illuminator of all. The illuminations of Science give us
        a sense of the nothingness of error, and they show the
        spiritual inspiration of Love and Truth to be the only fit
596:18  preparation for admission to the presence and power of
        the Most High.

        VALLEY. Depression; meekness; darkness.

596:21  "Though I walk through the valley of the shadow of
        death, I will fear no evil." (Psalm xxiii.4.)

        Though the way is dark in mortal sense, divine Life
596:24  and Love illumine it, destroy the unrest of mortal thought,
        the fear of death, and the supposed reality of error. Chris-
        tian Science, contradicting sense, maketh the valley to bud
596:27  and blossom as the rose.

        VEIL. A cover; concealment; hiding; hypocrisy.

        The Jewish women wore veils over their faces in token
597:1   of reverence and submission and in accordance with
        Pharisaical notions.

597:3   The Judaic religion consisted mostly of rites and cere-
        monies. The motives and affections of a man were of
        little value, if only he appeared unto men to fast. The
597:6   great Nazarene, as meek as he was mighty, rebuked the
        hypocrisy, which offered long petitions for blessings upon
        material methods, but cloaked the crime, latent in thought,
597:9   which was ready to spring into action and crucify God's
        anointed. The martyrdom of Jesus was the culminating
        sin of Pharisaism. It rent the veil of the temple. It re-
597:12  vealed the false foundations and superstructures of super-
        ficial religion, tore from bigotry and superstition their
        coverings, and opened the sepulchre with divine Science,
597:15  - immortality and Love.

        WILDERNESS. Loneliness; doubt; darkness. Spon-
        taneity of thought and idea; the vestibule in which a
597:18  material sense of things disappears, and spiritual sense
        unfolds the great facts of existence.

        WILL. The motive-power of error; mortal belief; ani-
597:21  mal power. The might and wisdom of God.

        "For this is the will of God." (I Thessalonians
        iv. 3.)

597:24  Will, as a quality of so-called mortal mind, is a wrong-
        doer; hence it should not be confounded with the term
        as applied to Mind or to one of God's qualities.

597:27  WIND. That which indicates the might of omnipo-
        tence and the movements of God's spiritual government,
        encompassing all things. Destruction; anger; mortal
597:30  passions.

598:1   The Greek word for /wind/ (/pneuma/) is used also for
        /spirit/, as in the passage in John's Gospel, the third chap-
598:3   ter, where we read: "The wind [/pneuma/] bloweth where
        it listeth. . . . So is every one that is born of the Spirit
        [/pneuma/]." Here the original word is the same in both
598:6   cases, yet it has received different translations, as in other
        passages in this same chapter and elsewhere in the New
        Testament. This shows how our Master had constantly
598:9   to employ words of material significance in order to unfold
        spiritual thoughts. In the record of Jesus' supposed
        death, we read: "He bowed his head, and gave up the
598:12  ghost;" but this word /ghost/ is /pneuma/. It might be trans-
        lated /wind/ or /air/, and the phrase is equivalent to our
        common statement, "He breathed his last." What
598:15  Jesus gave up was indeed air, an etherealized form of
        matter, for never did he give up Spirit, or Soul.

        WINE. Inspiration; understanding. Error; fornica-
598:18  tion; temptation; passion.

        YEAR. A solar measurement of time; mortality;
        space for repentance.

598:21  "One day is with the Lord as a thousand years."
        (II Peter iii. 8.)

        One moment of divine consciousness, or the spiritual
598:24  understanding of Life and Love, is a foretaste of eternity.
        This exalted view, obtained and retained when the Sci-
        ence of being is understood, would bridge over with life
598:27  discerned spiritually the interval of death, and man
        would be in the full consciousness of his immortality and
        eternal harmony, where sin, sickness, and death are un-
598:30  known. Time is a mortal thought, the divisor of which
599:1   is the solar year. Eternity is God's measurement of Soul-
        filled years.

599:3   YOU. As applied to corporeality, a mortal; finity.

        ZEAL. The reflected animation of Life, Truth, and
        Love. Blind enthusiasm; mortal will.

599:6   ZION. Spiritual foundation and superstructure; in-
        spiration; spiritual strength. Emptiness; unfaithful-
        ness; desolation.






