replied, "O Dhritarashtra, a quarrel with the Pandavas is what I can never
approve of. As thou art to me, so was Pandu without doubt. And the sons of
Gandhari are to me, as those of Kunti. I should protect them as well as I
should thy sons, O Dhritarashtra! And, O king, the Pandavas are as much
near to me as they are to prince Duryodhana or to all the other Kurus.
Under these circumstances a quarrel with them is what I never like.
Concluding a treaty with those heroes, let half the land be given unto
them. This is without doubt, the paternal kingdom of those foremost ones
of the Kuru race. And, O Duryodhana, like thee who lookest upon this
kingdom as thy paternal property, the Pandavas also look upon it as their
paternal possession. If the renowned sons of Pandu obtain not the kingdom,
how can it be thine, or that of any other descendant of the Bharata race?
If thou regardest thyself as one that hath lawfully come into the
possession of the kingdom, I think they also may be regarded to have
lawfully come into the possession of this kingdom before thee. Give them
half the kingdom quietly. This, O tiger among men, is beneficial to all.
If thou actest otherwise, evil will befall us all. Thou too shall be
covered with dishonour. O Duryodhana, strive to maintain thy good name. A
good name is, indeed, the source of one's strength. It hath been said that
one liveth in vain whose reputation hath gone. A man, O Kaurava, doth not
die so long as his fame lasteth. One liveth as long as one's fame endureth,
and dieth when one's fame is gone. Follow thou, O son of Gandhari, the
practice that is worthy of the Kuru race. O thou of mighty arms, imitate
thy own ancestors. We are fortunate that the Pandavas have not perished.
We are fortunate that Kunti liveth. We are fortunate that the wretch
Purochana without being able to accomplish his purpose hath himself
perished. From that time when I heard that the sons of Kuntibhoja's
daughter had been burnt to death, I was, O son of Gandhari, ill able to
meet any living creature. O tiger among men, hearing of the fate that
overtook Kunti, the world doth not regard Purochana so guilty as it
regardeth thee. O king, the escape, therefore, of the sons of Pandu with
life from that conflagration and their re-appearance, do away with thy
evil repute. Know, O thou of Kuru's race, that as long as those heroes
live, the wielder of the thunder himself cannot deprive them of their
ancestral share in the kingdom. The Pandavas are virtuous and united. They
are being wrongly kept out of their equal share in the kingdom. If thou
shouldst act rightly, if thou shouldst do what is agreeable to me, if thou
shouldst seek the welfare of all, then give half the kingdom unto them."'"


SECTION CCVI

(Viduragamana Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'After Bhishma had concluded, Drona spoke, saying, "O
king Dhritarashtra, it hath been heard by us that friends summoned for
consultation should always speak what is right, true, and conductive to
fame. O sire, I am of the same mind in this matter with the illustrious
Bhishma. Let a share of the kingdom be given unto the Pandavas. This is
eternal virtue. Send, O Bharata, unto Drupada without loss of time some
messenger of agreeable speech, carrying with him a large treasure for the
Pandavas. And let the man go unto Drupada carrying costly presents for
both the bridegrooms and the bride, and let him speak unto that monarch of
thy increase of power and dignity arising from this new alliance with him.
And, O monarch, let the man know also that both thyself and Duryodhana
have become exceedingly glad in consequence of what hath happened. Let him
say this repeatedly unto Drupada and Dhrishtadyumna. And let him speak
also about the alliance as having been exceedingly proper, and agreeable
unto thee, and of thyself being worthy of it. And let the man repeatedly
propitiate the sons of Kunti and those of Madri (in proper words). And at
thy command, O king, let plenty of ornaments of pure gold be given unto
Draupadi. And let, O bull of Bharata's race, proper presents be given unto
all the sons of Drupada. Let the messenger then propose the return of the
Pandavas to Hastinapura. After the heroes will have been permitted (by
Drupada), to come hither, let Duhsasana and Vikarna go out with a handsome
train to receive them. And when they will have arrived at Hastinapura, let
those foremost of men be received with affection by thee. And let them
then be installed on their paternal throne, agreeably to the wishes of the
people of the realm. This, O monarch of Bharata's race, is what I think
should be thy behaviour towards the Pandavas who are to thee even as thy
own sons."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'After Drona had ceased, Karna spake again, "Both
Bhishma and Drona have been pampered with wealth that is thine and favours
conferred by thee! They are also always regarded by thee as thy trusted
friends! What can therefore be more amusing than that they both should
give thee advice which is not for thy good? How can the wise approve that
advice which is pronounced good by a person speaking with wicked intent
but taking care to conceal the wickedness of his heart? Indeed, in a
season of distress, friends can neither benefit nor injure. Every one's
happiness or the reverse dependeth on destiny. He that is wise and he that
is foolish, he that is young (in years) and he that is old, he that hath
allies and he that hath none, all become, it is seen everywhere, happy or
unhappy at times. It hath been heard by us that there was, of old, a king
by name Amvuvicha. Having his capital at Rajagriha, he was the king of all
the Magadha chiefs. He never attended to his affairs. All his exertion
consisted in inhaling the air. All his affairs were in the hands of his
minister. And his minister, named Mahakarni, became the supreme authority
in the state. Regarding himself all powerful, he began to disregard the
king. And the wretch himself appropriated everything belonging unto the
king, his queens and treasures and sovereignty. But the possession of all
these, instead of satisfying his avarice, only served to inflame him the
more. Having appropriated everything belonging to the king, he even
coveted the throne. But it hath been heard by us that with all his best
endeavours he succeeded not in acquiring the kingdom of the monarch, his
master, even though the latter was inattentive to business and content
with only breathing the air. What else can be said, O king, than that
monarch's sovereignty was dependent on destiny? If, therefore, O king,
this kingdom be established in thee by destiny, it will certainly continue
in thee, even if the whole world were to become thy enemy! If, however,
destiny hath ordained otherwise, howsoever mayest thou strive, it will not
last in thee! O learned one, remembering all this, judge of the honesty or
otherwise of thy advisers. Ascertain also who amongst them are wicked and
who have spoken wisely and well."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of Karna, Drona replied, "As
thou art wicked it is evident thou sayest so in consequence of the
wickedness of thy intent. It is for injuring the Pandavas that thou
findest fault with us. But know, O Karna, what I have said is for the good
of all and the prosperity of the Kuru race. If thou regardest all this as
productive of evil, declare thyself what is for our good. If the good
advice I have given be not followed, I think the Kurus will be
exterminated in no time."'"


SECTION CCVII

(Viduragamana Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'After Drona had ceased, Vidura spoke, saying, "O
monarch, thy friends without doubt, are saying unto thee what is for thy
good. But as thou art unwilling to listen to what they say, their words
scarcely find a place in thy ears. What that foremost one of Kuru's race,
viz., Bhishma, the son of Santanu, hath said, is excellent and is for thy
good. But thou dost not listen to it. The preceptor Drona also hath said
much that is for thy good which however Karna, the son of Radha, doth not
regard to be such. But, O king, reflecting hard I do not find any one who
is better a friend to thee than either of these two lions among men (viz.,
Bhishma and Drona), or any one who excels either of them in wisdom. These
two, old in years, in wisdom, and in learning, always regard thee, O king,
and the sons of Pandu with equal eyes. Without doubt, O king of Bharata's
race, they are both, in virtue and truthfulness, not inferior to Rama, the
son of Dasaratha, and Gaya. Never before did they give thee any evil
advice. Thou also, O monarch, hast never done them any injury. Why should,
therefore, these tigers among men, who are ever truthful, give thee wicked
advice, especially when thou hast never injured them? Endued with wisdom
these foremost of men, O king, will never give thee counsels that are
crooked. O scion of Kuru's race, this is my firm conviction that these two,
acquainted with all rules of morality, will never, tempted by wealth,
utter anything betraying a spirit of partisanship. What they have said, O
Bharata, I regard highly beneficial to thee. Without doubt, O monarch, the
Pandavas are thy sons as much as Duryodhana and others are. Those
ministers, therefore, that give thee any counsel fraught with evil unto
the Pandavas, do not really look to thy interests. If there is any
partiality in thy heart, O king, for thy own children, they who by their
counsel seek to bring it out, certainly do thee no good. Therefore, O king,
these illustrious persons endued with great splendour, have not I think,
said anything that leadeth to evil. Thou, however, dost not understand it.
What these bulls among men have said regarding the invincibility of the
Pandavas is perfectly true. Think not otherwise of it, O tiger among men.
Blest be thou! Can the handsome Dhananjaya, the son of Pandu, using the
right and the left hand with equal activity, be vanquished in battle even
by Maghavat himself? Can the great Bhimasena of strong arms possessing the
might of ten thousand elephants, be vanquished in battle by the immortals
themselves? Who also that desireth to live can overcome in battle the
twins (Nakula and Sahadeva) like unto the sons of Yama himself, and well-
skilled in fight? How too can the eldest one of the Pandavas in whom
patience, mercy, forgiveness, truth, and prowess always live together, be
vanquished? They who have Rama (Valadeva) as their ally, and Janardana
(Krishna) as their counsellor, and Satyaki as their partisan, have already
defeated everybody in war. They who have Drupada for their father-in-law,
and Drupada's sons--the heroic brothers, viz., Dhristadyumna and others of
Prishata's race for their brothers-in-law, are certainly invincible.
Remembering this, O monarch, and knowing that their claim to the kingdom
is even prior to thine, behave virtuously towards them. The stain of
calumny is on thee, O monarch, in consequence of that act of Purochana.
Wash thyself of it now, by a kindly behaviour towards the Pandavas. This
kindly behaviour of thine, O monarch, towards the Pandavas will be an act
of great benefit to us, protecting the lives of us all that belong to
Kuru's race, and leading to the growth of the whole Kshatriya order! We
had formerly warred with king Drupada; if we can now secure him as an ally,
it will strengthen our party. The Dasarhas, O king, are numerous and
strong. Know where Krishna is, all of them must be, and where Krishna is,
there victory also must be! O king, who, unless cursed by the gods, would
seek, to effect that by means of war which can be effected by
conciliation? Hearing that the sons of Pritha are alive, the citizens and
other subjects of the realm have become exceedingly glad and eager for
beholding them. O monarch, act in a way that is agreeable to them.
Duryodhana and Karna and Sakuni, the son of Suvala, are sinful, foolish
and young; listen not to them. Possessed of every virtue thou art. I long
ago told thee, O monarch that for Duryodhana's fault, the subjects of this
kingdom would be exterminated."'"


SECTION CCVIII

(Viduragamana Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Hearing these various speeches, Dhritarashtra said,
"The learned Bhishma, the son of Santanu, and the illustrious Rishi Drona,
and thyself also (O Vidura), have said the truth and what also is most
beneficial to me. Indeed, as those mighty car-warriors, the heroic sons of
Kunti, are the children of Pandu, so are they, without doubt, my children
according to the ordinance. And as my sons are entitled to this kingdom,
so are the sons of Pandu certainly entitled to it. Therefore, hasten to
bring hither the Pandavas along with their mother, treating them with
affectionate consideration. O thou of Bharata's race, bring also Krishna
of celestial beauty along with them. From sheer good fortune the sons of
Pritha are alive; and from good fortune alone those mighty car-warriors
have obtained the daughter of Drupada. It is from good fortune alone that
our strength hath increased, and it is from good fortune alone that
Purochana hath perished. O thou of great splendour, it is from good
fortune that my great grief hath been killed!"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then Vidura, at the command of Dhritarashtra,
repaired, O Bharata, unto Yajnasena and the Pandavas. And he repaired
thither carrying with him numerous jewels and various kinds of wealth for
Draupadi and the Pandavas and Yajnasena also. Arrived at Drupada's abode,
Vidura conversant with every rule of morality and deep in every science,
properly accosted the monarch and waited upon him. Drupada received Vidura
in proper form and they both enquired after each other's welfare. Vidura
then saw there the Pandavas and Vasudeva. As soon as he saw them he
embraced them from affection and enquired after their well being. The
Pandavas also along with Vasudeva, in due order, worshipped Vidura of
immeasurable intelligence. But Vidura, O king, in the name of
Dhritarashtra repeatedly enquired with great affection after their welfare.
He then gave, O monarch, unto the Pandavas and Kunti and Draupadi, and
unto Drupada and Drupada's sons, the gems and various kinds of wealth that
the Kauravas had sent through him. Possessed of immeasurable intelligence,
the modest Vidura then, in the presence of the Pandavas and Keshava,
addressed the well-behaved Drupada thus:

"'"With thy ministers and sons, O monarch, listen to what I say. King
Dhritarashtra, with ministers, sons, and friends, hath with a joyous heart,
O king, repeatedly enquired after thy welfare. And, O monarch, he hath
been highly pleased with this alliance with thee. So also, O king, Bhishma
of great wisdom, the son of Santanu, with all the Kurus, enquired after
thy welfare in every respect. Drona also of great wisdom the son of
Bharadwaja and thy dear friend, embracing thee mentally, enquired of thy
happiness. And, O king of Panchalas, Dhritarashtra and all the Kurus, in
consequence of this alliance with thee regard themselves supremely blest.
O Yajnasena, the establishment of this alliance with thee hath made them
happier than if they had acquired a new kingdom. Knowing all this, O
monarch, permit the Pandavas to re-visit their ancestral kingdom. The
Kurus are exceedingly eager to behold the sons of Pandu. These bulls among
men have been long absent (from their kingdom). They as well as Pritha
must be very eager to behold their city. And all the Kuru ladies and the
citizens and our subjects are eagerly waiting to behold Krishna the
Panchala Princess. This, therefore, is my opinion, O monarch, that thou
shouldst, without delay, permit the Pandavas to go thither with their wife.
And after the illustrious Pandavas, O king, will have received thy
permission to go thither, I shall send information unto Dhritarashtra by
quick messengers. Then, O king, will the Pandavas set out with Kunti and
Krishna."'"


SECTION CCIX

(Viduragamana Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Hearing these words of Vidura, Drupada said, "It is
even so as thou, O Vidura of great wisdom, hast said. Venerable one, I too
have been exceedingly happy in consequence of this alliance. It is highly
proper that these illustrious princes should return to their ancestral
kingdom. But it is not proper for me to say this myself. If the brave son
of Kunti viz., Yudhishthira, if Bhima and Arjuna, if these among men, viz.,
the twins, themselves desire to go and if Rama (Valadeva) and Krishna,
both acquainted with every rule of morality, be of the same mind, then let
the Pandavas go thither. For these tigers among men (Rama and Krishna) are
ever engaged in doing what is agreeable and beneficial to the sons of
Pandu."

"'Hearing this, Yudhishthira said, "We are now, O monarch, with all our
younger brothers, dependent on thee. We shall cheerfully do what thou art
pleased to command."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then Vasudeva said, "I am of opinion that the
Pandavas should go. But we should all abide by the opinion of king Drupada
who is conversant with every rule of morality."

"'Drupada then spoke, "I certainly agree with what this foremost of men
thinketh, having regard to the circumstances. For the illustrious sons of
Pandu now are to me as they are, without doubt, to Vasudeva. Kunti's son
Yudhishthira himself doth not seek the welfare of the Pandavas so
earnestly as Kesava, that tiger among men."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Commanded by the illustrious Drupada, the
Pandavas, then, O king, and Krishna and Vidura, taking with them Krishna,
the daughter of Drupada, and the renowned Kunti, journeyed towards the
city called after the elephant, stopping at various places along the way
for purposes of pleasure and enjoyment. King Dhritarashtra, hearing that
those heroes had neared the capital sent out the Kauravas to receive them.
They who were thus sent out were, O Bharata, Vikarna of the great bow, and
Chitrasena, and Drona that foremost of warriors, and Kripa of Gautama's
line. Surrounded by these, those mighty heroes, their splendour enhanced
by that throng slowly entered the city of Hastinapura. The whole city
became radiant, as it were, with the gay throng of sight-seers animated by
curiosity. Those tigers among men gladdened the hearts of all who beheld
them. And the Pandavas, dear unto the hearts of the people, heard, as they
proceeded, various exclamations which the citizens, ever desirous of
obeying the wishes of those princes, loudly uttered. Some exclaimed, "Here
returns that tiger among men, conversant with all the rules of morality
and who always protects us as if we were his nearest relatives." And
elsewhere they said, "It seems that king Pandu--the beloved of his people--
returneth today from the forest, doubtless to do what is agreeable to us."
And there were some that said, "What good is not done to us today when the
heroic sons of Kunti come back to our town? If we have ever given away in
charity, if we have ever poured libations of clarified butter on the fire,
if we have any ascetic merit, let the Pandavas, by virtue of all those
acts stay in town for a hundred years."

"'At last the Pandavas, on arriving at the palace, worshipped the feet of
Dhritarashtra, as also those of the illustrious Bhishma. They also
worshipped the feet of everybody else that deserved that honour. And they
enquired after the welfare of every citizen (there present). At last, at
the command of Dhritarashtra they entered the chambers that had been
assigned to them.

"'After they had rested there for some time, they were summoned (to the
court) by king Dhritarashtra and Bhishma, the son of Santanu. When they
came, king Dhritarashtra addressing Yudhishthira, said, "Listen, O son of
Kunti, with thy brothers, to what I say. Repair ye to Khandavaprastha so
that no difference may arise again (between you and your cousins). If you
take up your quarters there no one will be able to do you any injury.
Protected by Partha (Arjuna), like the celestials by the thunderbolt,
reside ye at Khandavaprastha, taking half of the kingdom."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Agreeing to what Dhritarashtra said, those bulls
among men worshipping the king set out from Hastinapura. And content with
half the kingdom, they removed to Khandavaprastha, which was in
unreclaimed desert. Then those heroes of unfading splendour, viz., the
Pandavas, with Krishna at their head, arriving there, beautified the place
and made it a second heaven. And those mighty car-warriors, selecting with
Dwaipayana's assistance a sacred and auspicious region, performed certain
propitiatory ceremonies and measured out a piece of land for their city.
Then surrounded by a trench wide as the sea and by walls reaching high up
to the heavens and white as the fleecy clouds or the rays of the moon,
that foremost of cities looked resplendent like Bhogavati (the capital of
the nether kingdom) decked with the Nagas. And it stood adorned with
palatial mansions and numerous gates, each furnished with a couple of
panels resembling the out-stretched wings of Garuda. And it was protected
with gateways looking like the clouds and high as the Mandara mountains.
And well-furnished with numerous weapons of attack the missiles of the
foes could not make slightest impression on them. And they were almost
covered with darts and other missiles like double-tongued snakes. The
turrets along the walls were filled with armed men in course of training;
and the walls were lined with numerous warriors along their whole length.
And there were thousands of sharp hooks and Sataghnis (machines slaying a
century of warriors) and numerous other machines on the battlements. There
were also large iron wheels planted on them. And with all these was that
foremost of cities adorned. The streets were all wide and laid out
excellently; and there was no fear in them of accident. And decked with
innumerable mansions, the city became like unto Amaravati and came to be
called Indraprastha (like unto Indra's city). In a delightful and
auspicious part of the city rose the palace of the Pandavas filled with
every kind of wealth and like unto the mansion of the celestial treasurer
(Kuvera) himself. And it looked like a mass of clouds charged with
lightning.

"'When the city was built, there came, O king, numerous Brahmanas well-
acquainted with all the Vedas and conversant with every language, wishing
to dwell there. And there came also unto that town numerous merchants from
every direction, in the hope of earning wealth. There also came numerous
persons well-skilled in all the arts, wishing to take up their abode there.
And around the city were laid out many delightful gardens adorned with
numerous trees bearing both fruits and flowers. There were Amras (mango
trees) and Amaratakas, and Kadamvas and Asokas, and Champakas; and
Punnagas and Nagas and Lakuchas and Panasas; and Salas and Talas (palm
trees) and Tamalas and Vakulas, and Ketakas with their fragrant loads;
beautiful and blossoming and grand Amalakas with branches bent down with
the weight of fruits and Lodhras and blossoming Ankolas; and Jamvus
(blackberry trees) and Patalas and Kunjakas and Atimuktas; and Karaviras
and Parijatas and numerous other kinds of trees always adorned with
flowers and fruits and alive with feathery creatures of various species.
And those verdant groves always resounded with the notes of maddened
peacocks and Kokilas (blackbirds). And there were various pleasure-houses,
bright as mirrors, and numerous bowers of creepers, and charming and
artificial hillocks, and many lakes full to the brim of crystal water, and
delightful tanks fragrant with lotuses and lilies and adorned with swans
and ducks and chakravakas (brahminy ducks). And there were many delicious
pools overgrown with fine aquatic plants. And there were also diverse
ponds of great beauty and large dimension. And, O king, the joy of the
Pandavas increased from day to day, in consequence of their residence in
that large kingdom that was peopled with pious men.

"'Thus in consequence of the virtuous behaviour of Bhishma and king
Dhritarashtra towards them, the Pandavas took up their abode in
Khandavaprastha. Adorned with those five mighty warriors, each equal unto
Indra himself, that foremost of cities looked like Bhogavati (the capital
of the nether kingdom) adorned with the Nagas. And, O monarch, having
settled the Pandavas there, the heroic Krishna, obtaining their leave,
came back with Rama to Dwaravati.'"


SECTION CCX

(Rajya-labha Parva)

"Janamejaya said, 'O thou possessed of ascetic wealth, what did those high-
souled ones, my grandsires, the illustrious Pandavas, do, after obtaining
the kingdom of Indraprastha? How did their wife Draupadi obey them all?
How is it also that no dissensions arose amongst those illustrious rulers
of men, all attached to one wife, viz., Krishna? O thou of the wealth of
asceticism, I wish to hear everything in detail regarding the behaviour
towards one another of those rulers of men after their union with
Krishna.'

"Vaisampayana said, 'Those scorchers of foes, the Pandavas, having
obtained their kingdom, at the command of Dhritarashtra, passed their days
in joy and happiness at Khandavaprastha with Krishna. And Yudhishthira.
endued with great energy and ever adhering to truth, having obtained the
sovereignty, virtuously ruled the land, assisted by his brothers. And the
sons of Pandu, endued with great wisdom and devoted to truth and virtue,
having vanquished all their foes, continued to live there in great
happiness. And those bulls among men, seated on royal seats of great value,
used to discharge all the duties of government. And one day, while all
those illustrious heroes were so seated, there came unto them the
celestial Rishi Narada, in course of his wanderings. Beholding the Rishi,
Yudhishthira offered him his own handsome seat. And after the celestial
Rishi had been seated, the wise Yudhishthira duly offered him the Arghya
with his own hands. And the king also informed the Rishi of the state of
his kingdom. The Rishi accepting the worship, became well-pleased, and
eulogising him with benedictions, commanded the king to take his seat.
Commanded by the Rishi, the king took his seat. Then the king sent word
unto Krishna (in the inner apartments) of the arrival of the illustrious
one. Hearing of the Rishi's arrival Draupadi, purifying herself properly,
came with a respectful attitude to where Narada was with the Pandavas. The
virtuous princess of Panchala, worshipping the celestial Rishi's feet,
stood with joined hands before him, properly veiled. The illustrious
Narada, pronouncing various benedictions on her, commanded the princess to
retire. After Krishna had retired, the illustrious Rishi, addressing in
private all the Pandavas with Yudhishthira at their head, said, "The
renowned princess of Panchala is the wedded wife of you all. Establish a
rule amongst yourselves so that disunion may not arise amongst you. There
were, in former days, celebrated throughout the three worlds, two brothers
named Sunda and Upasunda living together and incapable of being slain by
anybody unless each slew the other. They ruled the same kingdom, lived in
the same house, slept on the same bed, sat on the same seat, and ate from
the same dish. And yet they killed each for the sake of Tilottama.
Therefore, O Yudhishthira, preserve your friendship for one another and do
that which may not produce disunion amongst you."

"'On hearing this, Yudhishthira asked, "O great Muni, whose sons were
Asuras called Sunda and Upasunda? Whence arose that dissension amongst
them, and why did they slay each other? Whose daughter also was this
Tilottama for whose love the maddened brothers killed each other? Was she
an Apsara (water nymph) or the daughter of any celestial? O thou whose
wealth is asceticism, we desire, O Brahmana, to hear in detail everything
as it happened. Indeed, our curiosity hath become great."'"


SECTION CCXI

(Rajya-labha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Hearing these words of Yudhishthira, Narada replied,
"O son of Pritha, listen with thy brothers to me as I recite this old
story, O Yudhishthira, exactly as everything happened. In olden days, a
mighty Daitya named Nikumbha, endued with great energy and strength was
born in the race of the great Asura, Hiranyakasipu. Unto this Nikumbha,
were born two sons called Sunda and Upasunda. Both of them were mighty
Asuras endued with great energy and terrible prowess. The brothers were
both fierce and possessed of wicked hearts. And those Daityas were both of
the same resolution, and ever engaged in achieving the same tasks and ends.
They were ever sharers with each other in happiness as well as in woe.
Each speaking and doing what was agreeable to the other, the brothers
never were unless they were together, and never went anywhere unless
together. Of exactly the same disposition and habits, they seemed to be
one individual divided into two parts. Endued with great energy and ever
of the same resolution in everything they undertook, the brothers
gradually grew up. Always entertaining the same purpose, desirous of
subjugating the three worlds, the brothers, after due initiation, went to
the mountains of Vindhya. And severe were the ascetic penances they
performed there. Exhausted with hunger and thirst, with matted locks on
their heads and attired in barks of trees, they acquired sufficient
ascetic merit at length. Besmearing themselves with dirt from head to foot,
living upon air alone, standing on their toes, they threw pieces of the
flesh of their bodies into the fire. Their arms upraised, and eye fixed,
long was the period for which they observed their vows. And during the
course of their ascetic penances, a wonderful incident occurred there. For
the mountains of Vindhya, heated for a long course of years by the power
of their ascetic austerities, began to emit vapour from every part of
their bodies. And beholding the severity of their austerities, the
celestials became alarmed. The gods began to cause numerous obstructions
to impede the progress of their asceticism. The celestials repeatedly
tempted the brothers by means of every precious possession and the most
beautiful girls. The brothers broke not their vows. Then the celestials
once more manifested, before the illustrious brothers, their powers of
illusion. For it seemed their sisters, mothers, wives, and other relatives,
with disordered hair and ornaments and robes, were running towards them in
terror, pursued and struck by a Rakshasa with a lance in hand. And it
seemed that the women implored the help of the brothers crying, 'O save
us!' But all this went for nothing, for firmly wedded thereto, the
brothers did not still break their vows. And when it was found that all
this produced not the slightest impression on any of the two, both the
women and the Rakshasa vanished from sight. At last the Grandsire himself,
the Supreme Lord ever seeking the welfare of all, came unto those great
Asuras and asked them to solicit the boon they desired. Then the brothers
Sunda and Upasunda, both of great prowess, beholding the Grandsire, rose
from their seats and waited with joined palms. And the brothers both said
unto the God, 'O Grandsire, if thou hast been pleased with these our
ascetic austerities, and art, O lord, propitious unto us, then let us have
knowledge of all weapons and of all powers of illusion. Let us be endued
with great strength, and let us be able to assume any form at will. And
last of all, let us also be immortal.' Hearing these words of theirs,
Brahman said, 'Except the immortality you ask for, you shall be given all
that you desire. Solicit you some form of death by which you may still be
equal unto the immortals. And since you have undergone these severe
ascetic austerities from desire of sovereignty alone I cannot confer on
you the boon of immortality. You have performed your ascetic penances even
for the subjugation of the three worlds. It is for this, O mighty Daityas,
that I cannot grant you what you desire.'"

"'Narada continued, "Hearing these words of Brahman, Sunda and Upasunda
said, 'O Grandsire, let us have no fear then from any created thing,
mobile or immobile, in the three worlds, except only from each other!' The
Grandsire then said, 'I grant you what you have asked for, even this your
desire'. And granting them this boon, the Grandsire made them desist from
their asceticism, and returned to his own region. Then the brothers, those
mighty Daityas, having received those several boons became incapable of
being slain by anybody in the universe. They then returned to their own
abode. All their friends and relatives, beholding those Daityas of great
intelligence, crowned with success in the matter of the boons they had
obtained, became exceedingly glad. And Sunda and Upasunda then cut off
their matted locks and wore coronets on their heads. Attired in costly
robes and ornaments, they looked exceedingly handsome. They caused the
moon to rise over their city every night even out of his season. And
friends and relatives gave themselves up to joy and merriment with happy
hearts. Eat, feed, give, make merry, sing, drink--these were the sounds
heard everyday in every house. And here and there arose loud uproars of
hilarity mixed with clappings of hands which filled the whole city of the
Daityas, who being capable of assuming any form at will, were engaged in
every kind of amusement and sport and scarcely noticed the flight of time,
even regarding a whole year as a single day."'"


SECTION CCXII

(Rajya-labha Parva continued)

"'Narada continued, "As soon as those festivities came to an end, the
brothers Sunda and Upasunda, desirous of the Sovereignty of the three
worlds, took counsel and commanded their forces to be arranged. Obtaining
the assent of their friends and relatives, of the elders of the Daitya
race and of their ministers of state, and performing the preliminary rites
of departure, they set out in the night when the constellation Magha was
in the ascendant. The brothers set out with a large Daitya force clad in
mail and armed with maces and axes and lances and clubs. The Daitya heroes
set out on their expedition with joyous hearts, the charanas (bards)
chanting auspicious panegyrics indicative of their future triumphs.
Furious in war, the Daitya brothers, capable of going everywhere at will,
ascended the skies and went to the region of the celestials. The
celestials knowing they were coming and acquainted also with the boons
granted unto them by the Supreme Deity left heaven and sought refuge in
the region of Brahman. Endued with fierce prowess, the Daitya heroes soon
subjugated the region of Indra, and vanquishing the diverse tribes of
Yakshas and Rakshasas and every creature ranging the skies, came away.
Those mighty car-warriors next subjugated the Nagas of the nether region,
and then the inmates of the ocean and then all the tribes of the
Mlechchhas. Desirous next of subjugating the whole earth, those heroes of
irresistible sway, summoning their soldiers, issued these cruel commands.
'Brahmanas and royal sages (on earth) with their libations and other food
offered at grand sacrifices, increase the energy and strength of the gods,
as also their prosperity. Engaged in such acts, they are the enemies of
the Asuras. All of us, therefore, mustering together should completely
slaughter them off the face of the earth!' Ordering their soldiers thus on
the eastern shore of the great ocean, and entertaining such a cruel
resolution, the Asura brothers set out in all directions. And those that
were performing sacrifices and the Brahmanas that were assisting at those
sacrifices, the mighty brothers instantly slew. And slaughtering them with
violence they departed for some other place. Whilst their soldiers threw
into the water the sacrificial fires that were in the asylums of Munis
with souls under complete control, the curses uttered by the illustrious
Rishis in wrath, rendered abortive by the boons granted (by Brahman),
affected not the Asura brothers. When the Brahmanas saw that their curses
produced not the slightest effect like shafts shot at stones they fled in
all directions, forsaking their rites and vows. Even those Rishis on earth
that were crowned with ascetic success, and had their passions under
complete control and were wholly engrossed in meditation of the Deity,
from fear of the Asura brothers, fled like snakes at the approach of
Vinata's son (Garuda the snake-eater). The sacred asylums were all trodden
down and broken. The sacrificial jars and vessels being broken, their
(sacred) contents were scattered over the ground. The whole universe
became empty, as if its creatures had all been stricken down during the
season of general dissolution. And, O king, after the Rishis had all
disappeared and made themselves invisible both the great Asuras, resolved
upon their destruction, began to assume various forms. Assuming the forms
of maddened elephants with temples rent from excess of juice, the Asura
pair, searching out the Rishis who had sheltered themselves in caves, sent
them to the region of Yama. Sometimes becoming as lions and again as
tigers and disappearing the next moment, by these and other methods the
cruel couple, seeing the Rishis, slew them instantly. Sacrifice and study
ceased, and kings and Brahmanas were exterminated. The earth became
utterly destitute of sacrifices and festivals. And the terrified people
uttered cries of Oh and Alas and all buying and selling were stopped. All
religious rites ceased, and the earth became destitute of sacred
ceremonies and marriages. Agriculture was neglected and cattle were no
longer tended. Towns and asylums became desolate. And scattered over with
bones and skeletons, the earth assumed a frightful aspect. All ceremonies
in honour of the Pitris were suspended, and the sacred sound of Vashat and
the whole circle of auspicious rites ceased. The earth became frightful to
behold. The Sun and the Moon, the Planets and Stars, and Constellations,
and the other dwellers in the firmament, witnessing these acts of Sunda
and Upasunda, grieved deeply. Subjugating all the points of heaven by
means of such cruel acts, the Asura brothers took up their abode in
Kurukshetra, without a single rival."'"


SECTION CCXIII

(Rajya-labha Parva continued)

"'Narada continued, "Then the celestial Rishis, the Siddhas, and the high-
souled Rishis possessing the attributes of tranquillity and self-restraint,
beholding that act of universal slaughter, were afflicted with great grief.
With passions and senses and souls under complete control, they then went
to the abode of the Grandsire, moved by compassion for the universe.
Arrived there, they beheld the Grandsire seated with gods, Siddhas, and
Brahmarshis around him. There were present that God of gods, viz.,
Mahadeva, and Agni, accompanied by Vayu, and Soma and Surya and Sakra, and
Rishis devoted to the contemplation of Brahma, and the Vaikhanasas, the
Valakhilyas, the Vanaprasthas, the Marichipas, the Ajas, the Avimudas, and
other ascetics of great energy. All those Rishis were sitting with the
Grandsire, when the celestial and other Rishis, approaching Brahman with
sorrowful hearts, represented unto him all the acts of Sunda and Upasunda.
And they told the Grandsire in detail everything that the Asura brothers
had done, and how they had done it, and in what order. Then all the
celestials and the great Rishis pressed the matter before the Grandsire.
The Grandsire, hearing everything they said, reflected for a moment and
settled in his mind what he should do. Resolving to compass the
destruction of the Asura brothers, he summoned Viswakarman (the celestial
architect). Seeing Viswakarman before him, the Grandsire possessed of
supreme ascetic merit commanded him, saying, 'Create thou a damsel capable
of captivating all hearts.' Bowing down unto the Grandsire and receiving
his command with reverence, the great artificer of the universe created a
celestial maiden with careful attention. Viswakrit first collected all
handsome features upon the body of the damsel he created. Indeed, the
celestial maiden that he created was almost a mass of gems. And created
with great care by Viswakarman, the damsel, in beauty, became unrivalled
among the women of the three worlds. There was not even a minute part of
her body which by its wealth of beauty could not attract the gaze of
beholders. And like unto the embodied Sri herself, that damsel of
extraordinary beauty captivated the eyes and hearts of every creature. And
because she had been created with portions of every gem taken in minute
measures, the Grandsire bestowed upon her the name of Tilottama. And as
soon as he started it into life, the damsel bowed to Brahman and with
joined palms said, 'Lord of every created thing, what task am I to
accomplish and what have I been created for?' The Grandsire answered, 'Go,
O Tilottama, unto the Asuras, Sunda and Upasunda. O amiable one, tempt
them with thy captivating beauty. And, O damsel, conduct thyself there in
such a way that the Asura brothers may, in consequence of the wealth of
thy beauty, quarrel with each other as soon as they cast their eyes upon
thee.'"

"'Narada continued, "Bowing unto the Grandsire and saying, 'So be it,'--the
damsel walked round the celestial conclave. The illustrious Brahman was
then sitting with face turned eastwards, and Mahadeva with face also
towards the east, and all the celestials with faces northwards, and the
Rishis with faces towards all directions. While Tilottama walked round the
conclave of the celestials, Indra and the illustrious Sthanu (Mahadeva)
were the only ones that succeeded in preserving their tranquillity of mind.
But exceedingly desirous as Mahadeva was (of beholding Tilottama) when the
damsel (in her progress round the celestial conclave) was at his side,
another face like a full-blown lotus appeared on the southern side of his
body. And when she was behind him, another face appeared on the west. And
when the damsel was on the northern side of the great god, a fourth face
appeared on the northern side of his body. Mahadeva (who was eager to
behold the damsel) came also to have a thousand eyes, each large and
slightly reddish, before, behind and on his flanks. And it was thus that
Sthanu the great god came to have four faces, and the slayer of Vala, a
thousand eyes. And as regards the mass of the celestials and the Rishis,
they turned their faces towards all directions as Tilottama walked round
them. Except the divine Grandsire himself, the glances of those
illustrious personages, even of all of them fell upon Tilottama's body.
And when Tilottama set out (for the city of the Asuras) with the wealth of
her beauty, all regarded the task as already accomplished. After Tilottama
had gone away, the great god who was the First Cause of the Universe,
dismissed all the celestials and the Rishis."'"


SECTION CCXIV

(Rajya-labha Parva continued)

"'Narada continued, "Meanwhile the Asura brothers having subjugated the
earth were without a rival. The fatigue of exertion gone, they, having
brought the three worlds under equal sway, regarded themselves as persons
that had nothing more to do. Having brought all the treasures of the gods,
the Gandharvas, the Yakshas, the Nagas, the Rakshasas, and the kings of
the earth, the brothers began to pass their days in great happiness. When
they saw they had no rivals (in the three worlds), they gave up all
exertion and devoted their time to pleasure and merriment, like the
celestials. They experienced great happiness by giving themselves up to
every kind of enjoyment, such as women, and perfumes and floral wreaths
and viands, and drinks and many other agreeable objects all in profusion.
In houses and woods and gardens, on hills and in forests, wherever they
liked they passed their time in pleasure and amusement, like the immortals.
And it so happened that one day they went for purposes of pleasure to a
tableland of the Vindhya range, perfectly level and stony, and overgrown
with blossoming trees. After every object of desire, all of the most
agreeable kind, had been brought, the brothers sat on an excellent seat,
with happy hearts and accompanied by handsome women. And those damsels,
desirous of pleasing the brothers, commenced a dance in accompaniment to
music, and sweetly chanted many a song in praise of the mighty pair.

"'"Meanwhile Tilottama attired in a single piece of red silk that exposed
all her charms, came along, plucking wild flowers on her way. She advanced
slowly to where those mighty Asuras were. The Asura brothers, intoxicated
with the large portions they had imbibed, were smitten upon beholding that
maiden of transcendent beauty. Leaving their seats they went quickly to
where the damsel was. Both of them being under the influence of lust, each
sought the maiden for himself. And Sunda seized that maid of fair brows by
her right hand. Intoxicated with the boons they had obtained, with
physical might, with the wealth and gems they had gathered from every
quarter, and with the wine they had drunk, maddened with all these, and
influenced by wishful desire, they addressed each other, each contracting
his brow in anger. 'She is my wife, and therefore your superior,' said
Sunda. 'She is my wife, and therefore your sister-in-law', replied
Upasunda. And they said unto each other, 'She is mine not yours.' And soon
they were under the influence of rage. Maddened by the beauty of the
damsel, they soon forgot their love and affection for each other. Both of
them, deprived of reason by passion, then took up their fierce maces. Each
repeating, 'I was the first, I was the first,' (in taking her hand) struck
the other. And the fierce Asuras, struck by each other with the mace, fell
down upon the ground, their bodies bathed in blood, like two suns
dislodged from the firmament. And beholding this, the women that had come
there, and the other Asuras there present, all fled away trembling in
grief and fear, and took refuge in the nether regions. The Grandsire
himself of pure soul, then came there, accompanied by the celestials, and
the great Rishis. And the illustrious Grandsire applauded Tilottama and
expressed his wish of granting her a boon. The Supreme Deity, before
Tilottama spoke, desirous of granting her a boon, cheerfully said, 'O
beautiful damsel, thou shalt roam in the region of the Adityas. Thy
splendour shall be so great that nobody will ever be able to look at thee
for any length of time!' The Grandsire of all creatures, granting this
boon unto her, establishing the three worlds in Indra as before, returned
to his own region."

"'Narada continued, "It was thus that Asuras, ever united and inspired by
the same purpose slew each other in wrath for the sake of Tilottama.
Therefore, from affection I tell you, ye foremost ones of Bharata's line,
that if you desire to do anything agreeable to me, make some such
