



WORDS FROM THE CROSS


    'And when they were come to the place which is called
    Calvary, there they crucified Him, and the malefactors,
    one on the right hand, and the other on the left.
    34. Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them; for they
    know not what they do. And they parted His raiment,
    and cast lots. 35. And the people stood beholding. And
    the rulers also with them derided Him, saying, He saved
    others; let Him save Himself, if He be Christ, the
    chosen of God. 36. And the soldiers also mocked Him,
    coming to Him and offering Him vinegar. 37. And saying,
    if Thou be the king of the Jews, save Thyself. 38. And
    a superscription also was written over Him in letters
    of Greek, and Latin, and Hebrew, THIS IS THE KING OF
    THE JEWS. 39. And one of the malefactors which were
    hanged railed on Him, saying, If Thou be Christ, save
    Thyself and us. 40. But the other answering rebuked
    him, saying, Dost not thou fear God, seeing thou art
    in the same condemnation? 41. And we indeed justly;
    for we receive the due reward of our deeds: but this
    Man hath done nothing amiss. 42. And he said unto
    Jesus, Lord, remember me when Thou comest into Thy
    kingdom. 43. And Jesus said unto him, Verily I say
    unto thee, To-day shall thou be with Me in paradise.
    44. And it was about the sixth hour, and there was
    darkness over all the earth until the ninth hour.
    45. And the sun was darkened, and the vail of the
    temple was rent in the midst. 46. And when Jesus had
    cried with a loud voice, He said, Father, into Thy
    hands I commend My spirit: and having said thus, He
    gave up the ghost.'--LUKE xxiii. 33-46.

The calm tone of all the narratives of the Crucifixion is very
remarkable. Each Evangelist limits himself to the bare recording of
facts, without a trace of emotion. They felt too deeply to show
feeling. It was fitting that the story which, till the end of time,
was to move hearts to a passion of love and devotion, should be told
without any colouring. Let us beware of reading it coldly! This
passage is more adapted to be pondered in solitude, with the
thought, 'All this was borne for me,' than to be commented on. But a
reverent word or two is permissible.

Luke's account is noticeably independent of the other three. The
three sayings of Christ's, round which his narrative is grouped, are
preserved by him alone. We shall best grasp the dominant impression
which the Evangelist unconsciously had himself received, and sought
to convey, by gathering the whole  round these three words from the
Cross.

I. The first word sets Jesus forth as the all-merciful Intercessor
and patient friend of sinners. It is very significantly set in the
centre of the paragraph (vs. 33-38) which recounts the heartless
cruelty and mockery of soldiers and rulers. Surrounded by that
whirlwind of abuse, contempt and ferocious glee at His sufferings,
He gave back no taunt, nor uttered any cry of pain, nor was moved to
the faintest anger, but let His heart go out in pity for all who
took part in that wicked tragedy; and, while 'He opened not His
mouth' in complaint or reviling, He did open it in intercession. But
the wonderful prayer smote no heart with compunction, and, after it,
the storm of mocking and savage triumph hurtled on as before.

Luke gathers all the details together in summary fashion, and piles
them on one another without enlarging on any. The effect produced is
like that of a succession of breakers beating on some lonely rock,
or of blows struck by a battering-ram on a fortress.

'They crucified Him,'--there is no need to say who 'they' were.
Others than the soldiers, who did the work, did the deed. Contempt
gave Him two malefactors for companions and hung the King of the
Jews in the place of honour in the midst. Did John remember what his
brother and he had asked? Matter-of-fact indifference as to a piece
of military duty, and shameless greed, impelled the legionaries to
cast lots for the clothes stripped from a living man. What did the
crucifying of another Jew or two matter to them? Gaping curiosity,
and the strange love of the horrible, so strong in the vulgar mind,
led the people, who had been shouting Hosanna! less than a week ago,
to stand gazing on the sight without pity but in a few hearts.

The bitter hatred of the rulers, and their inhuman glee at getting
rid of a heretic, gave them bad preeminence in sin. Their scoff
acknowledged that He had 'saved others,' and their hate had so
blinded their eyes that they could not see how manifestly His
refusal to use His power to save Himself proved Him the Son of God.
He could not save Himself, just because He would save these scoffing
Rabbis and all the world. The rough soldiers knew little about Him,
but they followed suit, and thought it an excellent jest to bring
the 'vinegar,' provided in kindness, to Jesus with a mockery of
reverence as to a king. The gibe was double-barrelled, like the
inscription over the Cross; for it was meant to hit both this
Pretender to royalty and His alleged subjects.

And to all this Christ's sole answer was the ever-memorable prayer.
One of the women who bravely stood at the Cross must have caught the
perhaps low-voiced supplication, and it breathed so much of the
aspect of Christ's character in which Luke especially delights that
he could not leave it out. It opens many large questions which
cannot be dealt with here. All sin has in it an element of
ignorance, but it is not wholly ignorance as some modern teachers
affirm. If the ignorance were complete, the sin would be
nonexistent. The persons covered by the ample folds of this prayer
were ignorant in very different degrees, and had had very different
opportunities of changing ignorance for knowledge. The soldiers and
the rulers were in different positions in that respect. But none
were so entirely blind that they had no sin, and none were so
entirely seeing that they were beyond the reach of Christ's pity or
the power of His intercession. In that prayer we learn, not only His
infinite forgivingness for insults and unbelief levelled at Himself,
but His exaltation as the Intercessor, whom the Father heareth
always. The dying Christ prayed for His enemies; the glorified
Christ lives to make intercession for us.

II. In the second saying Christ is revealed as having the keys of
Hades, the invisible world of the dead. How differently the same
circumstances work on different natures! In the one malefactor,
physical agony and despair found momentary relief in taunts, flung
from lips dry with torture, at the fellow-sufferer whose very
innocence provoked hatred from the guilty heart. The other had been
led by his punishment to recognise in it the due reward of his
deeds, and thus softened, had been moved by Christ's prayer, and by
his knowledge of Christ's innocence, to hope that the same mercy
which had been lavished on the inflicters of His sufferings, might
stretch to enfold the partakers in it.

At that moment the dying thief had clearer faith in Christ's coming
in His kingdom than any of the disciples had. Their hopes were
crumbling as they watched Him hanging unresisting and gradually
dying. But this man looked beyond the death so near for both Jesus
and himself, and believed that, after it, He would come to reign. We
may call him the only disciple that Christ then had.

How pathetic is that petition, 'Remember me'! It builds the hope of
sharing in Christ's royalty on the fact of having shared in His
Cross. 'Thou wilt not forget Thy companion in that black hour, which
will then lie behind us.' Such trust and clinging, joined with such
penitence and submission, could not go unrewarded.

From His Cross Jesus speaks in royal style, as monarch of that dim
world. His promise is sealed with His own sign-manual, 'Verily, I
say.' It claims to have not only the clear vision of, but the
authority to determine, the future. It declares the unbroken
continuance of personal existence, and the reality of a state of
conscious blessedness, in which men are aware of their union with
Him, the Lord of the realm and the Life of its inhabitants. It
graciously accepts the penitent's petition, and assures him that
the companionship, begun on the Cross, will be continued there.
'With Me' makes 'Paradise' wherever a soul is.

III. The third word from the Cross, as recorded by Luke, reveals
Jesus as, in the act of dying, the Master of death, and its
Transformer for all who trust Him into a peaceful surrender of
themselves into the Father's hands. The circumstances grouped round
the act of His death bring out various aspects of its significance.
The darkness preceding had passed before He died, and it bore rather
on His sense of desertion, expressed in the unfathomably profound
and awful cry, 'Why hast Thou forsaken Me?' The rent veil is
generally taken to symbolise the unrestricted access into the
presence of God, which we have through Christ's death; but it is
worth considering whether it does not rather indicate the divine
leaving of the desecrated shrine, and so is the beginning of the
fulfilment of the deep word, 'Destroy this Temple.'

But the centre-point of the section is the last cry which, in its
loudness, indicated physical strength quite incompatible with the
exhaustion to which death by crucifixion was generally due. It thus
confirms the view which sees, both in the words of Jesus and in the
Evangelist's expression for His death, clear indications that He
died, not because His physical powers were unable to live longer,
but by the exercise of His own volition. He died because He chose,
and He chose because He loved and would save. As St. Bernard says,
'Who is He who thus easily falls asleep when He wills? To die is
indeed great weakness, but to die thus is immeasurable power. Truly
the weakness of God is stronger than men.'

Nor let us forget that, in thus dying, Jesus gave us an imitable
example, as well as revealed inimitable power. For, if we trust
ourselves, living and dying, to Him, we shall not be dragged
reluctantly, by an overmastering grasp against which we vainly
struggle, out of a world where we would fain stay, but we may
yield ourselves willingly, as to a Father's hand, which draws His
children gently to His own side, and blesses them, when there, with
His fuller presence.




THE DYING THIEF


    'And he said unto Jesus, Lord, remember me when Thou
    comest into Thy kingdom.'--LUKE xxiii, 42.

There is an old and true division of the work of Christ into three
parts--prophet, priest, and king. Such a distinction manifestly
exists, though it may be overestimated, or rather, the statement of
it may be exaggerated, if it be supposed that separate acts of His
discharge these separate functions, and that He ceases to be the one
before He becomes the other. Rather it is true that all His work is
prophetic, that all His work is priestly, and that His prophetic and
priestly work is the exercise of His kingly authority. But still the
division is a true one, and helps to set before us, clearly and
definitely, the wide range of the benefits of Christ's mission and
death. It is noteworthy that these three groups round the Cross, the
third of which we have to speak of now--that of the 'daughters of
Jerusalem,' that of the deriding scribes and the indifferent
soldiers, and this one of the two thieves--each presents us Christ
in one of the three characters. The words that He spoke upon the
Cross, with reference to others than Himself, may be gathered
around, and arranged under, that threefold aspect of Christ's work.
The _prophet_ said, 'Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for Me,
but weep for yourselves, for the days are coming.' The _priest_
said, 'Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do. 'The
_king_, in His sovereignty, ruled the heart of that penitent
man from His Cross, and while the crown shone athwart the smoke and
the agony of the death, the king 'opened the gates of the kingdom
of heaven unto all believers' when He said, 'This day shalt thou be
with Me in Paradise!'

We shall not attempt, in dealing with this incident, to paint
pictures. I have a far more important thing to do than even to try
to bring vividly before your minds the scene on that little hill of
Calvary. It is the meaning that we are concerned with, and not the
mere externals. I take it for granted, then, that we know the
details:--the dying man in his agony, beginning to see dimly, as his
soul closed upon earthly things, who this was--patient, loving,
mighty there in His sufferings; and using his last breath to cry,
'Lord, remember me!'--and the sufferer throned in the majesty of His
meekness, and divinity of His endurance; calm, conscious, full of
felt but silent power, accepting homage, bending to the penitence,
loving the sinner, and flinging open the gates of the pale kingdoms
into which He was to pass, with these His last words.

First, then, we see here an illustration of the Cross in its power
of drawing men to itself. It is strange to think that, perhaps, at
that moment the only human being who thoroughly believed in Christ
was that dying robber. The disciples are all gone. The most faithful
of them are recreant, denying, fleeing. A handful of women are
standing there, not knowing what to think about it, stunned but
loving; and alone (as I suppose), alone of all the sons of men, the
crucified malefactor was in the sunshine of faith, and could say
'I believe!' As everything of the future history of the world and of
the Gospel is typified in the events of the Crucifixion, it was
fitting that here again and at the last there should be a prophetic
fulfilment of His own saying, 'I, if I be lifted up, will draw all
men unto Me.'

But mark, here we have a striking instance of the universal law of
the progress of the Gospel, in the two-fold effort of the
contemplation of the Cross. By its foot was to be seen the derision
of the scribes and the stupor of the soldiery; and now here are the
two thieves--the one chiming in with the universal reproaches; and
the other beholding the same event, having the same circumstances
displayed before him, and they influence him _thus_. Brethren,
it is just the history of the Gospel wherever it goes. It is its
history now, and among us. The Gospel is preached equally to every
man. The same message comes to us all, offering us the same terms.
Christ stands before each of us in the same attitude. And what is
the consequence? A parting of the whole mass of us, some to one side
and some to the other. So, when you take a magnet, and hold it to an
indiscriminate heap of metal filings, it will gather out all the
iron, and leave behind all the rest. 'I, if I be lifted up,' said
He, 'will draw all men unto Me.' The attractive power will go out
over the whole race of His brethren; but from some there will be no
response. In some hearts there will be no yielding to the
attraction. Some will remain rooted, obstinate, steadfast in their
place; and to some the lightest word will be mighty enough to stir
all the slumbering pulses of their sin-ridden hearts, and to bring
them, broken and penitent, for mercy to His feet. To the one He is
'a savour of life unto life, and to the other a savour of death unto
death.' The broadest doctrine of the universal adaptation, and the
universal intention too, of the Gospel, as the 'power of God unto
salvation,' contains hidden in its depths this undeniable fact,
that, be the cause what it may (and as I believe, the cause lies
with us, and is our fault) this separating, judging effect follows
from all faithful preaching of Christ's words. He came to judge the
world, 'that they which see not' (as He Himself said) 'might see,
and they which see might be made blind,' And on the Cross that
process went on in two men, alike in necessity, alike in
criminality, alike in this, that Death's icy finger was just being
laid upon their heart, to stop all the flow of its wild blood and
passion, but different in this, that the one of them turned himself,
by God's grace, and laid hold on the Gospel that was offered to him,
and the other turned himself away, and derided, and died.

And now, there is another consideration. If we look at this man,  this
penitent thief, and contrast him, his previous history, and his present
feelings, with the people that stood around, and rejected and scoffed,
we get some light as to the sort of thing that unfits men for perceiving
and accepting the Gospel when it is offered to them. Remember the other
classes of persons who were there. There were Roman soldiers, with very
partial knowledge of what they were doing, and whose only feeling was
that of entire indifference; and there were Jewish Rabbis, Pharisees,
Priests, and people, who knew a little more of what they were doing,
and whose feeling was derision and scorn. Now, if we mark the ordinary
scriptural representation, especially as to the last class, we cannot
help seeing that there comes out this principle:--The thing of all
others that unfits men for the reception of Christ as a Saviour, and
for the simple reliance on His atoning blood and divine mercy, is not
gross, long profligacy, and outward, vehement transgression; but it is
self-complacency, clean, fatal self-righteousness and self-sufficiency.

Why was it that Scribes and Pharisees turned away from Him? For
three reasons. Because of their pride of wisdom. 'We are the men who
know all about Moses and the traditions of the elders; we judge this
new phenomenon not by the question, How does it come to our
consciences, and how does it appeal to our hearts? but we judge it
by the question, How does it fit our Rabbinical learning and subtle
casuistical laws? _We_ are the Priests and the Scribes; and the
people that know not the law, _they_ may accept a thing that
only appeals to the common human heart, but for us, in our
intellectual superiority, living remote from the common wants of the
lower class, not needing a rough outward Gospel of that sort, we can
do without such a thing, and we reject it.' They turned away from
the Cross, and their hatred darkened into derision, and their
menaces ended in a crucifixion, not merely because of a pride of
wisdom, but because of a complacent self-righteousness that knew
nothing of the fact of sin, that never had learned to believe itself
to be full of evil, that had got so wrapped up in ceremonies as to
have lost the life; that had degraded the divine law of God, with
all its lightning splendours, and awful power, into a matter of
'mint and anise and cummin.' They turned away for a third reason.
Religion had become to them a mere set of traditional dogmas, to
think accurately or to reason clearly about which was all that was
needful. Worship having become ceremonial, and morality having
become casuistry, and religion having become theology, the men were
as hard as a nether millstone, and there was nothing to be done with
them until these three crusts were peeled off the heart, and, close
and burning, the naked heart and the naked truth of God came into
contact.

Brethren, change the name, and the story is true about _us_.
God forbid that I should deny that every form of gross, sensual
immorality, 'hardens all within' (as one poor victim of it said),
'and petrifies the feeling.' God forbid that I should seem to be
speaking slightingly of the exceeding sinfulness of such sin, or to
be pouring contempt upon the laws of common morality. Do not
misapprehend me so. Still it is not sin in its outward forms that
makes the worst impediment between a man and the Cross, but it is
sin plus self-righteousness which makes the insurmountable obstacle
to all faith and repentance. And oh! in our days, when passion is
tamed down by so many bonds and chains; when the power of society
lies upon all of us, prescribing our path, and keeping most of us
from vice, partly because we are not tempted, and partly because we
have been brought up like some young trees behind a wall, within the
fence of decent customs and respectable manners,--we have far more
need to tell orderly, respectable moral men--'My brother, that thing
that you have is worth nothing, as settling your position before God';
than to stand up and thunder about crimes which half of us never heard
of, and perhaps only an infinitesimal percentage of us have ever
committed. All sin separates from God, but the thing that makes the
separation permanent is not the sin, but the ignorance of the sin.
Self-righteousness, aye, and pride of wisdom, they--they have perverted
many a nature, many a young man's glowing spirit, and have turned him
away from the Gospel. If there be a man here who is looking at the
simple message of peace and pardon and purity through Christ, and is
saying to himself, Yes; it may fit the common class of minds that
require outward signs and symbols, and must pin their faith to forms;
but for me with my culture, for me with my spiritual tendencies, for
me with my new lights, _I_ do not want any objective redemption;
_I_ do not want anything to convince _me_ of a divine love, and I
do not need any crucified Saviour to preach to _me_ that God is
merciful!--this incident before us has a very solemn lesson in it for
him. And if there be a man here who is living a life of surface
blamelessness, it has as solemn a lesson for him. Look at the Scribe,
and look at the Pharisee--religious men in their way, wise men in
their way, decent and respectable men in their way; and look at that
poor thief that had been caught in the wilderness amongst the caves
and dens, and had been brought red-handed with blood upon his sword,
and guilt in his heart, and nailed up there in the short and summary
process of a Roman jurisprudence;--and think that Scribe, and Pharisee,
and Priest, saw nothing in Christ; and that the poor profligate wretch
saw this in Him,--innocence that showed heavenly against his diabolical
blackness; and his heart stirred, and he laid hold of Him in the stress
of his mighty agony--as a drowning man catches at anything that
protrudes from the bank; and he held and shook it, and the thing was
fast, and he was safe! Not transgression shuts a man out from mercy.
Transgression, which belongs to us all, makes us subjects for the
mercy; but it is pride, self-righteousness, trust in ourselves, which
'bars the gates of mercy on mankind'; and the men that _are_ condemned
are condemned not only because they have transgressed the commandments
of God, but '_this_ is the condemnation, that light came into the
world, and men loved darkness rather than light, because their deeds
were evil.'

And then (and but a word) we see here, too, the elements of which
acceptable faith consists. One does not exactly know by what steps
or through what process this poor dying thief passed, which issued
in faith--whether it was an impression from Christ's presence,
whether it was that he had ever heard anything about Him before, or
whether it was only that the wisdom which dwells with death was
beginning to clear his eyes as life ebbed away. But however he
_came_ to the conviction, mark what it was that he believed and
expressed,--I am a sinful man; all punishment that comes down upon me
is richly deserved: This man is pure and righteous; 'Lord, remember
me when Thou comest into Thy kingdom!' That is all--that is all. That
is the thing that saves a man. How much he _did_ know--whether he
knew all the depth of what he was saying, when he said 'Lord!' is a
question that we cannot answer; whether he understood what the
'kingdom' was that he was expecting, is a question that we cannot
solve; but this is clear--the intellectual part of faith may be dark
and doubtful, but the moral and emotional part of it is manifest and
plain. There was, '_I_ am nothing--_Thou_ art everything: I bring
myself and my emptiness unto Thy great fullness: fill it and make me
blessed!' Faith has that. Faith has in it repentance--repentance has in
it faith too. Faith has in it the recognition of the certainty and the
justice of a judgment that is coming down crashing upon every human
head; and then from the midst of these fears, and sorrows, and the
tempest of that great darkness, there rises up in the night of terrors,
the shining of one perhaps pale, quivering, distant, but divinely given
hope, 'My Saviour! My Saviour! He is righteous: He has died--He lives!
I will stay no longer; I will cast myself upon Him!'

Once more--this incident reminds us not only of the attractive power
of the Cross, but of the prophetic power of the Cross. We have here
the Cross as pointing to and foretelling the Kingdom. Pointing out,
and foretelling: that is to say, of course, and only, if we accept
the scriptural statement of what these sufferings were, the Person
that endured them, and the meaning of their being endured. But the
only thing I would dwell upon here, is, that when we think of Christ
as dying for us, we are never to separate it from that other solemn
and future coming of which this poor robber catches a glimpse. They
crowned Him with thorns, and they gave Him a reed for His sceptre.
That mockery, so natural to the strong practical Romans in dealing
with one whom they thought a harmless enthusiast, was a symbol which
they who did it little dreamed of. The crown of thorns proclaims a
sovereignty founded on sufferings. The sceptre of feeble reed speaks
of power wielded in gentleness. The Cross leads to the crown. The
brow that was pierced by the sharp acanthus wreath, therefore wears
the diadem of the universe. The hand that passively held the mockery
of the worthless, pithless reed, therefore rules the princes of the
earth with the rod of iron. He who was lifted up to the Cross, was,
by that very act, lifted up to be a Ruler and Commander to the
peoples. For the death of the Cross God hath highly exalted Him to
be a Prince and a Saviour. The way to glory for Him, the power by
which He wields the kingdom of the world, is precisely through the
suffering. And therefore, whensoever there arises before us the
image of the one, oh! let there rise before us likewise the image of
the other. The Cross links on to the kingdom--the kingdom lights up
the Cross. My brother, the Saviour comes--the Saviour comes a King.
The Saviour that comes a King is the Saviour that has been here and
was crucified. The kingdom that He establishes is all full of
blessing, and love, and gentleness; and to us (if we will unite the
thoughts of Cross and Crown) there is opened up not only the
possibility of having boldness before Him in the day of judgment,
but there is opened up this likewise--the certainty that He 'shall
receive of the travail of His soul and be satisfied.' Oh, remember
that as certain as the historical fact--He died on Calvary; so
certain is the prophetic fact--He shall reign, and you and I will
stand there! I durst not touch that subject. Take it into your own
hearts; and think about it--a kingdom, a judgment-seat, a crown, a
gathered universe; separation, decision, execution of the sentence.
And oh! ask yourselves, 'When that gentle eye, with lightning in its
depths, falls upon _me_, individualises _me_, summons out _me_ to its
bar--how shall I stand?' 'Herein is our love made perfect, that we may
have boldness before Him in the day of judgment,' 'Lord, remember me
when Thou comest into Thy kingdom.'

Finally. Here is the Cross as revealing and opening the true
Paradise.--'This day shalt thou be with Me in Paradise.' We have no
concern at present with the many subtle inferences as to the state
of the dead, and as to the condition of our Lord's human spirit before
the Resurrection, which have been drawn from these words. To me they
do seem fairly to bear the broad and single conclusion that the spirits
of the saved do enter at death into a state of conscious presence with
their Saviour, and therefore of joy and felicity. But beyond this we
have no firm ground for going. It is of more practical worth to note
that the penitent's vague prayer is answered, and over-answered. He
asks, 'When Thou comest'--whensoever that may be--'remember me.' 'I
shall stand afar off; do not let me be utterly forgotten.' Christ
answers--'Remember thee! thou shalt be _with Me_, close to My side.
Remember thee _when_ I come!--_this day_ shalt thou be with Me.'

And what a contrast that is--the conscious blessedness rushing in
close upon the heels of the momentary darkness of death. At the one
moment there hangs the thief writhing in mortal agony; the wild
shouts of the fierce mob at his feet are growing faint upon his ear;
the city spread out at his feet, and all the familiar  sights of
earth are growing dim to his filmy eye. The soldier's spear comes,
the legs are broken, and in an instant there hangs a relaxed corpse;
and the spirit, the spirit--is where? Ah! how far away; released
from all its sin and its sore agony, struggling up at once into such
strange divine enlargement, a new star swimming into the firmament
of heaven, a new face before the throne of God, another sinner
redeemed from earth! The conscious immediate blessedness of the
departed--be he what he may, be his life whatsoever it may have
been--who at last, dark, sinful, standing with one foot on the verge
of eternity, and poising himself for the flight, flings himself into
the arms of Christ--the everlasting blessedness, the Christ-presence
and the Christ-gladness, that is the message that the robber leaves
to us from his cross. Paradise is opened to us again. The Cross is
the true 'tree of life.' The flaming cherubim, and the sword that
turneth every way, are gone, and the broad road into the city, the
Paradise of God, with all its beauties and all its peaceful joy--a
better Paradise, 'a statelier Eden,' than that which we have lost,
is flung open to us for ever.

Do not trust a death-bed repentance, my brother. I have stood by
many a death-bed, and few indeed have they been where I could have
believed that the man was in a condition physically (to say nothing
of anything else) clearly to see and grasp the message of the
Gospel. There is no limit to the mercy. I know that God's mercy is
boundless. I know that 'whilst there is life there is hope.' I know
that a man, going--swept down that great Niagara--if, before his
little skiff tilts over into the awful rapids, he can make one great
bound with all his strength, and reach the solid ground--I know he
may be saved. It is an awful risk to run. A moment's miscalculation,
and skiff and voyager alike are whelming in the green chaos below,
and come up mangled into nothing, far away down yonder upon the
white turbulent foam. '_One_ was saved upon the Cross,' as the
old divines used to tell us, 'that none might despair; and only one,
that none might presume.' _'Now_ is the accepted time, and
_now_ is the day of salvation!'




THE FIRST EASTER SUNRISE


    'Now, upon the first day of the week, very early in
    the morning, they came onto the sepulchre, bringing
    the spices which they had prepared, and certain others
    with them. 2. And they found the stone rolled away
    from the sepulchre. 3. And they entered in, and found
    not the body of the Lord Jesus. 4. And it came to pass,
    as they were much perplexed thereabout, behold, two
    men stood by them in shining garments: 5. And as they
    were afraid, and bowed down their faces to the earth,
    they said unto them, Why seek ye the living among the
    dead? 6. He is not here, but is risen: remember how He
    spake unto you when He was yet in Galilee, 7. Saying,
    The Son of man must be delivered into the hands of
    sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day rise
    again. 8. And they remembered His words, 9. And
    returned from the sepulchre, and told all these things
    unto the eleven, and to all the rest. 10. It was Mary
    Magdalene, and Joanna, and Mary the mother of James,
    and other women that were with them, which told these
    things unto the apostles. 11. And their words seemed
    to them as idle tales, and they believed them not.
    12. Then arose Peter, and ran unto the sepulchre; and
    stooping down, he beheld the linen clothes laid by
    themselves, and departed, wondering in himself at that
    which was come to pass.'--LUKE xxiv. 1-12.

No Evangelist narrates the act of Resurrection. Apocryphal Gospels
cannot resist the temptation of describing it. Why did the Four
preserve such singular reticence about what would have been
irresistible to 'myth' makers? Because they were not myth-makers,
but witnesses, and had nothing to say as to an act that no man had
seen. No doubt, the Resurrection took place in the earliest hours of
the first day of the week. The Sun of Righteousness rose before the
Easter Day sun. It was midsummer day for Him, while it was but
spring for earth's calendar. That early rising has no setting to
follow.

The divergences of the Evangelists reach their maximum in the accounts
of the Resurrection, as is natural if we realise the fragmentary
character of all the versions, the severely condensed style of
Matthew's, the incompleteness of the genuine Mark's, the evidently
selective purpose in Luke's, and the supplementary design of John's.
If we add the perturbed state of the disciples, their separation from
each other, and the number of distinct incidents embraced in the
records, we shall not wonder at the differences, but see in them
confirmation of the good faith of the witnesses, and a reflection of
the hurry and wonderfulness of that momentous day. Differences there
are; contradictions there are not, except between the doubtful verses
added to Mark and the other accounts. We cannot put all the pieces
together, when we have only them to guide us. If we had a complete
and independent narrative to go by, we could, no doubt, arrange our
fragments. But the great certainties are unaffected by the small
divergences, and the points of agreement are vital. They are, for
example, that none saw the Resurrection, that the first to know of
it were the women, that angels appeared to them at the tomb, that
Jesus showed Himself first to Mary Magdalene, that the reports of the
Resurrection were not believed. Whether the group with whom this
passage has to do were the same as that whose experience Matthew
records we leave undetermined. If so, they must have made two visits
to the tomb, and two returns to the Apostles,--one, with only the
tidings of the empty sepulchre, which Luke tells; one, with the
tidings of Christ's appearance, as in Matthew. But harmonistic
considerations do not need to detain us at present.

Sorrow and love are light sleepers, and early dawn found the brave
women on their way. Nicodemus had bound spices in with the body, and
these women's love-gift was as 'useless' and as fragrant as Mary's
box of ointment. Whatever love offers, love welcomes, though Judas
may ask 'To what purpose is this waste?' Angel hands had rolled away
the stone, not to allow of Jesus' exit, for He had risen while it
was in its place, but to permit the entrance of the 'witnesses of
the Resurrection.' So little did these women dream of such a thing
that the empty tomb brought no flash of joy, but only perplexity to
their wistful gaze. 'What does it mean?' was their thought. They and
all the disciples expected nothing less than they did a Resurrection,
therefore their testimony to it is the more reliable.

Luke marks the appearance of the angels as sudden by that 'behold.'
They were not seen approaching, but at one moment the bewildered
women were alone, looking at each other with faces of dreary wonder,
and the next, 'two men' were standing beside them, and the tomb was
lighted by the sheen of their dazzling robes. Much foolish fuss has
been made about the varying reports of the angels, and 'contradictions'
have been found in the facts that some saw them and some did not, that
some saw one and some saw two, that some saw them seated and some saw
them standing, and so on. We know so little of the laws that govern
angelic appearances that our opinion as to the probability or veracity
of the accounts is mere guess-work. Where should a flight of angels
have gathered and hovered if not there? And should they not 'sit in
order serviceable' about the tomb, as around the 'stable' at Bethlehem?
Their function was to prepare a way in the hearts of the women for the
Lord Himself, to lessen the shock,--for sudden joy shocks and may
hurt,--as well as to witness that these 'things angels desire to look
into.'

Their message flooded the women's hearts with better light than
their garments had spread through the tomb. Luke's version of it
agrees with Mark and Matthew in the all-important central part, 'He
is not here, but is risen' (though these words in Luke are not
beyond doubt), but diverges from them otherwise. Surely the message
was not the mere curt announcement preserved by any one of the
Evangelists. We may well believe that much more was said than any or
all of them have recorded. The angels' question is half a rebuke,
wholly a revelation, of the essential nature of 'the Living One,'
who was so from all eternity, but is declared to be so by His
rising, of the incongruity of supposing that He could be gathered
to, and remain with, the dim company of the dead, and a blessed
word, which turns sorrow into hope, and diverts sad eyes from the
grave to the skies, for all the ages since and to come. The angels
recall Christ's prophecies of death and resurrection, which, like so
many of His words to the disciples and to us, had been heard, and
not heard, being neglected or misinterpreted. They had questioned
'what the rising from the dead should mean,' never supposing that it
meant exactly what it said. That way of dealing with Christ's words
did not end on the Easter morning, but is still too often practised.

If we are to follow Luke's account, we must recognise that the women
in a company, as well as Mary Magdalene separately, came back first
with the announcement of the empty tomb and the angels' message, and
later with the full announcement of having seen the Lord. But apart
from the complexities of attempted combination of the narratives,
the main point in all the Evangelists is the disbelief of the
disciples, 'Idle tales,' said they, using a very strong word which
appears only here in the New Testament, and likens the eager story
of the excited women to a sick man's senseless ramblings. That was
the mood of the whole company, apostles and all. Is that mood likely
to breed hallucinations? The evidential value of the disciples'
slowness to believe cannot be overrated.

Peter's race to the sepulchre, in verse 12 of Luke xxiv., is omitted
by several good authorities, and is, perhaps, spurious here. If
allowed to stand as Luke's, it seems to show that the Evangelist had
a less complete knowledge of the facts than John. Mark, Peter's
'interpreter,' has told us of the special message to him from the
risen, but as yet unseen, Lord, and we may well believe that that
quickened his speed. The assurance of forgiveness and the hope of a
possible future that might cover over the cowardly past, with the
yearning to sob his heart out on the Lord's breast, sent him swiftly
to the tomb. Luke does not say that he went in, as John, with one of
his fine touches, which bring out character in a word, tells us that
he did; but he agrees with John in describing the effect of what
Peter saw as being only 'wonder,' and the result as being only that
he went away pondering over it all, and not yet able to grasp the
joy of the transcendent fact. Perhaps, if he had not had a troubled
conscience, he would have had a quicker faith. He was not given to
hesitation, but his sin darkened his mind. He needed that secret
interview, of which many knew the fact but none the details, ere he
could feel the full glow of the Risen Sun thawing his heart and
scattering his doubts like morning mists on the hills.




THE LIVING DEAD


    'Why seek ye the living among the dead! 6. He is not
    here, but is risen.'--LUKE xxiv. 5,6.

We can never understand the utter desolation of the days that lay
betwixt Christ's Death and His Resurrection. Our faith rests on
centuries. We know that that grave was not even an interruption to
the progress of His work, but was the straight road to His triumph
and His glory. We know that it was the completion of the work of
which the raising of the widow's son and of Lazarus were but the
beginnings. But these disciples did not know that. To them the
inferior miracles by which He had redeemed others from the power of
the grave, must have made His own captivity to it all the more
stunning; and the thought which such miracles ending so must have
left upon them, must have been something like, 'He saved others;
Himself He cannot save.' And therefore we can never think ourselves
fully back to that burst of strange sudden thankfulness with which
these weeping Marys found those two calm angel forms sitting with
folded wings, like the Cherubim over the Mercy-seat, but
overshadowing a better propitiation, and heard the words of my text,
'Why seek ye the living among the dead? He is not here, but is
risen.'

But yet, although the words before us, in the full depth and
preciousness of their meaning, of course could only be once
fulfilled, we may not only gather from them thoughts concerning that
one death and resurrection, but we may likewise apply them, in a
very permissible modification of meaning, to the present condition
of all who have departed in His faith and fear; since for us, too,
it is true that, whenever we go to an open grave, sorrowing for those
whom we love, or oppressed with the burden of mortality in any shape,
if our eyes are anointed, we can see there sitting the quiet angel
forms; and if our ears be purged from the noise of earth, we can hear
them saying to us, in regard to all that have gone away, 'Why seek ye
the living in these graves? They are not here; they are risen, as He
said.' The thoughts are very old, brethren. God be thanked that they
_are_ old! Perhaps to some of you they may come now with new power,
because they come with new application to your own present condition.
Perhaps to some of you they may sound very weak, and 'words weaker
than your grief will make grief more';--but such as they are, let us
look at them for a moment or two together now.

The first thought, then, that these words of the angel messengers,
and the scene in which we find them, suggest, is this--The dead are
the living.

Language, which is more accustomed and adapted to express the
appearances than the realities of things, leads us astray very much
when we use the phrase 'the dead' as if it expressed the continuance
of the condition into which men pass in the act of dissolution. It
misleads us no less, when we use it as if it expressed in itself the
whole truth even as to that act of dissolution. 'The dead' and 'the
living' are not names of two classes which exclude each other. Much
rather, there are _none_ who are _dead_. The dead are the living who
have died. Whilst they were dying they lived, and after they were dead
they lived more fully. All live unto God. 'God is not the God of the
dead, but of the living.' Oh, how solemnly sometimes that thought comes
up before us, that all those past generations which have stormed across
this earth of ours, and then have fallen into still forgetfulness, live
yet. Somewhere at this very instant, they now verily _are_! We say,
'They _were_, they _have been_'. There are no have beens! Life is life
for ever. _To be_ is eternal being. Every man that has died is at this
instant in the full possession of all his faculties, in the intensest
exercise of all his capacities, standing somewhere in God's great
universe, ringed with the sense of God's presence, and feeling in
every fibre of his being that life, which comes after death, is not less
real, but more real, not less great, but more great, not less full or
intense, but more full and intense, than the mingled life which, lived
here on earth, was a centre of life surrounded with a crust and
circumference of mortality. The dead are the living. They lived whilst
they died; and after they die, they live on for ever.

Such a conviction has as a matter of fact been firmly grasped as an
unquestionable truth and a familiar operative belief only within the
sphere of the Christian revelation. From the natural point of view
the whole region of the dead is 'a land of darkness, without any
order, where the light is as darkness.' The usual sources of human
certainty fail us here. Reason is only able to stammer a
peradventure. Experience and consciousness are silent. 'The simple
senses' can only say that it looks as if Death were an end, the
final Omega. Testimony there is none from any pale lips that have
come back to unfold the secrets of the prison-house.

The history of Christ's Death and Resurrection, His dying words
'_This day_ thou shalt be with Me in Paradise,' the full
identity of being with which He rose from the grave, the manhood
changed and yet the same, the intercourse of the forty days before
His ascension, which showed the continuance of all the old love
'stronger than death,' and was in all essential points like His
former intercourse with His disciples, though changed in form and
introductory to the times when they should see Him no more in the
flesh-these teach us, not as a peradventure, nor as a dim hope, nor
as a strong foreboding which may be in its nature prophetic, but as
a certainty based upon a historical fact, that Death's empire is
partial in its range and transitory in its duration. But, after we
are convinced of that, we can look again with new eyes even on the
external accompaniments of death, and see that sense is too hasty in
its conclusion that death is the final end. There is no reason from
what we see passing before our eyes then to believe, that it, with
all its pitifulness and all its pain, has any power at all upon the
soul. True, the spirit gathers itself into itself, and, poising
itself for its flight, becomes oblivious of what is passing round
about it. True, the tenant that is about to depart from the house in
which he has dwelt so long, closes the windows before he goes. But
what is there in the cessation of the power of communication with an
outer world--what is there in the fact that you clasp the nerveless
hand, and it returns no pressure; that you whisper gentle words that
you think might kindle a soul under the dull, cold ribs of death
itself, and get no answer--that you look with weeping gaze to catch
the response of affection from out of the poor filmy, closing,
tearless eyes there, and look in vain--what is there in all that to
lead to the conviction that _the spirit_ is participant of that
impotence and silence? Is not the soul only self-centring itself,
retiring from, the outposts, but not touched in the citadel? Is it
not only that as the long sleep of life begins to end, and the
waking eye of the soul begins to open itself on realities, the
sights and sounds of the dream begin to pass away? Is it not but
that the man, in dying, begins to be what he fully is when he is
dead, 'dead unto sin,' dead unto the world, that he may 'live unto
God' that he may live with God, that he may live really? And so we
can look upon that ending of life, and say, 'It is a very small
thing; it only cuts off the fringes of my life, it does not touch
_me_ at all' It only plays round about the husk, and does not
get at the core. It only strips off the circumferential mortality,
but the soul rises up untouched by it, and shakes the bands of death
from off its immortal arms, and flutters the stain of death from
off its budding wings, and rises fuller of life _because of
death_, and mightier in its vitality in the very act of
submitting the body to the law, 'Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt
thou return.'

Touching but a part of the being, and touching that but for a
moment, death is no state, it is an act. It is not a condition, it
is a transition. Men speak about life as 'a narrow neck of land,
betwixt two unbounded seas': they had better speak about death as
that. It is an isthmus, narrow and almost impalpable, on which, for
one brief instant, the soul poises itself; whilst behind it there
lies the inland lake of past being, and before it the shoreless
ocean of future life, all lighted with the glory of God, and making
music as it breaks even upon these dark, rough rocks. Death is but a
passage. It is not a house, it is only a vestibule. The grave has a
door on its inner side. We roll the stone to its mouth and come
away, thinking that we have left them there till the Resurrection.
But when the outer access to earth is fast closed, the inner portal
that opens on heaven is set wide, and God says to His child, 'Come,
enter into thy chambers and shut thy doors about thee ... until the
indignation be overpast!' Death is a superficial thing, and a
transitory thing--a darkness that is caused by the light, and a
darkness that ends in the light--a trifle, if you measure it by
duration; a trifle if you measure it by depth. The death of the mortal
is the emancipation and the life of the immortal. Then, brethren, we
may go with the words of my text, and look upon every green hillock
below which any that are dear to us are lying, and say to ourselves,
'Not _here_--God be thanked, no--not here: living, and not dead;
_yonder_, with the Master!' Oh, we think far too much of the grave,
and far too little of the throne and the glory! We are far too much
