you are going to follow.

So then I have just one or two things to say about this first part of
my subject. Let me remind you that however beautiful, however gracious,
however tender and full of love and mercy and good tidings the message
of God's love in Jesus Christ is, there is another side to it, a side
which is meant to rouse men's consciences and to awaken men's fears.

If you bring a man like the man in the story, Felix, or a very much
better man than he--any of you who hear me now--into contact with these
three thoughts, 'Righteousness, temperance, judgment to come,' the
effect of such a direct appeal to moral convictions will always be more
or less to awaken a sense of failure, insufficiency, defect, sin, and
to create a certain creeping dread that if I set myself against the
great law of God, that law of God will have a way of crushing me. The
fear is well founded, and not only does the contemplation of God's
_law_ excite it. God's gospel comes to us, and just because it is a
gospel, and is intended to lead you and me to love and trust Jesus
Christ, and give our whole hearts and souls to Him--just because it is
the best 'good news' that ever came into the world, it begins often
(not always, perhaps) by making a man feel what a sinful man he is, and
how he has gone against God's law, and how there hang over him, by the
very necessities of the case and the constitution of the universe,
consequences bitter and painful. Now I believe that there are very few
people who, like you, come occasionally into contact with the preaching
of the truth, who have not had their moments when they felt--'Yes, it
is all true--it is all true. I _am_ bad, and I _have_ broken God's law,
and there _is_ a dark lookout before me!' I believe that most of us
know what that feeling is.

And now my next step is--that the awakened conscience is just like the
sense of pain in the physical world, it has a work to do and a mission
to perform. It is meant to warn you off dangerous ground. Thank God for
pain! It keeps off death many a time. And in like manner thank God for
a swift conscience that speaks! It is meant to ring an alarm-bell to
us, to make us, as the Bible has it, 'flee for refuge to the hope that
is set before us.' My imploring question to my young friends now is:
'Have you used that sense of evil and wrongdoing, when it has been
aroused in your consciences, to lead you to Jesus Christ, or what have
you done with it?'

There are two persons in this Book of the Acts of the Apostles who pass
through the same stages of feeling up to a certain point, and then they
diverge. And the two men's outline history is the best sermon that I
can preach upon this point. Felix becoming afraid, recoils, shuts
himself up, puts away the message that disturbs him, and settles
himself back into his evil. The Philippian jailer becoming afraid (the
phrases in the original being almost identical), like a sensible man
tries to find out the reason of his fear and how to get rid of it; and
falls down at the Apostles' feet and says, 'Sirs, what must I do to be
saved?'

The fear is not meant to last; it is of no use in itself. It is only an
impelling motive that leads us to look to the Saviour, and the man that
uses it so has used it rightly. Yet there rises in many a heart that
transparent self-deception of delay. 'They all with one consent began
to make excuse'; that is as true to-day as it was true then. My
experience tells me that it will be true in regard to a sad number of
you who will go away feeling that my poor word has gone a little way
into their hardened hide, but settling themselves back into their
carelessness, and forgetting all impressions that have been made. O
dear young friend, do not do that, I beseech you! Do not stifle the
wholesome alarm and cheat yourself with the notion of a little delay!

II. And now I wish next to pass very swiftly in review before you some
of the reasons why we fall into this habit of self-deceiving,
indecision, and delay--'Go thy way' would be too sharp and unmistakable
if it were left alone, so it is fined off. 'I will not commit myself
beyond to-day,' 'for this time go thy way, and when I have a convenient
season I will call for thee.'

What are the reasons for such an attitude as that? Let me enumerate one
or two of them as they strike me. First, there is the instinctive,
natural wish to get rid of a disagreeable subject--much as a man,
without knowing what he is doing, twitches his hand away from the
surgeon's lancet. So a great many of us do not like--and no wonder that
we do not like--these thoughts of the old Book about 'righteousness and
temperance and judgment to come,' and make a natural effort to turn our
minds away from the contemplation of the subject, because it is painful
and unpleasant. Do you think it would be a wise thing for a man, if he
began to suspect that he was insolvent, to refuse to look into his
books or to take stock, and let things drift, till there was not a
halfpenny in the pound for anybody? What do you suppose his creditors
would call him? They would not compliment him on either his honesty or
his prudence, would they? And is it not the part of a wise man, if he
begins to see that something is wrong, to get to the bottom of it and,
as quickly as possible, to set it right? And what do you call people
who, suspecting that there may be a great hole in the bottom of the
ship, never man the pumps or do any caulking, but say, 'Oh, she will
very likely keep afloat until we get into harbour'?

Do you not think that it would be a wiser thing for you if, _because_
the subject is disagreeable, you would force yourself to think about it
until it became agreeable to you? You can change it if you will, and
make it not at all a shadow or a cloud or a darkness over you. And you
can scarcely expect to claim the designation of wise and prudent
orderers of your lives until you do. Certainly it is not wise to
shuffle a thing out of sight because it is not pleasing to think about.

Then there is another reason. A number of our young people say, 'Go thy
way for this time,' because you have a notion that it is time enough
for you to begin to think about serious things and be religious when
you grow a bit older. And some of you even, I dare say, have an idea
that religion is all very well for people that are turned sixty and are
going down the hill, but that it is quite unnecessary for you.
Shakespeare puts a grim word into the mouth of one of his characters,
which sets the theory of many of us in its true light, when, describing
a dying man calling on God, he makes the narrator say: 'I, to comfort
him, bid him he should not think of God. I hoped there was no need to
trouble himself with any such thoughts yet.'

Some of my hearers practically live on that principle, and are tempted
to regard thoughts of God as in place only among medicine bottles, or
when the shadows of the grave begin to fall cold and damp on our path.
'Young men will be young men,' 'We must sow our wild oats,' 'You can't
put old heads on young shoulders'--and such like sayings, often
practically mean that vice and godlessness belong to youth, and virtue
and religion to old age, just as flowers do to spring and fruit to
autumn. Let me beseech you not to be deceived by such a notion; and to
search your own thoughts and see whether it be one of the reasons which
leads you to say, 'Go thy way for this time.'

Then again some of us fall into this habit of putting off the decision
for Christ, not consciously, not by any distinct act of saying, 'No, I
will not,' but simply by letting the impressions made on our hearts and
consciences be crowded out of them by cares and enjoyments and
pleasures and duties of this world. If you had not so much to study at
College, you would have time to think about religion. If you had not so
many parties and balls to go to, you would have time to nourish and
foster these impressions. If you had not your place to make in the
warehouse, if you had not this, that, and the other thing to do; if you
had not love and pleasure and ambition and advancement and mental
culture to attend to, you would have time for religion; but as soon as
the seed is sown and the sower's back is turned, hovering flocks of
light-winged thoughts and vanities pounce down upon it and carry it
away, seed by seed. And if some stray seed here and there remains and
begins to sprout, the ill weeds which grow apace spring up with ranker
stems and choke it. 'The cares of this world, and the deceitfulness of
riches, and the lusts of other things entering in, choke the word, and
efface the impression made upon your hearts.

Here as I speak some serious thought is roused; by to-morrow at midday
it has all gone. You did not intend it to go, you did not set yourself
to banish it, you simply opened the door to the flocking in of the
whole crowd of the world's cares and occupations, and away went the
shy, solitary thought that, if it had been cared for and tended, might
have led you at last to the Cross of Jesus Christ. Do not allow
yourselves to be drifted, by the rushing current of earthly cares, from
the impressions that are made upon your consciences and from the duty
that you know you ought to do!

And then some of you fall into this attitude of delay, and say to the
messenger of God's love, 'Go thy way for this time,' because you do not
like to give up something that you know is inconsistent with His love
and service. Felix would not part with Drusilla nor disgorge the
ill-gotten gains of his province. Felix therefore was obliged to put
away from him the thoughts that looked in that direction. I wonder if
there is any young man listening to me now who feels that if he lets my
words carry him where they seek to carry him, he will have to give up
'fleshly lusts which war against the soul'? I wonder if there is any
young woman listening to me now who feels that if she lets my words
carry her where they would carry her, she will have to live a different
life from that which she has been living, to have more of a high and a
noble aim in it, to live for something else than pleasure? I wonder if
there are any of you who are saying, 'I cannot give up that'? My dear
young friend, 'If thine eye offend thee, pluck it out and cast it from
thee. It is better for thee to enter into life blind than with both
eyes to be cast into hell-fire.'

Reasons for delay, then, are these: first, getting rid of an unpleasant
subject; second, thinking that there is time enough; third, letting the
world obliterate the impressions that have been made; and fourth,
shrinking from the surrender of something that you know you will have
to give up.

III. And now let me very briefly, as my last point, put before you one
or two of the reasons which I would fain might be conclusive with you
for present decision to take Christ for your Saviour and your Master.

And I say, Do not delay, but _now_ choose Him for your Redeemer, your
Friend, your Helper, your Commander, your All; because delay is really
decision in the wrong way. Do not delay, but take Jesus Christ as the
Saviour of your sinful souls, and rest your hearts upon Him to-night
before you sleep; because there is no real reason for delay. No season
will be more convenient than the present season. Every time is the
right time to do the right thing, every time is the right time to begin
following Him. There is nothing to wait for. There is no reason at all,
except their own disinclination, why every man and woman listening to
me should not now grasp the Cross of Christ as their only hope for
forgiveness and acceptance, and yield themselves to that Lord, to live
in His service for ever. Let not this day pass without your giving
yourselves to Jesus Christ, because every time that you have this
message brought to you, and you refuse to accept it, or delay to accept
it, you make yourselves less capable of receiving it another time.

If you take a bit of phosphorus and put it upon a slip of wood and
ignite the phosphorus, bright as the blaze is, there drops from it a
white ash that coats the wood and makes it almost incombustible. And so
when the flaming conviction laid upon your hearts has burnt itself out,
it has coated the heart, and it will be very difficult to kindle the
light there again. Felix said, 'Go thy way, when I have a more
convenient season I will send for thee.' Yes, and he did send for Paul,
and he talked with him often--he repeated the conversation, but we do
not know that he repeated the trembling. He often communed with Paul,
but it was only once that he was alarmed. You are less likely to be
touched by the Gospel message for every time that you have heard it and
put it away. That is what makes my place here so terribly responsible,
and makes me feel that my words are so very feeble in comparison with
what they ought to be. I know that I may be doing harm to men just
because they listen and are not persuaded, and so go away less and less
likely to be touched.

Ah, dear friends! you will perhaps never again have as deep impressions
as you have now; or at least they are not to be reckoned upon as
probable, for the tendency of all truth is to lose its power by
repetition, and the tendency of all emotion which is not acted upon is
to become fainter and fainter. And so I beseech you that now you would
cherish any faint impression that is being made upon your hearts and
consciences. Let it lead you to Christ; and take Him for your Lord and
Saviour now.

I say to you: Do that now because delay robs you of large blessing. You
will never want Jesus Christ more than you do to-day. You need Him in
your early hours. Why should it be that a portion of your lives should
be left unfilled by that rich mercy? Why should you postpone possessing
the purest joy, the highest blessing, the divinest strength? Why should
you put off welcoming your best Friend into your heart? Why should you?

I say to you again, Take Christ for your Lord, because delay inevitably
lays up for you bitter memories and involves dreadful losses. There are
good Christian men and women, I have no doubt, in this world now, who
would give all they have, if they could blot out of the tablets of
their memories some past hours of their lives, before they gave their
hearts to Jesus Christ. I would have you ignorant of such
transgression. O young men and women! if you grow up into middle life
not Christians, then should you ever become so, you will have habits to
fight with, and remembrances that will smart and sting; and some of
you, perhaps, remembrances that will pollute, even though you are
conscious that you are forgiven. It is a better thing not to know the
depths of evil than to know them and to have been raised from them. You
will escape infinite sorrows by an early cleaving to Christ your Lord.

And last of all I say to you, give yourselves now to Jesus Christ,
because no to-morrow may be yours. Delay is gambling, very
irrationally, with a very uncertain thing--your life and your future
opportunities. 'You know not what shall be on the morrow.'

For a generation I have preached in Manchester these annual sermons to
the young. Ah, how many of those that heard the early ones are laid in
their graves; and how many of them were laid in _early_ graves; and how
many of them said, as some of you are saying, 'When I get older I will
turn religious'! And they never got older. It is a commonplace word
that, but I leave it on your hearts. You have no time to lose.

Do not delay, because delay is decision in the wrong way; do not delay,
because there is no reason for delay; do not delay, because delay robs
you of a large blessing; do not delay, because delay lays up for you,
if ever you come back, bitter memories; do not delay, because delay may
end in death. And for all these reasons, come as a sinful soul to
Christ the Saviour; and ask Him to forgive you, and follow in His
footsteps, and do it now! 'To-day, if ye will hear His voice, harden
not your hearts.'



CHRIST'S REMONSTRANCES

'And when we were all fallen to the earth, I heard a voice speaking
unto me, and saying in the Hebrew tongue, Saul, Saul, why perseoutest
thou Me! it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks.'--ACTS xxvi.
14.

'Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the leopard his spots?' No. But
God can change the skin, because He can change the nature. In this
story of the conversion of the Apostle Paul--the most important thing
that happened that day--we have an instance how brambles may become
vines; tares may become wheat; and a hater of Jesus Christ may be
changed in a moment into His lover and servant, and, if need be, His
martyr.

Now the very same motives and powers which were brought to bear upon
the Apostle Paul by miracle are being brought to bear upon every one of
us; and my object now is just to trace the stages of the process set
forth here, and to ask some of you, if you, like Paul, have been
'obedient to the heavenly vision.' Stages, I call them, though they
were all crowded into a moment, for even the lightning has to pass
through the intervening space when it flashes from one side of the
heavens to another, and we may divide its path into periods. Time is
very elastic, as any of us whose lives have held great sorrows or great
joys or great resolutions well know.

I. The first of these all but simultaneous and yet separable stages was
the revelation of Jesus Christ.

Of course to the Apostle it was mediated by miracle; but real as he
believed that appearance of the risen Lord in the heavens to be, and
valid as he maintained that it was as the ground of his Apostleship, he
himself, in one of his letters, speaks of the whole incident as being
the revelation of God's Son in him. The revelation in heart and mind
was the main thing, of which the revelation to eye and ear were but
means. The means, in his case, are different from those in ours; the
end is the same. To Paul it came like the rush of a cataract that the
Christ whom he had thought of as lying in an unknown grave was living
in the heavens and ruling there. You and I, I suppose, do not need to
be convinced by miracle of the resurrection of Jesus Christ; but the
bare fact that Jesus was living in the heavens would have had little
effect upon Saul, unless it had been accompanied with the revelation of
the startling fact that between him and Jesus Christ there were close
personal relations, so that he had to do with Jesus, and Jesus with him.

'Saul, Saul! why persecutest thou Me?' They used to think that they
could wake sleep-walkers by addressing them by name. Jesus Christ, by
speaking His name to the Apostle, wakes him out of his diseased
slumber, and brings him to wholesome consciousness. There are
stringency and solemnity of address in that double use of the name
'Saul, Saul!'

What does such an address teach you and me? That Jesus Christ, the
living, reigning Lord of the universe, has perfect knowledge of each of
us, and that we each stand isolated before Him, as if all the light of
omniscience were focussed upon us. He knows our characters; He knows
all about us, and more than that, He directly addresses Himself to each
man and woman among us.

We are far too apt to hide ourselves in the crowd, and let all the
messages of God's love, the warnings of His providences, as well as the
teachings and invitations and pleadings of His gospel, fly over our
heads as if they were meant vaguely for anybody. But they are all
intended for _thee_, as directly as if thou, and thou only, wert in the
world. I beseech you, lay this to heart, that although no audible
sounds may rend the silent heavens, nor any blaze may blind thine eye,
yet that as really, though not in the same outward fashion as Saul,
when they were all fallen to the earth, felt himself to be singled out,
and heard a voice 'speaking to _him_ in the Hebrew tongue, saying,
Saul, Saul!' _thou_ mayest hear a voice speaking to thee in the English
tongue, by thy name, and directly addressing its gracious remonstrances
and its loving offers to thy listening ear. I want to sharpen the blunt
'whosoever' into the pointed 'thou.' And I would fain plead with each
of my friends hearing me now to believe that the gospel of Jesus Christ
is meant for thee, and that Christ speaks to _thee_. 'I have a message
from God unto thee,' just as Nathan said unto David. '_Thou_ art the
man!'

Do not lose yourselves in the crowd or hide yourselves from the
personal incidence of Christ's offer, but feel that you stand, as you
do indeed, alone the hearer of His voice, the possible recipient of His
saving mercy.

II. Secondly, notice, as another stage in this process the discovery of
the true character of the past.

'Why persecutest thou Me?' Now I am not going to be tempted from my
more direct purpose in this sermon to dwell even for a moment on the
beautiful, affecting, strengthening thought here, of the unity of Jesus
Christ with all the humble souls that love Him, so as that, whatsoever
any member suffers, the Head suffers with it. I must leave that truth
untouched.

Saul was brought to look at all his past life as standing in immediate
connection with Jesus Christ. Of course he knew before the vision that
he had no love to Him whom he thought to be a Galilean impostor, and
that the madness with which he hated the servants was only the glancing
off of the arrow that he would fain have aimed at the Master. But he
did not know that Jesus Christ counted every blow struck at one of His
servants as being struck at Him. Above all he did not know that the
Christ whom he was persecuting was reigning in the heavens. And so his
whole past life stood before him in a new aspect when it was brought
into close connection with Christ, and looked at as in relation to Him.

The same process would yield very remarkable results if applied to our
lives. If I could only get you for one quiet ten minutes, to lay all
your past, as far as memory brought it to your minds, right before that
pure and loving Face, I should have done much. One infallible way of
judging of the rottenness or goodness of our actions is that we should
bring them where they will all be brought one day, into the brightness
of Christ's countenance. If you want to find out the flaws in some
thin, badly-woven piece of cloth, you hold it up against the light, do
you not? and then you see all the specks and holes, and the irregular
threads. Hold up your lives in like fashion against the light, and I
shall be surprised if you do not find enough there to make you very
much ashamed of yourselves. Were you ever on the stage of a theatre in
the daytime? Did you ever see what miserable daubs the scenes look, and
how seamy it all is when the pitiless sunshine comes in? Let that great
light pour on your life, and be thankful if you find out what a daub it
has been, whilst yet colours and brushes and time are at your disposal,
and you may paint the future fairer than the past.

Again, this revelation of Saul's past life disclosed its utter
unreasonableness. That one question, '_Why_ persecutest thou Me?'
pulverised the whole thing. It was like the wondering question so
unanswerable in the Psalm, 'Why do the heathen rage, and the people
imagine a vain thing?' If you take into account what you are, and where
you stand, you can find no reason, except utterly unreasonable ones,
for the lives that I fear some of us are living--lives of godlessness
and Christlessness. There is nothing in all the world a tithe so stupid
as sin. There is nothing so unreasonable, if there be a God at all, and
if we depend upon Him, and have duties to Him, as the lives that some
of you are living. You admit, most of you, that there is such a God;
you admit, most of you, that you do hang upon Him; you admit, in
theory, that you ought to love and serve Him. The bulk of you call
yourselves Christians. That is to say, you believe, as a piece of
historical fact, that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, came into this
world and died for men. And, believing that, you turn your back on Him,
and neither love nor serve nor trust Him nor turn away from your
iniquity. Is there anything outside a lunatic asylum more madlike than
that? 'Why persecutest thou?' 'And he was speechless,' for no answer
was possible. Why neglectest thou? Why forgettest thou? Why, admitting
what thou dost, art thou not an out-and-out Christian? If we think of
all our obligations and relations, and the facts of the universe, we
come back to the old saying, 'The fear of the Lord is the beginning of
wisdom,' and any man who, like many of my hearers, fails to give his
heart and life to Jesus Christ will one day have to say, 'Behold, I
have played the fool, and erred exceedingly.' Wake up, my brother, to
apply calm reason to your lives while yet there is time, and face the
question, Why dost thou stand as thou dost to Jesus Christ? There is
nothing sadder than the small share that deliberate reason and
intelligent choice have in the ordering of most men's lives. You live
by impulse, by habit, by example, by constraint of the outward
necessities of your position. But I am sure that there are many amongst
us now who have very seldom, if ever, sat down and said, 'Now let me
think, until I get to the ultimate grounds of the course of life that I
am pursuing.' You can carry on the questions very gaily for a step or
two, but then you come to a dead pause. 'What do I do so-and-so for?'
'Because I like it.' 'Why do I like it?' 'Because it meets my needs, or
my desires, or my tastes, or my intellect.' Why do you make the meeting
of your needs, or your desires, or your tastes, or your intellect your
sole object? Is there any answer to that? The Hindoos say that the
world rests upon an elephant, and the elephant rests upon a tortoise.
What does the tortoise rest on? Nothing! Then that is what the world
and the elephant rest on. And so, though you may go bravely through the
first stages of the examination, when you come to the last question of
all, you will find out that your whole scheme of life is built upon a
blunder; and the blunder is this, that anybody can be blessed without
God.

Further, this disclosure of the true character of his life revealed to
Saul, as in a lightning flash, the ingratitude of it.

'Why persecutest thou Me?' That was as much as to say, 'What have I
done to merit thy hate? What have I _not_ done to merit rather thy
love?' Paul did not know all that Jesus Christ had done for him. It
took him a lifetime to learn a little of it, and to tell his brethren
something of what he had learned. And he has been learning it ever
since that day when, outside the walls of Rome, they hacked off his
head. He has been learning more and more of what Jesus Christ has done
for him, and why he should not persecute Him but love Him.

But the same appeal comes to each of us. What has Jesus Christ done for
thee, my friend, for me, for every soul of man? He has loved me better
than His own life. He has given Himself for me. He has lingered beside
me, seeking to draw me to Himself, and He still lingers. And this, at
the best, tremulous faith, this, at the warmest, tepid love, this, at
the completest, imperfect devotion and service, are all that we bring
to Him; and some of us do not bring even these. Some of us have never
known what it was to sacrifice one inclination for the sake of Christ,
nor to do one act for His dear love's sake, nor to lean our weakness
upon Him, nor to turn to Him and say, 'I give Thee myself, that I may
possess Thee.' 'Do ye thus requite the Lord, O foolish people and
unwise?' I have heard of wounded soldiers striking with their bayonets
at the ambulance men who came to help them. That is like what some of
you do to the Lord who died for your healing, and comes as the
Physician, with bandages and with balm, to bind up the brokenhearted.
'Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?'

III. Lastly, we have here a warning against self-inflicted wounds.

That second clause of the remonstrance on the lips of Christ in my text
is, according to the true reading, not found in the account of Paul's
conversion in the ninth chapter of this book. My text is from Paul's
own story; and it is interesting to notice that he adds this eminently
pathetic and forcible appeal to the shorter account given by the writer
of the book. It had gone deep into his heart, and he could not forget.

The metaphor is a very plain one. The ox-goad was a formidable weapon,
some seven or eight feet in length, shod with an iron point, and
capable of being used as a spear, and of inflicting deadly wounds at a
pinch. Held in the firm hand of the ploughman, it presented a sharp
point to the rebellious animal under the yoke. If the ox had readily
yielded to the gentle prick, given, not in anger, but for guidance, it
had been well. But if it lashes out with its hoofs against the point,
what does it get but bleeding flanks? Paul had been striking out
instead of obeying, and he had won by it only bloody hocks.

There are two truths deducible from this saying, which may have been a
proverb in common use. One is the utter futility of lives that are
spent in opposing the divine will. There is a strong current running,
and if you try to go against it you will only be swept away by it.
Think of some little fishing coble coming across the bow of a great
ocean-going steamer. What will be the end of that? Think of a
pony-chaise jogging up the line, and an express train thundering down
it. What will be the end of that? Think of a man lifting himself up and
saying to God, 'I will _not_!' when God says, 'Do thou this!' or 'Be
thou this!' What will be the end of that? 'The world passeth away, and
the lusts thereof, but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever.'
'It is hard for thee to kick against the pricks'--hard in regard to
breaches of common morality, as some of my friends sitting quietly in
these pews very well know. It is hard to indulge in sensual sin. You
cannot altogether dodge what people call the 'natural consequences';
but it was God who made Nature; and so I call them God-inflicted
penalties. It is hard to set yourselves against Christianity. I am not
going to speak of that at all now, only when we think of the
expectations of victory with which so many antagonists of the Cross
have gaily leaped into the arena, and of how the foes have been
forgotten and there stands the Cross still, we may say of the whole
crowd, beginning with the earliest, and coming down to the latest
brand-new theory that is going to explode Christianity--'it is hard to
kick against the pricks.' Your own limbs you may wound; you will not do
the goad much harm.

But there is another side to the proverb of my text, and that is the
self-inflicted harm that comes from resisting the pricks of God's
rebukes and remonstrances, whether inflicted by conscience or by any
other means; including, I make bold to say, even such poor words as
these of mine. For if the first little prick of conscience, a warning
and a guide, be neglected, the next will go a great deal deeper. The
voice which, before you do the wrong thing, says to you, 'Do not do
it,' in tones of entreaty and remonstrance, speaks, after you have done
it, more severely and more bitterly. The Latin word _remorse_, and the
old English name for conscience, 'again-bite'--which latter is a
translation of the other--teach us the same lesson, that the gnawing
which comes after wrong done is far harder to bear than the touch that
should have kept us from the evil. The stings of marine jelly-fish will
burn for days after, if you wet them. And so all wrong-doing, and all
neglect of right-doing of every sort, carries with it a subsequent
pain, or else the wounded limb _mortifies_, and that is worse. There is
no pain then; it would be better if there were. There is such a
possibility as to have gone on so obstinately kicking against the
pricks and leaving the wounds so unheeded, as that they mortify and
feeling goes. A conscience 'seared with a hot iron' is ten times more
dreadful than a conscience that pains and stings.

So, dear brethren, let me beseech you to listen to the pitying Christ,
who says to us each, more in sorrow than in anger, 'It is hard for thee
to kick against the pricks.' It is no pleasure to Him to hold the goad,
nor that we should wound ourselves upon it. He has another question to
put to us, with another 'why,' 'Why should ye be stricken any more?
Turn ye, turn ye; why will ye die, O house of Israel?'

There is another metaphor drawn from the employment of oxen which we
may set side by side with this of my text: 'Take My yoke upon you, and
ye shall find rest unto your souls.' The yoke accepted, the goad is
laid aside; and repose and healing from its wounds are granted to us.
Dear brethren, if you will listen to the Christ revealed in the
heavens, as knowing all about you, and remonstrating with you for your
unreasonableness and ingratitude, and setting before you the miseries
of rebellion and the suicide of sin, then you will have healing for all
your wounds, and your lives will neither be self-tormenting, futile,
nor unreasonable. The mercy of Jesus Christ lavished upon you makes
your yielding yourselves to Him your only rational course. Anything
else is folly beyond comparison and harm and loss beyond count.



FAITH IN CHRIST

'...Faith that is in Me.'--ACTS xxvi. 18.

It is commonly said, and so far as the fact is concerned, said truly,
that what are called the distinguishing doctrines of Christianity are
rather found in the Epistles than in the Gospels. If we wish the
clearest statements of the nature and person of Christ, we turn to
Paul's Epistle to the Colossians. If we wish the fullest dissertation
upon Christ's work as a sacrifice, we go to the Epistle to the Hebrews.
If we seek to prove that men are justified by faith, and not by works,
it is to the Epistles to Romans and Galatians that we betake
ourselves,--to the writings of the servant rather than the words of the
Master. Now this fuller development of Christian doctrine contained in
the teaching of the Apostles cannot be denied, and need not be wondered
at. The reasons for it I am not going to enter upon at present; they
are not far to seek. Christ came not to _speak_ the Gospel, but _to be_
the Gospel. But then, this truth of a fuller development is often
over-strained, as if Christ 'spake nothing concerning priesthood,'
sacrifices, faith. He _did_ so speak when on earth. It is often misused
by being made the foundation of an inference unfavourable to the
authority of the Apostolic teaching, when we are told, as we sometimes
are, that not Paul but Jesus speaks the words which we are to receive.

Here we have Christ Himself speaking from the heavens to Paul at the
very beginning of the Apostle's course, and if any one asks us where
did Paul get the doctrines which he preached, the answer is, Here, on
the road to Damascus, when blind, bleeding, stunned, with all his
self-confidence driven out of him--with all that he had been crushed
into shivers--he saw his Lord, and heard Him speak. These words spoken
then are the germ of all Paul's Epistles, the keynote to which all his
writings are but the melody that follows, the mighty voice of which all
his teaching is but the prolonged echo. 'Delivering thee,' says Christ
to him, 'from the people, and from the Gentiles, unto whom now I send
thee, to open their eyes, to turn them from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan unto God; that they may receive forgiveness of sins,
and inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith that is in Me.'
Now, I ask you, what of Paul's Gospel is not here? Man's ruin, man's
depravity and state of darkness, the power of Satan, the sole
redemptive work of Christ, justification by belief in that,
sanctification coming with justification, and glory and rest and heaven
at last--there they all are in the very first words that sounded upon
the quickened ear of the blinded man when he turned from darkness to
light.

It would be foolish, of course, to try to exhaust such a passage as
this in a sermon. But notice, what a complete summary of Christian
truth there lies in that one last clause of the verse, 'Inheritance
among them which are sanctified by faith that is in Me.' Translate that
into distinct propositions, and they are these: Faith refers to Christ;
that is the first thing. Holiness depends on faith; that is the next:
'_sanctified_ by faith.' Heaven depends on holiness: that is the last:
'_inheritance_ among them which are sanctified by faith that is in Me.'
So there we have the whole gospel!

To the one part of this comprehensive summary which is contained in my
text I desire to turn now, in hope of gathering from it some truths as
to that familiar word 'faith' which may be of use to us all. The
expression is so often on our lips that it has come to be almost
meaningless in many minds. These keywords of Scripture meet the same
fate as do coins that have been long in circulation. They pass through
so many fingers that the inscriptions get worn off them. We can all
talk about faith and forgiveness and justifying and sanctifying, but
how few of us have definite notions as to what these words that come so
easily from our lips mean! There is a vast deal of cloudy haze in the
minds of average church and chapel goers as to what this wonder-working
faith may really be. Perhaps we may then be able to see large and
needful truths gleaming in these weighty syllables which Christ Jesus
spoke from heaven to Paul, 'faith that is in Me.'

I. In the first place, then, the object of faith is Christ.

'Faith that is in Me' is that which is directed towards Christ as its
object. Christianity is not merely a system of truths about God, nor a
code of morality deducible from these. In its character of a
revelation, it is the revelation of God in the person of His Son.
Christianity in the soul is not the belief of these truths about God,
still less the acceptance and practice of these pure ethics, but the
affiance and the confidence of the whole spirit fixed upon the
redeeming, revealing Christ,

True, the object of our faith is Christ as made known to us in the
facts of His recorded life and the teaching of His Apostles. True, our
only means of knowing Him as of any other person whom we have never
seen, are the descriptions of Him, His character and work, which are
given. True, the empty name 'Christ' has to be filled with the
doctrinal and biographical statements of Scripture before the Person on
whom faith is to fix can be apprehended or beheld. True, it is Christ
as He is made known to us in the word of God, the Incarnate Son, the
perfect Man, the atoning Sacrifice, the risen Lord, the ascended
Intercessor in whom we have to trust. The characteristics and
attributes of Christ are known to us only by biographical statements
and by doctrinal propositions. These must be understood in some measure
and accepted, ere there can be faith in Him. Apart from them, the image
of Christ must stand a pale, colourless phantom before the mind, and
the faith which is directed towards such a nebula will be an
unintelligent emotion, as nebulous and impotent as the vagueness
towards which it turns.

Thus far, then, the attempt which is sometimes made to establish a
Christianity without doctrines on the plea that the object of faith is
not a proposition, but a person, must be regarded as nugatory; for how
can the 'person' be an object of thought at all, but through the
despised 'propositions'?

But while on the one hand it is true that Christ as revealed in these
doctrinal statements of Scripture, the divine human Saviour, is the
Object of faith, on the other hand it is to be remembered that it is
He, and not the statements about Him, who is the Object.

Look at His own words. He does not merely say to us, 'Believe this,
that, and the other thing about Me; put your credence in this and the
other doctrine; accept this and the other promise; hope for this and
the other future thing.' All these come with but are not the central
act. He says, 'Believe: believe in Me! "_I_ am the Way, and the Truth,
and the Life": He that cometh to _Me_ shall never hunger, and he that
believeth in _Me_ shall never thirst.' Do we rightly appreciate that? I
think that if people firmly grasped this truth--that Christ is the
Gospel, and that the Object of faith is not simply the truths that are
recorded here in the word, but He with regard to whom these truths are
recorded--it would clear away rolling wreaths of fog and mist from
their perceptions. The whole feeling and attitude of a man's mind is
different, according as he is trusting a person, or according as he is
believing something about a person. And this, therefore, is the first
broad truth that lies here. Faith has reference not merely to a
doctrine, not to a system; but deeper than all these, to a living
Lord--'faith that is _in Me_.'

I cannot help observing, before I go on--though it may be somewhat of a
digression--what a strong inference with regard to the divinity of
Christ is deducible from this first thought that He is the Object to
whom faith has reference. If you look into the Old Testament, you will
find constantly, 'Trust ye in the Lord for ever'; 'Put thy trust in
Jehovah!' There, too, though under the form of the Law, there, too,
faith was the seed and germ of all religion. There, too, though under
the hard husk of apparently external obedience and ceremonial
sacrifices, the just lived by faith. Its object was the Jehovah of that
ancient covenant. Religion has always been the same in every
dispensation. At every time, that which made a man a devout man has
been identically the same thing. It has always been true that it has
been faith which has bound man to God, and given man hope. But when we
come to the New Testament, the centre is shifted, as it would seem.
What has become of the grand old words, 'Trust ye in the Lord Jehovah'?
Look! Christ stands there, and says, 'Believe upon Me'! With calm,
simple, profound dignity, He lays His hand upon all the ancient and
consecrated words, upon all the ancient and hallowed emotions that used
to set towards the unseen God between the cherubim, throned above
judgment and resting upon mercy; and He says, 'They are Mine--give them
to Me! That ancient trust, I claim the right to have it. That old
obedience, it belongs to Me. I am He to whom in all time the loving
hearts of them that loved God, have set. I am the Angel of the
Covenant, in whom whoever trusteth shall never be confounded.' And I
ask you just to take that one simple fact, that Christ thus steps, in
the New Testament--in so far as the direction of the religious emotions
of faith and love are concerned--that Christ steps into the place
filled by the Jehovah of the Old; and ask yourselves honestly what
theory of Christ's nature and person and work explains that fact, and
saves Him from the charge of folly and blasphemy? 'He that believeth
upon Me shall never hunger.' Ah, my brother! He was no mere _man_ who
said that. He that spake from out of the cloud to the Apostle on the
road to Damascus, and said, 'Sanctified by faith that is in Me,' was no
mere _man_. Christ was our brother and a man, but He was the Son of
God, the divine Redeemer. The Object of faith is Christ; and as Object
of faith He must needs be divine.

II. And now, secondly, closely connected with and springing from this
thought as to the true object of faith, arises the consideration as to
the nature and the essence of the act of faith itself.

_Whom_ we are to trust in we have seen: what it is to _have_ faith may
be very briefly stated. If the Object of faith were certain truths, the
assent of the understanding would be enough. If the Object of faith
were unseen things, the confident persuasion of them would be
sufficient. If the Object of faith were promises of future good, the
hope rising to certainty of the possession of these would be
sufficient. But if the Object be more than truths, more than unseen
realities, more than promises; if the Object be a living Person,--then
there follows inevitably this, that faith is not merely the assent of
the understanding, that faith is not merely the persuasion of the
reality of unseen things, that faith is not merely the confident
expectation of future good; but that faith is the personal relation of
him who has it to the living Person its Object,--the relation which is
expressed not more clearly, perhaps a little more forcibly to us, by
substituting another word, and saying, Faith is _trust_.

And I think that there again, by laying hold of that simple principle,
Because Christ is the Object of Faith, therefore Faith must be trust,
we get bright and beautiful light upon the grandest truths of the
Gospel of God. If we will only take that as our explanation, we have
not indeed defined faith by substituting the other word for it, but we
have made it a little more clear to our apprehensions, by using a
non-theological word with which our daily acts teach us to connect an
intelligible meaning. If we will only take that as our explanation, how
simple, how grand, how familiar too it sounds,--to _trust_ Him! It is
the very same kind of feeling, though different in degree, and
glorified by the majesty and glory of its Object, as that which we all
know how to put forth in our relations with one another. We trust each
other. That is faith. We have confidence in the love that has been
around us, breathing benedictions and bringing blessings ever since we
were little children. When the child looks up into the mother's face,
the symbol to it of all protection, or into the father's eye, the
symbol to it of all authority,--that emotion by which the little one
hangs upon the loving hand and trusts the loving heart that towers
above it in order to bend over it and scatter good, is the same as the
one which, glorified and made divine, rises strong and immortal in its
power, when fixed and fastened on Christ, and saves the soul. The
Gospel rests upon a mystery, but the practical part of it is no
mystery. When we come and preach to you, 'Trust in Christ and thou
shalt be saved,' we are not asking you to put into exercise some
mysterious power. We are only asking you to give to Him that which you
give to others, to transfer the old emotions, the blessed emotions, the
exercise of which makes gladness in life here below, to transfer them
to Him, and to rest safe in the Lord. Faith is trust. The living Person
as its Object rises before us there, in His majesty, in His power, in
His gentleness, and He says, 'I shall be contented if thou wilt give to
Me these emotions which thou dost fix now, to thy death and loss, on
the creatures of a day.' Faith is mighty, divine, the gift of God; but
Oh! it is the exercise of a familiar habit, only fixed upon a divine
and eternal Person.

And if this be the very heart and kernel of the Christian doctrine of
faith--that it is simple personal trust in Jesus Christ; it is worthy
of notice, how all the subsidiary meanings and uses of the word flow
out of that, whilst it cannot be explained by any of them. People are
in the habit of setting up antitheses betwixt faith and reason, betwixt
faith and sight, betwixt faith and possession. They say, 'We do not
_know_, we must _believe_'; they say, 'We do not _see_, we must have
faith'; they say, 'We do not _possess_, we must trust.' Now faith--the
trust in Christ--the simple personal relation of confidence in
Him--_that_ lies beneath all these other meanings of the word. For
instance, faith is, in one sense, the opposite and antithesis of sight;
because Christ, unseen, having gone into the unseen world, the
confidence which is directed towards Him must needs pass out beyond the
region of sense, and fix upon the immortal verities that are veiled by
excess of light at God's right hand. Faith is the opposite of sight;
inasmuch as Christ, having given us assurance of an unseen and
everlasting world, we, trusting in Him, believe what He says to us, and
are persuaded and know that there are things yonder which we have never
seen with the eye nor handled with the hand. Similarly, faith is the
completion of reason; because, trusting Christ, we believe what He
says, and He has spoken to us truths which we in ourselves are unable
to discover, but which, when revealed, we accept on the faith of His
truthfulness, and because we rely upon Him. Similarly, faith is
contrasted with present possession, because Christ has promised us
future blessings and future glories; and having confidence in the
Person, we believe what He says, and know that we shall possess them.
