Junipero Serra interposed, and as if inspired pleaded with the Governor
for "one more day;" Portola out of respect did grant just "one more day"
before ordering the whole expedition back.

Junipero Serra then repaired to the summit of the Presidio Hill and
with arms extended, prayed as if in ecstasy from sunrise until sunset,
"storming the heavens" that the relief ship might come, and the
conversion of the heathen of California be realized. O unquestionable
miracle! "More things are wrought by prayer, than this world ever
dreamed of!" As the last rays of sun kissed his venerable brow, from out
the gold and purple horizon, he sighted the top-most point of a mast,
which while he was still "pouring his soul" no longer in supplication
but in thanksgiving, grew into the unmistakable figure of the long
expected ship. But for that "one more day" what would California be
now? No converted Indians, no monumental missions, no exploration and
colonization no civilization! The ship had been delayed on account of
the rough voyage it encountered. But now relief, contentment, renewed
hope, renewed courage; and the Mission of San Diego was but the first
of the twenty-one which were to strew El Camino Real (the Royal Road,
literally, commonly called the King's Highway) of California. And
chivalrous Portola, filled with even greater reverence for the humble
priest Junipero Serra, whom his lofty soul had always appreciated,
once more gathered his forces, and started anew in search of Monterey.
Junipero Serra left the Mission of San Diego in charge of two of the
good fathers and a small garrison as guards, and set out with Portola
on his second expedition; and it was Serra whose very presence seemed to
draw the blessings of heaven, who pointed out to the Governor the error
on Vizcaino's map which caused him to miss the Port of Monterey.

This expedition was also divided into two parts, one to go overland the
other by sea. Father Serra went with the sea party which sailed on
the Paqueboat San Antonio. A number of Spanish dragoons from the fair
province of Catalonia, muleteers, and some of the convert Indians
recruited from the mission of La Paz were in the overland party.

On May 24th, 1770, the expedition reached Point Pinos on the Coast
of Monterey; after going south about six miles and encamping on a
picturesque spot on the shores of the Bay, the missionaries raised an
altar and Junipero Serra celebrated the first Mass on the shores of
Monterey on June 3rd, 1770. It is more than likely that the Carmelite
fathers who came here with Vizcaino had done so one hundred and sixty
eight years before, but as there is no official record of the fact,
the Mass celebrated on the improvised altar under the oak (which is
preserved in the premises of San Carlos Church, Monterey), is recorded
as the first. Mass over, Junipero Serra and Gaspar de Portola exhorted
the Spanish soldiers to hold to the traditional faith and purity of
the Spanish race, and to kindness to the natives, calling them "weaker
brethren who should be christianized, not debauched." Then Junipero
Serra planted a Mission Cross and blessed the Spanish flag which Portola
hoisted, taking possession of the land in the name of "His Most Catholic
Majesty King Carlos III, by right of discovery." [1] Junipero Serra also
blessed the sea and land.

As Monterey was from the first established as the civil, military
and religious headquarters of the Spanish kingdom in California, her
Presidio was known as el Presidio Real (the Royal Presidio), and the
present parish church of Monterey, which was built as a chapel for the
Presidio was la Capilla Real de San Carlos (the Royal Chapel of Saint
Charles).

Junipero Serra found the Indians of Monterey and the surrounding country
very docile, while the Indians from Lower California soon learned their
dialect and acted as interpreters of the missionaries. The Cross which
Vizcaino had planted in 1602 was found decked with skins and shells. On
inquiry the Missionaries were told by the Indians that they had often
seen mysterious rays of light around it, and thinking that some god was
angry they were trying to propitiate him by means of those offerings.

As we have already noted Junipero Serra said his first, Mass in Monterey
on June 3rd, 1770, and two years later he recorded his first baptism.
From that date the Indians would come in dozens to present themselves
for instruction. Then the marvels that had attended Junipero Serra at
Sierra Gorda in Mexico, were repeated in Monterey. The naked savages
were clothed, many of them were beginning to learn Spanish and to sing
the Latin responses of the Mass and hymns both in Spanish and Latin,
playing such musical instruments as the cymbal and triangle, keeping
perfect time to every beat. The flocks and cattle were increasing and
the harvest fields were golden with grain. While some of the Indians
were taught to till the soil others were herdsmen, and some were taught
to work as artisans. Nearly fifty trades were taught the California
Indians under the supervision of the Missionaries. In 1771 Junipero
Serra founded the San Carlos Mission in the most entrancing location of
the Carmelo Valley that the nature loving Serra could have chosen; the
forests of oak, pine and cypress for which Monterey is noted to this
day, stretch with even greater beauty as we pierce farther into the
interior, while the fertility of the land drained by the beautiful
Carmelo River together with the commanding position of the spot, made
the site of the Mission ideal. And this Mission of the Carmelo Valley
of Monterey, was Junipero Serra's headquarters, here he lies buried, and
here was the center of that unequalled hospitality and pure society for
which every mission was noted. The Spanish Government made large grants
of land to the missions, and under the labor, care and excellent methods
of the missionaries, they became powerful and wealthy institutions, the
pride and blessing of New Spain. Fine stock, teeming grain fields and
luscious orchards graced every mission, and Mission San Carlos was no
exception, indeed it was one of the most prosperous and beautiful.

Fathers from the Mission at Carmelo, attended the Royal Chapel of San
Carlos in Monterey and continued to do so until long after the last Act
of Secularization in 1835 had been passed by the Mexican Government, and
San Carlos of Carmelo was left desolate with no priest to guard her own
altar light. But of this we shall, alas, have but too much reason to
speak later. Junipero Serra did not stop his arduous work by founding
beautiful San Carlos of Carmelo and consecrating the Royal Chapel of
Monterey; he was to christianize all California, for all California
had now been added to the Crown of Castile and Leon. Spain followed
in California the same policy which has distinguished her in her other
possessions such as Cuba, the Philippines and other colonies, steeped in
idolatry until the Spanish Missionary, whose zeal is proverbial, wrested
their countless inhabitants from the cymmerian gloom of paganism. Thus
as soon as San Carlos Mission was founded, the glorious march of El
Camino Real continued.

Mission San Antonio de Padua, the third mission, was established in July
1, 1771. The beauty of the spot and wonderful eagerness of the Indians
to receive baptism greatly touched Junipero Serra and the other two
Franciscan Fathers who accompanied him as well as some of the soldiers
who were in the party. To-day Mission San Antonio is almost in ruins,
but its very ruins are piles which speak of mystic beauty, and in
the days of mission glory San Antonio was one of the fairest of the
missions.

On returning to Carmelo, Junipero Serra filled the other missionaries
with joy over this latest conquest of souls, and sent messengers to
Fathers Somera and Cambon whom he had left in charge of the Mission at
San Diego, to establish a mission in southern California, which they
would name San Gabriel. The two Fathers, with ten soldiers as guards,
started a march northward until they came to the present sight of San
Gabriel, which they saw immediately was a good location for a mission,
particularly as a beautiful stream flowed through the Valley, and
wherever possible the Fathers chose a spot where there was water for the
mission orchards and gardens.

Here we may add that the Fathers had a system of irrigation by means
of ditches, traces of which may be seen to this day in the sites where
stood many of the old mission orchards. The fruits from these good
Fathers gardens were the fairest and most luscious that California has
ever seen, none of our lovely grapes compare with theirs, and their
olives were larger and better than any of which California boasts
to-day.

Although not deviating from our subject we have wandered from the thread
of our story in the foundation of Mission San Gabriel. One incident
contained in the records of this Mission may hardly be passed over in
silence. The good Franciscans and their brave little bodyguard found the
Indians in a very hostile mood, still they blessed a Mission Cross and
planted it; but the Indians increasing their threatening attitude, the
Fathers unfurled a large white banner bearing the image of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, placing the side of the banner with the image in full
view of the heathens. Priests and soldiers then knelt and implored the
intercession of the Redeemer's Immaculate Mother for their safety
and for the conversion of the Indians to the Faith of her Divine Son.
Immediately came the answer from Heaven! The Indians not only abandoned
every sign of hostility, but came forward towards the Fathers with every
sign of sincere submissiveness, and after due instruction were baptized.
For it must be remembered that the Church does not, and cannot force her
belief on anyone who does not willingly accept it; the poor savage is
no exception; instruction, kindness, prayers may always be employed, no
more. As in many cases the nature of the Indian was too elementary to
be moved at first by the lessons and exhortations of suffering and
self-denial of Our Saviour, and the bridling of the human passions; in
many instances the Fathers would first win the Indians' confidence by
giving them blankets, beads and such things as attracted them, then by
degrees unfolded the tenets of religion and mysteries of faith, to which
in most cases these erstwhile savages clung with firmness and gave many
edifying signs of true and sincere christianity. A band of white beads
around the head distinguished the christian Indians from the pagan.

The flocks, vineyards and orchards of Mission San Gabriel, as well as
the skill of its Indians, in time became famous throughout California,
and it was from here that Governor Felipe de Neve, third Governor of
California, started in 1781 with several of the Fathers and a company of
soldiers to found the present city of Los Angeles.

The fifth Mission, San Luis Obispo, was founded on September 1, 1772, by
Junipero Serra in person; the saintly Father making a pilgrimage there
for that purpose. Thus in the space of three years, five missions were
founded. A royal record of the zeal of the missionaries and of the
humanity of the Spanish Government and Authorities.

In 1774 the Spanish Viceroy of Mexico informed Junipero Serra that
he intended to establish a presidio in San Francisco "for the further
extension of Spanish and Christian power." Junipero Serra, on receipt
of this letter, selected Fathers Palou and Cambon to accompany the
soldiers, and Lieutenant Juan de Ayala was ordered with his ship
stationed at Monterey to further explore the San Francisco Bay; Juan de
Anza, another brilliant officer, was entrusted with the establishment of
the new presidio; the site he chose being the identical one on which the
Presidio of San Francisco stands today. Lieutenant Juan de Ayala of the
Royal Navy of Spain, was the first to steer a ship through the Golden
Gate, and a strange coincidence was that his ship was the San Carlos
which had come to San Diego with a portion of the first Spanish pioneers
in 1769. With Lieutenant Ayala was Father Vincente de Santa Maria who,
with Fathers Palou and Cambon, planted a Mission Cross and founded
Mission Nuestra Senora de los Dolores, which has withstood so many
ravages of time and change, of man and elements.

The seventh Mission was San Juan Capistrano, founded November 1, 1776,
by Father Lasuen. This Mission was also a very flourishing Mission, the
Indians were laborers in its construction, which lasted nearly fourteen
years.

Mission Santa Clara was the eighth to be established. It was founded on
January 12, 1777. The original lines of this once beautiful Mission
are almost entirely changed but like all its sister missions it still
retains much of its dear old atmosphere, and can boast of the tomb of
Father Magin Catala who died there in 1836 "in the odor of sanctity."
Mission Santa Clara was founded by Father Tomas de la Pena y Saradia;
and its history is fascinating and romantic. The Mission Cross which
Father de la Pena y Saradia planted here, is still standing.

The ninth Mission was San Buenaventura, founded also by Junipero Serra
in person, in company with Governor Felipe de Neve, on Easter Sunday of
March 31, 1783.

From San Buenaventura, Junipero Serra and Governor de Neve marched
to what is now Santa Barbara. Here the Indians were numerous and more
intelligent than any in California, where the Indians were far denser
than either the Incas of South America or the Aztecs of Mexico. Delays,
caused by military differences, retarded the foundation of Santa Barbara
Mission, which would have been the tenth, but Junipero Serra planted
a Mission Cross and selected the site on which it was destined to be
founded four years after his death. From here Serra returned to Carmelo;
his journeys from one Mission to another being always on foot.

And here we must pause: We have come in our narrative to that momentous
year in the history, not only of the missions, but of California. The
year when. Junipero Serra, true priest of God, christianizer, civilizer,
wonderful among wonderful pioneers, or as Governor Gaspar de Portola
had spoken of him years before, "the humblest, bravest man of God I ever
knew," had done his work! Junipero Serra was ready for his throne in
Heaven, his crown awaited him, his rough Franciscan habit was to be
glorified. We have briefly glanced at his chief characteristics from
his boyhood in historic Spain, and must have gauged the measure of his
untiring and tried virtue from the time he landed in Mexico and San
Diego, on through the years he labored as the Apostle of California; to
these let us add just a few of the private practices of mortification
which he imposed on his innocent flesh, notwithstanding his age, his
physical infirmities, extraordinary labors and hardships in a new, half
explored country. Virtually they sound like a passage from the lives of
the Saints. His journeys were always on foot, although the old sore
on his leg remained like an instrument of torture throughout his life,
nothing being able to help him. El Camino Real, from San Francisco to
Monterey and from Monterey to San Diego, with its rough roads, was as
familiar to him who walked it with so much difficulty as it is to us
who enjoy it by comfortable travel on the railroad or pleasurable motor
trips; his fasts were austere and frequent, wine he never used, the
discipline was no stranger to him, a bed was not among his possessions,
on the bare floor or bench at most he would rest his sore missionary
body; yet he never imposed unnecessary penance on anyone, he was hard
only on himself, he was gentle and affectionate to a marked degree, his
faith, trust in Providence, humility and charity, were heroic. Of his
seventy-four years of life, fifty-four he had been a Franciscan Priest
and thirty-five he had devoted to missionary work, of which nine were
spent in Mexico and fourteen in California. His wonderful eloquence and
magnetic power for preaching which had won him honors in the Old
World even as a newly ordained priest, he had used and adapted for the
instruction of thousands of heathens of the New World; and now that
christianity and civilization were beginning to bud with springtime
loveliness like the Castilian roses he had planted in some of the
mission gardens, while the sun of Spanish glory was still in the
ascendency and no threatening omens of the fall of Spanish or Franciscan
power, or nightmares of the Acts of Secularization disturbed the
cloudless skies, while the Presidio Real of Monterey bore the arms of
the Spanish King and the Capilla Real do San Carlos was thronged with
gallant officers and brave men of the Royal Army and Navy of Castile and
Leon, and Our Lady seemed to smile blessings on her Valley of Carmelo,
before the beauteous dream, nay, realization of noble ambitions, had
vanished like a fair sun, God called His faithful Servant unto Himself,
in his cell at his beloved San Carlos Mission about 2:30 P. M. on August
28, 1784, according to the entry of Father Francisco Palou, in the
archives of San Carlos Mission, preserved in San Carlos Church of
Monterey. And what a day this was! The archives here are full of
touching detail. Solemn salutes were fired from the ships stationed in
the Harbor of Monterey, and the grief of the people was inexpressible.
The Indians were inconsolable. The officers of the Royal Navy claimed
his sandals as a precious keepsake, and the Fathers could not restrain
the people from cutting pieces of his habit to carry away as souvenirs;
the Indians claimed his Franciscan cord and many cut locks of his
silver hair; his corpse had to be dressed twice on account of this pious
proceeding. In a plain redwood coffin his precious remains were laid
in a vault "on the gospel side of the altar within the sanctuary of San
Carlos Mission." O! holy grave, how many changes thou hast seen! O happy
Serra, from the dazzling splendors of God's light how often thou
must have prayed for thy work, thy people, thy neophytes! In God's
