have been stitched on to this verse. There they will see how men
describe miracles; and here they will see how God does so.

'_He was not_.' As I have said, he disappeared; that was what the world
knew. 'God took him'; that was what God tells the world.

Thus this strange exception to the law of death stood, as I suppose, to
the ancient world as doing somewhat the same office for them that the
translation of Elijah afterwards partially did for Israel, and that the
resurrection of Jesus Christ does completely for us, viz. it brought
the future life into the realm of fact, and took it out of the dim
region of speculation altogether. He establishes a truth who proves it,
and he proves a fact that shows it. A doctrine of a future state is not
worth much, but the fact of a future state, which was established by
this incident then, and is certified for us all now, by the Christ
risen from the dead, is all-important. Our gospel is all built upon
facts, and this is the earliest fact in man's history which made man's
subsistence in other conditions than that of earthly life a certainty.

And then, again, this wonderful exception shows to us, as it did to
that ancient world, that the natural end of a religious life is union
with God hereafter. It seems to me that the real proofs of a future
life are two: one, the fact of Christ's resurrection, and the other,
the fact of our religious experience. For anything looks to me more
likely, and less incredible, than that a man who could walk with God
should only have a poor earthly life to do it in, and that all these
aspirations, these emotions, should be bounded and ended by a trivial
thing, that touches only the physical frame. Surely, surely, there is
nothing so absurd as to believe that he who can say 'Thou art my God,'
and who has said it, should ever by anything be brought to cease to say
it. Death cannot kill love to God; and the only end of the religious
life of earth is its perfecting in heaven. The experiences that we have
here, in their loftiness and in their incompleteness, equally witness
for us, of the rest and the perfectness that remain for the children of
God.

Then, again, this man in his unique experience was, and is, a witness
of the fact that death is an excrescence, and results from sin. I
suppose that he trod the road which the divine intention had destined
to be trodden by all the children of men, if they had not sinned; and
that his experience, unique as it is, is a survival, so to speak, of
what was meant to be the law for humanity, unless there had intervened
the terrible fact of sin and its wages, death. The road had been made,
and this one man was allowed to travel along it that we might all
learn, by the example of the exception, that the rule under which we
live was not the rule that God originally meant for us, and that death
has resulted from the fact of transgression. No doubt Enoch had in him
the seeds of it, no doubt there were the possibilities of disease and
the necessity of death in his physical frame, but God has shown us in
that one instance, and in the other of the great prophet's, how _He_ is
not subject to the law that men shall die, although men are subject to
it, and that if He will, He can take them all to Himself, as He did
take these two, and will take them who, at last, shall not die but be
changed.

Let me remind you that this unique and exceptional end of a life of
communion may, in its deepest, essential character, be experienced by
each of us. There are two passages in the book of Psalms, both of which
I regard as allusions to this incident. The one of them is in the
forty-ninth Psalm and reads thus: 'He will deliver my soul from the
power of the grave, for He will take me.' Our version conceals the
allusion, by its unfortunate and non-literal rendering 'receive.' The
same word is employed there as here. Can we fail to see the reference?
The Psalmist expects his soul to be 'delivered from the power of the
grave,' because God _takes_ it.

And again, in the great seventy-third Psalm, which marks perhaps the
highwater mark of pre-Christian anticipations of a future state, we
read: 'Thou wilt guide me by Thy counsel, and afterwards _take_ me'
(again the same word) 'to glory.' Here, again, the Psalmist looks back
to the unique and exceptional instance, and in the rapture and ecstasy
of the faith that has grasped the living God as his portion, says to
himself: 'Though the externals of Enoch's end and of mine may differ,
their substance will be the same, and I, too, shall cease to be seen of
men, because God takes me into the secret of His pavilion, by the
loving clasp of His lifting hand.'

Enoch was led, if I may say so, round the top of the valley, beyond the
head waters of the dark river, and was kept on the high level until he
got to the other side. You and I have to go down the hill, out of the
sunshine, in among the dank weeds, to stumble over the black rocks, and
wade through the deep water; but we shall get over to the same place
where he stands, and He that took him round by the top will 'take' us
through the river; and so shall we 'ever be with the Lord'

'Enoch walked with God and he was not; for God took him.' This verse is
like some little spring with trees and flowers on a cliff. The dry
genealogical table--and here this bit of human life in it! How unlike
the others--they _lived_ and they _died_; this man's life was walking
with God and his departure was a fading away, a ceasing to be found
here. It is remarkable in how calm a tone the Bible speaks of its
supernatural events. We should not have known this to be a miracle but
for the Epistle to the Hebrews.

The dim past of these early chapters carries us over many centuries. We
know next to nothing about the men, where they lived, how they lived,
what thoughts they had, what tongue they spoke. Some people would say
that they never lived at all. I believe, and most of you, I suppose,
believe that they did. But how little personality we give them! Little
as we know of environment and circumstances, we know the main thing,
the fact of their having been. Then we are sure that they had sorrow
and joy, strife and love, toil and rest, like the rest of us, that
whether their days were longer or shorter they were filled much as ours
are, that whatever was the pattern into which the quiet threads of
their life was woven it was, warp and weft, the same yarn as ours. In
broad features every human life is much the same. Widely different as
the clothing of these grey fathers in their tents, with their simple
contrivances and brief records, is from that of cultivated busy
Englishmen to-day, the same human form is beneath both. And further, we
know but little as to their religious ideas, how far they were
surrounded with miracles, what they knew of God and of His purposes,
how they received their knowledge, what served them for a Bible. Of
what positive institutions of religion they had we know nothing;
whether for them there was sacrifice and a sabbath day, how far the
original gospel to Adam was known or remembered or understood by them.
All that is perfectly dark to us. But this we know, that those of them
who were godly men lived by the same power by which godly men live
nowadays. Whatever their creed, their religion was ours. Religion, the
bond that unites again the soul to God, has always been the same.




THE SAINT AMONG SINNERS


    'These are the generations of Noah: Noah was a just man
    and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with
    God. And Noah begat three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
    The earth also was corrupt before God, and the earth was
    filled with violence. And God looked upon the earth,
    and, behold, it was corrupt; for all flesh had corrupted
    His way upon the earth. And God said unto Noah, The end
    of all flesh is come before Me; for the earth is filled
    with violence through them; and, behold, I will destroy
    them with the earth. Make thee an ark of gopher wood;
    rooms shalt thou make in the ark, and shalt pitch it
    within and without with pitch. And this is the fashion
    which thou shalt make it of: The length of the ark shall
    be three hundred cubits, the breadth of it fifty cubits,
    and the height of it thirty cubits. A window shalt thou
    make to the ark, and in a cubit shalt thou finish it
    above; and the door of the ark shalt thou set in the
    side thereof; with lower, second, and third stories shalt
    thou make it. And, behold, I, even I, do bring a flood of
    waters upon the earth, to destroy all flesh, wherein is
    the breath of life, from under heaven; and every thing
    that is in the earth shall die. But with thee will I
    establish My covenant; and thou shalt come into the ark,
    thou, and thy sons, and thy wife, and thy sons' wives
    with thee. And of every living thing of all flesh, two
    of every sort shalt thou bring into the ark, to keep them
    alive with thee; they shall be male and female. Of fowls
    after their kind, and of cattle after their kind, of
    every creeping thing of the earth after his kind, two of
    every sort shall come unto thee, to keep them alive.
    And take thou unto thee of all food that is eaten, and
    thou shalt gather it to thee; and it shall be for food
    for thee, and for them. Thus did Noah; according to all
    that God commanded him, so did he.'--GENESIS vi. 9-22.

1. Notice here, first, the solitary saint. Noah stands alone 'in his
generations' like some single tree, green and erect, in a forest of
blasted and fallen pines. 'Among the faithless, faithful only he.' His
character is described, so to speak, from the outside inwards. He is
'righteous,' or discharging all the obligations of law and of his
various relationships. He is 'perfect.' His whole nature is developed,
and all in due symmetry and proportion; no beauty wanting, no grace
cultivated at the expense of others. He is a full man; not a one-sided
and therefore a distorted one. Of course we do not take these words to
imply sinlessness. They express a relative, not an absolute,
completeness. Hence we may learn both a lesson of stimulus and of hope.
We are not to rest satisfied with partial goodness, but to seek to
attain an all-round perfectness, even in regard to the graces least
natural to our dispositions. And we can rejoice to believe that God is
generous in His acceptance and praise. He does not grudge commendation,
but takes account of the deepest desires and main tendencies of a life,
and sees the germ as a full-blown flower, and the bud as a fruit.

Learn, too, that solitary goodness is possible. Noah stood uninfected
by the universal contagion; and, as is always the case, the evil
around, which he did not share, drove him to a more rigid abstinence
from it. A Christian who is alone 'in his generations,' like a lily
among nettles, has to be, and usually is, a more earnest Christian than
if he were among like-minded men. The saints in 'Caesar's household'
needed to be very unmistakable saints, if they were not to be swept
away by the torrent of godlessness. It is hard, but it is possible, for
a boy at school, or a young man in an office, or a soldier in a
barrack, to stand alone, and be Christlike; but only on condition that
he yields to no temptation to drop his conduct to the level around him,
and is never guilty of compromise. Once yield, and all is over. Flowers
grow on a dunghill, and the very reeking rottenness may make the bloom
finer.

Learn, too, that the true place for the saint is 'in his generations.'
If the mass is corrupt, so much the more need to rub the salt well in.
Disgust and cowardice, and the love of congenial society, keep
Christian people from mixing with the world, which they must do if they
are to do Christ's work in it. There is a great deal too much union
with the world, and a great deal too much separation from it, nowadays,
and both are of the wrong sort. We cannot keep too far away from it, by
abstinence from living by its maxims, and tampering with its pleasures.
We cannot mix too much with it if we take our Christianity with us, and
remember our vocation to be its light.

Notice, again, the companion of the solitary saint. What beauty there
is in that description of the isolated man, passing lonely amid his
contemporaries, like a stream of pure water flowing through some foul
liquid, and untouched by it, and yet not alone in his loneliness,
because 'he walked with God!' The less he found congenial companionship
on earth, the more he realised God as by his side. The remarkable
phrase, used only of Enoch and of Noah, implies a closer relation than
the other expression, 'To walk before God.' Communion, the habitual
occupation of mind and heart with God, the happy sense of His presence
making every wilderness and solitary place glad because of Him. the
child's clasping the father's hand with his tiny fingers, and so being
held up and lifted over many a rough place, are all implied. Are we
lonely in outward reality? Here is our unfailing companion. Have we to
stand single among companions, who laugh at us and our religion? One
man, with God to back him, is always in the majority. Though surrounded
by friends, have we found that, after all, we live and suffer, and must
die alone? Here is the all-sufficient Friend, if we have fellowship
with whom our hearts will be lonely no more.

Observe that this communion is the foundation of all righteousness in
conduct. Because Noah walked with God, he was 'just' and 'perfect.' If
we live habitually in the holy of holies, our faces will shine when we
come forth. If we desire to be good and pure, we must dwell with God,
and His Spirit will pass into our hearts, and we shall bear the
fragrance of his presence wherever we go. Learn, also, that communion
with God is not possible unless we are fighting against our sin, and
have some measure of holiness. We begin communion with Him, indeed, not
by holiness, but by faith. But it is not kept up without the
cultivation of purity. Sin makes fellowship with God impossible. 'Can
two walk together, except they be agreed?' 'What communion hath light
with darkness?' The delicate bond which unites us in happy communion
with God shrivels up, as if scorched, at the touch of sin. 'If we say
that we have fellowship with Him, and walk in darkness, we lie.'

2. Notice the universal apostasy. Two points are brought out in the
sombre description. The first is moral corruption; the second,
violence. Bad men are cruel men. When the bonds which knit society to
God are relaxed, selfishness soon becomes furious, and forcibly seizes
what it lusts after, regardless of others' rights. Sin saps the very
foundations of social life, and makes men into tigers, more destructive
to each other than wild beasts. All our grand modern schemes for the
reformation of society will fail unless they begin with the reformation
of the individual. To walk with God is the true way to make men gentle
and pitying.

Learn from this dark outline that God gazes in silence on the evil.
That is a grand, solemn expression, 'Corrupt before God.' All this mad
riot of pollution and violence is holding its carnival of lust and
blood under the very eye of God, and He says never a word. So is it
ever. Like some band of conspirators in a dark corner, bad men do deeds
of darkness, and fancy they are unseen, and that God forgets _them_,
because they forget God; and all the while His eye is fixed on them,
and the darkness is light about them. Then comes a further expression
of the same thought: 'God looked upon the earth.' As a sudden beam of
sunshine out of a thunder-cloud, His eye flashes down, not as if He
then began to know, but that His knowledge then began, as it were, to
act.

3. What does the stern sentence on the rotten world teach us? A very
profound truth, not only of the certain divine retribution, but of the
indissoluble connection of sin with destruction. The same word is
thrice employed in verses 11 and 12 to express 'corruption' and in
verse 13 to express 'destruction.' A similar usage is found in 1
Corinthians iii. 17, where the same Greek word is translated 'defile'
and 'destroy.' This teaches us that, in deepest reality, corruption is
destruction, that sin is death, that every sinner is a suicide. God's
act in punishment corresponds to, and is the inevitable outcome of, our
act in transgression. So fatal is all evil, that one word serves to
describe both the poison-secreting root and the poisoned fruit. Sin is
death in the making; death is sin finished.

The promise of deliverance, which comes side by side with the stern
sentence, illustrates the blessed truth that God's darkest threatenings
are accompanied with a revelation of the way of escape. The ark is
always shown along with the flood. Zoar is pointed out when God
foretells Sodom's ruin. We are no sooner warned of the penalties of
sin, than we are bid to hear the message of mercy in Christ. The brazen
serpent is ever reared where the venomous snakes bite and burn.

4. We pass by the details of the construction of the ark to draw the
final lesson from the exact obedience of Noah. We have the statement
twice over, He did 'according to all that God commanded him.' It was no
easy thing for him to build the ark, amidst the scoffing of his
generations. Smart witticisms fell around him like hail. All the
'practical men' thought him a dreamy fool, wasting his time, while they
prospered and made something of life. The Epistle to the Hebrews tells
us the secret of his obedience: 'By faith, Noah,' etc. He realised the
distant unseen, because he believed Him who warned him of it. The
immediate object of his faith was 'the things not seen as yet'; but the
real, deepest object was God, whose word showed him these. So faith is
always trust in a divine Person, whether it lays hold of the past
sacrifice, the present indwelling Spirit, or the future heaven.

Noah's example teaches us the practical effects of faith. 'Moved with
godly fear,' says Hebrews; by which is meant, not a mere dread of
personal evil, for Noah was assured of safety--but that godly reverence
and happy fear which dwells with faith, and secures precise obedience.
Learn that a faith which does not work on the feelings is a very poor
thing. Some Christian people have a great horror of emotional religion.
Unemotional religion is a great deal worse. The road by which faith
gets at the hands is through the heart. And he who believes but feels
nothing, will do exactly as much as he feels, and probably does not
really believe much more.

So after Noah's emotion followed his action. He was bid to prepare his
ark, we have only to take refuge in the ark which God has prepared in
Christ; but the principle of Noah's obedience applies to us all. He
realised so perfectly that future, with its double prospect of
destruction and deliverance, that his whole life was moulded by the
conduct which should lead to his escape. The far-off flood was more
real to him than the shows of life around him. Therefore he could stand
all the gibes, and gave himself to a course of life which was sheer
folly unless that future was real. Perhaps a hundred and twenty years
passed between the warning and the flood; and for all that time he held
on his way, nor faltered in his faith. Does our faith realise that
which lies before us with anything like similar clearness? Do we see
that future shining through all the trivial, fleeting present? Does it
possess weight and solidity enough to shape our lives? Noah's creed was
much shorter than ours; but I fear his faith was as much stronger.

5. We may think, finally, of the vindication of his faith. For a
hundred and twenty years the wits laughed, and the 'common-sense'
people wondered, and the patient saint went on hammering and pitching
at his ark. But one morning it began to rain; and by degrees, somehow,
Noah did not seem quite such a fool. The jests would look rather
different when the water was up to the knees of the jesters; and their
sarcasms would stick in their throats as they drowned. So is it always.
So it will be at the last great day. The men who lived for the future,
by faith in Christ, will be found out to have been the wise men when
the future has become the present, and the present has become the past,
and is gone for ever; while they who had no aims beyond the things of
time, which are now sunk beneath the dreary horizon, will awake too
late to the conviction that they are outside the ark of safety, and
that their truest epitaph is 'Thou fool!'




'CLEAR SHINING AFTER RAIN'


    'And God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all
    the cattle that was with him in the ark: and God made a
    wind to pass over the earth, and the waters asswaged;
    The fountains also of the deep and the windows of heaven
    were stopped, and the rain from heaven was restrained;
    And the waters returned from off the earth continually:
    and after the end of the hundred and fifty days the
    waters were abated. And the ark rested in the seventh
    month, on the seventeenth day of the month, upon the
    mountains of Ararat. And the waters decreased continually
    until the tenth month: in the tenth month, on the first
    day of the month, were the tops of the mountains seen.
    And it came to pass at the end of forty days that Noah
    opened the window of the ark which he had made: And he
    sent forth a raven, which went forth to and fro, until
    the waters were dried up from off the earth. Also he sent
    forth a dove from him, to see if the waters were abated
    from off the face of the ground; But the dove found no
    rest for the sole of her foot, and she returned unto him
    into the ark, for the waters were on the face of the
    whole earth: then he put forth his hand, and took her,
    and pulled her in unto him into the ark. And he stayed
    yet other seven days; and again he sent forth the dove
    out of the ark; And the dove came in to him in the
    evening; and, lo, in her mouth was an olive leaf pluckt
    off: so Noah knew that the waters were abated from off
    the earth. And he stayed yet other seven days; and sent
    forth the dove; which returned not again unto him any
    more. And it came to pass in the six hundredth and first
    year, in the first month, the first day of the month,
    the waters were dried up from off the earth: and Noah
    removed the covering of the ark, and looked, and, behold,
    the face of the ground was dry. And in the second month,
    on the seven and twentieth day of the month, was the
    earth dried. And God spake unto Noah, saying, Go forth
    of the ark, thou, and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy
    sons wives with thee. Bring forth with thee every living
    thing that is with thee, of all flesh, both of fowl,
    and of cattle, and of every creeping thing that creepeth
    upon the earth; that they may breed abundantly in the
    earth, and be fruitful, and multiply upon the earth.
    And Noah went forth, and his sons, and his wife, and
    his sons' wives with him: Every beast, every creeping
    thing, and every fowl, and whatsoever creepeth upon the
    earth, after their kinds, went forth out of the ark.
    And Noah builded an altar unto the Lord; and took of
    every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered
    burnt offerings on the altar. And the Lord smelled a
    sweet savour; and the Lord said in His heart, I will
    not again curse the ground any more for man's sake; for
    the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth;
    neither will I again smite any more every thing living,
    as I have done. While the earth remaineth, seedtime and
    harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and
    day and night shall not cease,'--GENESIS viii. 1-22.

The universal tradition of a deluge is most naturally accounted for by
admitting that there was a 'universal deluge.' But 'universal' does not
apply to the extent as embracing the whole earth, but as affecting the
small area then inhabited--an area which was probably not greater than
the valleys of the Euphrates and Tigris. The story in Genesis is the
Hebrew version of the universal tradition, and its plain affinity to
the cuneiform narratives is to be frankly accepted. But the
relationship of these two is not certain. Are they mother and daughter,
or are they sisters? The theory that the narrative in Genesis is
derived from the Babylonian, and is a purified, elevated rendering of
it, is not so likely as that both are renderings of a more primitive
account, to which the Hebrew narrative has kept true, while the other
has tainted it with polytheistic ideas. In this passage the cessation
of the flood is the theme, and it brings out both the love of the God
who sent the awful punishment, and the patient godliness of the man who
was spared from it. So it completes the teaching of the flood, and
proclaims that God 'in wrath remembers mercy.'

1. 'God remembered Noah.' That is a strong 'anthropomorphism,' like
many other things in Genesis--very natural when these records were
written, and bearing a true meaning for all times. It might seem as if,
in the wild rush of the waters from beneath and from above, the little
handful in the ark were forgotten. Had the Judge of all the earth,
while executing 'terrible things in righteousness,' leisure to think of
them who were 'afar off upon the sea'? Was it a blind wrath that had
been let loose? No; in all the severity there was tender regard for
those worthy of it. Judgment was discriminating. The sunshine of love
broke through even the rain-clouds of the flood.

So the blessed lesson is taught that, in the widest sweep of the most
stormy judgments, there are those who abide safely, fearing no evil.
Though the waters are out, there is a rock on which we may stand safe,
above their highest wave. And why did God 'remember Noah'? It was not
favouritism, arbitrary and immoral. Noah was bid to build the ark,
because he was 'righteous' in a world of evil-doers; he was
'remembered' in the ark, because he had believed God's warning, obeyed
God's command as seeing the judgment 'not seen as yet,' and so 'became
heir of the righteousness which is by faith.' They who trust God, and,
trusting Him, realise as if present the future judgment, and, 'moved
with fear,' take refuge in the ark, are never forgot by Him, even while
the world is drowned. They live in His heart, and in due time He will
show that He remembers them.

2. The gradual subsidence of the flood is told with singular exactitude
of dates, which are certainly peculiar if they are not historical. The
slow decrease negatives the explanation of the story as being the
exaggerated remembrance of some tidal-wave caused by earthquake and the
like. Precisely five months after the flood began, the ark grounded,
and the two sources, the rain from above and the 'fountains of the
deep' (that is, probably, the sea), were 'restrained,' and a high wind
set in. That date marked the end of the increase of the waters, and
consequently the beginning of their decrease. Seven months and ten days
elapsed between it and the complete restoration of the earth to its
previous condition. That time was divided into stages. Two months and a
half passed before the highest land emerged; two months more and the
surface was all visible; a month and twenty-seven days more before 'the
earth was dry.' The frequent recurrence of the sacred numbers, seven
and ten, is noticeable. The length of time required for the restorative
process witnesses to the magnitude of the catastrophe, impresses the
imagination, and suggests the majestic slowness of the divine working,
and how He uses natural processes for His purposes of moral government,
and rules the wildest outbursts of physical agents. The Lord as king
'sitteth upon the flood,' and opens or seals the fountains of the great
deep as He will. Scripture does not tell of the links between the First
Cause and the physical effect. It brings the latter close up to the
former. The last link touches the fixed staple, and all between may be
ignored.

But the patient expectance of Noah comes out strongly in the story, as
well as the gradualness of God's working. Not till 'forty days'--a
round number--after the land appeared, did He do anything. He waited
quietly till the path was plain. Eager impatience does not become those
who trust in God. It is not said that the raven was sent out to see if
the waters were abated. No purpose is named, nor is it said that it
returned at all. 'To and fro' may mean over the waste of waters, not
back and forward to and from the ark. The raven, from its blackness,
its habit of feeding on carrion, its fierceness, was a bird of
ill-omen, and sending it forth has a grim suggestion that it would find
food enough, and 'rest for the sole of its foot,' among the swollen
corpses floating on the dark waters. The dove, on the other hand, is
the emblem of gentleness, purity, and tenderness. She went forth, the
very embodiment of meek hope that wings its way over dark and desolate
scenes of calamity and judgment, and, though disappointed at first,
patiently waits till the waters sink further, discerns the earliest
signs of their drying up, and comes back to the sender with a report
which is a prophecy: 'Your peace shall return to you again.' Happy they
who send forth, not the raven, but the dove, from their patient hearts.
Their gentle wishes come back with confirmation of their hopes, 'as
doves to their windows.'

3. But Noah did not leave the ark, though 'the earth was dry.' God had
'shut him in,' and it must be God who brings him out. We have to take
heed of precipitate departure from the place where He has fixed us.
Like Israel in the desert, it must be 'at the commandment of the Lord'
that we pitch the camp, and at the commandment of the Lord that we
journey. Till He speaks we must remain, and as soon as He speaks we
must remove. 'God spake unto Noah, saying, Go forth ... and Noah went
forth.' Thus prompt must be our obedience. A sacrifice of gratitude is
the fit close of each epoch in our lives, and the fit beginning of each
new one. Before he thought of anything else, Noah built his altar. All
our deeds should be set in a golden ring of thankfulness. So the past
is hallowed, and the future secure of God's protection. It is no
unworthy conception of God which underlies the strongly human
expression that he 'smelled the sweet savour.' He delights in our
offerings, and our trustful, grateful love is 'an odour of a sweet
smell, a sacrifice acceptable' to Him. The pledge that He will not any
more curse the ground for man's sake is occasioned by the sacrifice,
but is grounded on what seems, at first sight, a reason for the very
opposite conclusion. Man's evil heart the reason for God's forbearance?
Yes, because it is _'evil from his youth_.' He deals with men as
knowing our frame, the corruption of our nature, and the need that the
tree should be made good before it can bring forth good fruit.
Therefore He will not smite, but rather seek to draw to repentance by
His goodness, and by the faithful continuance of His beneficence in the
steadfast covenant of revolving seasons, 'filling our hearts with food
and gladness.'




THE SIGN FOR MAN AND THE REMEMBRANCER FOR GOD


    'And God spake unto Noah, and to his sons with him,
    saying, And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you,
    and with your seed after you; And with every living
    creature that is with you, of the fowl, of the cattle,
    and of every beast of the earth with you; from all that
    go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth. And I
    will establish my covenant with you; neither shall all
    flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood;
    neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the
    earth. And God said, This is the token of the covenant
    which I make between Me and you and every living creature
    that is with you, for perpetual generations: I do set My
    bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a
    covenant between Me and the earth. And it shall come to
    pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow
    shall be seen in the cloud: And I will remember My
    covenant, which is between Me and you and every living
    creature of all flesh; and the waters shall no more
    become a flood to destroy all flesh. And the bow shall
    be in the cloud; and I will look upon it, that I may
    remember the everlasting covenant between God and every
    living creature of all flesh that is upon the earth. And
    God said unto Noah, This is the token of the covenant,
    which I have established between Me and all flesh that
    is upon the earth.
    GENESIS ix. 8-17.

The previous verses of this chapter lay down the outlines of the new
order which followed the flood. The blessing and the command to be
fruitful are repeated. The dominion over animals is confirmed, but
enlarged by the permission to use them as food, and by the laying on
them of 'the terror of you and the dread of you.' The sanctity of human
life is laid down with great emphasis. Violence and bloodshed had
brought about the flood. The appalling destruction effected by it might
lead to the mistaken notion that God held man's life cheap. Therefore
the cornerstone of future society is laid in that declaration that life
is inviolable. These blessings and commands are followed by this
remarkable section, which deals with God's covenant with Noah, and its
token in the rainbow.

1. The covenant is stated, and the parties concerned in it enumerated
in verses 3-11. When Noah came forth from the ark, after the stupendous
act of divine justice, he must have felt that the first thing he needed
was some assurance as to the footing on which he and the new world
round him stood with God. The flood had swept away the old order. It
had revealed terrible possibilities of destruction in nature, and
terrible possibilities of wrath in God. Was any knowledge of His
intentions and ways possible? Could continuance of the new order be
counted on? The answer to such questions was--God's covenant. Now, as
then, when any great convulsions shake what seems permanent, and bring
home to men the thinness of the crust of use and wont roofing an
infinite depth of unknown possibilities of change, on which we walk,
the heart cries out for some assurance of perpetuity, and some
revelation of God's mind. We can have such, as truly as Noah had, if we
use the Revelation given us in Jesus.

In God's covenant with Noah, the fact of the covenant may first be
noted. What is a covenant? The term usually implies a reciprocal bond,
both parties to which come under obligations by it, each to the other.
But, in this case, there are no obligations on the part of man or of
the creatures. This covenant is God's only. It is contingent on nothing
done by the recipients. He binds Himself, whatever be the conduct of
men. This covenant is the self-motived promise of an unconditional
mercy. May we not say that the 'New Covenant' in Jesus Christ is after
the pattern of this, rather than after the manner of compacts which
require both parties to do their several parts?

But note the great thought, that God limits His freedom of action by
this definite promise. Noah was not left to grope in dread among the
terrible possibilities opened by the flood. God marked out the line on
which He would move, and marked off a course which He would not pursue.
It is like a king giving his subjects a constitution. Men can reckon on
God. He has let them know much of the principles and methods of His
government. He has buoyed out His course, as it were, on the ocean, or
pricked it down upon a chart. We have not to do with arbitrary power,
with inscrutable will. Our God is not one who 'giveth no account of any
of His matters.' To use a common saying, 'We know where to have Him.'

The substance of this covenant is noteworthy. It is concerned solely
with physical nature. There is nothing spiritual or 'religious' about
it. There are to be no more universal deluges. That is all which it
guarantees. But consider how important such an assurance was in two
aspects. Note the solemn light which it threw on the past. It taught
that the flood was an exception in the divine government, which should
stand unrepeated for ever, in its dread pre-eminence testifying how
awful it was as a judicial act, and how outrageous had been the guilt
which it drowned out of existence and sight. A wholesome terror at the
unexampled act of judgment would fill the hearts of the little group
which now represented mankind.

Consider the effect of the covenant in encouraging hope. We have said
that the one thing needful for Noah was some assurance that the new
order would last. He was like a man who has just been rescued from an
earthquake or a volcanic eruption. The ground seems to reel beneath
him. Old habitudes have been curled up like leaves in the fire. Is
there to be any fixity, any ground for continuous action, or for labour
for a moment beyond the present? Is it worth while to plant or sow? Men
who have lived through national tempests or domestic crashes know how
much they need to be steadied afterwards by some reasonable assurance
of comparative continuity. And these men, in the childhood of the race,
would need it much. So they were sent out to till the earth, and to
begin again strenuous lives, with this covenant to keep them from
falling into a hand-to-mouth style of life, which would have brought
them down to barbarism. We all need the same kind of assurance; and
then, when we get it, such is the weakness of humanity, we are tempted
to think that continuity means eternity, and that, because probably
to-morrow shall be as this day, there will never come a to-morrow which
shall be quite unlike to-day. The crust of cooled earth, on which we
walk, is thick enough to bear man and all his works, but there comes a
time when it will crack. The world will not be flooded again, but we
forget, what Noah did not know, that it will be burned.

The parties to the covenant must be noticed. Note how frequently the
share in it, which all living creatures have, is referred to in the
context. In verse 10 the language becomes strained (in the original),
in order to express the universal participation of all living
creatures; and in verse 13 'the earth' itself is spoken of as one
party. God recognises obligations to all living things, and even to the
dumb, non-sentient earth. He will not causelessly quench one bright,
innocent life, nor harm one clod. Surely this is, at least, an
incipient revelation of a God whose 'tender mercies are over all his
works.' He 'doth take care for oxen'; and man, with all the creatures
that are with him, and all the wild ones that 'come not near' him, and
all the solid structure of the world, are held in one covenant of
protecting and sustaining providence and power.

2. The sign of the covenant is described at great length in verses
12-17. Note that verses 12, 13 state the general idea of a token or
sign, that verses 14-16 deepen this by stating that the token to man is
a reminder to God, and that verse 17 sums up the whole with emphatic
repetition of the main points. The narrative does not imply, as has
often been supposed, that the rainbow was visible for the first time
after the deluge. To suppose that, is to read more into the story than
is there, or than common sense tolerates. If there were showers and
sunshine, there must have been rainbows. But the fair vision strode
across the sky with no articulate promise in its loveliness, though it
must always have kindled wonder, and sometimes stirred deeper thoughts.
Now, for the first time, it was made 'a sign,' the visible pledge of
God's promise.

Mark the emphasis with which God's agency is declared and His ownership
asserted. '_I_ do set _My_ bow.' Neither Noah nor the writer knew
anything about refraction or the prismatic spectrum. But perhaps they
knew more about the rainbow than people do who know all about how it
comes, except that God sets it in the cloud, and that it is His. Let us
have the facts which science labels as such, by all means, and the more
the better; but do not let us forget that there are other facts in
nature which science has no means of attaining, but which are as solid
and a great deal deeper than those which it supplies.

The natural adaptation of the rainbow for this office of a token is too
plain to need dwelling on. It 'fills the sky when storms prepare to
part,' and hence is a natural token that the downpour is being stayed.
Somewhere there must be a bit of blue through which the sun can pierce;
and the small gap, which is large enough to let it out, will grow till
all the sky is one azure dome. It springs into sight in front of the
cloud, without which it could not be, so it typifies the light which
may glorify judgments, and is born of sorrows borne in the presence of
God. It comes from the sunshine smiting the cloud; so it preaches the
blending of love with divine judgment. It unites earth and heaven; so
it proclaims that heavenly love is ready to transform earthly sorrows.
It stretches across the land; so it speaks of an all-embracing care,
which enfolds the earth and all its creatures.

It is not only a 'sign to men.' It is also, in the strong
anthropomorphism of the narrative, a remembrancer to God. Of course
this is accommodation of the representation of His nature to the
limitations of ours. And the danger of attaching unworthy ideas to it
is lessened by noticing that He is said to set His bow in the cloud,
before it acts as His remembrancer. Therefore, He had remembered before
it appeared. The truth, conveyed in the childlike language, is that God
has His covenant ever before Him, and that He responds to and honours
the appeal made to Him, by that which He has Himself appointed for a
sign to men. The expectant eyes of the trustful man and the eye of God
meet, as it were, in looking on the sign. On earth it nourishes faith;
in heaven it moves to love and blessing. God can be reminded of what He
always remembers. The rainbow reminds Him of His covenant by its calm
light. Jesus Christ reminds Him of His grace by His intercession before
the throne. We remind Him of His plighted faithfulness by our prayers.
'Ye that are the Lord's remembrancers, keep not silence.'




AN EXAMPLE OF FAITH


    'Now the Lord had said unto Abram, Get thee out of thy
    country, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's
    house, unto a land that I will shew thee: And I will
    make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and
    make thy name great; and thou shalt be a blessing: And
    I will bless them that bless thee, and curse him that
    curseth thee: and in thee shall all families of the earth
    be blessed. So Abram departed, as the Lord had spoken
    unto him; and Lot went with him: and Abram was seventy
    and five years old when he departed out of Haran. And
    Abram took Sarai his wife, and Lot his brother's son,
    and all their substance that they had gathered, and the
    souls that they had gotten in Haran; and they went forth
    to go into the land of Canaan; and into the land of
    Canaan they came. And Abram passed through the land unto
    the place of Sichem, unto the plain of Moreh. And the
    Canaanite was then in the land. And the Lord appeared
    unto Abram, and said, Unto thy seed will I give this
    land: and there builded he an altar unto the Lord, who
    appeared unto him. And he removed from thence unto a
    mountain on the east of Beth-el, and pitched his tent,
    having Beth-el on the west, and Hai on the east: and
    there he builded an altar unto the Lord, and called upon
    the name of the Lord. And Abram journeyed, going on
    still toward the south.'
    GENESIS xii. 1-9.


I


We stand here at the well-head of a great river--a narrow channel,
across which a child can step, but which is to open out a broad bosom
that will reflect the sky and refresh continents. The call of Abram is
the most important event in the Old Testament, but it is also an
eminent example of individual faith. For both reasons he is called 'the
Father of the Faithful.' We look at the incident here mainly from the
latter point of view. It falls into three parts.

1. The divine voice of command and promise.--God's servants have to be
