them, so good men judge the assertions of boys, although lacking the
power of speech, and are favourably disposed towards them. O Janaka,
thou hearest my words as if thou hast been stupefied in consequence of
having eaten the fruit of the Sleshmataki tree. Or flattery hath robbed
thee of thy sense, and for this it is that although pierced by my words
as an elephant (by the hook), thou hearest them not."

"'Janaka said, "Listening to thy words, I take them to be excellent and
superhuman. Thy form also standeth manifest as superhuman. As thou hast
to-day defeated Vandin in discussion, I place even him at thy disposal."
Ashtavakra said, "O king, Vandin remaining alive, will not serve any
purpose of mine. If his father be really Varuna, let him be drowned in
the sea." Vandin said, "I am King Varuna's son. I have no fear
(therefore) in being drowned. Even at this moment, Ashtavakra shall see
his long-lost sire, Kahoda."'

"Lomasa said, 'Then rose before Janaka all the Brahmanas, after having
been duly worshipped by the magnanimous Varuna. Kahoda said, "It is for
this, O Janaka, that men pray for sons, by performing meritorious acts.
That in which I had failed hath been achieved by my son. Weak persons
may have sons endued with strength; dunces may have intelligent sons;
and the illiterate may have sons possessed of learning." Vandin said,
"It is with thy sharpened axe, O monarch, that even Yama severeth the
heads of foes. May prosperity attend thee! In this sacrifice of king
Janaka, the principal hymns relating to the _Uktha_ rites are being
chanted, and the Soma juice also is being adequately quaffed. And the
gods themselves, in person, and with cheerful hearts, are accepting
their sacred shares."'

"Lomasa said, 'When in enhanced splendour, the Brahmanas had risen up,
Vandin, taking king Janaka's permission, entered into the waters of the
sea. And then Ashtavakra worshipped his father, and he himself also was
worshipped by the Brahmanas. And having thus defeated the Suta's
son,[40] Ashtavakra returned to his own excellent hermitage, in company
with his uncle. Then in the presence of his mother, his father addressed
him, saying, "(O son), thou speedily enter into this river, Samanga."
And accordingly, he entered (into the water). (And as he plunged beneath
the water), all his (crooked) limbs were immediately made straight. And
from that day that river came to be called Samanga and she became
invested with the virtues of purifying (sins). He that shall bathe in
her, will be freed from his sins. Therefore, O Yudhishthira, do thou
with thy brothers and wife descend to the river, and perform thy
ablutions. O Kunti's son, O scion of the Ajamidha race, living happily
and cheerfully at this place together with thy brothers and the
Brahmanas, thou wilt perform with me other acts of merit, being intent
upon good deeds.'"

    [40] _Su_ means _excellent_, and _uta_, _sacrifice_. The
    compound accordingly means,--_performer of excellent sacrifice_.


SECTION CXXXV

"Lomasa said, 'Here, O king, is visible the river Samanga, whose former
name was Madhuvila, and yonder is the spot named Kardamila, the bathing
place of Bharata. The lord of Sachi, when fallen into misery in
consequence of having slain Vritra, became freed from his sin, by
performing his ablutions in this Samanga. Here, O bull among men, is the
spot where the Mainaka mountain hath sunk into the interior of the
earth; and it is hence called Vinasana. For obtaining sons, here Aditi
in days of yore had cooked that celebrated food, (presided over by the
Supreme Being). O ye bulls among men, ascend this lofty mountain and put
an end to your inglorious misery unworthy to be uttered. Here, O king,
before thee is the Kanakhala range, the favourite resort of sages. And
yonder is the mighty river Ganga. Here, in ancient times, the holy sage
Sanatkumara attained ascetic success. O scion of the Ajamidha race, by
performing thy ablutions here in this river, thou wilt be freed from all
thy sins. O son of Kunti, do thou together with thy ministers, touch
(the waters) of this lake called Punya, and this mountain Bhrigutunga
and also (the water of) these two rivers, called Tushniganga. Here, O
Kunti's son, appeareth the hermitage of the sage Sthulasiras. Resign
here thy anger and sense of self-importance. There, O son of Pandu, is
seen the beautiful hermitage of Raivya, where perished Bharadwaja's son,
Yavakri, profound in Vedic lore.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'How did the mighty sage, Yavakri, son of the
ascetic Bharadwaja, acquire profoundity in the Vedas? And how also did
he perish? I am anxious to hear all this, just as it happened. I take
delight in listening to the narration of the deeds of god-like men.'

"Lomasa said, 'Bharadwaja and Raivya were two friends. And they dwelt
here, ever taking the greatest pleasure in each other's company. Now,
Raivya had two sons, named Arvavasu and Paravasu. And, Bharadwaja, O
Bharata's son, had an only son, named Yavakri. Raivya and his two sons
were versed in the Vedas, while Bharadwaja practised asceticism. But, O
son of Bharata, from their boyhood, the friendship subsisting between
those two was unequalled. O sinless one, the highspirited Yavakri
finding that his father, who practised asceticism, was slighted by the
Brahmanas, while Raivya with his sons was greatly respected by them, was
overwhelmed with sorrow, and became sore aggrieved. Thereupon, O son of
Pandu, he entered upon severe austerities, for (obtaining) a knowledge
of the Vedas. And he exposed his body to a flaming fire. By thus
practising the most rigid austerities, he caused anxiety in the mind of
Indra. Then Indra, O Yudhishthira, went to him and addressed him saying,
"Wherefore, O sage, hast thou become engaged in practising such rigid
austerities?" Yavakri said, "O thou adored of celestial hosts, I am
practising severe penances, because I wish that such a knowledge of the
Vedas as hath never been acquired by any Brahmana whatever, may be
manifest unto me. O conqueror of Paka, these endeavours of mine have
been for Vedic lore. O Kausika, by the force of my asceticism, I purpose
to obtain all sorts of knowledge. O lord, a knowledge of the Vedas as
learnt through teachers, is acquired in a long time. Therefore, (with
the view of attaining in short time a proficiency in the Vedas), I have
put forth these high endeavours." Indra said, "O Brahmana sage, the way
that thou hast adopted is not the proper way. What for, O Brahmana,
wilt thou destroy thyself? Go and learn from the lips of a preceptor."'

"Lomasa said, 'O son of Bharata, having said this, Sakra went away, and
Yavakri of immeasurable energy, once more directed his attention to
asceticism. O king, we have heard that carrying on severe austerities he
again greatly agitated Indra. And the god Indra, slayer of Vala, again
came unto that great sage, who was engaged in austere penances; and
forbade him, saying, "Thou art striving with the object that Vedic lore
may be manifest unto thee as well as unto thy father; but thy exertions
can never be successful, nor is this act of thine well-advised." Yavakri
said, "O lord of the celestials, if thou wilt not do for me what I want,
I shall, observing stricter vows, practise still severer penances. O
lord of celestials! know that if thou do not fulfil all my desires, I
shall then cut off my limbs and offer them as a sacrifice into a blazing
fire."'

"Lomasa said, 'Knowing the determination of that high-souled sage, the
sagacious Indra reflected and hit upon some expedient to dissuade him.
Then Indra assumed the guise of an ascetic Brahmana, hundreds of years
old, and infirm, and suffering from consumption. And he fell to throwing
up a dam with sands, at that spot of the Bhagirathi to which Yavakri
used to descend for performing ablutions. Because Yavakri, chief of the
Brahmanas, paid no heed to Indra's words, the latter began to fill the
Ganga with sands. And without cessation, he threw handfuls of sand into
the Bhagirathi, and began to construct the dam attracting the notice of
the sage. And when that bull among the sages, Yavakri, saw Indra thus
earnestly engaged in constructing the dam, he broke into laughter, and
said the following words, "What art thou engaged in, O Brahmana, and
what is thy object? Why dost thou, for nothing, make this mighty
endeavour?" Indra said, "I am trying, O my son, to dam the Ganga so that
there may be a commodious passage. People experience considerable
difficulty in crossing and recrossing (the river) by boat." Yavakri
said, "O thou of ascetic wealth, thou canst not dam up this mighty
current. O Brahmana, desist from, what is impracticable, and take up
something that is practicable." Indra said, "O sage, I have imposed on
myself this heavy task, even as, for obtaining a knowledge of the Vedas,
thou hast begun these penances, which can never be fruitful." Yavakri
said, "If, O chief of the celestials, those efforts of mine be
fruitless, even as those of thy own, then, O lord of heavenly hosts, be
thou pleased to do for me what is practicable. Vouchsafe unto me boons
whereby I may excel other men."'

"Lomasa said 'Then Indra granted boons, as was prayed for by the mighty
ascetic. Indra said, "As thou desirest, the Vedas will be manifest unto
thee, yea--even unto thy father. And all thy other desires will also be
fulfilled. Return home, O Yavakri."

"'Having thus obtained the object of his desire, Yavakri came unto his
father and said, "The Vedas, O father, will be manifest unto thee as
well as unto myself and I have obtained boons whereby we shall excel all
men." Thereat Bharadwaja said, "O my son, as thou hast obtained the
objects of thy desire, thou wilt be proud. And when thou art puffed up
with pride and hast also become uncharitable, destruction will soon
overtake thee. O my son, there is a current anecdote narrated by the
gods. In ancient times, O son, there lived a sage named Valadhi,
possessed of great energy. And in grief for the death of a child, he
practised the severest penances to have a child that should be immortal.
And he obtained a son even as he desired. But the gods, though very
favourably disposed (towards him), did not yet make his son immortal
like unto the gods. They said, "On condition can a mortal being be made
immortal. Thy son's life, however, shall depend on some instrumental
cause." Thereupon, Valadhi said, "O chiefs of the celestials, these
mountains have been existing eternally, and indestructible, let them be
the instrumental cause of my son's life." Afterwards a son was born to
the sage, named Medhavi. And he was of a very irritable temper. And
hearing of (the incident of his birth), he grew haughty, and began to
insult the sages. And he ranged over the earth, doing mischief to the
_munis_. And one day, meeting with the learned sage Dhannushaksha endued
with energy, Medhavi maltreated him. Thereupon, the former cursed him,
saying, "Be thou reduced to ashes." Medhavi, however, was not reduced to
ashes. Then Dhannushaksha caused the mountain which was the instrumental
cause of Medhavi's life, to be shattered by buffaloes. And the boy
perished, with the destruction of the instrumental cause of his life.
And embracing his dead son, Medhavi's father began to bewail his fate.
Now hear from me, O my son, what was chanted by the sages conversant
with the Vedas, when they found the sage mourning. _A mortal on no
condition whatever can overcome what hath been ordained by Fate. Lo!
Dhannushaksha succeeded in shattering even the mountain by buffaloes._
Thus young ascetics, puffed up with pride for having obtained boons,
perish in a short time. Be thou not one of them. This Raivya, O my son,
is possessed of great energy, and his two sons are like him. Therefore,
be thou vigilant--so as never to approach him. O my son, Raivya is a
great ascetic of an irritable temper. When angry, he can do thee harm."
Yavakri said, "I shall do as thou biddest me. Oh father, do thou not by
any means entertain anxiety for that. Raivya deserveth my regard even as
thou, my father." Having replied unto his father in these sweet words,
Yavakri, fearing nothing and nobody, began to delight in wantonly
offending other _munis_.'"


SECTION CXXXVI

"Lomasa said, 'One day in the month of Chaitra, while fearlessly
wandering at large, Yavakri approached the hermitage of Raivya. And O
son of Bharata, in that beautiful hermitage, adorned with trees bearing
blossoms, he happened to behold the daughter-in-law of Raivya,
sauntering about like a Kinnara woman. And having lost his senses
through passion, Yavakri shamelessly spake unto the bashful maiden,
saying, "Be thou attached unto me." Thereupon, knowing his nature, and
afraid of a curse, as well as thinking of Raivya's power, she went unto
him saying, "I agree." Then, O son of Bharata, taking him in private,
she kept him chained. O conqueror of foes, returning to his hermitage,
Raivya found his daughter-in-law, Paravasu's wife, in tears. O
Yudhishthira, thereat consoling her with soft words, he enquired of her
as to the cause of her grief. Thereupon, the beautiful damsel told him
all that Yavakri had said unto her, and what she also had cleverly said
unto him. Hearing of this gross misbehaviour of Yavakri, the mind of the
sage flamed up, and he waxed exceedingly wroth. And being thus seized
with passion, the great sage of a highly irascible temper, tore off a
matted lock of his hair, and with holy _mantras_, offered it as a
sacrifice on the sacred fire. At this, there sprang out of it a female
exactly resembling his daughter-in-law. And then he plucked another
matted lock of his hair, and again offered it as a sacrifice into the
fire. Thereupon sprang out of it a demon, terrible to behold, and having
fierce eyes. Then those two spake unto Raivya, saying, "What shall we
do?" Thereat, the angry sage said unto them, "Go and kill Yavakri." Then
saying, "We shall do (as thou biddest)"--they two went away with the
intention of slaying Yavakri. And with her charms, the female whom the
large-hearted sage had created, robbed Yavakri of his sacred water-pot.
Then with his uplifted spear the demon flew at Yavakri, when he had been
deprived of his water-pot and rendered unclean. And seeing the demon
approach with uplifted spear for the purpose of slaying him, Yavakri
rose up all on a sudden and fled towards a tank. But finding it devoid
of water, he hurried towards all the rivers. But they too were all dried
up. And being obstructed again and again by the fierce demon, holding
the spear, Yavakri in fright attempted to enter into the _Agnihotra_
room of his father. But there, O king, he was repulsed by a blind Sudra
warder, and he remained at the door, grasped by the man. And, finding
Yavakri thus grasped by the Sudra, the demon hurled his spear at him,
and thereupon he fell down dead, pierced in the heart. After slaying
Yavakri, the demon went back to Raivya, and with the permission of that
sage, began to live with the female.'"


SECTION CXXXVII

"Lomasa said, 'O son of Kunti, Bharadwaja returned to his hermitage
after performing the ritual duties of the day, and having collected the
sacrificial fuel. And because his son had been slain, the sacrificial
fires which used to welcome him everyday, did not on that day come
forward to welcome him. And marking this change in the Agnihotra, the
great sage asked the blind Sudra warder seated there, saying, "Why is
it, O Sudra, that the fires rejoice not at sight of me? Thou too dost
not rejoice as is thy wont. Is it all well with my hermitage? I hope
that my son of little sense had not gone to the sage Raivya. Answer
speedily, O Sudra, all these questions of mine. My mind misgiveth me."
The Sudra said, "Thy son of little sense had gone to the sage Raivya,
and therefore it is that he lieth prostrate (on the ground), having been
slain by a powerful demon. Being attacked by the Rakshasa, holding a
spear, he attempted to force his way into this room, and I therefore
barred his way with my arms. Then desirous of having water in an unclean
state, as he stood hopeless, he was slain by the vehement Rakshasa,
carrying a spear in his hand." On hearing from the Sudra of this great
calamity, Bharadwaja, sorely afflicted with grief, began to lament,
embracing his dead son. And he said, "O my son, it is for the good of
the Brahmanas that thou didst practise penances, with the intention that
the Vedas unstudied by any Brahmana whatever might be manifest unto
thee. Thy behaviour towards the Brahmanas had always been for their
good, and thou hadst also been innocent in regard to all creatures. But,
alas! (at last) thou didst lapse into rudeness. I had prohibited thee, O
my son, from visiting the residence of Raivya; but alas! to that very
hermitage, (destructive to thee) as the god of death himself, Yama,
didst thou repair. Evil-minded is that man, who, (knowing that) I am an
old man, and also that (Yavakri) was my only son, had given way to
wrath. It is through the agency of Raivya that I have sustained the loss
of my child. Without thee, O my son, I shall give up my life, the most
precious thing in the world. In grief for the death of my son, I
renounce my life; but this I say that Raivya's eldest son shall in a
short time kill him although he be innocent. Blessed are those to whom
children have never been born, for they lead a happy life, without
having to experience the grief (incident to the death of a child). Who
in this world can be more wicked than those who from affliction, and
deprived of their sense by sorrow consequent upon the death of a child,
curse even their dearest friend! I found my son dead, and, therefore,
have cursed my dearest friend. Ah! what second man can there be in this
world, destined to suffer so grievous a misfortune!" Having lamented
long Bharadwaja cremated his son and then himself entered into a
full-blazing fire.'"


SECTION CXXXVIII

"Lomasa said, 'At that very time, the mighty king, Vrihadyumna, of high
fortune, who was the _Yajamana_ of Raivya, commenced a sacrifice. And
the two sons of Raivya, Arvavasu and Paravasu, were engaged by that
intelligent monarch, to assist him in the performance of the ceremony.
And, O son of Kunti, taking the permission of their father, they two
went to the sacrifice, while Raivya with Paravasu's wife remained in the
hermitage. And it came to pass that one day, desirous of seeing his
wife, Paravasu returned home alone. And he met his father in the wood,
wrapped in the skin of a black antelope. And the night was far advanced
and dark; and Paravasu, blinded by drowsiness in that deep wood, mistook
his father for a straggling deer. And mistaking him for a deer,
Paravasu, for the sake of personal safety, unintentionally killed his
father. Then, O son of Bharata, after performing the funeral rites (of
his father), he returned to the sacrifice and there addressed his
brother saying, "Thou wilt never be able to perform this task
unassisted. I again, have killed our father, mistaking him for a deer. O
brother, for me do thou observe a vow, prescribed in the case of killing
a Brahmana. O Muni, I shall be able to perform this work (sacrifice),
without any assistant." Arvavasu said, "Do thou then thyself officiate
at this sacrifice of the gifted Vrihadyumna; and for thee will I,
bringing my senses under perfect control, observe the vow prescribed in
the case of slaying a Brahmana."'

"Lomasa said, 'Having observed the vow relative to the killing of a
Brahmana, the sage Arvavasu came back to the sacrifice. Seeing his
brother arrive, Paravasa, in accents choked with malice, addressed
Vrihadyumna, saying, "O king, see that this slayer of a Brahmana enter
not into thy sacrifice, nor look at it. Even by a glance, the killer of
a Brahmana can, without doubt, do thee harm." O lord of men, immediately
on hearing this, the king ordered his attendants (to turn out Arvavasu).
O king, on being driven out by the king's attendants, and repeatedly
addressed by them--"_O slayer of a Brahmana_"--Arvavasu more than once
cried, "It is not I that have killed a Brahmana." Nor did he own that he
had observed the vow for his own sake. He said that his brother had
committed the sin, and that he had freed him therefrom. Having said this
in anger, and being reprimanded by the attendants, the Brahmana sage of
austere penances, retired in silence into the woods. There betaking
himself to the severest penances, the great Brahmana sought the
protection of the Sun. Thereupon, the revelation teaching the _mantra_
relative to the worship of the Sun, became manifest unto him and that
eternal deity who obtaineth his share (of the sacrificial butter) first,
appeared before him in an embodied form.'

"Lomasa said, 'The celestials, O king, were well pleased with Arvavasu
for his acts. And they made him engaged as the chief priest in the
sacrifice (of Vrihadyumna), and Paravasu to be dismissed from it. Then
Agni and the other celestials (of their own accord) bestowed boons on
Arvavasu. And they also prayed that his father might be restored to
life. He further prayed that his brother might be absolved from his sin;
that his father might have no recollection of his having been slain;
that Bharadwaja and Yavakri might both be restored to life; and that the
solar revelation might attain celebrity (on earth). Then the god said,
"So be it," and conferred on him other boons also. Thereat, O
Yudhishthira, all of these persons regained their life. Yavakri now
addressed Agni and the other deities, saying, "I had obtained a
knowledge of all the Vedas, and also practised penances. How came it
then, O chiefs of the immortals, that Raivya succeeded in killing me in
that way?" Thereupon the gods said, "O Yavakri, never act again as those
have done. What thou askest about is quite possible, for thou hast
learnt the Vedas without exertion, and without the help of a preceptor.
But this man (Raivya) bearing various troubles, had satisfied his
preceptor by his conduct, and obtained (from the latter) the excellent
Vedas through great exertions and in a long time."'

"Lomasa said, 'Having said this to Yavakri, and restored all those to
life, the celestials with Indra at their head, ascended to heaven. Here,
O Yudhishthira, is the sacred hermitage of that sage embellished with
trees bearing blossoms and fruits at all seasons. O tiger among kings,
dwelling at this spot, thou wilt be delivered from all thy sins.'"


SECTION CXXXIX

"Lomasa said, 'O descendant of Bharata, O king, now hast thou left
behind the mountains Usiravija, Mainaka and Sweta, as well as the Kala
hills. O son of Kunti, O bull among the descendants of Bharata, here
flow before thee the seven Gangas. This spot is pure and holy. Here Agni
blazeth forth without intermission. No son of Manu is able to obtain a
sight of this wonder. Therefore, O son of Pandu, concentrate your mind
in order that he may intently behold these _tirthas_. Now wilt thou see
the play-ground of the gods, marked with their footprints, as we have
passed the mountain Kala. We shall now ascend that white rock--the
mountain Mandara, inhabited by the Yakshas, Manibhadra and Kuvera, king
of the Yakshas. O king, at this place eighty thousand fleet Gandharvas,
and four times as many Kimpurushas and Yakshas of various shapes and
forms, holding various weapons, attend upon Manibhadra, king of the
Yakshas. In these regions their power is very great. And in speed they
are even as the wind. They can, without doubt, displace even the lord of
the celestials from his seat. Protected by them, and also watched over
by the Rakshasas, these mountains have been rendered inaccessible.
Therefore, O son of Pritha, do thou concentrate thy thoughts. Besides
these, O son of Kunti, here are fierce ministers of Kuvera and his
Rakshasa kindred. We shall have to meet them, and, therefore, O Kunti's
son, gather up thy energies. O king the mountain Kailasa is six
_yojanas_ in height. It contains a gigantic jujube tree. And, O son of
Kunti, numberless gods and Yakshas and Rakshasas and Kinnaras and Nagas
and Suparnas and Gandharvas pass this way, in going towards Kuvera's
palace. O king, protected by me, as well as by the might of Bhimasena,
and also in virtue of thy own asceticism and self-command, do thou
to-day mix with them. May king Varuna and Yama, conqueror of battles,
and Ganga, and Yamuna, and this mountain, and the Maruts and the twin
Aswins, and all rivers and lakes, vouchsafe thy safety. And, O effulgent
one, mayst thou have safety from all the celestials and the Asuras, and
the Vasus. O Goddess Ganga, I hear thy roar from this golden mountain,
sacred to Indra. O Goddess of high fortune, in these mountainous
regions, protect the king, worshipped by all of the Ajamidha race. O
daughter of the mountain (Himalaya), this king is about to enter into
these mountainous regions. Do thou, therefore, confer protection upon
him.'

"Having thus addressed the river, Lomasa bade Yudhishthira, saying, 'Be
thou careful.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'This confusion of Lomasa is unprecedented.
Therefore, protect ye Krishna, and be not careless. Lomasa knows this
place to be certainly difficult of access. Therefore, do ye practise
here the utmost cleanliness.'"

Vaisampayana said, "He next addressed his brother Bhima of vast prowess,
saying, 'O Bhimasena, do thou protect Krishna carefully. Whether Arjuna
be near or away, Krishna in times of danger ever seeketh protection from
thee alone.'

"Then the high-souled monarch approached the twins, Nakula and Sahadeva,
and after smelling their heads, and rubbing their persons, with tears
said unto them, 'Do not fear. Proceed, however, with caution.'"


SECTION CXL

"Yudhishthira said, 'O Vrikodara, there are mighty and powerful
invisible spirits at this place. We shall, however, pass it, through the
merit of our asceticism and _Agnihotra_ sacrifices. O son of Kunti, do
thou therefore, restrain thy hunger and thirst by collecting thy
energies, and also, O Vrikodara have recourse to thy strength and
cleverness. O Kunti's son, thou hast heard what the sage (Lomasa) had
said regarding mount Kailasa. Ascertain, therefore, after deliberation,
how Krishna will pass the spot. Or, O mighty Bhima of large eyes, do
return from hence, taking with thee Sahadeva, and all our charioteers,
cooks, servants, cars, horses, and Brahmanas worn out with travel, while
I together with Nakula and the sage Lomasa of severe austerities
proceed, subsisting on the lightest fare and observing vows. Do thou in
expectation of my return, cautiously wait at the source of the Ganga,
protecting Draupadi till I come back.'

"Bhima replied, 'O descendant of Bharata, although this blessed princess
hath been sore afflicted by toil and distress, yet she easily
proceedeth, in the hope of beholding him of the white steeds (Arjuna).
Thy dejection also is already very great at not seeing the high-souled
Arjuna, who never retreateth from fight. O Bharata, it is superfluous
then to say that if thou seest neither myself nor Sahadeva nor Krishna,
thy dejection will certainly increase. The Brahmanas had better return
with our servants, charioteers, cooks and whomsoever else thou mayst
command. I never shall leave thee in these rugged and inaccessible
mountainous regions, infested by Rakshasas. And, O tiger among men, also
this princess of high fortune, ever devoted to her lords, desireth not
to return without thee. Sahadeva is always devoted to thee; he too will
never retrace his steps. His disposition is known to me. O king, O
mighty monarch, we are all eager to behold Savyasachin, and therefore,
will we all go together. If we are unable to go over this mountain in
our cars, abounding as it doth in defiles, well, we would go on foot.
Trouble thyself not, O king, I shall carry Panchala's daughter wherever
she will be incapable of walking. O king, I have decided upon this.
Therefore let not thy mind be distracted. I shall also carry over
inaccessible tracts those tender-bodied heroes, the twins, the delight
of their mother, wherever they will be incapable of proceeding.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'May thy strength increase, O Bhima, as thou speakest
thus, and as thou boldly undertakest to carry the illustrious Panchali
and these twins. Blessed be thou! Such courage dwelleth not in any other
individual. May thy strength, fame, merit, and reputation increase! O
long-armed one, as thou offerest to carry Krishna and our brothers the
twins, exhaustion and defeat never be thine!'"

Vaisampayana said, "Then the charming Krishna said with a smile, 'O
descendant of Bharata, I shall be able to go, and, therefore, be thou
not anxious on my account.'

"Lomasa said, 'Access to the mountain, Gandhamadana, is only to be
obtained by dint of asceticism. Therefore, O son of Kunti, shall we all
practise austerities, O king, Nakula, Sahadeva, Bhimasena, thou and
myself shall then see him of the white steeds, O Kunti's son.'"

