introductory; doctrines, devout emotion, worship and ceremonies,
churches and organisations are valuable as auxiliary. Let that
wondrous issue of God's mercy be the purpose of our lives, and the
end as well as the test of all the things which we call our
Christianity. Prize and use them as helps towards it, and remember
that they are helps only in proportion as they show us that Saviour,
the image of whom is our perfection, the beholding of whom is our
transformation.

III. Notice, lastly, that the life of contemplation finally becomes a
life of complete assimilation.

'Changed into the same image, from glory to glory.' The lustrous
light which falls upon Christian hearts from the face of their Lord
is permanent, and it is progressive. The likeness extends, becomes
deeper, truer, every way perfecter, comprehends more and more of the
faculties of the man; soaks into him, if I may say so, until he is
saturated with the glory; and in all the extent of his being, and in
all the depth possible to each part of that whole extent, is like his
Lord. That is the hope for heaven, towards which we may indefinitely
approximate here, and at which we shall absolutely arrive there.
There we expect changes which are impossible here, while compassed
with this body of sinful flesh. We look for the merciful exercise of
His mighty working to 'change the body of our lowliness, that it may
be fashioned like unto the body of His glory'; and that physical
change in the resurrection of the just rightly bulks very large in
good men's expectations. But we are somewhat apt to think of the
perfect likeness of Christ too much in connection with that
transformation that begins only after death, and to forget that the
main transformation must begin here. The glorious, corporeal life
like our Lord's, which is promised for heaven, is great and
wonderful, but it is only the issue and last result of the far
greater change in the spiritual nature, which by faith and love
begins here. It is good to be clothed with the immortal vesture of
the resurrection, and in that to be like Christ. It is better to be
like Him in our hearts. His true image is that we should feel as He
does, should think as He does, should will as He does; that we should
have the same sympathies, the same loves, the same attitude towards
God, and the same attitude towards men. It is that His heart and ours
should beat in full accord, as with one pulse, and possessing one
life. Wherever there is the beginning of that oneness and likeness of
spirit, all the rest will come in due time. As the spirit, so the
body. The whole nature must be transformed and made like Christ's,
and the process will not stop till that end be accomplished in all
who love Him. But the beginning here is the main thing which draws
all the rest after it as of course. 'If the Spirit of Him that raised
up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He that raised up Christ from
the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies, by His Spirit that
dwelleth in you.'

And, while this complete assimilation in body and spirit to our Lord
is the end of the process which begins here by love and faith, my
text, carefully considered, adds a further very remarkable idea. 'We
are all changed,' says Paul, 'into the _same_ image.' Same as what?
Possibly the same as we behold; but more probably the phrase,
especially 'image' in the singular, is employed to convey the thought
of the blessed likeness of all who become perfectly like Him. As if
he had said, 'Various as we are in disposition and character, unlike
in the histories of our lives, and all the influences that these have
had upon us, differing in everything but the common relation to Jesus
Christ, we are all growing like the same image, and we shall come to
be perfectly like it, and yet each retain his own distinct
individuality.' 'We being many are one, for we are all partakers of
one.'

Perhaps, too, we may connect with this another idea which occurs more
than once in Paul's Epistles. In that to the Ephesians, for instance,
he says that the Christian ministry is to continue, till a certain
point of progress has been reached, which he describes as our
_all_ coming to 'a perfect _man_.' The whole of us together
make a perfect man--the whole make one image. That is to say, perhaps
the Apostle's idea is, that it takes the aggregated perfectness of
the whole Catholic Church, one throughout all ages, and containing a
multitude that no man can number, to set worthily forth anything like
a complete image of the fulness of Christ. No one man, even raised to
the highest pitch of perfection, and though his nature be widened out
to perfect development, can be the full image of that infinite sum of
all beauty; but the whole of us taken together, with all the
diversities of natural character retained and consecrated, being
collectively His body which He vitalises, may, on the whole, be a not
wholly inadequate representation of our perfect Lord. Just as we
set round a central light sparkling prisms, each of which catches the
glow at its own angle, and flashes it back of its own colour, while
the sovereign completeness of the perfect white radiance comes from
the blending of all their separate rays, so they who stand round
about the starry throne receive each the light in his own measure and
manner, and give forth each a true and perfect, and altogether a
complete, image of Him who enlightens them all, and is above them
all.

And whilst thus all bear the same image, there is no monotony; and
while there is endless diversity, there is no discord. Like the
serene choirs of angels in the old monk's pictures, each one with the
same tongue of fire on the brow, with the same robe flowing in the
same folds to the feet, with the same golden hair, yet each a
separate self, with his own gladness, and a different instrument for
praise in his hand, and his own part in that 'undisturbed song of
pure content,' we shall all be changed into the same image, and yet
each heart shall grow great with its own blessedness, and each spirit
bright with its own proper lustre of individual and characteristic
perfection.

The law of the transformation is the same for earth and for heaven.
Here we see Him in part, and beholding grow like. There we shall see
Him as He is, and the likeness will be complete. That Transfiguration
of our Lord (which is described by the same word as occurs in this
text) may become for us the symbol and the prophecy of what we look
for. As with Him, so with us; the indwelling glory shall come to the
surface, and the countenance shall shine as the light, and the
garments shall be 'white as no fuller on earth can white them.' Nor
shall that be a fading splendour, nor shall we fear as we enter into
the cloud, nor, looking on Him, shall flesh bend beneath the burden,
and the eyes become drowsy, but we shall be as the Lawgiver and the
Prophet who stood by Him in the lambent lustre, and shone with a
brightness above that which had once been veiled on Sinai. We shall
never vanish from His side, but dwell with Him in the abiding temple
which He has built, and there, looking upon Him for ever, our happy
souls shall change as they gaze, and behold Him more perfectly as
they change, for 'we know that when He shall appear we shall be like
Him, for we shall see Him as He is.'




LOOKING AT THE UNSEEN

   'While we look not at the things which are seen, but
   at the things which are not seen.'--2 COR. iv. 18.


Men may be said to be divided into two classes, materialists and
idealists, in the widest sense of those two words. The mass care for,
and are occupied by, and regard as really solid good, those goods
which can be touched and enjoyed by sense. The minority--students,
thinkers, men of ideas, moralists, and the like--believe in, and care
for, impalpable spiritual riches. Everybody admits that the latter
class is distinctly the higher. Now it is from no disregard to the
importance and reality of that broad distinction that I insist, to
begin with, that it is not the antithesis which is in the Apostle's
mind here. His notion of 'the things that are seen' and 'the things
that are not seen' is a much grander and wider one than that. By 'the
things that are seen' he means the whole of this visible world, with
all its circumstances and relations, and by 'the things that are not
seen' he means the realities beyond the stars.

He means the same thing that we mean when we talk in a much less true
and impressive contrast about the present and the future. To him the
'things that are not seen' are present instead of being, as we weakly
and foolishly christen them, 'the future state.' And it makes all the
difference whether we think of that august realm as lying far away
ahead of us, or whether we feel that it is, as it is, in very deed,
all round about us, and pressing in upon us, only that 'the
veil'--that is to say, our 'flesh'--has come between us and it. Do
not habitually think of these two sets of objects according to that
misleading distinction 'present' and 'future,' but think of them
rather as 'the things that are seen,' and 'the things that are not
seen.'

I. Now, first, I wish to say a word or two about what such a look
will do for us.

Paul's notion is, as you will see if you look at the context, that if
we want to understand the visible, or to get the highest good out of
the things that are seen, we must bring into the field of vision 'the
things that are not seen.' The case with which he is dealing is that
of a man in trouble. He talks about light affliction which is but for
a moment, working out a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory, 'while we look at the things which are not seen.' But the
principle on which that statement is made, of course, has its widest
application to all sorts and conditions of human life.

And the thought that emerges from it directly is that only when we
take the 'things that are not seen' into account, and make them the
standard and the scale by which we judge all things, do we understand
'the things that are seen.' That triumphant paradox of the Apostle's
about the heavy burdens that pressed upon him and his brethren,
lifelong as these burdens were, which yet he calls 'light' and 'but
for a moment' is possible only when we open the shutter of the
dungeon which we fancied was the whole universe, and look out on to
the fair land that stretches beyond. A man who has seen the Himalayas
will not be much overwhelmed by the height of Helvellyn. They who
look out into the eternities have the true measuring rod and standard
by which to estimate the duration and intensity of the things that
are present. We are all tempted to do as villagers in some little
hamlet do--think that their small local affairs are the world's
affairs, and mighty, until they have been up to London and seen the
scale of things there. If you and I would let the steady light of
Eternity, and the sustaining pressure of the 'exceeding weight of
glory' pour into our minds, we should carry with us a standard which
would bring down the greatness, dwindle the duration, lighten the
pressure, of the most crushing sorrow, and would set in its true
dimensions everything that is here. It is for want of that that we go
on as we do, calculating wrongly what are the great things and what
are the small things. When, like some of those prisoners in the
Inquisition, the heavy iron weights are laid upon our half-crushed
hearts, we are tempted to shriek, 'Oh, these will be my death!'
instead of taking in that great vision which, as it makes all earthly
riches dross, so it makes all crushing burdens and blows of sorrow
light as a feather.

But, on the other hand, do not let us forget that this same standard
which thus dwindles, also magnifies the small, and in a very solemn
sense, makes eternal the else fleeting things of this life. For there
is nothing that makes this present existence of ours so utterly
contemptible, insignificant, and transitory, as to block out of our
sight its connection with Eternity. And there is nothing which so
lifts the commonplace into the solemn, and invests with everlasting
and tremendous importance everything that a man does here, as to feel
that it all tells on his condition away beyond there. The shafting is
on this side of the wall, but the work that it does is through the
wall there, in the other chamber; and you do not understand the
cranks and the wheels here unless you know that they go through the
partition and are doing something there beyond. If you shut out
Eternity from our life in time, then it is an inexplicable riddle;
and I, for my part, would venture to say that in that case, the men
who answer the question, 'Is life worth living?' with a distinct
negative, are wise. It is a tale told by an idiot, 'full of sound and
fury, signifying nothing,' unless the light of 'the things not seen'
flashes and flares in upon it.

Further, this look of which my text speaks is the condition on which
Time prepares for Eternity.

The Apostle is speaking about the effect of affliction in making
ready for us an eternal weight of glory, and he says that is done
while, or on condition that during the suffering, we are looking
steadfastly towards the 'things that are not seen.' But no outward
circumstances or events can prepare a weight of glory for us
hereafter, unless they prepare us for the glory. Affliction works for
us that blessed result, in the measure in which it fits us for that
result. And so you will find that, only a verse or two after my text,
Paul, using the same very significant and emphatic verb, writes
inverting the order of things, and says 'He that hath wrought _us
for_ the self-same thing is God.' So that working the thing for us,
and working us for the thing, are one and the same process. Or, to
put it into plain English, our various duties and circumstances here
will prepare the glory of Eternity for us if they prepare us for the
glory of Eternity. But only in the measure in which these outward
things do thus shape and mould our characters do they work out for us
'an exceeding weight of glory.'

It is often thought that a man has been so miserable here that God is
sure to give him future blessedness to recompense him. Well! 'that
depends.' If he has used his miserableness as he will use it when he
lets the light of 'the things not seen' in upon it, then, certainly,
it will work out for him the blessed results. But if he does not,
then, as certainly, it will not. Whilst there are many ways by which
character is hammered and moulded and shaped into that which is fit
to be clothed upon with the glory that is yonder, one of the foremost
of these is the passing through things temporal with a continual
regard to the things that are eternal. If you want to understand
to-day you must bring Eternity into the account, and if you want to
use to-day you must use it with the light of the eternal world full
upon it. The sum of it all is, brethren, that the things seen cannot
be estimated in their true character, unless they are regarded in
immediate connection with the things that are unseen; and that the
things seen will only prepare an eternal weight of glory for us when
they prepare us for an eternal weight of glory.

II. And so, I note that this look at the things not seen is only
possible through Jesus Christ.

He is the only window which opens out and gives the vision of that
far-off land. I, for my part, believe that, if I might use such a
metaphor, He is the Columbus of the New World. Men believed, and
argued, and doubted about the existence of it across the seas there,
until a man went, and came back again, and then went to found a new
city yonder. And men hoped for immortality, and believed after a
fashion--some of them--in a future life, and dreaded that it might be
true, and discussed and debated whether it was, but doubt clouded all
minds, until One, our Brother, went away into the darkness, and came
back again, in most respects as He had gone, and then departed once
more to make ready a city in which all who love Him should finally
dwell, and to which you and I may be sure that we shall emigrate. It
is only in Jesus Christ that the look which my text enjoins is
possible.

For not only has He given a certitude so that we need now not to say
'We think, we hope, we fear, we are pretty well sure, that there must
be a life beyond,' but we can say 'We know.' Not only has He done
this, but also in Him and His life of glory at God's right hand in
heaven, is summed up all that we really can know about that future.
We look into the darkness in vain; we look at Him, and, our
knowledge, though limited, is blessed. All other adumbrations of a
life beyond must necessarily be cast into the metaphorical forms or
the negative symbols in which the New Testament abounds. We may speak
of golden pavements, and thrones, and harps, and the like. We may
say: 'No night there, no sighing, nor weeping, no burdened hearts, no
toil, no pain, for the former things are passed away.' But a future
life which is all described in metaphors, and a future life of which
we know only that it is the negation of the disagreeables and
limitations of the present, is but a poor affair. Here is the positive
truth, 'To him that overcometh will I grant to sit with Me on My
throne.' 'We shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is.' And
beyond that nearness to Christ, blessed communion with Christ,
likeness to Christ, royalty derived from Christ, I think we neither
know nor need to know anything about that life.

Not only is He our sole medium of knowledge and Himself the
revelation of our heaven, but it is only by Him that man's thoughts
and desires are drawn to, and find themselves at home in, that
tremendous thought of immortality. I know not how it may be with you,
but I am not ashamed to confess that to me the idea of eternal
continuance of my conscious being is an awful thought, rather
depressing and bewildering than delighting and attractive. I, for my
part, do not believe that men generally do grapple to their hearts,
with any gratitude or joy, that solemn belief of immortal life unless
they feel that it is life with, and in, and like, Jesus Christ. 'To
depart' is dreary, and it is only when we can say 'and to be with
Christ' that it becomes distinctly 'far better.' He is, if I may so
say, at once telescope and star. By Him we see Him; we see, seeing
Him, that the things that are unseen all cluster round Himself and
become blessed.

III. And now, lastly, this look should be habitual with all Christian
people.

Paul takes it for granted that every Christian man is, as the
habitual direction of his thoughts, looking towards those 'things
that are not seen.' The original shows that even more distinctly than
our translation, but our translation shows it plainly enough. He does
not say 'works for us an exceeding weight of glory _for_,' but
_'while'_ we look, as if it were a matter of course. He took it for
granted as to these Corinthians. I wonder if he would be warranted in
taking it for granted about us?

Note what sort of a look it is which produces these blessed effects.
The word which the Apostle employs here is a more pointed one than
the ordinary one for 'seeing.' It is translated in other places in
the New Testament, _'Mark'_ them which walk so as ye have us for
an ensample, and the like. And it implies a concentrated, protracted
effort and interested gaze. A man, standing on the deck of a ship,
casts a languid eye for a moment out on to the horizon, and sees
nothing. A keen-eyed sailor by his side shades his eyes with his
hand, and shuts out cross-lights, and looks, and peers, and keeps his
eyes steady, and he sees the filmy outline of the mountain land. If
you look for a minute, not much caring whether you see anything or
not, and then turn away, and get your eye dazzled with all those
vulgar, crude, high colours round about you here on earth, it is very
little that you will see of 'the things that are not seen.'
Concentrated attention, and a steadfast look, are wanted to make the
invisible visible. You have to alter the focus of your eye if you are
to see the thing that is afar off.

There has to be a positive shutting out of all other things, as is
emphatically taught in the text by putting first the not looking at
'the things that are seen.' Here they are pressing in upon our
eyeballs, all round us, insisting on being looked at, and unless
we resolutely avert our eyes, we shall not see anything else. They
monopolise us unless we resist the intrusive appeals that they make
to us. We are like men down in some fertile valley, surrounded by
rich vegetation, but seeing nothing beyond the green sides of the
glen. We have to go up to the hill-top if we are to look out over the
flashing ocean, and behold afar off the towers of the mother city
across the restless waves. Brethren, unless you shut out the world
you will never see the things that are not seen.

Now, as I have said, the Apostle regards this conscious effort at
bringing ourselves into touch, in mind and heart and faith, with 'the
things that are not seen' as being a habitual characteristic of
Christian men. I am very much afraid that the present generation of
Christian people do not, in anything like the degree in which they
should, recreate and strengthen themselves with the contemplation
which he here recommends. It seems to me, for instance, that we do
not hear nearly as much in pulpits about the life beyond the grave as
we used to do when I was a boy. And, though I confess I speak from
limited knowledge, it seems to me that these great motives which lie
in the thought of Eternity and our place there, are by no means as
prominent in the minds of the Christian people of this generation as
they used to be. Partly, I suppose, that arises from the wholesome
emphasis which has been given of late years to the present day, and
this-side-the grave effects of Christianity, upon character and life.
Partly it arises, I think, from the half-consciousness of being
surrounded by an atmosphere of scepticism and unbelief as to a future
life, and from the most unwise, inexpedient, and cowardly yielding to
the temptation to say very little about the distinctive features of
Christianity, and to dwell rather upon those which are sure to be
recognised by even unbelieving people. And it comes, too, from the
lack of faith, which, again, it tends mightily to increase.

Oh, dear brethren! our consciences tell us what different people we
should be if habitually there shone before us that great, solemn
issue to which we are all tending. Variations in the atmosphere there
will always be, and sometimes the distant outlines will be clearer
and sharper than at others, and the colours will shine out more
distinctly. But surely it should not be that our vision of the
Eternal should be like the vision that dwellers amongst the mountains
have of the summits. They say that some of the great peaks of the
world are swathed in mist all day long, and that only for a few
moments in the morning, or for a brief space in the evening, does the
solemn summit gleam rosy in the light. And that, I am afraid, is very
much like the degree in which most of us look at 'the things that are
not seen' and so we are feeble, and we do not understand 'the things
that are not seen'; and we do not get the good out of them.

Dear brethren, let us turn away our eyes from the gauds that we can
see, and open the eyes of our spirits on the things that are, the
things where Christ is, sitting at the right hand of God. Surely,
surely, it is madness that when two sets of objects are before us,
the one lasting for a moment, and then dying down into black
nothingness, and the other shining on for ever; and when our 'look'
settles whether we shall share the fate of the one or of the other,
we should choose to gaze with all our eyes and hearts at the
perishable and turn away from the permanent. Surely, if it is true
that the things which are seen are temporal, common-sense, and a
reasonable regard for our own well-being, bid us look at the eternal
'things which are not seen,' since only so can the light and the
momentary afflictions, joys, sorrows, or circumstances, work out for
us, and work us for 'a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory.'




TENT AND BUILDING

   'For we know that if our earthly house of this tabernacle
   be dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made
   with hands, eternal in the heavens.'--2 COR. v. 1.


Knowledge and ignorance, doubt and certitude, are remarkably blended
in these words. The Apostle knows what many men are not certain of;
the Apostle doubts as to what all men now are certain of. '_If_ our
earthly house of this tabernacle be dissolved'--there is surely no if
about that. But we must remember that the first Christians, and the
Apostles with them, did not know whether they might not survive till
the coming of Christ; and so not die, but 'be changed.' And this
possibility, as appears from the context, is clearly before the
Apostle's mind. Such a limitation of his knowledge is in entire
accordance with our Lord's own words, 'It is not for you to know the
times and the seasons,' and does not in the smallest degree derogate
from his authority as an inspired teacher. But his certitude is as
remarkable as his hesitation. He knows--and he modestly and calmly
affirms the confidence, as possessed by all believers--that, in the
event of death coming to him or them, he and they have a mansion
waiting for their entrance; a body of glory like to that which Jesus
already wears.

I. So my text mainly sets before us very strikingly the Christian
certitude as to the final future.

I need not dwell, I suppose, upon that familiar metaphor by which the
relation of man to his bodily environment is described as that of a
man to his dwelling-place. Only I would desire, in a word, to
emphasise this as being the first of the elements of the blessed
certitude in which Christian people may expatiate--the clear, broad
distinction between me and my physical frame. There is no more
connection, says Paul, between us and the organisation in which we at
present dwell than there is between a man and the house that he
inhabits. 'The foolish senses crown' Death and call him lord; but the
Christian's certitude firmly draws the line, and declares that the
man, the whole personality, is undisturbed by anything that befalls
his residence; and that he may pass unimpaired from one house to
another, being in both the self-same person. And that is something to
keep firm hold of in these days when we are being told that life and
consciousness are but a function of organisation, and that if the one
be annihilated the other cannot persist. No; though all illustrations
and metaphors must necessarily fail, the two which lie side by side
here in my text and its context are far truer than that
pseudo-science--which is not science at all, but only inference from
science--which denies that the man is one thing and his house
altogether another.

Then again, note, as part of the elements of this Christian
certitude, the blessed thought that a body is part of the perfection
of manhood. No mere dim, ghostly future, where consciousness somehow
persists, without environment or tools to act upon an outer world,
completes the idea of God in reference to man. But the old trinity is
the eternal trinity for humanity, body, soul, and spirit. Corporeity,
with all that it means of definiteness, with all that it means of
relation to an external universe, is the perfection of manhood. To
dwell naked, as the Apostle says in the context, is a thing from
which man shudderingly recoils; and it is not to be his final fate.
Let us take this as no small gain in reference to our conceptions of
a future--the emphatic drawing into light of that thought that for
his perfection man requires body, soul, and spirit. And now, if we
turn for a moment to the characteristics of the two conditions with
which my text deals, we get some familiar enough but yet great and
strengthening thoughts. The 'earthly house of this tabernacle is
dissolved,' or, more correctly, retaining the metaphor of the house,
is to be pulled down--and in its place there comes a building of God,
a 'house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.'

Now the contrast that is drawn here, whilst it would run out into a
great many other particulars, about which we know nothing, and
therefore had better say nothing, revolves in the Apostle's mind
mainly round these two 'earthly' as contrasted with 'in the heavens';
and 'tabernacle,' or tent, as contrasted, first of all with a
'building,' and then with the predicate 'eternal.'

That is to say, the first outstanding difference which arises before
the Apostle as blessed and glorious, is the contrast between the
fragile dwelling-place, with its thin canvas, its bending poles, its
certain removal some day, and the permanence of that which is not a
'tent,' but a 'building' which is 'eternal.' Involved in that is
the thought that all the limitations and weaknesses which are
necessarily associated with the perishableness of the present
abode are at an end for ever. No more fatigue, no more working beyond
the measure of power, no more need for recuperation and repose; no
more dread of sickness and weakness; no more possibility of decay,
'It is sown in corruption; it is raised in incorruption'--neither
'_can_ they die any more.' Whether that be by reason of any inherent
immortality, or by reason of the uninterrupted flow into the creature
of the immortal life of Christ, to whom he is joined, is a question
that need not trouble us now. Enough for us that the contrast between
the Bedouin tent--which is folded up and carried away, and nothing
left but the black circle where the cheerful hearth once glinted
amidst the sands of the desert--and the stately mansion reared for
eternity, is the contrast between the organ of the spirit in which we
now dwell and that which shall be ours.

And the other contrast is no less glorious and wonderful. 'The
_earthly_ house of this tent' does not merely define the composition,
but also the whole relations and capacities of that to which it
refers. The 'tent' is 'earthly', not merely because, to use a kindred
metaphor, it is a 'building of clay,' but because, by all its
capacities, it belongs to, corresponds with, and is fitted only for,
this lower order of things, the seen and the perishable. And, on the
other hand, the 'mansion' is in 'the heavens,' even whilst the future
tenant is a nomad in his tent. That is so, because the power which
can create that future abode is 'in the heavens.' It is so called in
order to express the security in which it is kept for those who shall
one day enter upon it. And it is so, further, to express the order of
things with which it brings its dwellers into contact. 'Flesh and
blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God; neither doth corruption
inherit incorruption.' That future home of the spirit will be
congruous with the region in which it dwells; fitted for the heavens
in which it is now preserved. And thus the two contrasts--adapted to
the perishable, and itself perishable, belonging to the eternal and
itself incorruptible--are the two which loom largest before the
Apostle's mind.

Let no man say that such ideas of a possible future bodily frame are
altogether inconsistent with all that we know of the limitations and
characteristics of what we call matter. 'There is one flesh of beasts
and another of birds,' says Paul; 'there is one glory of the sun and
another of the moon.' And his old-fashioned argument is perfectly
sound to-day.

Do you know so fully all the possibilities of creation as that you
are warranted in asserting that such a thing as a body which is the
fit organ of the spirit, and is incorruptible like the heavens in
which it dwells, is an impossibility? Surely the forms of matter are
sufficiently varied to make us chary in asserting that other forms
are impossible, to which there may belong, as characteristics, even
these glorious ones of my text. The old story of the king in the
tropics, who laughed to scorn some one who told him that water could
be turned into a solid, may well be quoted in this connection. Let us
be less confident that we know all that is to be known in regard to
the sweep of God's creative power; and let us thankfully accept the
teaching by which we, too, in all our ignorance, may be able to say,
'We know that ... we have a building of God ... eternal in the
heavens.'

Now there is only one more remark that I wish to make about this part
of my subject; and it is this, that the teaching of my text and its
context casts great light--and I think by many people much-needed
light--on what the resurrection of the dead means. That doctrine has
been weighted with a great many incredibilities and I venture to say
absurdities, by well-meaning misconceptions and exaggerations. We
have heard grand platitudes about 'the scattered dust being gathered
from the four winds of heaven,' and so on, but the teaching of my
text is that the contrast between the present physical frame and the
future bodily environment is utter and complete; and that
resurrection does not mean the assuming again of the body that is
left behind and done with, but the reinvestiture of the man with
another body. And so the Scriptural phrase is, not 'the resurrection
of the body,' but 'the resurrection of the dead.' It is a house 'in
the heavens.' It comes 'from heaven.'

We leave the tent. Life and thought

    ... have gone away, side by side,
  Leaving doors and windows wide;
  Careless tenants they!

And they may well be careless, because in the heavens they have
another mansion, incorruptible and glorious.

We leave the 'tent'; we enter the 'building.' There is nothing here
of some germ of immortality being somehow extricated from the ruins,
and fostered into glorious growth. Or, to take another metaphor of
the context, we strip off the garment and are naked; and then we are
clothed with another garment and are not found naked. The
resurrection of the dead is the clothing of the spirit with the house
which is from heaven. And there is as much difference between the two
habitations as there is between the grim, solid architecture
of northern peoples, amidst snow and ice, needed to resist the
blasts, and to keep the life within in an ungenial climate, and the
light, graceful dwellings of those who walk in an atmosphere of
perpetual sunshine in the tropics, as there is between the close-knit
and narrow-windowed and narrow-doored abode in which we now have to
pass our days, and that large house, with broad windows that take in
a mightier sweep and new senses that have relation with new qualities
in the world then around us. Therefore let us, whilst we grope in the
dark here, and live in a narrow hovel in a back street, look forward
to the time when we shall dwell on the sunny heights in the great
pavilion which God prepares for them that love Him.

II. And now note, again, how we come to this certitude.

My text is very significantly followed by a 'for,' which gives the
reason of the knowledge in a very remarkable manner. 'We know, ...
for in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed upon with our
house, which is from heaven.' Now that singular collocation of ideas
may be set forth thus--whatever longing there is in a Christian,
God-inspired soul, that longing is a prophecy of its own fulfilment.
We know that there is a house, because of the yearning, which is
deepest and strongest when we are nearest God, and likest what He
would have us to be--the yearning to be 'clothed upon with our house
which is from heaven.' That is a truth that goes a long way; though
to enlarge on it is irrelevant to our present purpose. It has its
limitations, as is obvious from the context, in which are human
elements which are not destined to be gratified, mingled with the
yearning, which is of God, and which is destined to be satisfied. But
this at least we may firmly hold by, that just because God will not
put men to confusion intellectually, and does not let them entertain
uncherished--still less Himself foster and excite--longings which He
does not mean to gratify, a Christian yearning for immortality is, to
the man who feels it, a declaration that immortality is sure for him.
'Delight thyself in the Lord, and He shall give thee the desires of
thine heart.' Whatsoever, in touching Him, we do deeply long for may
have blended with it human elements, which will be dispersed
unsatisfied, but the substance of it is a prophecy of its own
fulfilment. And as surely as the stork in the heavens, flying
southward, will reach the sunny lands which draw it from the grim
northern winter, so surely may a man say, 'I know that I have a house
in heaven, because I long for it, and shrink from being found naked.'

Of course such longing, such aspiration and revulsion are no proofs
of a fact except there be some fact which changes them, from mere
vague desires, and makes these solid certainties. And such a fact we
have in that which is the only proof that the world has received, of
the persistence of life through death and the continuance of personal
identity unchanged by the grave, and that is the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ from the dead. Our faith in immortality does not depend
merely on our own subjective desires and longings, but these desires
and longings are quickened, confirmed, and certified by this great
fact that Jesus Christ has risen from the dead; and therefore we know
that the yearnings in us are not in vain. So we come to this
certitude, first, by reason of his experience; and, second, by reason
of the longings which that experience fosters if it does not kindle,
within our hearts.

And let no man take exception to the Apostle's word here, 'we know,'
or tell us that 'Knowledge is of the things we see.' That is true,
and not true. It is true in regard to what arrogates to itself the
name of science. And we are willing to admit the limitation if the
men who insist upon it will, on their sides, admit that there are
other sources of certitude than so-called 'facts,' by which they mean
merely material facts. If it is meant to assert that we are less sure
of the love of God, of immortality, than we are of the existence of
this piece of wood, or that flame of gas; then I humbly venture to
say that there is another region of facts than those which are
appreciable by sense; that the evidence upon which we rest our
certitude of immortal blessedness is quite as valid, quite as true,
quite as able to bear the weight of a leaning heart as anything that
can be produced, in the nature of evidence, for the things round us.
It is not, 'We fancy, we believe, we hope, we are pretty nearly
sure,' but it is 'We _know_ ... that we have a building of God.'

III. Lastly, note what this certitude does.

The Apostle tells us by the 'for' which lies at the beginning of my
text, and makes it a reason for something that has preceded, and what
has preceded is this, 'We look not at the things which are seen, but
at the things which are not seen.'

That is to say, such a joyous, calm certitude draws men's thoughts
away from this shabby and transitory present, and fixes them on the
solemn majesties of that eternal future. Yes! and nothing else will.
Take away the idea of resurrection, and the remaining idea of
immortality is a poor, shadowy, impotent thing. There is no force in
it; there is no blessedness in it; there is nothing in it for a man
to lay hold of. And, as a matter of fact, there is no vivid faith in
a future life without belief in the resurrection and bodily existence
of the perfected dead.

And we shall not let our thoughts willingly go out thither unless our
own personal wellbeing there is very sure to us. When we know that
for us individually there is that house waiting for us to enter into
it, when the Lord comes, then we shall not be unwilling to turn our
hearts and our desires thither. We look at the things which are not
seen, for we know that we have a house eternal.

And such a certitude will also make a man willing to accept the else
unwelcome necessity of leaving the tent, and for a while doing
without the mansion. It is that which the Apostle is speaking of in
subsequent verses, on which I cannot enter now. He says--and therein
speaks a universal experience--that men recoil from the idea of
having to lay aside this earthly body and be 'naked.' But we know
that we have that glorious mansion waiting for us, and that till the
day comes when we enter upon it we may be lapt in Christ instead,
and, in that so-called intermediate state, may have Him to surround
us, Him to be to us the medium by which we come into connection with
anything external, and so can contentedly go away from our home in
the body; and go to our home in Christ. 'Wherefore, we are always
confident, and willing rather to be absent from the body, and to be
at home with the Lord.'

Oh, brethren! do we think of our future thus? If we do, then let us
lay to heart the final words of our teacher in this part of his
letter: 'Wherefore we make it our aim, whether at home or absent, to
be well-pleasing unto Him.'




THE PATIENT WORKMAN

   'Now He that hath wrought us for the self-same thing
   is God.'--2 COR. v. 5.


These words penetrate deep into the secrets of God. They assume to
have read the riddle of life. To Paul everything which we experience,
outwardly or inwardly, is from the divine working. Life is to him no
mere blind whirl, or unintelligent play of accidental forces, nor is
it the unguided result of our own or of others' wills, but is the
slow operation of the great Workman. Paul assumes to know the meaning
of this protracted process, that it all has one design which we may
know and grasp and further. And he believes that the clear perception
of the divine purpose, and the habit of looking at everything as
contributing thereto, will be a magic charm against all sorrow,
doubt, despondency, or fear, for he adds, 'Therefore we are always
confident.' So let us try to follow the course of thought which
issues in such a blessed gift as that of a continual, courageous
outlook, and buoyant though grave lightheartedness, because we
discern what He means 'Who worketh all things according to the
counsel of His own will.'

I. The first thought here is, God's purpose in all His working; 'He
that hath wrought us for the self-same thing is God.'

What is that 'self-same thing'? To understand it we must look back
for a moment to the previous context. The Apostle has been speaking
about the instinctive reluctance which even good men feel at prospect
of dying and 'putting off the earthly house of this tabernacle.' He
distinguishes between three different conditions in which the human
spirit may be--dwelling in the earthly body, stripped of that, and
'clothed with the house which is from Heaven,' and to this last and
highest state he sees that for him and for his brethren there were
two possible roads. They might reach it either through losing the
present body, in the act of death, and passing through a period of
what he calls nakedness; or they might attain it by being
'superinvested,' as it were, with the glorious body which was to come
to saints with Christ when He came; and so slip on, as it were, the
wedding garment over their old clothes, without having to denude
themselves of these. And he says that deep in the Christian heart
there lay reluctance to take the former road and the preference for
the latter. His longing was that that which is mortal might be
'swallowed up of life,' as some sand-bank in the tide-way may be
gradually covered and absorbed by the rejoicing waters. And then he
says, 'Now He that hath wrought us for this very thing, is God.'

Of course it is impossible that he can mean by this 'very thing' the
second of the roads by which it was possible to reach the ultimate
issue, because he did not know whether his brethren and he were to
die or to be changed. He speaks in the context about death as a
possible contingency for himself and for them,--'_If_ our earthly
house of this tabernacle were dissolved,' and so on. Therefore we
must suppose that 'the self-same thing' of which he is thinking as
the divine purpose in all His dealings with us, is not the manner in
which we may attain that ultimate condition, but the condition itself
which, by one road or another, God's children shall attain. Or, in
other words, the highest aim of the divine love in all its dealings
with us Christian men, is not merely a blessed spiritual life, but
the completion of our humanity in a perfect spirit dwelling in a
glorified body. Corporeity--the dwelling in a body by which the pure
spirit moves amidst pure universes--is the highest end of God's will
concerning us.

That glorified body is described in our context in wonderful words,
which it would take me far too long to do more than just touch upon.
Here we dwell in a tent, there we shall dwell in a building. Here in
a house made with hands, a corporeal frame derived from parents by
material transmission and intervention; there we shall dwell in a
building of which God is the maker. Here we dwell in a crumbling clay
tenement, which rains dissolve, which lightning strikes, and winds
overthrow, and which finally lies on the ground a heap of tumbled
ruin. There we dwell in a building, God's direct work, eternal, and
knowing no corruption nor change. Here we dwell in a body congruous
with, and part of, the perishable earthly world in which it abides,
and with which it stands in relation; there we dwell in a house
partaking of the nature of the heavens in which it moves, a body that
is the fit organ of a perfect spirit.

And so, says Paul, the end of what God means with us is not stated in
all its wonderfulness, when we speak of spirits imbued with His
wisdom and surcharged with His light and perfectness, but when we add
to that the thought of a fitting organ in which these spirits dwell,
whereby they can come into contact with an external universe,
incorruptible, and so reach the summit of their destined
completeness. 'The house not made with hands,' eternal, the building
of God in the Heavens, is the end that God has in view for all His
children.

II. So, then, secondly, note the slow process of the Divine Workman.

The Apostle employs here a very emphatic compound term for 'hath
wrought.' It conveys not only the idea of operation, but the idea of
continuous and somewhat toilsome and effortful work, as if against
the resistance of something that did not yield itself naturally to
the impulse that He would bestow. Like some sculptor with a hard bit
of marble, or some metallurgist who has to work the rough ore till it
becomes tractable, so the loving, patient, Divine Artificer is here
represented as labouring long and earnestly with a somewhat obstinate
material which can and does resist His loving touch, and yet going on
with imperturbable and patient hope, by manifold touches, here a
