edge of the abyss, and there _it_ stops, but the traveller does
not. He goes over; and nobody can see the darkness into which he falls.

Dear friends, Christ says, 'I am the Way.' Do you go to Him and cry,
'See if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me into the way
everlasting.'


THE TWO HOUSES

     'Therefore, whosoever heareth these sayings of Mine, and doeth
     them, I will liken him unto a wise man, which built his house upon
     a rock.... 25. And every one that heareth these sayings of Mine,
     and doeth them not, shall be likened unto a foolish man, which
     built his house upon the sand.'--Matt. vii. 24, 25.

Our Lord closes the so-called Sermon on the Mount, which is really the
King's proclamation of the law of His Kingdom, with three pairs of
contrasts, all meant to sway us to obedience. The first is that of the
two ways: one broad, and leading down to abysses of destruction; the
other narrow, and leading up to shining heights of life. The second is
that of the two trees, one good and one bad, each bearing fruit
according to its nature; by which our Lord would teach us that conduct
is the outcome and revelation of character, and the test of being a
follower of His. The third is that of our text, the two houses on the
two foundations, and their fate before the one storm; by which our Lord
would teach us that the only foundation on which can be built a life
that will stand the blast of final judgment is His sayings and Himself.

Now, there are many very important and profound links of connection and
relation between these three contrasted pictures, but I only point to
one thing here, and that is that in all of them Jesus Christ most
decisively divides all His hearers--for it is about them that He is
speaking--into two classes: either on the broad road or on the narrow,
not a foot in each; either the good tree or the bad; either the house
on the sand or the house on the rock. Such a sharp division is said
nowadays to be narrow, and to be contradicted by the facts of life, in
which the great mass of men are neither very white nor very black, but a
kind of neutral grey. Yes, they are--on the surface. But if you go down
to the bottom, and grasp the life in its inmost principles and essential
nature, I fancy that Jesus Christ's narrowness is true to fact. At all
events, there it is.

Now, following out the imagery of our text, I wish to bring before you
the two foundations, the two houses, the one storm, the two endings.

I. The two foundations: Rock, Sand.

Now, to build on the Rock, Jesus Christ Himself explains to us as being
the same thing as to hear and do His sayings. The one representation is
plain fact, the other is metaphor which points precisely in the same
direction. It is scarcely a digression if I pause for a moment, and
point you to the singular and unique attitude which this Carpenter's Son
of Nazareth takes up here, fronting the whole race with that
'whosoever,' and alleging that _His_ sayings are an infallible law
for conduct, and that _He_ has the right absolutely to command
every man, woman, and child of the sons and daughters of Adam. And the
strange thing is that the best men have admitted His claim, have
recognised that He had the right, and have seen that His precepts are
the very ideal of human conduct, and, if they have ventured to criticise
at all, their criticism has only been that the precepts are too good to
be obeyed, and contemplate an ideal that is unreachable in human
society. Be that as it may, there stands the fact that this Man, in this
Sermon on the Mount, which so many people say has no doctrinal teaching
in it, assumes an attitude which nothing can warrant and nothing explain
except the full-toned belief that in Him we have God manifest in the
flesh.

But what I desire to point to now is the significance of this demand
that He makes, that we shall take His sayings as the foundation of our
lives. The metaphor is a very plain one, by which the principles that
underlie or dominate and mould our conduct are regarded as the
foundation upon which we build the structure of our lives. But the
Sermon on the Mount is not all of these 'sayings of Mine.' It is
fashionable in certain quarters to-day to isolate these precepts, and to
regard them as being the part of Christian Revelation by which men who
set little store by theological subtleties, and reject the mysteries of
the Incarnation and the Atonement, may still abide. But I would have you
notice that it is absurd to isolate this Sermon on the Mount, or to deal
with it as if it were the very centre of the Christian Revelation. It is
nothing of the sort. Beautiful as it is, wonderful as it is as a high
ideal of human conduct, it is a law still, though it is a perfect law;
and it has all the impotences and all the deficiencies that attach to a
law, if you take it and rend it out of its place, and insist upon
dealing with it as if it stood alone. There is not a word in it that
tells you how to keep its precepts. There is no power in it, or raying
from it, to make a man obey any one of its commandments. It comes
radiant and beautiful, but imperative, and just because no man keeps it
to the full, its very beauty becomes menacing, and it stands there over
against us, showing us what we ought to be, and, by consequence, what we
are not. And is that all that Jesus Christ came into the world to do?
God forbid! If He had only spoken this Sermon on the Mount--which some
of you take for the _Alpha_ and the _Omega_ of Christianity as far as
you are concerned--He would not have been different in essence from
other teachers,--though high above them in degree,--who speak to us of
the shining heights of duty that we are to scale, but leave us
grovelling in the mire.

The Sermon on the Mount, with its stringent requirements, absolutely
demands to be completed by other thoughts and other 'sayings of Mine.'
And so I remind you, not only that there are other 'sayings of Mine' to
be kept than it, but also that there is no keeping of it without keeping
other sayings first. For the highest of Christ's commandments is
'Believe also in Me,' and you have to take Him as your Redeemer and
Saviour from death before you will ever thoroughly accept Him as your
Guide and Pattern for life. We must first draw near to Him in humble
penitence and lowly faith, and then there comes into our hearts a power
which makes it possible and delightsome to keep even the loftiest, and
in other aspects the hardest, of 'those sayings of Mine.' So, brethren,
the obedience of which this text speaks is second, and the building of
ourselves on Jesus Christ Himself, by faith in Him, is first. Only when
we build on Him as our Saviour shall we build our lives upon Him in
obedience to His commands.

'Behold! I lay in Zion for a foundation, a stone, a tried corner-stone,
a sure foundation, and he that believeth shall not make haste'; and long
after the prophet said that, the Apostle catches up the same thought
when he says, 'Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid. Let
every man take heed how he buildeth thereon.' Jesus Christ is the
foundation of our lives, if we have any true life at all. He ought to be
the foundation of all our thinking. His word should be the absolute
truth, His life the final all-satisfying, perfect revelation of God, to
our hearts. 'In Him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge.'
The facts of His Incarnation, earthly life, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, and present Sovereignty--these facts, with the truths that
are deduced from them, and the great glimpses which they afford into the
heart of God and the depths of things, are the foundations of all true
thinking on moral and social and religious questions, and on not a few
other questions besides. Christ in His Revelation gives us the ultimate
truth on which we have to build.

He is also the foundation of all our hope, the foundation of all our
security, the foundation of all our effort and aspiration. His Cross
goes before the nations and leads them, His Cross stands by the
individual, and anodynes the sense of guilt, and breaks the bondage and
captivity of sin, and stirs to all lofty emotions and holy living, and
moves ever in the van like the pillar of cloud and fire, the Pattern of
our lives and the Guide of our pilgrimage. It is Christ Himself who is
the foundation, and His death and sacrifice which are the sure basis of
our hope, safety, and blessedness; and it is only because He Himself is
the Foundation, and what He has done for us is the basis of hope and
blessedness, that He has the right to come to us and say, 'Take My
commandments as the foundation on which you build your lives.'

The Rock of Ages cleft for us, is the Rock on which we build if we are
Christians; the other man built his house upon the sand. That is to say,
shifting inclinations, short-lived appetites, transitory aims, varying
judgments of men, the fashions of the day in morality, the changing
judgments of our own consciences--these are the things on which men
build, if they are not building upon Jesus Christ. Like a vessel that
has a raw hand at the helm, you sometimes head one way, and then the
puff of wind that fills your sails dies down, or the sails that were
flat as a board belly out a little, or you are caught in some current,
and round goes the bowsprit on another tack altogether. How many of us
are pursuing the objects which we pursued five-and-twenty years ago, if
we have numbered so many years? What has become of aims that were
everything to us then? We have won some of them, and they have turned
out not half as good as we thought they would be. The hare is never so
big when it is in the bag as when it is hurrying across the fields. We
have missed some of them, and we scarcely remember that we once wanted
them. We have outlived a great many, and they lie away behind us, hull
down on the horizon, and we are making for some other point that, in
like manner, if we reach it, will be left behind and be lost. There is
nothing that lasts but God and Christ, and the people that build their
lives upon them.

I press upon all your hearts that one simple thought--what an absurdity
it is for us to choose for our life's object anything that is
shorter-lived than ourselves!--and how long-lived you are you know. They
tell us that sand makes a very good foundation under certain
circumstances. I believe it does, but what if the water gets in? What
about it then? But in regard to all these transitory aims and
short-lived purposes on which some of you are building your lives, there
is a certainty that the water will come in some day. So, friend, dig
deeper down, even to the Eternal Rock. That is the only foundation on
which an immortal man or woman like you is wise to build your life. Are
you doing it?

II. Let me say a word, in the next place, about the two houses.

The one is built upon the rock. That just means, of course--and I need
not enlarge upon that--a life which is based upon, and shaped after, the
commandments of Jesus Christ, His Pattern and Example. And that life
will stand. Now, of course, the ideal would be that the whole of His
sayings should enter into the whole of our lives, that no commandment of
that dear Lord should be left unobeyed, and that no action of ours
should be unaffected by His known will. That is the ideal, and for us
the task of wisdom is daily to draw nearer and nearer to that ideal, and
to bring the whole of our lives more and more under the sway and
sanctifying influence of the whole sum of Christ's precepts. Of course,
on the other side, the life that is built on the sand is the life which
is not thus regulated by Christ's will and known commandments.

But I desire rather to bring out, in a word or two, some of the lessons
that may be gathered from this general metaphor of a man's life as a
house. And the first that I would suggest is this:--Have you ever
thought of your life as being a whole, with a definite moral
characteristic stamped upon it? I look upon the men and women that I
come across in the world, and I cannot help seeing that a great many of
them have never got into their heads the idea that their life is a
whole. A house? No. A cartload of bricks, tumbled down at random, would
be a better metaphor. A chain? No! A heap of links not linked. Many of
you live from hand to mouth. Many of you have such unity in your life as
comes from the pressure of the external circumstances of your trade or
profession. But for anything like the living consciousness that life is
a whole, with a definite moral character for which you are responsible,
it has never dawned upon your mind. And so you go on haphazard, never
bringing reflection to bear upon the trend and drift of your days; doing
what you must do because your occupation is this, that, or the other
thing; doing what you incline to do in the matter of recreation; now and
then sporadically, and for a minute or two, bringing conscience to bear,
and being very uncomfortable sometimes when you do. But as for
recognising the mystic solemnity of all these days of yours in that they
are welded together, and are all tending to one end, and that each
passing moment contributes its infinitesimal share to the awful solemn
whole--that has seldom entered your minds, and for a great many of you
it has never had any effect in restraining or stimulating or regulating
your conduct.

Then there is another consideration which this metaphor suggests--viz.
that the house is built up by slow degrees, brick upon brick, course by
course, day by day, and moment by moment. It is slow work, but certain
work. 'Let every man take heed how he buildeth,' and never despise the
little things. Very small bricks make a large house.

Then there is another consideration that I would suggest, and that is,
you have to live in the house that you build. Your deeds make the house
that Christ is here speaking of. Like the chrysalis that spins out of
its own entrails the cocoon in which it lies, so are you spinning, to
vary the metaphor, what you lodge in, until you eat your way through it,
and pass into the next stage of being. Our deeds seem transient, but
although we are building on the sand we are building for Eternity,
because, though the deeds are transient in appearance, they abide.

They abide in memory. Some of you know how true that is. Black memories
haunt some of us, and there could be for some no worse hell than that
God should say, 'Son, remember.' You have to live in the house that you
build. The deeds abide in habit. They abide in limiting and determining
what we can be and do in the future; and in a hundred other ways that I
must not touch upon. Only, I bring to you this question, and I pray God
that you may listen to it and answer it: What are you building? A shop?
That is a noble ambition, is it not? A pleasure-house? That is worse. A
prison? Some of you are rearing for your incarceration a jail where you
will be tied and held by the cords of your sins, and whence you will be
unable to break out. Or are you building a temple? If you are building
on Christ it is all right. Only take heed _what_ you build on that
foundation.

III. Now let me say a word, in the next place, about the storm.

I need not dwell upon the picturesque force of our Lord's description,
so true to the sudden inundations of Eastern lands, and as true to the
sudden floods of Northern countries when the snows melt. The house is
attacked on all sides. From above, the rain comes down to beat on the
roof, the wind rages round the walls, the flood comes swirling round the
eaves from beneath, and if the house stands upon a cliff, the polished
rock turns the flood off innocuous, but if it stands upon sand, the
furious rush of waters eats a way beneath and undermines the whole.

But you will notice that the description of the storm is repeated in
both cases, and is _verbatim_ the same in each. And the lesson from that
is just this--let no Christian man fancy that he is not going to be
judged according to his works, for he is. The storm that comes, which I
take distinctly to mean the final judgment which falls upon all men,
beats against the house that is built upon the rock. For every one of
us, Christian or not Christian, 'must all appear before the Judgment
Seat of Christ, that we may receive according to the deeds done in the
body.' Christian people, do not fancy that the great doctrine of
forgiveness of sins and acceptance in the Beloved, means that you have
not to stand His judgment according to your works. According to the
other metaphor of the Apostle, working out the same idea with some
changes in figure, the Christian man who builds 'upon the foundation
gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay, stubble,' has his 'work tried
by fire.' So all of us have to face that prospect, and I beseech you to
face it wisely. A sensible builder calculates the strain to which his
work will be exposed before he begins to put it up. Or if he does not
there will befall it the same fate that years ago befell that
unfortunate Tay Bridge, where, by reason of girders too feeble, and
piers not solid enough, and rivets left out where they should have been
put in, one December night the whole thing went over into the water
below. You have to stand the hurtling black storm. Take into account the
strain which your building will have to resist, and build accordingly.

IV. And now, lastly, one word about the two endings.

'It stood'; 'it fell'; that is all. A life of obedience to Christ is
stable, a life not based on Christ vanishes; and these two statements
are true because whatsoever a man does for himself, apart from God in
Christ, he is sowing to corruption, and he will reap corruption. As I
said, nothing lasts but God, and what is done according to the will of
God. And when the storm conies, whether the builder was a Christian man
or not, all which was not thus built on Christ will be swept away, as
the flimsy habitation of Eastern people, made of bamboos and oiled
paper, are whirled away before the typhoon. All that was not built upon
Christ--and much of you Christian people's lives is not built on
Christ--will have to go.

And what about the builders? 'If any man's work abide he will receive a
reward.' 'Their works do follow them.' 'If any man's work is burned, he
himself shall be saved, yet so as by fire.' And if any man has reared a
structure of a life ignoring Jesus Christ, and with no connection with
Him, then house and builder will perish together.

Jesus Christ does not speak in my text about the righteousness or the
unrighteousness of these two courses of conduct. He does not say, 'a
_good_ man does so-and-so, or a _bad_ man does the other thing,' but he
says: A _wise_ man builds his house on the Rock, and a _foolish_ man
builds his on the sand. To live by faith and obedience is supreme
wisdom. Every life which is not built upon Christ is the perfection of
folly.


THE CHRIST OF THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT

     'And it came to pass, when Jesus had ended these sayings, the
     people were astonished at His doctrine: 29. For He taught them as
     one having authority, and not as the scribes.'--MATT. vii. 28-29.

It appears, then, from these words, that the first impression made on
the masses by the Sermon on the Mount was not so much an appreciation of
its high morality, as a feeling of the personal authority with which
Christ spoke. Had the scribes, then, no authority? They ruled the whole
life of the nation with tyrannical power. They sat in Moses' seat, and
claimed all manner of sway and control. And yet when people listened to
Jesus, they heard something ringing in His voice that they missed in the
rabbis. They only set themselves up, in their highest claims, as being
commentators upon, and the expositors of, the Law. Their language was
'Moses commanded'; 'Rabbi _this_ said _so-and-so_; Rabbi _that_ said
_such-and-such_.' But as even the crowd that listened to Him detected,
Jesus Christ, in these great laws of His kingdom, adduced no authority
but His own; stood forth as a Legislator, not as a commentator; and
commanded, and prohibited, and repealed, and promised, on His own bare
word. That is a characteristic of all Christ's teaching; and, as we see
from my text, to the apprehension of the first auditors, it was deeply
stamped on the Sermon on the Mount.

I purpose to turn to that Sermon now, and try if we can make out the
points in it which impressed these people, who first heard it, with the
sense that they were in the presence of an autocratic Voice that had a
right to speak, and which did speak, with absolute and unexampled
authority.

And I do that the more readily because I dare say you have all heard
people that said 'Oh! I do not care about the dogmas of Christianity;
give me the Sermon on the Mount and its sublime morality; that is
Christianity enough for me.' Well, I should be disposed to say so pretty
nearly too, if you will take _all_ the Sermon on the Mount, and not go
picking and choosing bits out of it. For I am sure that if you will take
the whole of its teaching you will find yourself next door to, if not in
the very inmost chamber of, the mysticism of the Gospel of John and the
theology of Paul.

I. I ask you, then, to note that the Sermon claims for Jesus Christ the
authority of supremacy above all former revelation and revealers.

'Think not,' says He, 'that I am come to destroy the law or the
prophets; I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.' And then He goes on,
in five cases, to illustrate, in a very remarkable way, the authority
that He claimed over the former Law, moulding it according to His will.

Now I do not propose to do more than suggest, in a sentence, two points
that I think of importance. Observe that remarkable form of speech, 'I
am come.' May we not fairly say that it implies that He existed before
birth, and that His appearance among men was the result of His own act?
Does it not imply that He was not merely born, but _came_, choosing to
be born just as He chose to die? In what sense can we understand the
Apostle's view that it was an infinite and stupendous act of
condescension in Christ to 'be found in fashion as a man,' unless we
believe that by His own will and act He came forth from the Father and
entered into the world, just as by His own will and act He left the
world and went unto the Father?

But I do not dwell upon that, nor upon another very important
consideration. Why was it that Jesus Christ, at the very beginning of
His mission, felt Himself bound to disclaim any intention of destroying
the law or the prophets? Must not the people have begun to feel that
there was something revolutionary and novel about His teaching, and that
it was threatening to disturb what had been consecrated by ages? So that
it was needful that He should begin His career with this disclaimer of
the intention of destruction. Strange for a divine messenger, if He
simply stood as one in the line and sequence of divine revelation, to
begin His work by saying, 'Now, I do not mean to annihilate all that is
behind Me!' The question arises how anybody should have supposed that He
did, and why it should ever have been needful for Him to say that He did
not.

But I pass by all that, and ask you to think how much lies in these
words of our Lord: 'I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil.' They imply
a claim that His life was a complete embodiment of God's law. Here is a
man beginning His ministry as a religious teacher, with the assertion,
stupendous, and, upon any other lips but His, insane arrogance, that He
had come to do everything which God demanded, and to set forth before
the world a living Pattern of the whole obedience of a human nature to
the whole law of God. Who is He that said that? And how do we account
for the fact that nineteen centuries have passed, and, excepting in the
case of here and there a bitter foe whose hostility had robbed him of
his common sense, no lip has ventured to say that He claimed too much
for Himself when He said, 'I am come to fulfil the law'; or that He
falsely read the facts of His own experience and consciousness when He
declared, 'I have finished the work which Thou gavest Me to do.'

Still further, here our Lord claims specifically and expressly to fulfil
not only law but prophets. That is to say, He sets Himself forth as the
Reality which had filled the imaginations and the hearts of a whole
nation for centuries; as the living Reality which had been meant by all
those lofty words of seers and prophets in the past. He declares that
all those rapturous forecastings, all those dim anticipations, all those
triumphant promises, were not left to swing _in vacuo_, or to float
about unfulfilled, but that He stood there, the actual Realisation of
them all; and in Him, wrapped up as in a seed, the Kingdom of Heaven was
among men.

And still further, He claims not only personal purity and completeness,
and the fulfilment of all prior and prophetic anticipation, but also He
claims to have, and He exercises, the power of moulding, expanding,
interpreting, and in some cases brushing aside, laws which He and they
alike knew to be the laws of God. I do not need to specify in detail the
instances which are contained in this Sermon on the Mount. But I simply
ask you to consider the formula with which our Lord introduces each of
His references to that subject. 'Ye have heard that it hath been said to
them of old time' so-and-so,--and then follows a command of the Mosaic
law; but '_I_ say unto you' so-and-so,--and then follows a deepening or
a modification or a repeal, of statutes acknowledged by Him and His
hearers to be divine. He certainly claims to speak with the same right
and authority as the old Law did. He as certainly claims to speak with
incomparably higher authority than Moses did, for the latter never
professed to give precepts of his own. He was not the Lawgiver, as he is
often called, but only the messenger of the Lawgiver. But Christ is
Himself the fountain of the laws of His Kingdom. Nor only so, but He
puts Himself without apology or explanation in front of Moses and
asserts power to modify, to set aside, or to re-enact with new
stringency, the precepts of the divine law.

One supposition alone accounts for Christ's attitude to law and prophets
in this Sermon, and that is that the Eternal Wisdom and Personal Word of
God, which at sundry times and in 'divers manners' spake to the old
world by Moses, itself at last, in human form and personal guise, came
here on earth and spake to us men. It is the same Voice that breathed
through the prophets of old, and that spake on the lips of the Christ of
Nazareth; the same Eternal Word who manifested Himself in a 'fiery law'
on Sinai, and in words of no less majesty and of deepened gentleness,
when He gathered the people round about Him, and said to them, 'It hath
been said to them of old time, ... but _I_ say unto you ...'

Here is the sum and climax of all revelation, the last word of the
divine mind and will and heart, to the world. Moses and Elias stand
beside Him on the Mount of Transfiguration, witnesses of His superiority
and servants at His feet, and they vanish into mist and darkness, and
leave there, erect, white-robed, solitary, the unique figure of the One
Lawgiver and the perfect Revealer of God to men.

And this is the authority which struck even on the unsusceptible hearts
of the listening crowds.

II. Still further, let me ask you to consider how, in this same great
Sermon, He claims the authority of One who is unique in His relation to
the Father.

You will find that in it there occurs very frequently the expression,
'_your_ Father which is in Heaven'; or sometimes with the
variation,'_thy_ Father which is in Heaven,' or, 'which seeth in
secret.' But you will also find that whilst our Lord speaks about '_My_
Father which is in Heaven,' He never says '_our_ Father'; excepting in
the exception which proves the rule when He is putting into the lips of
His disciples the great formula of prayer which we call the 'Lord's
Prayer'; and there speaking as through their consciousness, and teaching
them their lesson, He says '_Our_ Father,' not as if He Himself were
praying, but as if He were telling them how to pray. But when He speaks
out of His own consciousness He speaks of '_My_ Father' and '_your_
Father,' never of '_our_ Father.'

And that corresponds with other phenomena in Scripture in our Lord's own
language where you find that always He draws this broad distinction. He
never associates Himself with us in His Sonship. He ever asserts that He
is _the_ Son of God. Even when He wishes to speak with the utmost
tenderness, He bids the weeping Mary hear the message, 'I go unto My
Father and your Father.' This doctrine is thought by many to be one of
those which they get rid of by professing the Christianity of the Sermon
on the Mount. But it is there as plainly as in other parts of Scripture.
If we accept all which it teaches, we cannot escape from the belief that
He is the only begotten and well-beloved Son of the Father; and also
that through Him and in Him we, too, may receive the adoption of sons.

Dear friends, I press this upon you as no mere piece of hard theological
doctrine, but as containing in it the very essentials of all spiritual
life for each of us, that all our spiritual life must come by
participation in Christ, and that we enter into an altogether new and
blessed relation to God when, laying our humble and penitent hands on
the head of that dear Sacrifice that died on the Cross for as, we
through Him cease to be children of wrath and become heirs of God. 'To
as many as received Him, to them gave He authority to become the
children of God, even to them that believe in His name,' but His Sonship
stands unique and unapproachable, though it is the foundation from which
flows all the sonship of the whole family in heaven and in earth. Moses
and the prophets, teachers and guides, Apostles and Helpers, they are
all but the servants of the family; this is the Son through whom we
receive the adoption of sons.

III. We have in this great discourse the authority of One who is
absolute Lord and Master over men.

'Not every one that saith unto me, Lord! Lord! shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. Many will say to Me in that day, Lord! Lord! have we
not prophesied in Thy name, and in Thy name done many wonderful works?'
'Whoso heareth these sayings of Mine, and doeth them, I will liken him
to a wise man, which built his house upon a rock.'

Jesus Christ here comes before the whole race, and claims an absolute
submission. His word is to control, with authoritative and
all-comprehensive scrutiny and power, every aim of our lives, and every
action. In His name we may be strong, in His name we may cast out
devils, in His name we may do many wonderful works. If we build upon Him
we build upon a rock; if we build anywhere else we build upon the sand.

Strange, outrageous claims for a _man_ to make! 'Give me the Sermon on
the Mount, and keep your doctrinal theology,' say people. But I want to
know what kind of morality it is that is all traceable up to this--'Do
as I bid you, My will is your law; My smile is your reward; to obey Me
is perfection.' I think that takes you a good long way into 'theology.'
I think that the Man who said that--and you all know that He said
it--must he either a good deal more or a good deal less than a perfect
man. If He is only that He is not that; for if He is only that, He has
no business to tell me to obey Him. He has no business to substitute His
will for every other law; and you have no business--and it will be at
the peril of your manhood if you do--to take any man, the Man Christ or
any other, as an absolute example and pattern and master.

My brethren, Christ's claim to absolute obedience rests upon His divine
nature and on His redeeming work. He has delivered us from our enemies,
and therefore He commands us. He has given Himself for us, and therefore
He has a right to say, 'Give yourselves to Me.' He is God manifest in
the flesh, and therefore absolute power becomes His lips, and utter
submission is our dignity. To say to Him 'Lord, Lord,' carries us whole
universes beyond saying to Him, 'Rabbi, Rabbi.'

IV. And now, lastly, we have in this great discourse the authority of
our Lord set forth as being the authority of Him who is to be the Judge
of the world.

'Then will _I_ profess unto you I never knew you; depart from _Me_, ye
that work iniquity.' He, the meek, the humble, who never claimed for
Himself anything except what His consciousness compelled Him to assert,
who desired only that men should know Him for what He was, because it
was their life so to know Him, here declares that the whole world is to
be judged by Him, that He has such knowledge of men as will pierce
beneath the surface of professions and will be undazzled by the most
stupendous miracles, and beneath the eloquent words of many a preacher
and the wonderful works of many a so-called Christian philanthropist,
will see the hidden rottenness that they never saw, and, tearing down
the veil, will reveal men at the last to themselves.

That is no human function, that is no work that belongs to a mere
teacher, pattern, martyr, sage, philosopher, or saint. That is a divine
work; and the authority of Him whose final word to each of us will
settle beyond appeal our fate, and reveal beyond cavil our character, is
a divine authority. He has a right to command because He is going to
judge; and the lips that declare the law are the lips that will read the
sentence.

So, my brethren, do you take the whole Christ for yours, the Son of God,
the crown and end of revelation, the sinless and the perfect, who died
on the Cross for our salvation, and loves and pities, and is ready to
help every one of us; who, therefore, commands us with an absolute
authority, and who one day comes to be our Judge? If you turn to Him and
ask Him, 'Art Thou He that should come?' let Him speak for Himself, and
He will answer you: 'I that speak unto thee am He.' When He asks each of
us, as He does now, 'Whom sayest thou that I am?' oh that we may all
answer, with the assent of our understandings, with the love of our
hearts, with the submission of our wills, 'Thou art the Christ, the Son
of the living God.'


THE TOUCH THAT CLEANSES

     'When He was come down from the mountain, great multitudes followed
     Him. 1. And, behold, there came a leper and worshipped Him, saying,
     Lord, if Thou wilt, Thou canst make me clean. 3. And Jesus put
     forth His hand, and touched him, saying, I will; he thou clean. And
     immediately his leprosy was cleansed. 4. And Jesus saith unto him,
     See thou tell no man; but go thy way, shew thyself to the priest,
     and offer the gift that Moses commanded, for a testimony unto
     them.'--MATT. viii. 14.

THE great collection of Jesus' sayings, which we call the Sermon on the
Mount, is followed by a similar collection of Jesus' doings, which we
call miracles. It is significant that Matthew puts the words first and
the works second, as if to teach us the relative importance of the two.
Some one has said that miracles are 'the bell rung before the sermon,'
but Matthew thinks that the sermon comes first. He masses together nine
miracles (the raising of Jairus' daughter and the healing of the woman
with the bloody issue being so closely connected that they may be
regarded as one) which are divided into three groups of three each, and
are separated by three sections of more general character, like three
landings in a broad flight of stairs, or three breaks in a procession
(ch. viii. 18-22; ix. 9-17, 35-38).

The first triplet comprises miracles of bodily healing, and shows Jesus
as the great physician, curing leprosy, palsy, and fever, three types of
disease which have their analogues in the moral world. The cure of the
leper comes first, apparently not from chronological reasons, but
because leprosy had been made by the Old Testament legislation the
symbol of sin. The story is found in all the Synoptic Gospels, with
slight variations, which make more impressive their verbal identity in
reporting the leper's appeal and the Lord's answer.

A leper had to keep apart from men and was shunned by them, but this one
ventured to mingle with the 'great multitudes' that 'followed' Jesus,
till he reached His side. He must have known something of Christ to have
approached Him with a flicker of long-absent hope in his heart. No doubt
he had heard of some of the earlier miracles; and no doubt the crowd
recoiled from him so that he could easily reach Jesus. When he got there
he worshipped, or, as Luke puts it, 'fell on his face,' and made his
appeal. It would be all the more piteous, because it was spoken in that
feeble, hoarse voice characteristic of leprosy, and it was in itself
most pathetic. The poor creature has won his way to a surprising
confidence, dashed with a yet more surprising diffidence and doubt. He
is sure of the power, but not of the willingness, of this wonderful
healer. 'Thou canst,' does not make him confident, because it is
weakened by 'If Thou wilt.' Faith, desire, humility, and submissiveness
are beautifully smelted together in the wistful words, which are all the
more prevalent a prayer, because they do not venture to take the form of
prayer. To tell Jesus that His will was all that was needed to heal him
was, as it were, to throw the responsibility for this continued misery
on Him who could so easily deliver, if He only willed to do it. But the
hope which gleamed before his poor eyes was only a gleam, obscured by
his ignorance of Jesus' disposition towards him. The lowly acquiescence,
with which he leaves Jesus to decide whether he is to be freed from his
horrible, living death, is very beautiful, and speaks of a patient,
disciplined spirit, as well as of a profound insight into our Lord's
authority. The leper does cling to the hope that Jesus does will to heal
him, but he will not rebel if he is left shut up in his prison-house.
Surely in such a blending of trust, yearning, and acceptance of that
Will, whatever it involved, there was the germ of discipleship. Surely
there was, at least, the beginning of a living union with Jesus, which
would heal more than the leprosy of the flesh.

Mark gives the precious addition to the narrative, of a glimpse into the
heart of Jesus, when he tells us that, 'moved with compassion,' He 'put
forth His hand and touched him.' Swift and, we may almost say,
instinctive was the outgoing of pity from the heart, which was so
pitiful because it was so pure, and laid on itself every man's sorrow
because it carried no burden of its own sin or self-regard. That touch
had deep meaning, but it was not done for the sake of a meaning. It was
the spontaneous expression of love, and revealed the delicate quickness
of perception of another's feelings which flows from love only. The
leper had almost forgotten what the touch of a hand felt like. He had
lived, ever since his disease was manifest, apart from others, had
perhaps lost the embraces of wife and children, had walked alone in
crowds, and had a heart-chilling circle cleared round him everywhere.
But now this Man stretches His hand across the dreary gulf, and lets him
feel once more the sweetness of a warm and gentle touch. It was half
the cure; it was the complete clearing away of the last film of the
cloud of doubt as to the will of Jesus. It answered the 'if' by
something that spoke louder than any word. And, though it was not meant
for anything but the silent voice of pity and love, we do not rob it of
its beautiful spontaneity when we see, in the touch of that pure hand on
the rotting feculence of leprosy, a parable of the Incarnation, in which
He lays hold on our flesh of sin and is yet without sin--contracts no
defilement by contact, but by touching cleanses the foulness on which He
lays His white fingers. By that touch He proclaimed Himself the priest,
to whom the Law gave the office of laying his hand on the leper.

But the great word accompanying the touch is majestic in its brevity and
absolute claim to absolute power. Jesus accepts the leper's lofty
conception of His omnipotent will, as He always accepted the highest
conceptions that any formed of His person or authority. The sovereign
utterance, 'I will,' claims possession of the divine prerogative of
affecting dead matter by the mere outgoing of His volition. Not only is
it true of Him that 'He spake and it was done,' but He willed and it was
done; and these are the hall-marks of divine power. Neither the touch of
His hand nor the word of His lips cleansed the leper, but simply the
exercise of His will, of which word and touch were but audible and
visible tokens for sense to grasp. The form of the poor husky croak for
help determined the form of the answer, and the correspondence is marked
by all the evangelists as a striking instance of Christ's loving way of
echoing our petitions in His replies, and moulding His gifts to match
our desires. Thunder in heaven wakes echoes on earth, but more wonderful
is it that the thin voice of our supplications, when we scarcely dare to
shape them into prayers, should wake a voice from the throne, which,
though it is mighty as 'the voice of many waters' and sweet as that of
'harpers harping with their harps,' deigns to echo our poor cries.

The prohibition to speak of the cure till the priests had pronounced it
real and complete is more stringent in Mark, who also tells how utterly
it was disregarded. Its reason was obviously the wish to comply with the
law, and also the wish to get the official seal to the cure. Jesus did
desire the miracle to be known, but not till it was authoritatively
certified by the priest whose business it was to pronounce a sufferer
clean. It was for the leper's advantage, too, that he should have the
official certificate, since he would not be restored to society without
it. One does not wonder that the prohibition was disregarded in the
uncontrollable delight and wonder at such an experience. The leper was
eloquent, as we all can be, when our hearts are engaged, and his
blessing refused to be hid. Alas, how many of us, who profess to have
been cleansed from a worse defilement, find no such impulse to speak
welling up in ourselves! Alas, how superfluous is the injunction to
hundreds of Christ's disciples: 'See thou say nothing to any man'!


THE FAITH WHICH CHRIST PRAISES

     'The centurion answered and said: Lord, I am not worthy that Thou
     shouldest come under my roof, but speak the word only, and my
     servant shall be healed. 9. For I am a man under authority, having
     soldiers under me: and I say to this man, Go! and he goeth; and to
     another, Come I and he cometh; and to my servant, Do this; and he
     doeth it.'--MATT. viii. 8-9.

This miracle of the healing of the centurion's servant is the second of
the great series which Matthew gives us. It is perhaps not accidental
that both the first and the second miracles in his collection point out
our Lord's relation to outcasts from Israel. The first of them deals
with a leper, the second with the prayer of a heathen. And so they both
contribute to the great purpose of Matthew's Gospel, the bringing out of
the nature of the kingdom and the glory of the King.

My object now is to deal with the whole of the incident of which I have
read the most important part. We have in the story three things: the man
and his faith; Christ's eulogium upon the faith, and declaration of its
place in His kingdom; and the answer to the faith. Look, then, at these
three in succession.

I. We consider, first, the man and his faith.

He was a heathen and a Gentile. The Herod, who then ruled over Galilee,
had a little army, officered by Romans, of whom probably this centurion
was one; the commander, perhaps, of some small garrison of a hundred
men, the sixtieth part of a legion, which was stationed in Capernaum. If
we look at all the features of his character which come out in the
story, we get a very lovable picture of a much more tender heart than
might have been supposed to beat under the armour of a mercenary soldier
set to overawe a sullen people. 'He loveth our nation,' say the elders
of the Jews,--not certainly because of their amiability, but because of
the revelation which they possessed. Like a great many others in that
strange, restless era when our Lord came, this man seems to have become
tired of the hollowness of heathenism, and to have been groping for the
light. His military service brought him into contact with Judaism and
its monotheism, and his heart sprang to that as the thing he had been
seeking. 'He hath built us a synagogue,' thereby expressing his adhesion
to, or at least his lofty estimate of, the worship which was there
carried on. Just as, if an English officer in India were, in some little
village or other, to repair a ruined temple, he would win the hearts of
all the people, because they would think he was coming over to
Brahminism; so this soldier was felt to be nearer to the Jews than his
official position might have suggested.

Then, there was in him a beautiful human kindliness, which neither the
rough military life, nor that carelessness about a slave--which is one
of the worst fruits of slavery, had been able to sour or destroy. He was
tenderly anxious about his servant, who, according to Luke's expression,
was 'dear to him.' Then we get as the crown of all the beauty of his
character, the lowliness of spirit which the 'little brief authority' in
which he 'was dressed' had not puffed up. 'I am not worthy that Thou
shouldest come under my roof.' That lowliness is emphasised in Luke's
version of the story, which is more detailed and particularly accurate
than Matthew's summary account. By it we learn that he did not venture
to come himself, but sent His messengers to Jesus. If we take Matthew's
version, there is another lovely trait. He does not ask Christ to do
anything. He simply spreads the necessity before Him, in the confidence
that His pitying love lies so near the surface that it was sure to flow
forth, even at that light touch. He will not prescribe, he tells the
story, and leaves all to Him. Christ's answer, 'I will come and heal
him,' throbs with the consciousness of power, and is gentle with
tenderness, quick to interpret unspoken wishes, and not slow to answer,
unless it is for the wisher's good to be refused. When He was asked to
go, because the asker considered that His presence was necessary for His
power to have effect, He refused; when He is not asked to go, He
volunteers to do so. He is moved to apparently opposite actions by the
same motive, the good of the petitioner, whose weak faith He strengthens
by refusal, whose strong faith He confirms by acquiescence. And that is
the law of His conduct always, and you and I may trust it absolutely, He
may give, or retain ungiven, what we desire; in either case, He will be
acting in order that our trust in Him may be deepened.

That brings us to the remarkable and unique conception of our Lord's
manner of working and power to which this centurion gives utterance. 'I
also' (for the true text of Matthew has that 'also,' as the Revised
Version shows), 'I also am a man under authority, having soldiers under
me, and I say to this man, Go, and he goeth; to another, Come, and he
cometh; to my servant, Do this, and he doeth it. Speak thou with a word
only and my servant shall be healed.' A centurion was likely to
understand the power of a word of command. His whole training had taught
him the omnipotence of the uttered will of the authoritative general,
and although he was but an officer over a poor sixtieth part of a
legion, yet in some limited measure the same power lay in him, and his
