golden calf was finished, Aaron, who had entered into their views,
made proclamation--"Tomorrow is the feast of the Lord--[of Jehovah."]
Moses, who had greatly helped them in the worship and service of God,
was gone, and the idol was intended to supply his place; to help their
devotion, and excite them to honor the true God! "Up make us Gods--
for this Moses--we wot not what is become of him."

The idolatrous worship of the Romanists in later ages is of the same
kind. Their churches abound with rich images, and are adorned with
exquisite paintings; the likeness of Christ agonising on the cross,
and other affecting representations, designed to impress religious
subjection the heart and excite devotion. Such is the use which they
profess to make of them. And they seem not devoid of effect.
Protestants who have attended their worship, have observed greater
appearances of fervor, and greater moving of the passions, than are
usual in the religious assembles of other denominations of Christians.
And their adoration of angels and departed saints, is only as of
mediators and intercessors, who may present their prayers, and obtain
favor for them--the very idolatry of paganism.

In these things there is a shew of wisdom and humility--wisdom to
devise means to impress a sense of religion, and humility to draw nigh
to God by the intervention of those more worthy than themselves; and
the means seem not destitute of influence; they produce warm zeal, and
all the fervor of devotion; yea, all those feelings and emotions which
are thought by some to constitute the offence of religion.

And why is not all this right? Why are not these ways of honoring God
and exciting devotion commendable, when they render the worshipper
thus fervent in spirit to serve the Lord?

The reason is obvious--they are not required--yea, they are
forbidden of the divine Sovereign. "Thou shalt worship the Lord thy
God, and him _only_ shalt thou serve. Thou shalt not make unto thee
any graven image, or any likeness of any thing that is in heaven
above, or in the earth beneath, or that is in the waters under the
earth--I the Lord thy God am a jealous God."--

Pretending to honor God by direct disobedience is peculiarly
affrontive. Such worshippers "provoke him to his face. Their
offerings his soul hateth. They are a smoke in his nose, and a fire
that burneth all the day." Every thing of this nature, whatever may
be its design, is rebellion against God. Against no other sin hath he
manifested greater indignation.

No instance can be adduced of such homage being accepted, or of good
resulting from such worship. Yea, it hath commonly been followed with
the severest marks of the divine resentment. Witness the evils which
came upon Israel when they made the golden calf, to help their
devotions. Witness those which fell on the family and kingdom of
Jeroboam, when he forsook the appointed worship of God, and the
ministry of the Levites whom God had appointed to wait at the altar.
Jeroboam did not introduce the worship of Baal, or the other heathen
gods. This was done afterwards by the influence of Jezebel. He only
appointed other places of worship, beside that which God had chosen,
and consecrated others to minister who had not the attachments of the
Levites to the house of David and city of Zion, and made images to
help the devotion of his people; and lo! his family perish; a brand of
infamy is set on his name; and because his people walk in his ways,
they are finally "broken and cease to be a people!"

The divine resentment of attempts to change the ordinances of God, or
make innovations in his worship even where they seem _to have been
done out of concern for his honor_, is left on record in his word.
Saul once offered sacrifice. The necessity of his affairs seemed to
require it. He professed to have done it with reluctance, but to have
thought it his duty--"I said the Philistines will come down upon me,
and I have not made supplication unto the Lord: I forced myself
therefore, and offered a burnt offering." But Saul was not of the
family of Aaron, to whom the right of sacrificing solely appertained
by divine appointment. Hence instead of conciliating the divine favor,
his officious zeal offended heaven--for that act of disobedience he
was threatened with deposition; and a repetition of attempting to
improve on divine orders, in sparing the best cattle of Amelek to
sacrifice unto the Lord, confirmed the sentence, * placed another
on the throne, and led to the ruin of the rebellious prince. Uzzah only
put forth his hand to steady the trembling ark, and was struck dead
for his rashness, beside the ark of God. +

* 1 Samuel xiii. 1-14, xv. 15-13. + 2 Samuel vi. 6, 7.

Some spoiled through philosophy and vain deceit, have made changes in
the divine institutions, and attempted improvements upon them, since
the commencement of the gospel day. This hath been a leading trait of
character in the chiefs of the Romish church. Many of the heads of
that communion have signalized themselves in this way. And some of
their alterations have operated to impress what was thought to be
religion, as hath been observed. Another way in which they have
manifested the same disposition hath been the multiplying of holy days.
Under various pretences, nearly half the days in the year have been
consecrated to religion, by order of those gods on earth. Some real,
and many fictitious saints, have days consecrated to their memory.

Here is a great shew of wisdom, and zeal for God, and his cause in the
world; calling men so often from their temporal concerns to attend to
the duties of religion! Who can do other than approve it? Doubtless
many have been deceived by appearances, and considered those as wise
and good who have done these things. But this is far from being their
character. These have been the doings of "Antichrist, the Man of sin
--the Son of perdition! Because of these things cometh the wrath of
God, on the children of disobedience!" All these specious measures are
no better than Saul's sacrificing, Uzzah's steadying the ark, and the
use of images in divine worship! They are opposition to the orders of
the Most High, and rebellion against him.

"Six days shalt thou labor and do all thy work, but the seventh day
is the sabbath of the Lord thy God; in it thou shalt not do any work"
--Whoever takes it on himself to alter this appointment, "thinks to
change times and laws;" which was foretold of him who should "speak
great words against the Most High." *

* Daniel vii. 25.

The Lord's day, is the only day which God hath sanctified under the
gospel dispensation. This infinite wisdom judged sufficient. Had more
been requisite, more would have been consecrated by divine order. But
not a hint of any other holy day is to be found in the New Testament. +

* * * * *

+ Neither the day of Christ's birth, death, resurrection or ascension
appear to have been regarded as holy time, or any way distinguished
from the other days of the year, during the apostolic age. The former
of these is not marked in the scriptures. Whether it happened on the
twentyfifth of December, or at some other season is uncertain. So are
the times in which the apostles and primitive Christians suffered
martyrdom. These events are veiled. Divine providence hath hidden them
from mankind, probably for the same reason that the body of Moses was
hidden from Israel--to prevent its being made an object of idolatrous
worship--or for the same which is supposed to have occasioned our
Lord's seeming neglect of his mother, and his severer reproof given to
Peter, than to any other of his disciples--"Get thee behind me Satan;"
namely, that idolatrous honor, which he foresaw would be afterwards
paid them by some called Christians.

Easter is once mentioned in our translation of the New Testament; but
it is not found in the Greek original. The word there used is "Pasxa,"
the Passover. It is mentioned only to note the time in which Herod
intended to have brought forth Peter and delivered him up to his
enemies. *

* Acts xii. 4.

* * * * *

Occasional calls there may be to fasting and thanksgiving; and we
have scripture warrant for attending them in their seasons. But fixing
on certain days of the year, or month, statedly to call men from their
secular business to attend to religion, and requiring the consecration
of them to religion is adding to the book of God. However well
intended, it goes on mistaken principles, and however specious in
appearance, is affronting the wisdom and authority of heaven.

Most of the errors referred to above, are found among Pagans or
Catholics; but is nothing of the same kind chargeable on Protestants?
"Are there not with us sins against the Lord our God?" And of the
same nature with those we have been contemplating? The knowledge of
other's errors in ay be for our warning; but the knowledge of our own
is requisite to our reformation. Where then are we directed of God,
religiously to observe Christmas, Lent, or Easter? Where to attend the
eucharist only twice or thrice a year; and never without one, or more
preparatory lectures? * Where to add a third prayer at the
administration of that ordinance, when our divine pattern only blessed
the bread before he distributed it to his disciples, and gave thanks
to the Father, before he divided to them the cup? Where are we
directed to attend quarterly seasons of prayer, or to hold weekly
conferences for religious purposes?

* * * * *

* We would not be understood to intend that all religious meeting on
week days are unlawful. Special occasions often require them. But the
Lord's day is the only time set apart by divine order for the stated
attendance. No other hath he consecrated to the business of religion.
Neither would we be considered as denying the legality of ever uniting
to seek the Lord previous to the celebration of eucharist. We may look
to God to assist and accept us in every duty. But if we consider these
preparatory exercises as indispensibly requisite, and as constituting
a part of the duty, we do it without divine warrant.

From an attention to the gospel history, we are induced to believe
that the celebration of that ordinance constituted a part of the
common duties of every Lord's day, while the apostles ministered in
the Christian church; + and that an attendance at the sacramental
table, was not distinguished by any special preparatory exercises,
diverse from those which anteceded other sanctuary duties. No trace of
distinction, in these respects, is to be found in scripture; neither
precept nor example can be adduced to support it. Whence then its
origin?

+ Acts xx. 7.

Did not it derive from Rome? We know the errors of the Romish church
relative to the eucharist; and their tendency to induce a belief that
it is more holy, and requires greater sanctity in communicant, than is
requisite to an attendance on other ordinances. And the same notion is
prevalent and many who have withdrawn from the communion of that
church. Many serious people who attend other religious duties with
pleasure and advantage, are afraid to obey Christ's dying command! Is
not this a relic of popery? When Luther left the papal communion, his
reformation, particularly relative to this ordinance, was but partial.
Many other protestants retain a tinge of catholic leaven. Is not the
distinction respecting the sanctity of divine ordinances from this
source? It is not found in the gospel. If the exercises under
consideration serve to perpetuate this unscriptural distinction, and
to drive men from a plain and important duty, they have a baleful
effect. They may be well intended. Doubtless they are so by the
generality of those who attend them. It is painful to be obliged to
dissent from men whom we receive as brethren, and revere as
Christians. But after much deliberation, such are our views of the
subject before us; and we offer them to the serious consideration of
the followers of Christ.

* * * * *

But these are well intended. So probably was Uzzah's steadying the
ark--But some of these do help on the cause of God, and even more than
the stale attendance on Lord's day duties. So thought those who
introduced images and paintings into churches. [Some indeed attend
those who neglected Lord's day duties.]

Have we then discovered defects in the divine plan! And do we feel
ourselves capable of making emendations in it!--Of "teaching eternal
wisdom how to rule!"--How to effect its purposes of mercy!

Beware _lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit,
after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world and not
after Christ_. Vain man would be wise--He naturally thinks himself
qualified, even to ameliorate divine institutions. Temptation to this
sin coincides with a natural bias in depraved humanity. Many and very
mischievous errors have issued from it. Would we escape the snare, we
must listen to the apostle speaking in the text. The sum of his advice
is to keep to the divine directions, especially in matters of
religion. These are contained and plainly taught in the holy
Scriptures, which we have in our hands, and of the sense of which we
must judge for ourselves; remembering that we are accountable to God
the judge of all.

As some are _spoiled through philosophy and vain deceit_, others are
corrupted by regard to _the tradition of men and rudiments of the
world_. This endangered the Colossians, and eventually ruined the
church at Rome. The leading errors of paganism were thereby introduced
into that Christian church, and rendered it completely antichristian.
Errors which seemed to have been destroyed by Christianity, were again
revived, and the abominations which they had occasioned, were acted
over again with enlargements!

The _traditions of men and rudiments of the world_, have still their
seducing influence. Most men swim down with the current of the times
--adopt the sentiments and conform to the usages of those with whom
they live. The popular scheme of religion, they consider as the
orthodox scheme, and the religion of the land, the true religion.
Therefore is one nation Papists, another Protestants, one Calvinists,
another Lutherans. These differences of sentiment do not arise from
differences in the mental constitutions of nations, but from the
accidental differences of situation.

Few have sufficient independence of mind to "judge of themselves what
is right." Many who "call Christ Lord, receive for doctrines the
commandments of men." Therefore doth religion vary like the fashions
of the world. Was the fashion of the world to be the rule of judgment,
it might be wise to follow it: But "we must every one give an account
of himself to God," and be judged by the rule which be hath given us.
It becomes as therefore to "call no man master, because one is our
Matter, even Christ." To him we are accountable. At our peril do we
neglect obedience to his commands.

It concerns us to do all things according to the pattern drawn out
before us in the Scriptures. Against the natural bias to affect
improvements on divine institutions, and against the prevalence of
fashion and contagion of popular opinion, we should be particularly on
our guard. "For cursed is every one who confirmeth not all the words
of God's law to do them, and all the people shall say, Amen."



 * * * * * *



SERMON XXIX.

The Sins of Communities Noted and Punished.

Matthew xxiii. 36.

"Verily I say unto you, All these things shall come upon this
generation."


This is predicated of the judgments of God on those who had shed the
blood of his saints. The Savior declares that all the righteous blood
which had been shed on the earth from that of Abel down to the gospel
day, should come on that generation!

But is not this unreasonable and contrary to the Scriptures? "Far be
wickedness from God and iniquity from the Almighty. For the work of
man shall be render unto him, and cause every man to find according to
his ways--The righteousness of the righteous shall be upon him, and
the wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him." Such is the language
of revelation.

And is not that of reason the same? Will reason justify punishing some
men for other men's sins? Those who lived in the days of our Savior
had no share in the murder of Abel, or of many others who had died by
wicked hands. Those dire events had been accomplished before they had
existence. How then could they be answerable for them? To solve this
mystery we must consider man in a twofold view--as an individual and
as the member of a community.

As individuals mankind are solely accountable for the parts which they
act personally. In the judgment of the great day, they will only be
judged for the use which they shall have made of the talents committed
to them here--"We must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ;
that every one may receive the things done in the body, according to
that he hath done, whether good or bad,"

But every individual is a member of the human race, and of some
community. The race, as such, and the larger branches of it, the
nations and empires into which it is divided, are amenable to the
Supreme Governor, and liable to punishment, if in their public
characters, they rebel against him. And righteous individuals, may be
involved in the judgments sent to punish the sins of the community to
which they belong. They often are so. Personal rectitude is not
designated by an exemption from national calamities. Discriminations
will eventually be made in its favor, but not here. Here "all things
come alike unto all, and there is one event to the righteous and the
wicked."

To _shew such to be the general rule of the divine administration in
the government of the world, is the design of the following
discourse_: Which will explain the text.

The world, and the communities into which it is divided, have their
probation no less than persons; and there are reasons in which God
enters into judgment with them and adjusts retributions to their moral
states.

In discussing the subject, we shall treat, _first of families, then of
larger communities, and of the world_.

The first family of our race affords an example to our purpose. Before
that family was increased by a single branch issuing from it, it
rebelled against God, and God entered into judgment with it, and
punished its sin upon it. And the punishments was not restricted to
the offending pair, but extended to their race in common with
themselves: All were doomed to sufferings and death _in consequence of
their sin_. And the sentence hath been executing upon them from that
period to the present time. Mankind have gone through life sorrowing;
and "death hath reigned even over those, who have not sinned after
the similitude of Adam's transgression." Neither have discriminations
been made in favor of the saints, but they have been involved in the
general calamity, and groaned with the rest of the creation.

In some respects this was an exempt case, but in the general diffusion
of punishment on the various branches of the family, it accords with
the divine administration respecting other families, as appears from
sacred history, and from the general history of the human race.
Countless examples might be adduced.

The murder of Abel was not punished solely on Cain, but also on his
family. The ground cursed for _his_ sin, did not yield _to them_ its
strength; and they were deprived of those religious instructions which
they would no doubt have received, had their father dwelt "in the
presence of the Lord," or remained in the family of Adam which
contained the church of God. Many of the evils which fell on that
sinner, fell also on his children and rested on them till the
extinction of his race by the deluge.
