    listen to, it is very apparent that the work of the preacher has
    not fallen in any respect out of estimation. Here is a book which
    has gone through as great a number of editions as the most popular
    novel. It bears Mudie's stamp upon its dingy boards, and has all
    those marks of arduous service which are only to be seen in books
    which belong to great public libraries. It is thumbed,
    dog's-eared, pencil-marked, worn by much perusal. Is it then a
    novel? On the contrary, it is a volume of sermons. A fine, tender,
    and lofty mind, full of thoughtfulness, full of devotion, has
    herein left his legacy to his country. It is not rhetoric or any
    vulgar excitement of eloquence that charms so many readers to the
    book, so many hearers to this preacher's feet. It is not with the
    action of a Demosthenes, with outstretched arms and countenance of
    flame, that he presses his gospel upon his audience. On the
    contrary, when we read those calm and lofty utterances, this
    preacher seems seated, like his Master, with the multitude
    palpitating round, but no agitation or passion in his own
    thoughtful, contemplative breast. The Sermons of Robertson, of
    Brighton, have few of the exciting qualities of oratory. Save for
    the charm of a singularly pure and lucid style, their almost sole
    attraction consists in their power of instruction, in their
    faculty of opening up the mysteries of life and truth. It is pure
    teaching, so far as that ever can be administered to a popular
    audience, which is offered to us in these volumes."


 [EDINBURGH CHRISTIAN MAGAZINE.]

   "They are Sermons of a bold, uncompromising thinker--of a man
    resolute for the truth of God, and determined in the strength of
    God's grace to make that truth clear, to brush away all the
    fine-spun sophistries and half-truths by which the cunning sins of
    men have hidden it.... There must be a great and true heart, where
    there is a great and true preacher. And in that, beyond everything
    else, lay the secret of Mr. Robertson's influence. His Sermons
    show evidence enough of acute logical power. His analysis is
    exquisite in its subtleness and delicacy.... With Mr. Robertson
    style is but the vehicle, not the substitute for thought.
    Eloquence, poetry, scholarship, originality--his Sermons show
    proof enough of these to put him on a level with the foremost men
    of his time. But, after all, their charm lies in the warm, loving,
    sympathetic heart, in the well-disciplined mind of the true
    Christian, in his noble scorn of all lies, of all things mean and
    crooked, in his brave battling for right, even when wrong seems
    crowned with success, in his honest simplicity and singleness of
    purpose, in the high and holy tone--as if, amid the discord of
    earth, he heard clear, though far off, the perfect harmony of
    heaven; in the fiery earnestness of his love for Christ, the
    devotion of his whole being to the goodness and truth revealed in
    him."


 [CHURCH OF ENGLAND MONTHLY REVIEW.]

   "It is hardly too much to say, that had the Church of England
    produced no other fruit in the present century, this work alone
    would be amply sufficient to acquit her of the charge of
    barrenness.... The reputation of Mr. Robertson's Sermons is now so
    wide-spread, that any commendation of ours may seem superfluous.
    We will therefore simply, in conclusion, recommend such of our
    readers as have not yet made their acquaintance, to read them
    carefully and thoughtfully, and they will find in them more deeply
    suggestive matter than in almost any book published in the present
    century."


 [MORNING POST.]

   "They are distinguished by masterly exposition of Scriptural
    truths and the true spirit of Christian charity."


 [BRITISH QUARTERLY.]

   "These Sermons are full of thought and beauty, and admirable
    illustrations of the ease with which a gifted and disciplined mind
    can make the obscure transparent, the difficult plain. There is
    not a Sermon that does not furnish evidence of originality without
    extravagance, of discrimination without tediousness, and of piety
    without cant or conventionalism."


 [ECLECTIC REVIEW.]

   "We hail with unaffected delight the appearance of these volumes.
    The Sermons are altogether out of the common style. They are
    strong, free, and beautiful utterances of a gifted and cultivated
    mind. Occasionally, the expression of theological sentiment fails
    fully to represent our own thought, and we sometimes detect
    tendencies with which we cannot sympathize: but, taken as a whole,
    the discourses are fine specimens of a high order of preaching."


 [GUARDIAN.]

   "Very beautiful in feeling, and occasionally striking and forcible
    in conception to a remarkable degree.... Even in the imperfect
    shape in which their deceased author left them, they are very
    remarkable compositions."


 [CHRISTIAN REMEMBRANCER.]

   "We should be glad if all preachers more united with ourselves,
    preached such Sermons as these."


 [WESTMINSTER REVIEW.]

   "To those who affectionately remember the author, they will
    recall, though imperfectly, his living eloquence and his living
    truthfulness."


 [GLOBE.]

   "Mr. Robertson, of Brighton, is a name familiar to most of us, and
    honoured by all to whom it is familiar. A true servant of Christ,
    a bold and heart-stirring preacher of the Gospel, his teaching was
    unlike the teaching of most clergymen, for it was beautified and
    intensified by genius. New truth, new light, streamed from each
    well-worn text when he handled it."


 [BLACKWOOD'S MAGAZINE.]

   "When teaching of this description keeps the popular ear and
    secures the general attention, it is unquestionable proof that the
    office of the preacher has, in no way, lost its hold on the mind
    of the people. The acceptance of a voice so unimpassioned and
    thoughtful, so independent of all vulgar auxiliaries, so intent
    upon bringing every theme it touches to the illustration and
    sanctifying of the living life of the hour, that which alone can
    be mended, and purified, and sanctified, is a better tribute to
    the undying office of the preacher than the success of a hundred
    Spurgeons. Attention and interest are as eager as ever where there
    is in reality any instruction to bestow."


 [LITERARY GAZETTE.]

   "In earnestness of practical appeal, and in eloquent and graceful
    diction, Mr. Robertson has few rivals, and these characteristics
    are sufficient to account for his unusual popularity."


 [NATIONAL REVIEW.]

   "A volume of very fine Sermons, quite equal to the previous
    series."


 [BRIGHTON EXAMINER.]

   "There is in the Sermons in this volume the same freshness, vigour
    of thought and felicity of expression, as characterised whatever
    Mr. Robertson said."


 [ECONOMIST.]

   "Mr. Robertson's Sermons have the great and rare merit of
    neutralising by a more charitable and affectionate spirit, and by
    a wider intelligence, all that may appear rigid and _doctrinaire_
    in the Church of England. The result seems to have been his
    special mission: it most fully explains the mind of the man.... We
    recommend the Sermons to the perusal of our readers. They will
    find in them thought of so rare and beautiful a description, an
    earnestness of mind so steadfast in the search of truth, and a
    charity so pure and all-embracing, that we cannot venture to offer
    praise, which would be, in this case, almost as presumptuous as
    criticism."


 [SATURDAY REVIEW.]

   "When Mr. Robertson died, his name was scarcely known beyond the
    circle of his own private friends, and of those among whom he had
    laboured in his calling. Now, every word he wrote is eagerly
    sought for and affectionately treasured up, and meets with the
    most reverent and admiring welcome from men of all parties and all
    shades of opinion.... To those that find in his writings what they
    themselves want, he is a teacher quite beyond comparison--his
    words having a meaning, his thoughts a truth and depth, which they
    cannot find elsewhere. And they never look to him in vain.... He
    fixes himself upon the recollection as a most original and
    profound thinker, and as a man in whom excellence puts on a new
    form.... There are many persons, and the number increases every
    year, to whom Robertson's writings are the most stable,
    satisfactory, and exhaustless form of religious teaching which the
    nineteenth century has given--the most wise, suggestive, and
    practical."


 [BRIGHTON HERALD.]

   "To our thinking, no compositions of the same class, at least
    since the days of Jeremy Taylor, can be compared with these
    Sermons delivered to the congregation of Trinity Chapel, Brighton,
    by their late minister. They have that power over the mind which
    belongs only to the highest works of genius: they stir the soul to
    its inmost depths: they move the affections, raise the
    imagination, bring out the higher and spiritual part of our nature
    by the continual appeal that is made to it, and tend to make us,
    at the same time, humble and aspiring--merciful to others and
    doubtful of ourselves."


 [From a SERMON preached at the CONSECRATION of the BISHOP of NORWICH,
 by the REV. J.H. GURNEY, late of MARYLEBONE.]

   "I do not commit myself to all his theology; I may differ from the
    preacher in some things, and listen doubtfully to others. But I
    know of no modern sermons at once so suggestive and so
    inspiriting, with reference to the whole range of Christian duty.
    He is fresh and original without being recondite: plain-spoken
    without severity; and discusses some of the exciting topics of the
    day without provoking strife or lowering his tone as a Christian
    teacher. He delivers his message, in fact, like one who is
    commissioned to call men off from trifles and squabbles, and
    conventional sins and follies, to something higher and nobler than
    their common life: like a man in earnest, too, avoiding
    technicalities, speaking his honest mind in phrases that are his
    own, and with a directness from which there is no escape. O that a
    hundred like him were given us by God, and placed in prominent
    stations throughout our land!"


 [GUARDIAN.]

   "Without anything of that artificial symmetry which the
    traditional division into heads was apt to display, they present
    each reflection in a distinct method of statement, clearly and
    briefly worked out; the sentences are short and terse, as in all
    popular addresses they should be; the thoughts are often very
    striking, and entirely out of the track of ordinary sermonising.
    In matters of doctrine such novelty is sometimes unsafe; but the
    language is that of one who tries earnestly to penetrate into the
    very centre of the truth he has to expound, and differs as widely
    as possible from the sceptic's doubt or the controversialist's
    mistake. More frequently Mr. Robertson deals with questions of
    practical life, of public opinion, and of what we may call social
    casuistry--turning the light of Christian ethics upon this
    unnoticed though familiar ground. The use of a carriage on Sunday,
    the morality of feeing a railway porter against his employers'
    rules, are topics not too small for illustration or application of
    his lessons in divine truth."


 [BRIGHTON GAZETTE.]

   "As an author, Mr. Robertson was, in his lifetime, unknown; for
    with the exception of one or two addresses, he never published,
    having a singular disinclination to bring his thoughts before the
    public in the form of published sermons. As a minister, he was
    beloved and esteemed for his unswerving fidelity to his principles
    and his fearless propagation of his religious views. As a
    townsman, he was held in the highest estimation; his hand and
    voice being ever ready to do all in his power to advance the moral
    and social position of the working man. It was not till after his
    decease, which event created a sensation and demonstration such as
    Brighton never before or since witnessed, that his works were
    subjected to public criticism. It was then found that in the
    comparatively retired minister of Trinity Chapel there had existed
    a man possessed of consummate ability and intellect of the highest
    order; that the sermons laid before his congregation were replete
    with the subtleties of intellect, and bore evidence of the keenest
    perception and most exalted catholicity. His teaching was of an
    extremely liberal character, and if fair to assign a man possessed
    of such a universality of sympathy to any party, we should say
    that he belonged to what is denominated the 'Broad Church.' We,
    with many others, cannot agree in the fullest extent of his
    teaching, but, at the same time, feel bound to accord the tribute
    due to his genius."


 [MORNING CHRONICLE.]

   "A volume of very excellent Sermons, by the late lamented
    Incumbent of Trinity Chapel, Brighton."


 [TITAN.]

   "But the Sermons now under notice are, we venture to say, taking
    all the circumstances into consideration, the most remarkable
    discourses of the age.... They are throughout vital with the
    rarest force, burning with an earnestness perhaps never surpassed,
    and luminous with the light of genius.... We suspect that even
    Brighton little knew what a man Providence had placed in its
    midst."

       *       *       *       *       *

 On the "_Analysis of Mr. Tennyson's In Memoriam_:"--

 [GUARDIAN.]

   "An endeavour to give, in a few weighty words, the key-note (so to
    speak) of each poem in the series. Those will best appreciate the
    amount of success attained by Mr. Robertson who try to do the same
    work better."

       *       *       *       *       *

 From a few of the Notices on Mr. Robertson's "_Lecture on the Epistles
 to the Corinthians_:"--


 [MORNING POST.]

   "It was Mr. Robertson's custom every Sunday afternoon, instead of
    preaching from one text, to expound an entire chapter of some book
    in the Scriptures. The present volume is made up from notes of
    fifty-six discourses of this kind. 'Some people were startled by
    the introduction of what they called secular subjects into the
    pulpit. But the lecturer in all his ministrations refused to
    recognize the distinction so drawn. He said that the whole life of
    a Christian was sacred--that common every-day doings, whether of a
    trade, or of a profession, or the minuter details of a woman's
    household life, were the arenas in which trial and temptation
