
070.039
Y: By no means! For We have created them out of the (base matter) they
know!

P: Nay, verily. Lo! We created them from what they know.

S: By no means! Surely We have created them of what they know.

070.040
Y: Now I do call to witness the Lord of all points in the East and the
West that We can certainly-

P: But nay! I swear by the Lord of the rising-places and the
setting-places (of the planets) that We verily are Able

S: But nay! I swear by the Lord of the Easts and the Wests that We are
certainly able

070.041
Y: Substitute for them better (men) than they; And We are not to be
defeated (in Our Plan).

P: To replace them by (others) better than them. And we are not to be
outrun.

S: To bring instead (others) better than them, and We shall not be
overcome.

070.042
Y: So leave them to plunge in vain talk and play about, until they
encounter that Day of theirs which they have been promised!-

P: So let them chat and play until they meet their Day which they are
promised,

S: Therefore leave them alone to go on with the false discourses and to
sport until they come face to face with that day of theirs with which
they are threatened;

070.043
Y: The Day whereon they will issue from their sepulchres in sudden haste
as if they were rushing to a goal-post (fixed for them),-

P: The day when they come forth from the graves in haste, as racing to a
goal,

S: The day on which they shall come forth from their graves in haste, as
if they were hastening on to a goal,

070.044
Y: Their eyes lowered in dejection,- ignominy covering them (all over)!
such is the Day the which they are promised!

P: With eyes aghast, abasement stupefying them: Such is the Day which
they are promised.

S: Their eyes cast down; disgrace shall overtake them; that is the day
which they were threatened with.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 71:

                                NOOH (NOOH)
 Total Verses: 28 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

071.001
Y: We sent Noah to his People (with the Command): "Do thou warn thy
People before there comes to them a grievous Penalty."

P: Lo! We sent Noah unto his people (saying): Warn thy people ere the
painful doom come unto them.

S: Surely We sent Nuh to his people, saying: Warn your people before
there come upon them a painful chastisement.

071.002
Y: He said: "O my People! I am to you a Warner, clear and open:"

P: He said: O my people! Lo! I am a plain warner unto you

S: He said: O my people! Surely I am a plain warner to you:

071.003
Y: "That ye should worship Allah, fear Him and obey me:"

P: (Bidding you): Serve Allah and keep your duty unto Him and obey me,

S: That you should serve Allah and be careful of (your duty to) Him and
obey me:

071.004
Y: "So He may forgive you your sins and give you respite for a stated
Term: for when the Term given by Allah is accomplished, it cannot be
put forward: if ye only knew."

P: That He may forgive you somewhat of your sins and respite you to an
appointed term. Lo! the term of Allah, when it cometh, cannot be
delayed, if ye but knew.

S: He will forgive you some of your faults and grant you a delay to an
appointed term; surely the term of Allah when it comes is not
postponed; did you but know!

071.005
Y: He said: "O my Lord! I have called to my People night and day:"

P: He said: My Lord! Lo! I have called unto my people night and day

S: He said: O my Lord! surely I have called my people by night and by
day!

071.006
Y: "But my call only increases (their) flight (from the Right)."

P: But all my calling doth but add to their repugnance;

S: But my call has only made them flee the more:

071.007
Y: "And every time I have called to them, that Thou mightest forgive
them, they have (only) thrust their fingers into their ears, covered
themselves up with their garments, grown obstinate, and given
themselves up to arrogance."

P: And lo! whenever I call unto them that Thou mayst pardon them they
thrust their fingers in their ears and cover themselves with their
garments and persist (in their refusal) and magnify themselves in
pride.

S: And whenever I have called them that Thou mayest forgive them, they
put their fingers in their ears, cover themselves with their garments,
and persist and are puffed up with pride:

071.008
Y: "So I have called to them aloud;"

P: And lo! I have called unto them aloud,

S: Then surely I called to them aloud:

071.009
Y: "Further I have spoken to them in public and secretly in private,"

P: And lo! I have made public proclamation unto them, and I have
appealed to them in private.

S: Then surely I spoke to them in public and I spoke to them in secret:

071.010
Y: "Saying, 'Ask forgiveness from your Lord; for He is Oft-Forgiving;'"

P: And I have said: Seek pardon of your Lord. Lo! He was ever Forgiving.

S: Then I said, Ask forgiveness of your Lord, surely He is the most
Forgiving:

071.011
Y: "'He will send rain to you in abundance;'"

P: He will let loose the sky for you in plenteous rain,

S: He will send down upon you the cloud, pouring down abundance of rain:

071.012
Y: "'Give you increase in wealth and sons; and bestow on you gardens and
bestow on you rivers (of flowing water).'"

P: And will help you with wealth and sons, and will assign unto you
Gardens and will assign unto you rivers.

S: And help you with wealth and sons, and make for you gardens, and make
for you rivers.

071.013
Y: "'What is the matter with you, that ye place not your hope for
kindness and long-suffering in Allah,'"-

P: What aileth you that ye hope not toward Allah for dignity

S: What is the matter with you that you fear not the greatness of Allah?

071.014
Y: "'Seeing that it is He that has created you in diverse stages?'"

P: When He created you by (divers) stages?

S: And indeed He has created you through various grades:

071.015
Y: "'See ye not how Allah has created the seven heavens one above
another,'"

P: See ye not how Allah hath created seven heavens in harmony,

S: Do you not see how Allah has created the seven heavens one above
another,

071.016
Y: "'And made the moon a light in their midst, and made the sun as a
(Glorious) Lamp?'"

P: And hath made the moon a light therein, and made the sun a lamp?

S: And made the moon therein a light, and made the sun a lamp?

071.017
Y: "'And Allah has produced you from the earth growing (gradually),'"

P: And Allah hath caused you to grow as a growth from the earth,

S: And Allah has made you grow out of the earth as a growth:

071.018
Y: "'And in the End He will return you into the (earth), and raise you
forth (again at the Resurrection)?'"

P: And afterward He maketh you return thereto, and He will bring you
forth again, a (new) forthbringing.

S: Then He returns you to it, then will He bring you forth a (new)
bringing forth:

071.019
Y: "'And Allah has made the earth for you as a carpet (spread out),'"

P: And Allah hath made the earth a wide expanse for you

S: And Allah has made for you the earth a wide expanse,

071.020
Y: "'That ye may go about therein, in spacious roads.'"

P: That ye may thread the valley-ways thereof.

S: That you may go along therein in wide paths.

071.021
Y: Noah said: "O my Lord! They have disobeyed me, but they follow (men)
whose wealth and children give them no increase but only Loss."

P: Noah said: My Lord! Lo! they have disobeyed me and followed one whose
wealth and children increase him in naught save ruin;

S: Nuh said: My Lord! surely they have disobeyed me and followed him
whose wealth and children have added to him nothing but loss.

071.022
Y: "And they have devised a tremendous Plot."

P: And they have plotted a mighty plot,

S: And they have planned a very great plan.

071.023
Y: "And they have said (to each other), 'Abandon not your gods: Abandon
neither Wadd nor Suwa', neither Yaguth nor Ya'uq, nor Nasr';"-

P: And they have said: Forsake not your gods. Forsake not Wadd, nor
Suwa', nor Yaghuth and Ya'uq and Nasr.

S: And they say: By no means leave your gods, nor leave Wadd, nor Suwa;
nor Yaghus, and Yauq and Nasr.

071.024
Y: "They have already misled many; and grant Thou no increase to the
wrong-doers but in straying (from their mark)."

P: And they have led many astray, and Thou increasest the wrong-doers in
naught save error.

S: And indeed they have led astray many, and do not increase the unjust
in aught but error.

071.025
Y: Because of their sins they were drowned (in the flood), and were made
to enter the Fire (of Punishment): and they found- in lieu of Allah-
none to help them.

P: Because of their sins they were drowned, then made to enter a Fire.
And they found they had no helpers in place of Allah.

S: Because of their wrongs they were drowned, then made to enter fire,
so they did not find any helpers besides Allah.

071.026
Y: And Noah, said: "O my Lord! Leave not of the Unbelievers, a single
one on earth!"

P: And Noah said: My Lord! Leave not one of the disbelievers in the
land.

S: And Nuh said: My Lord! leave not upon the land any dweller from among
the unbelievers:

071.027
Y: "For, if Thou dost leave (any of) them, they will but mislead Thy
devotees, and they will breed none but wicked ungrateful ones."

P: If Thou shouldst leave them, they will mislead Thy slaves and will
beget none save lewd ingrates.

S: For surely if Thou leave them they will lead astray Thy servants, and
will not beget any but immoral, ungrateful (children)

071.028
Y: "O my Lord! Forgive me, my parents, all who enter my house in Faith,
and (all) believing men and believing women: and to the wrong-doers
grant Thou no increase but in perdition!"

P: My Lord! Forgive me and my parents and him who entereth my house
believing, and believing men and believing women, and increase not the
wrong-doers in aught save ruin.

S: My Lord! forgive me and my parents and him who enters my house
believing, and the believing men and the believing women; and do not
increase the unjust in aught but destruction!

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 72:

                             AL-JINN (THE JINN)
 Total Verses: 28 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

072.001
Y: Say: It has been revealed to me that a company of jinns listened (to
the Qur'an). They said, 'We have really heard a wonderful Recital!

P: Say (O Muhammad): It is revealed unto me that a company of the jinn
gave ear, and they said: Lo! we have heard a marvellous Qur'an,

S: Say: It has been revealed to me that a party of the jinn listened,
and they said: Surely we have heard a wonderful Quran,

072.002
Y: 'It gives guidance to the Right, and we have believed therein: we
shall not join (in worship) any (gods) with our Lord.

P: Which guideth unto righteousness, so we believe in it and we ascribe
no partner unto our Lord.

S: Guiding to the right way, so we believe in it, and we will not set up
any one with our Lord:

072.003
Y: 'And Exalted is the Majesty of our Lord: He has taken neither a wife
nor a son.

P: And (we believe) that He - exalted be the glory of our Lord! - hath
taken neither wife nor son,

S: And that He-- exalted be the majesty of our Lord-- has not taken a
consort, nor a son:

072.004
Y: 'There were some foolish ones among us, who used to utter extravagant
lies against Allah;

P: And that the foolish one among us used to speak concerning Allah an
atrocious lie.

S: And that the foolish amongst us used to forge extravagant things
against Allah:

072.005
Y: 'But we do think that no man or spirit should say aught that is untrue
against Allah.'

P: And lo! we had supposed that humankind and jinn would not speak a lie
concerning Allah -

S: And that we thought that men and jinn did not utter a lie against
Allah:

072.006
Y: 'True, there were persons among mankind who took shelter with persons
among the jinns, but they increased them in folly.

P: And indeed (O Muhammad) individuals of humankind used to invoke the
protection of individuals of the jinn, so that they increased them in
revolt (against Allah);

S: And that persons from among men used to seek refuge with persons from
among jinn, so they increased them in wrongdoing:

072.007
Y: 'And they (came to) think as ye thought, that Allah would not raise
up any one (to Judgment).'

P: And indeed they supposed, even as ye suppose, that Allah would not
raise anyone (from the dead) -

S: And that they thought as you think, that Allah would not raise
anyone:

072.008
Y: 'And we pried into the secrets of heaven; but we found it filled with
stern guards and flaming fires.'

P: And (the jinn who had listened to the Qur'an said): We had sought the
heaven but had found it filled with strong warders and meteors.

S: And that we sought to reach heaven, but we found it filled with
strong guards and flaming stars.

072.009
Y: 'We used, indeed, to sit there in (hidden) stations, to (steal) a
hearing; but any who listen now will find a flaming fire watching him
in ambush.'

P: And we used to sit on places (high) therein to listen. But he who
listeneth now findeth a flame in wait for him;

S: And that we used to sit in some of the sitting-places thereof to
steal a hearing, but he who would (try to) listen now would find a
flame lying in wait for him:

072.010
Y: 'And we understand not whether ill is intended to those on earth, or
whether their Lord (really) intends to guide them to right conduct.'

P: And we know not whether harm is boded unto all who are in the earth,
or whether their Lord intendeth guidance for them.

S: And that we know not whether evil is meant for those who are on earth
or whether their Lord means to bring them good:

072.011
Y: 'There are among us some that are righteous, and some the contrary:
we follow divergent paths.'

P: And among us there are righteous folk and among us there are far from
that. We are sects having different rules.

S: And that some of us are good and others of us are below that: we are
sects following different ways:

072.012
Y: 'But we think that we can by no means frustrate Allah throughout the
earth, nor can we frustrate Him by flight.'

P: And we know that we cannot escape from Allah in the earth, nor can we
escape by flight.

S: And that we know that we cannot escape Allah in the earth, nor can we
escape Him by flight:

072.013
Y: 'And as for us, since we have listened to the Guidance, we have
accepted it: and any who believes in his Lord has no fear, either of a
short (account) or of any injustice.'

P: And when we heard the guidance, we believed therein, and whoso
believeth in his Lord, he feareth neither loss nor oppression.

S: And that when we heard the guidance, we believed in it; so whoever
believes in his Lord, he should neither fear loss nor being overtaken
(by disgrace):

072.014
Y: 'Amongst us are some that submit their wills (to Allah), and some
that swerve from justice. Now those who submit their wills - they have
sought out (the path) of right conduct':

P: And there are among us some who have surrendered (to Allah) and there
are among us some who are unjust. And whoso hath surrendered to Allah,
such have taken the right path purposefully.

S: And that some of us are those who submit, and some of us are the
deviators; so whoever submits, these aim at the right way:

072.015
Y: 'But those who swerve,- they are (but) fuel for Hell-fire'-

P: And as for those who are unjust, they are firewood for hell.

S: And as to the deviators, they are fuel of hell:

072.016
Y: (And Allah's Message is): "If they (the Pagans) had (only) remained
on the (right) Way, We should certainly have bestowed on them Rain in
abundance."

P: If they (the idolaters) tread the right path, We shall give them to
drink of water in abundance

S: And that if they should keep to the (right) way, We would certainly
give them to drink of abundant water,

072.017
Y: "That We might try them by that (means). But if any turns away from
the remembrance of his Lord, He will cause him to undergo a severe
Penalty."

P: That We may test them thereby, and whoso turneth away from the
remembrance of his Lord; He will thrust him into ever-growing torment.

S: So that We might try them with respect to it; and whoever turns aside
from the reminder of his Lord, He will make him enter into an
afflicting chastisement:

072.018
Y: "And the places of worship are for Allah (alone): So invoke not any
one along with Allah;"

P: And the places of worship are only for Allah, so pray not unto anyone
along with Allah.

S: And that the mosques are Allah's, therefore call not upon any one
with Allah:

072.019
Y: "Yet when the Devotee of Allah stands forth to invoke Him, they just
make round him a dense crowd."

P: And when the slave of Allah stood up in prayer to Him, they crowded
on him, almost stifling.

S: And that when the servant of Allah stood up calling upon Him, they
wellnigh crowded him (to death).

072.020
Y: Say: "I do no more than invoke my Lord, and I join not with Him any
(false god)."

P: Say (unto them, O Muhammad): I pray unto Allah only, and ascribe unto
Him no partner.

S: Say: I only call upon my Lord, and I do not associate any one with
Him.

072.021
Y: Say: "It is not in my power to cause you harm, or to bring you to
right conduct."

P: Say: Lo! I control not hurt nor benefit for you.

S: Say: I do not control for you evil or good.

072.022
Y: Say: "No one can deliver me from Allah (If I were to disobey Him),
nor should I find refuge except in Him,"

P: Say: Lo! none can protect me from Allah, nor can I find any refuge
beside Him

S: Say: Surely no one can protect me against Allah, nor can I find
besides Him any place of refuge:

072.023
Y: "Unless I proclaim what I receive from Allah and His Messages: for
any that disobey Allah and His Messenger,- for them is Hell: they shall
dwell therein for ever."

P: (Mine is) but conveyance (of the Truth) from Allah, and His messages;
and whoso disobeyeth Allah and His messenger, lo! his is fire of hell,
wherein such dwell for ever.

S: (It is) only a delivering (of communications) from Allah and His
messages; and whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger surely he shall
have the fire of hell to abide therein for a long time.

072.024
Y: At length, when they see (with their own eyes) that which they are
promised,- then will they know who it is that is weakest in (his)
helper and least important in point of numbers.

P: Till (the day) when they shall behold that which they are promised
(they may doubt); but then they will know (for certain) who is weaker
in allies and less in multitude.

S: Until when they see what they are threatened with, then shall they
know who is weaker in helpers and fewer in number.

072.025
Y: Say: "I know not whether the (Punishment) which ye are promised is
near, or whether my Lord will appoint for it a distant term."

P: Say (O Muhammad, unto the disbelievers): I know not whether that
which ye are promised is nigh, or if my Lord hath set a distant term
for it.

S: Say: I do not know whether that with which you are threatened be nigh
or whether my Lord will appoint for it a term:

072.026
Y: "He (alone) knows the Unseen, nor does He make any one acquainted
with His Mysteries,"-

P: (He is) the Knower of the Unseen, and He revealeth unto none His
secret,

S: The Knower of the unseen! so He does not reveal His secrets to any,

072.027
Y: "Except a messenger whom He has chosen: and then He makes a band of
watchers march before him and behind him,"

P: Save unto every messenger whom He hath chosen, and then He maketh a
guard to go before him and a guard behind him

S: Except to him whom He chooses as a messenger; for surely He makes a
guard to march before him and after him,

072.028
Y: "That He may know that they have (truly) brought and delivered the
Messages of their Lord: and He surrounds (all the mysteries) that are
with them, and takes account of every single thing."

P: That He may know that they have indeed conveyed the messages of their
Lord. He surroundeth all their doings, and He keepeth count of all
things.

S: So that He may know that they have truly delivered the messages of
their Lord, and He encompasses what is with them and He records the
number of all things.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 73:

               AL-MUZZAMMIL (THE ENSHROUDED ONE, BUNDLED UP)
 Total Verses: 20 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

073.001
Y: O thou folded in garments!

P: O thou wrapped up in thy raiment!

S: O you who have wrapped up in your garments!

073.002
Y: Stand (to prayer) by night, but not all night,-

P: Keep vigil the night long, save a little -

S: Rise to pray in the night except a little,

073.003
Y: Half of it,- or a little less,

P: A half thereof, or abate a little thereof

S: Half of it, or lessen it a little,

073.004
Y: Or a little more; and recite the Qur'an in slow, measured rhythmic
tones.

P: Or add (a little) thereto - and chant the Qur'an in measure,

S: Or add to it, and recite the Quran as it ought to be recited.

073.005
Y: Soon shall We send down to thee a weighty Message.

P: For we shall charge thee with a word of weight.

S: Surely We will make to light upon you a weighty Word.

073.006
Y: Truly the rising by night is most potent for governing (the soul),
and most suitable for (framing) the Word (of Prayer and Praise).

P: Lo! the vigil of the night is (a time) when impression is more keen
and speech more certain.

S: Surely the rising by night is the firmest way to tread and the best
corrective of speech.

073.007
Y: True, there is for thee by day prolonged occupation with ordinary
duties:

P: Lo! thou hast by day a chain of business.

S: Surely you have in the day time a long occupation.

073.008
Y: But keep in remembrance the name of thy Lord and devote thyself to
Him whole-heartedly.

P: So remember the name of thy Lord and devote thyself with a complete
devotion -

S: And remember the name of your Lord and devote yourself to Him with
(exclusive) devotion.

073.009
Y: (He is) Lord of the East and the West: there is no god but He: take
Him therefore for (thy) Disposer of Affairs.

P: Lord of the East and the West; there is no God save Him; so choose
thou Him alone for thy defender -

S: The Lord of the East and the West-- there is no god but He--
therefore take Him for a protector.

073.010
Y: And have patience with what they say, and leave them with noble
(dignity).

P: And bear with patience what they utter, and part from them with a
fair leave-taking.

S: And bear patiently what they say and avoid them with a becoming
avoidance.

073.011
Y: And leave Me (alone to deal with) those in possession of the good
things of life, who (yet) deny the Truth; and bear with them for a
little while.

P: Leave Me to deal with the deniers, lords of ease and comfort (in this
life); and do thou respite them awhile.

S: And leave Me and the rejecters, the possessors of ease and plenty,
and respite them a little.

073.012
Y: With Us are Fetters (to bind them), and a Fire (to burn them),

P: Lo! with Us are heavy fetters and a raging fire,

S: Surely with Us are heavy fetters and a flaming fire,

073.013
Y: And a Food that chokes, and a Penalty Grievous.

P: And food which choketh (the partaker), and a painful doom

S: And food that chokes and a painful punishment,

073.014
Y: One Day the earth and the mountains will be in violent commotion. And
the mountains will be as a heap of sand poured out and flowing down.

P: On the day when the earth and the hills rock, and the hills become a
heap of running sand.

S: On the day when the earth and the mountains shall quake and the
mountains shall become (as) heaps of sand let loose.

073.015
Y: We have sent to you, (O men!) a messenger, to be a witness concerning
you, even as We sent a messenger to Pharaoh.

P: Lo! We have sent unto you a messenger as witness against you, even as
We sent unto Pharaoh a messenger.

S: Surely We have sent to you a Messenger, a witness against you, as We
sent a messenger to Firon.

073.016
Y: But Pharaoh disobeyed the messenger; so We seized him with a heavy
Punishment.

P: But Pharaoh rebelled against the messenger, whereupon We seized him
with no gentle grip.

S: But Firon disobeyed the messenger, so We laid on him a violent hold.

073.017
Y: Then how shall ye, if ye deny (Allah), guard yourselves against a Day
that will make children hoary-headed?-

P: Then how, if ye disbelieve, will ye protect yourselves upon the day
which will turn children grey,

S: How, then, will you guard yourselves, if you disbelieve, on the day
which shall make children grey-headed?

073.018
Y: Whereon the sky will be cleft asunder? His Promise needs must be
accomplished.

P: The very heaven being then rent asunder. His promise is to be
fulfilled.

S: The heaven shall rend asunder thereby; His promise is ever brought to
fulfillment.

073.019
Y: Verily this is an Admonition: therefore, whoso will, let him take a
(straight) path to his Lord!

P: Lo! This is a Reminder. Let him who will, then, choose a way unto his
Lord.

S: Surely this is a reminder, then let him, who will take the way to his
Lord.

073.020
Y: Thy Lord doth know that thou standest forth (to prayer) nigh
two-thirds of the night, or half the night, or a third of the night,
and so doth a party of those with thee. But Allah doth appoint night
and day in due measure He knoweth that ye are unable to keep count
thereof. So He hath turned to you (in mercy): read ye, therefore, of
the Qur'an as much as may be easy for you. He knoweth that there may be
(some) among you in ill-health; others travelling through the land,
seeking of Allah's bounty; yet others fighting in Allah's Cause, read
ye, therefore, as much of the Qur'an as may be easy (for you); and
establish regular Prayer and give regular Charity; and loan to Allah a
Beautiful Loan. And whatever good ye send forth for your souls ye shall
find it in Allah's Presence,- yea, better and greater, in Reward and
seek ye the Grace of Allah: for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: Lo! thy Lord knoweth how thou keepest vigil sometimes nearly
two-thirds of the night, or (sometimes) half or a third thereof, as do
a party of those with thee. Allah measureth the night and the day. He
knoweth that ye count it not, and turneth unto you in mercy. Recite,
then, of the Qur'an that which is easy for you. He knoweth that there
are sick folk among you, while others travel in the land in search of
Allah's bounty, and others (still) are fighting for the cause of Allah.
So recite of it that which is easy (for you), and establish worship and
pay the poor-due, and (so) lend unto Allah a goodly loan. Whatsoever
good ye send before you for your souls, ye will find it with Allah,
better and greater in the recompense. And seek forgiveness of Allah.
Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: Surely your Lord knows that you pass in prayer nearly two-thirds of
the night, and (sometimes) half of it, and (sometimes) a third of it,
and (also) a party of those with you; and Allah measures the night and
the day. He knows that you are not able to do it, so He has turned to
you (mercifully), therefore read what is easy of the Quran. He knows
that there must be among you sick, and others who travel in the land
seeking of the bounty of Allah, and others who fight in Allah's way,
therefore read as much of it as is easy (to you), and keep up prayer
and pay the poor-rate and offer to Allah a goodly gift, and whatever of
good you send on beforehand for yourselves, you will find it with
Allah; that is best and greatest in reward; and ask forgiveness of
Allah; surely Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 74:

         AL-MUDDATHTHIR (THE CLOAKED ONE, THE MAN WEARING A CLOAK)
 Total Verses: 56 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

074.001
Y: O thou wrapped up (in the mantle)!

P: O thou enveloped in thy cloak,

S: O you who are clothed!

074.002
Y: Arise and deliver thy warning!

P: Arise and warn!

S: Arise and warn,

074.003
Y: And thy Lord do thou magnify!

P: Thy Lord magnify,

S: And your Lord do magnify,

074.004
Y: And thy garments keep free from stain!

P: Thy raiment purify,

S: And your garments do purify,

074.005
Y: And all abomination shun!

P: Pollution shun!

S: And uncleanness do shun,

074.006
Y: Nor expect, in giving, any increase (for thyself)!

P: And show not favour, seeking wordly gain!

S: And bestow not favors that you may receive again with increase,

074.007
Y: But, for thy Lord's (Cause), be patient and constant!

P: For the sake of thy Lord, be patient!

S: And for the sake of your Lord, be patient.

074.008
Y: Finally, when the Trumpet is sounded,

P: For when the trumpet shall sound,

S: For when the trumpet is sounded,

074.009
Y: That will be- that Day - a Day of Distress,-

P: Surely that day will be a day of anguish,

S: That, at that time, shall be a difficult day,

074.010
Y: Far from easy for those without Faith.

P: Not of ease, for disbelievers.

S: For the unbelievers, anything but easy.

074.011
Y: Leave Me alone, (to deal) with the (creature) whom I created (bare
and) alone!-

P: Leave Me (to deal) with him whom I created lonely,

S: Leave Me and him whom I created alone,

074.012
Y: To whom I granted resources in abundance,

P: And then bestowed upon him ample means,

S: And give him vast riches,

074.013
Y: And sons to be by his side!-

P: And sons abiding in his presence

S: And sons dwelling in his presence,

074.014
Y: To whom I made (life) smooth and comfortable!

P: And made (life) smooth for him.

S: And I adjusted affairs for him adjustably;

074.015
Y: Yet is he greedy-that I should add (yet more);-

P: Yet he desireth that I should give more.

S: And yet he desires that I should add more!

074.016
Y: By no means! For to Our Signs he has been refractory!

P: Nay! For lo! he hath been stubborn to Our revelations.

S: By no means! surely he offers opposition to Our communications.

074.017
Y: Soon will I visit him with a mount of calamities!

P: On him I shall impose a fearful doom.

S: I will make a distressing punishment overtake him.

074.018
Y: For he thought and he plotted;-

P: For lo! he did consider; then he planned -

S: Surely he reflected and guessed,

074.019
Y: And woe to him! How he plotted!-

P: (Self-)destroyed is he, how he planned!

S: But may he be cursed how he plotted;

074.020
Y: Yea, Woe to him; How he plotted!-

P: Again (self-)destroyed is he, how he planned! -

S: Again, may he be cursed how he plotted;

074.021
Y: Then he looked round;

P: Then looked he,

S: Then he looked,

074.022
Y: Then he frowned and he scowled;

P: Then frowned he and showed displeasure.

S: Then he frowned and scowled,

074.023
Y: Then he turned back and was haughty;

P: Then turned he away in pride

S: Then he turned back and was big with pride,

074.024
Y: Then said he: "This is nothing but magic, derived from of old;"

P: And said: This is naught else than magic from of old;

S: Then he said: This is naught but enchantment, narrated (from
others);

074.025
Y: "This is nothing but the word of a mortal!"

P: This is naught else than speech of mortal man.

S: This is naught but the word of a mortal.

074.026
Y: Soon will I cast him into Hell-Fire!

P: Him shall I fling unto the burning.

S: I will cast him into hell.

074.027
Y: And what will explain to thee what Hell-Fire is?

P: - Ah, what will convey unto thee what that burning is! -

S: And what will make you realize what hell is?

074.028
Y: Naught doth it permit to endure, and naught doth it leave alone!-

P: It leaveth naught; it spareth naught

S: It leaves naught nor does it spare aught.

074.029
Y: Darkening and changing the colour of man!

P: It shrivelleth the man.

S: It scorches the mortal.

074.030
Y: Over it are Nineteen.

P: Above it are nineteen.

S: Over it are nineteen.

074.031
Y: And We have set none but angels as Guardians of the Fire; and We have
fixed their number only as a trial for Unbelievers,- in order that the
People of the Book may arrive at certainty, and the Believers may
increase in Faith,- and that no doubts may be left for the People of
the Book and the Believers, and that those in whose hearts is a disease
and the Unbelievers may say, "What symbol doth Allah intend by this?"
Thus doth Allah leave to stray whom He pleaseth, and guide whom He
pleaseth: and none can know the forces of thy Lord, except He and this
is no other than a warning to mankind.

P: We have appointed only angels to be wardens of the Fire, and their
number have We made to be a stumbling-block for those who disbelieve;
that those to whom the Scripture hath been given may have certainty,
and that believers may increase in faith; and that those to whom the
Scripture hath been given and believers may not doubt; and that those
in whose hearts there is disease, and disbelievers, may say: What
meaneth Allah by this similitude? Thus Allah sendeth astray whom He
will, and whom He will He guideth. None knoweth the hosts of thy Lord
save Him. This is naught else than a Reminder unto mortals.

S: And We have not made the wardens of the fire others than angels, and
We have not made their number but as a trial for those who disbelieve,
that those who have been given the book may be certain and those who
believe may increase in faith, and those who have been given the book
and the believers may not doubt, and that those in whose hearts is a
disease and the unbelievers may say: What does Allah mean by this
parable? Thus does Allah make err whom He pleases, and He guides whom
He pleases, and none knows the hosts of your Lord but He Himself; and
this is naught but a reminder to the mortals.

074.032
Y: Nay, verily: By the Moon,

P: Nay, by the Moon

S: Nay; I swear by the moon,

074.033
Y: And by the Night as it retreateth,

P: And the night when it withdraweth

S: And the night when it departs,

074.034
Y: And by the Dawn as it shineth forth,-

P: And the dawn when it shineth forth,

S: And the daybreak when it shines;

074.035
Y: This is but one of the mighty (portents),

P: Lo! this is one of the greatest (portents)

S: Surely it (hell) is one of the gravest (misfortunes),

074.036
Y: A warning to mankind,-

P: As a warning unto men,

S: A warning to mortals,

074.037
Y: To any of you that chooses to press forward, or to follow behind;-

P: Unto him of you who will advance or hang back.

S: To him among you who wishes to go forward or remain behind.

074.038
Y: Every soul will be (held) in pledge for its deeds.

P: Every soul is a pledge for its own deeds;

S: Every soul is held in pledge for what it earns,

074.039
Y: Except the Companions of the Right Hand.

P: Save those who will stand on the right hand.

S: Except the people of the right hand,

074.040
Y: (They will be) in Gardens (of Delight): they will question each
other,

P: In gardens they will ask one another

S: In gardens, they shall ask each other

074.041
Y: And (ask) of the Sinners:

P: Concerning the guilty:

S: About the guilty:

074.042
Y: "What led you into Hell Fire?"

P: What hath brought you to this burning?

S: What has brought you into hell?

074.043
Y: They will say: "We were not of those who prayed;"

P: They will answer: We were not of those who prayed

S: They shall say: We were not of those who prayed;

074.044
Y: "Nor were we of those who fed the indigent;"

P: Nor did we feed the wretched.

S: And we used not to feed the poor;

074.045
Y: "But we used to talk vanities with vain talkers;"

P: We used to wade (in vain dispute) with (all) waders,

S: And we used to enter into vain discourse with those who entered into
vain discourses.

074.046
Y: "And we used to deny the Day of Judgment,"

P: And we used to deny the Day of Judgment,

S: And we used to call the Day of Judgment a lie;

074.047
Y: "Until there came to us (the Hour) that is certain."

P: Till the Inevitable came unto us.

S: Till death overtook us.

074.048
Y: Then will no intercession of (any) intercessors profit them.

P: The mediation of no mediators will avail them then.

S: So the intercession of intercessors shall not avail them.

074.049
Y: Then what is the matter with them that they turn away from
admonition?-

P: Why now turn they away from the Admonishment,

S: What is then the matter with them, that they turn away from the
admonition,

074.050
Y: As if they were affrighted asses,

P: As they were frightened asses

S: As if they were asses taking fright

074.051
Y: Fleeing from a lion!

P: Fleeing from a lion?

S: That had fled from a lion?

074.052
Y: Forsooth, each one of them wants to be given scrolls (of revelation)
spread out!

P: Nay, but everyone of them desireth that he should be given open pages
(from Allah).

S: Nay; every one of them desires that he may be given pages spread out;

074.053
Y: By no means! But they fear not the Hereafter,

P: Nay, verily. They fear not the Hereafter.

S: Nay! but they do not fear the hereafter.

074.054
Y: Nay, this surely is an admonition:

P: Nay, verily. Lo! this is an Admonishment.

S: Nay! it is surely an admonition.

074.055
Y: Let any who will, keep it in remembrance!

P: So whosoever will may heed.

S: So whoever pleases may mind it.

074.056
Y: But none will keep it in remembrance except as Allah wills: He is the
Lord of Righteousness, and the Lord of Forgiveness.

P: And they will not heed unless Allah willeth (it). He is the fount of
fear. He is the fount of Mercy.

S: And they will not mind unless Allah please. He is worthy to be feared
and worthy to forgive.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 75:

              AL-QIYAMA (THE RISING OF THE DEAD, RESURRECTION)
 Total Verses: 40 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

075.001
Y: I do call to witness the Resurrection Day;

P: Nay, I swear by the Day of Resurrection;

S: Nay! I swear by the day of resurrection.

075.002
Y: And I do call to witness the self-reproaching spirit: (Eschew Evil).

P: Nay, I swear by the accusing soul (that this Scripture is true).

S: Nay! I swear by the self-accusing soul.

075.003
Y: Does man think that We cannot assemble his bones?

P: Thinketh man that We shall not assemble his bones?

S: Does man think that We shall not gather his bones?

075.004
Y: Nay, We are able to put together in perfect order the very tips of
his fingers.

P: Yea, verily. We are Able to restore his very fingers!

S: Yea! We are able to make complete his very fingertips

075.005
Y: But man wishes to do wrong (even) in the time in front of him.

P: But man would fain deny what is before him.

S: Nay! man desires to give the lie to what is before him.

075.006
Y: He questions: "When is the Day of Resurrection?"

P: He asketh: When will be this Day of Resurrection?

S: He asks: When is the day of resurrection?

075.007
Y: At length, when the sight is dazed,

P: But when sight is confounded

S: So when the sight becomes dazed,

075.008
Y: And the moon is buried in darkness.

P: And the moon is eclipsed

S: And the moon becomes dark,

075.009
Y: And the sun and moon are joined together,-

P: And sun and moon are united,

S: And the sun and the moon are brought together,

075.010
Y: That Day will Man say: "Where is the refuge?"

P: On that day man will cry: Whither to flee!

S: Man shall say on that day: Whither to fly to?

075.011
Y: By no means! No place of safety!

P: Alas! No refuge!

S: By no means! there shall be no place of refuge!

075.012
Y: Before thy Lord (alone), that Day will be the place of rest.

P: Unto thy Lord is the recourse that day.

S: With your Lord alone shall on that day be the place of rest.

075.013
Y: That Day will Man be told (all) that he put forward, and all that he
put back.

P: On that day man is told the tale of that which he hath sent before
and left behind.

S: Man shall on that day be informed of what he sent before and (what
he) put off.

075.014
Y: Nay, man will be evidence against himself,

P: Oh, but man is a telling witness against himself,

S: Nay! man is evidence against himself,

075.015
Y: Even though he were to put up his excuses.

P: Although he tender his excuses.

S: Though he puts forth his excuses.

075.016
Y: Move not thy tongue concerning the (Qur'an) to make haste therewith.

P: Stir not thy tongue herewith to hasten it.

S: Do not move your tongue with it to make haste with it,

075.017
Y: It is for Us to collect it and to promulgate it:

P: Lo! upon Us (resteth) the putting together thereof and the reading
thereof.

S: Surely on Us (devolves) the collecting of it and the reciting of it.

075.018
Y: But when We have promulgated it, follow thou its recital (as
promulgated):

P: And when We read it, follow thou the reading;

S: Therefore when We have recited it, follow its recitation.

075.019
Y: Nay more, it is for Us to explain it (and make it clear):

P: Then lo! upon Us (resteth) the explanation thereof.

S: Again on Us (devolves) the explaining of it.

075.020
Y: Nay, (ye men!) but ye love the fleeting life,

P: Nay, but ye do love the fleeting Now

S: Nay! But you love the present life,

075.021
Y: And leave alone the Hereafter.

P: And neglect the Hereafter.

S: And neglect the hereafter.

075.022
Y: Some faces, that Day, will beam (in brightness and beauty);-

P: That day will faces be resplendent,

S: (Some) faces on that day shall be bright,

075.023
Y: Looking towards their Lord;

P: Looking toward their Lord;

S: Looking to their Lord.

075.024
Y: And some faces, that Day, will be sad and dismal,

P: And that day will other faces be despondent,

S: And (other) faces on that day shall be gloomy,

075.025
Y: In the thought that some back-breaking calamity was about to be
inflicted on them;

P: Thou wilt know that some great disaster is about to fall on them.

S: Knowing that there will be made to befall them some great calamity.

075.026
Y: Yea, when (the soul) reaches to the collar-bone (in its exit),

P: Nay, but when the life cometh up to the throat

S: Nay! When it comes up to the throat,

075.027
Y: And there will be a cry, "Who is a magician (to restore him)?"

P: And men say: Where is the wizard (who can save him now)?

S: And it is said: Who will be a magician?

075.028
Y: And he will conclude that it was (the Time) of Parting;

P: And he knoweth that it is the parting;

S: And he is sure that it is the (hour of) parting

075.029
Y: And one leg will be joined with another:

P: And agony is heaped on agony;

S: And affliction is combined with affliction;

075.030
Y: That Day the Drive will be (all) to thy Lord!

P: Unto thy Lord that day will be the driving.

S: To your Lord on that day shall be the driving.

075.031
Y: So he gave nothing in charity, nor did he pray!-

P: For he neither trusted, nor prayed.

S: So he did not accept the truth, nor did he pray,

075.032
Y: But on the contrary, he rejected Truth and turned away!

P: But he denied and flouted.

S: But called the truth a lie and turned back,

075.033
Y: Then did he stalk to his family in full conceit!

P: Then went he to his folk with glee.

S: Then he went to his followers, walking away in haughtiness.

075.034
Y: Woe to thee, (O men!), yea, woe!

P: Nearer unto thee and nearer,

S: Nearer to you (is destruction) and nearer,

075.035
Y: Again, Woe to thee, (O men!), yea, woe!

P: Again nearer unto thee and nearer (is the doom).

S: Again (consider how) nearer to you and nearer.

075.036
Y: Does man think that he will be left uncontrolled, (without purpose)?

P: Thinketh man that he is to be left aimless?

S: Does man think that he is to be left to wander without an aim?

075.037
Y: Was he not a drop of sperm emitted (in lowly form)?

P: Was he not a drop of fluid which gushed forth?

S: Was he not a small seed in the seminal elements,

075.038
Y: Then did he become a leech-like clot; then did (Allah) make and
fashion (him) in due proportion.

P: Then he became a clot; then (Allah) shaped and fashioned

S: Then he was a clot of blood, so He created (him) then made (him)
perfect.

075.039
Y: And of him He made two sexes, male and female.

P: And made of him a pair, the male and female.

S: Then He made of him two kinds, the male and the female.

075.040
Y: Has not He, (the same), the power to give life to the dead?

P: Is not He (Who doeth so) Able to bring the dead to life?

S: Is not He able to give life to the dead?

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 76:

                               AL-INSAN (MAN)
 Total Verses: 31 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

076.001
Y: Has there not been over Man a long period of Time, when he was
nothing - (not even) mentioned?

P: Hath there come upon man (ever) any period of time in which he was a
thing unremembered?

S: There surely came over man a period of time when he was a thing not
worth mentioning.

076.002
Y: Verily We created Man from a drop of mingled sperm, in order to try
him: So We gave him (the gifts), of Hearing and Sight.

P: Lo! We create man from a drop of thickened fluid to test him; so We
make him hearing, knowing.

S: Surely We have created man from a small life-germ uniting (itself):
We mean to try him, so We have made him hearing, seeing.

076.003
Y: We showed him the Way: whether he be grateful or ungrateful (rests on
his will).

P: Lo! We have shown him the way, whether he be grateful or
disbelieving.

S: Surely We have shown him the way: he may be thankful or unthankful.

076.004
Y: For the Rejecters we have prepared chains, yokes, and a blazing Fire.

P: Lo! We have prepared for disbelievers manacles and carcans and a
raging fire.

S: Surely We have prepared for the unbelievers chains and shackles and a
burning fire.

076.005
Y: As to the Righteous, they shall drink of a Cup (of Wine) mixed with
Kafur,-

P: Lo! the righteous shall drink of a cup whereof the mixture is of
Kafur,

S: Surely the righteous shall drink of a cup the admixture of which is
camphor,

076.006
Y: A Fountain where the Devotees of Allah do drink, making it flow in
unstinted abundance.

P: A spring wherefrom the slaves of Allah drink, making it gush forth
abundantly,

S: A fountain from which the servants of Allah shall drink; they make it
to flow a (goodly) flowing forth.

076.007
Y: They perform (their) vows, and they fear a Day whose evil flies far
and wide.

P: (Because) they perform the vow and fear a day whereof the evil is
wide-spreading,

S: They fulfill vows and fear a day the evil of which shall be spreading
far and wide.

076.008
Y: And they feed, for the love of Allah, the indigent, the orphan, and
the captive,-

P: And feed with food the needy wretch, the orphan and the prisoner, for
love of Him,

S: And they give food out of love for Him to the poor and the orphan and
the captive:

076.009
Y: (Saying), "We feed you for the sake of Allah alone: no reward do we
desire from you, nor thanks."

P: (Saying): We feed you, for the sake of Allah only. We wish for no
reward nor thanks from you;

S: We only feed you for Allah's sake; we desire from you neither reward
nor thanks:

076.010
Y: "We only fear a Day of distressful Wrath from the side of our Lord."

P: Lo! we fear from our Lord a day of frowning and of fate.

S: Surely we fear from our Lord a stern, distressful day.

076.011
Y: But Allah will deliver them from the evil of that Day, and will shed
over them a Light of Beauty and (blissful) Joy.

P: Therefor Allah hath warded off from them the evil of that day, and
hath made them find brightness and joy;

S: Therefore Allah win guard them from the evil of that day and cause
them to meet with ease and happiness;

076.012
Y: And because they were patient and constant, He will reward them with
a Garden and (garments of) silk.

P: And hath awarded them for all that they endured, a Garden and silk
attire;

S: And reward them, because they were patient, with garden and silk,

076.013
Y: Reclining in the (Garden) on raised thrones, they will see there
neither the sun's (excessive heat) nor (the moon's) excessive cold.

P: Reclining therein upon couches, they will find there neither (heat
of) a sun nor bitter cold.

S: Reclining therein on raised couches, they shall find therein neither
(the severe heat of) the sun nor intense cold.

076.014
Y: And the shades of the (Garden) will come low over them, and the
bunches (of fruit), there, will hang low in humility.

P: The shade thereof is close upon them and the clustered fruits thereof
bow down.

S: And close down upon them (shall be) its shadows, and its fruits shall
be made near (to them), being easy to reach.

076.015
Y: And amongst them will be passed round vessels of silver and goblets
of crystal,-

P: Goblets of silver are brought round for them, and beakers (as) of
glass

S: And there shall be made to go round about them vessels of silver and
goblets which are of glass,

076.016
Y: Crystal-clear, made of silver: they will determine the measure
thereof (according to their wishes).

P: (Bright as) glass but (made) of silver, which they (themselves) have
measured to the measure (of their deeds).

S: (Transparent as) glass, made of silver; they have measured them
according to a measure.

076.017
Y: And they will be given to drink there of a Cup (of Wine) mixed with
Zanjabil,-

P: There are they watered with a cup whereof the mixture is of Zanjabil,

S: And they shall be made to drink therein a cup the admixture of which
shall be ginger,

076.018
Y: A fountain there, called Salsabil.

P: (The water of) a spring therein, named Salsabil.

S: (Of) a fountain therein which is named Salsabil.

076.019
Y: And round about them will (serve) youths of perpetual (freshness): If
thou seest them, thou wouldst think them scattered Pearls.

P: There wait on them immortal youths, whom, when thou seest, thou
wouldst take for scattered pearls.

S: And round about them shall go youths never altering in age; when you
see them you will think them to be scattered pearls.

076.020
Y: And when thou lookest, it is there thou wilt see a Bliss and a Realm
Magnificent.

P: When thou seest, thou wilt see there bliss and high estate.

S: And when you see there, you shall see blessings and a great kingdom.

076.021
Y: Upon them will be green Garments of fine silk and heavy brocade, and
they will be adorned with Bracelets of silver; and their Lord will give
to them to drink of a Wine Pure and Holy.

P: Their raiment will be fine green silk and gold embroidery. Bracelets
of silver will they wear. Their Lord will slake their thirst with a
pure drink.

S: Upon them shall be garments of fine green silk and thick silk
interwoven with gold, and they shall be adorned with bracelets of
silver, and their Lord shall make them drink a pure drink.

076.022
Y: "Verily this is a Reward for you, and your Endeavour is accepted and
recognised."

P: (And it will be said unto them): Lo! this is a reward for you. Your
endeavour (upon earth) hath found acceptance.

S: Surely this is a reward for you, and your striving shall be
recompensed.

076.023
Y: It is We Who have sent down the Qur'an to thee by stages.

P: Lo! We, even We, have revealed unto thee the Qur'an, a revelation;

S: Surely We Ourselves have revealed the Quran to you revealing (it) in
portions.

076.024
Y: Therefore be patient with constancy to the Command of thy Lord, and
hearken not to the sinner or the ingrate among them.

P: So submit patiently to thy Lord's command, and obey not of them any
guilty one or disbeliever.

S: Therefore wait patiently for the command of your Lord, and obey not
from among them a sinner or an ungrateful one.

076.025
Y: And celebrate the name or thy Lord morning and evening,

P: Remember the name of thy Lord at morn and evening.

S: And glorify the name of your Lord morning and evening.

076.026
Y: And part of the night, prostrate thyself to Him; and glorify Him a
long night through.

P: And worship Him (a portion) of the night. And glorify Him through the
livelong night.

S: And during part of the night adore Him, and give glory to Him (a)
long (part of the) night.

076.027
Y: As to these, they love the fleeting life, and put away behind them a
Day (that will be) hard.

P: Lo! these love fleeting life, and put behind them (the remembrance
of) a grievous day.

S: Surely these love the transitory and neglect a grievous day before
them.

076.028
Y: It is We Who created them, and We have made their joints strong; but,
when We will, We can substitute the like of them by a complete change.

P: We, even We, created them, and strengthened their frame. And when We
will, We can replace them, bringing others like them in their stead.

S: We created them and made firm their make, and when We please We will
bring in their place the likes of them by a change.

076.029
Y: This is an admonition: Whosoever will, let him take a (straight) Path
to his Lord.

P: Lo! this is an Admonishment, that whosoever will may choose a way
unto his Lord.

S: Surely this is a reminder, so whoever pleases takes to his Lord a
way.

076.030
Y: But ye will not, except as Allah wills; for Allah is full of
Knowledge and Wisdom.

P: Yet ye will not, unless Allah willeth. Lo! Allah is Knower, Wise.

S: And you do not please except that Allah please, surely Allah is
Knowing, Wise;

076.031
Y: He will admit to His Mercy whom He will; But the wrong-doers,- for
them has He prepared a grievous Penalty.

P: He maketh whom He will to enter His mercy, and for evil-doers hath
prepared a painful doom.

S: He makes whom He pleases to enter into His mercy; and (as for) the
unjust, He has prepared for them a painful chastisement.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 77:

               AL-MURSALAT (THE EMISSARIES, WINDS SENT FORTH)
 Total Verses: 50 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

077.001
Y: By the (Winds) sent forth one after another (to man's profit);

P: By the emissary winds, (sent) one after another

S: I swear by the emissary winds, sent one after another (for men's
benefit),

077.002
Y: Which then blow violently in tempestuous Gusts,

P: By the raging hurricanes,

S: By the raging hurricanes,

077.003
Y: And scatter (things) far and wide;

P: By those which cause earth's vegetation to revive;

S: Which scatter clouds to their destined places,

077.004
Y: Then separate them, one from another,

P: By those who winnow with a winnowing,

S: Then separate them one from another,

077.005
Y: Then spread abroad a Message,

P: By those who bring down the Reminder,

S: Then I swear by the angels who bring down the revelation,

077.006
Y: Whether of Justification or of Warning;-

P: To excuse or to warn,

S: To clear or to warn.

077.007
Y: Assuredly, what ye are promised must come to pass.

P: Surely that which ye are promised will befall.

S: Most surely what you are threatened with must come to pass.

077.008
Y: Then when the stars become dim;

P: So when the stars are put out,

S: So when the stars are made to lose their light,

077.009
Y: When the heaven is cleft asunder;

P: And when the sky is riven asunder,

S: And when the heaven is rent asunder,

077.010
Y: When the mountains are scattered (to the winds) as dust;

P: And when the mountains are blown away,

S: And when the mountains are carried away as dust,

077.011
Y: And when the messengers are (all) appointed a time (to collect);-

P: And when the messengers are brought unto their time appointed -

S: And when the messengers are gathered at their appointed time

077.012
Y: For what Day are these (portents) deferred?

P: For what day is the time appointed?

S: To what day is the doom fixed?

077.013
Y: For the Day of Sorting out.

P: For the Day of Decision.

S: To the day of decision.

077.014
Y: And what will explain to thee what is the Day of Sorting out?

P: And what will convey unto thee what the Day of Decision is! -

S: And what will make you comprehend what the day of decision is?

077.015
Y: Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

P: Woe unto the repudiators on that day!

S: Woe on that day to the rejecters.

077.016
Y: Did We not destroy the men of old (for their evil)?

P: Destroyed We not the former folk,

S: Did We not destroy the former generations?

077.017
Y: So shall We make later (generations) follow them.

P: Then caused the latter folk to follow after?

S: Then did We follow them up with later ones.

077.018
Y: Thus do We deal with men of sin.

P: Thus deal We ever with the guilty.

S: Even thus shall We deal with the guilty.

077.019
Y: Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

P: Woe unto the repudiators on that day!

S: Woe on that day to the rejecters.

077.020
Y: Have We not created you from a fluid (held) despicable?-

P: Did We not create you from a base fluid

S: Did We not create you from contemptible water?

077.021
Y: The which We placed in a place of rest, firmly fixed,

P: Which We laid up in a safe abode

S: Then We placed it in a secure resting-place,

077.022
Y: For a period (of gestation), determined (according to need)?

P: For a known term?

S: Till an appointed term,

077.023
Y: For We do determine (according to need); for We are the best to
determine (things).

P: Thus We arranged. How excellent is Our arranging!

S: So We proportion it-- how well are We at proportioning (things).

077.024
Y: Ah woe, that Day! to the Rejecters of Truth!

P: Woe unto the repudiators on that day!

S: Woe on that day to the rejecters.

077.025
Y: Have We not made the earth (as a place) to draw together.

P: Have We not made the earth a receptacle

S: Have We not made the earth to draw together to itself,

077.026
Y: The living and the dead,

P: Both for the living and the dead,

S: The living and the dead,

077.027
Y: And made therein mountains standing firm, lofty (in stature); and
provided for you water sweet (and wholesome)?

P: And placed therein high mountains and given you to drink sweet water
therein?

S: And made therein lofty mountains, and given you to drink of sweet
water?

077.028
Y: Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

P: Woe unto the repudiators on that day!

S: Woe on that day to the rejecters.

077.029
Y: (It will be said:) "Depart ye to that which ye used to reject as
false!"

P: (It will be said unto them:) Depart unto that (doom) which ye used to
deny;

S: Walk on to that which you called a lie.

077.030
Y: "Depart ye to a Shadow (of smoke ascending) in three columns,"

P: Depart unto the shadow falling threefold,

S: Walk on to the covering having three branches,

077.031
Y: "(Which yields) no shade of coolness, and is of no use against the
fierce Blaze."

P: (Which yet is) no relief nor shelter from the flame.

S: Neither having the coolness of the shade nor availing against the
flame.

077.032
Y: "Indeed it throws about sparks (huge) as Forts,"

P: Lo! it throweth up sparks like the castles,

S: Surely it sends up sparks like palaces,

077.033
Y: "As if there were (a string of) yellow camels (marching swiftly)."

P: (Or) as it might be camels of bright yellow hue.

S: As if they were tawny camels.

077.034
Y: Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

P: Woe unto the repudiators on that day!

S: Woe on that day to the rejecters.

077.035
Y: That will be a Day when they shall not be able to speak.

P: This is a day wherein they speak not,

S: This is the day on which they shall not speak,

077.036
Y: Nor will it be open to them to put forth pleas.

P: Nor are they suffered to put forth excuses.

S: And permission shall not be given to them so that they should offer
excuses.

077.037
Y: Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

P: Woe unto the repudiators on that day!

S: Woe on that day to the rejecters.

077.038
Y: That will be a Day of Sorting out! We shall gather you together and
those before (you)!

P: This is the Day of Decision, We have brought you and the men of old
together.

S: This is the day of decision: We have gathered you and those of yore.

077.039
Y: Now, if ye have a trick (or plot), use it against Me!

P: If now ye have any wit, outwit Me.

S: So if you have a plan, plan against Me (now).

077.040
Y: Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

P: Woe unto the repudiators on that day!

S: Woe on that day to the rejecters.

077.041
Y: As to the Righteous, they shall be amidst (cool) shades and springs
(of water).

P: Lo! those who kept their duty are amid shade and fountains,

S: Surely those who guard (against evil) shall be amid shades and
fountains,

077.042
Y: And (they shall have) fruits,- all they desire.

P: And fruits such as they desire.

S: And fruits such as they desire.

077.043
Y: "Eat ye and drink ye to your heart's content: for that ye worked
(Righteousness)."

P: (Unto them it is said:) Eat, drink and welcome, O ye blessed, in
return for what ye did.

S: Eat and drink pleasantly because of what you did.

077.044
Y: Thus do We certainly reward the Doers of Good.

P: Thus do We reward the good.

S: Surely thus do We reward the doers of good.

077.045
Y: Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

P: Woe unto the repudiators on that day!

S: Woe on that day to the rejecters.

077.046
Y: (O ye unjust!) Eat ye and enjoy yourselves (but) a little while, for
that ye are Sinners.

P: Eat and take your ease (on earth) a little. Lo! ye are guilty.

S: Eat and enjoy yourselves for a little; surely you are guilty.

077.047
Y: Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

P: Woe unto the repudiators on that day!

S: Woe on that day to the rejecters.

077.048
Y: And when it is said to them, "Prostrate yourselves!" they do not so.

P: When it is said unto them: Bow down, they bow not down!

S: And where it is said to them: Bow down, they do not bow down.

077.049
Y: Ah woe, that Day, to the Rejecters of Truth!

P: Woe unto the repudiators on that day!

S: Woe on that day to the rejecters.

077.050
Y: Then what Message, after that, will they believe in?

P: In what statement, after this, will they believe?

S: In what announcement, then, after it, will they believe?

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 78:

                  AN-NABA (THE TIDINGS, THE ANNOUNCEMENT)
 Total Verses: 40 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

078.001
Y: Concerning what are they disputing?

P: Whereof do they question one another?

S: Of what do they ask one another?

078.002
Y: Concerning the Great News,

P: (It is) of the awful tidings,

S: About the great event,

078.003
Y: About which they cannot agree.

P: Concerning which they are in disagreement.

S: About which they differ?

078.004
Y: Verily, they shall soon (come to) know!

P: Nay, but they will come to know!

S: Nay! they shall soon come to know

078.005
Y: Verily, verily they shall soon (come to) know!

P: Nay, again, but they will come to know!

S: Nay! Nay! they shall soon know.

078.006
Y: Have We not made the earth as a wide expanse,

P: Have We not made the earth an expanse,

S: Have We not made the earth an even expanse?

078.007
Y: And the mountains as pegs?

P: And the high hills bulwarks?

S: And the mountains as projections (thereon)?

078.008
Y: And (have We not) created you in pairs,

P: And We have created you in pairs,

S: And We created you in pairs,

078.009
Y: And made your sleep for rest,

P: And have appointed your sleep for repose,

S: And We made your sleep to be rest (to you),

078.010
Y: And made the night as a covering,

P: And have appointed the night as a cloak,

S: And We made the night to be a covering,

078.011
Y: And made the day as a means of subsistence?

P: And have appointed the day for livelihood.

S: And We made the day for seeking livelihood.

078.012
Y: And (have We not) built over you the seven firmaments,

P: And We have built above you seven strong (heavens),

S: And We made above you seven strong ones,

078.013
Y: And placed (therein) a Light of Splendour?

P: And have appointed a dazzling lamp,

S: And We made a shining lamp,

078.014
Y: And do We not send down from the clouds water in abundance,

P: And have sent down from the rainy clouds abundant water,

S: And We send down from the clouds water pouring forth abundantly,

078.015
Y: That We may produce therewith corn and vegetables,

P: Thereby to produce grain and plant,

S: That We may bring forth thereby corn and herbs,

078.016
Y: And gardens of luxurious growth?

P: And gardens of thick foliage.

S: And gardens dense and luxuriant.

078.017
Y: Verily the Day of Sorting out is a thing appointed,

P: Lo! the Day of Decision is a fixed time,

S: Surely the day of decision is (a day) appointed:

078.018
Y: The Day that the Trumpet shall be sounded, and ye shall come forth in
crowds;

P: A day when the trumpet is blown and ye come in multitudes,

S: The day on which the trumpet shall be blown so you shall come forth
in hosts,

078.019
Y: And the heavens shall be opened as if there were doors,

P: And the heaven is opened and becometh as gates,

