"It is a nice question," remarks Walter Lippmann, "whether the use of
God's name is not misleading when it is applied by modernists to ideas
so remote from the God men have worshipped. Plainly the modernist
churchman does not believe in the God of Genesis who walked in the
garden in the cool of the evening and called for Adam and his wife who
had hidden themselves behind a tree; nor in the God of Exodus who
appeared to Moses and Aaron and seventy of the Elders of Israel,
standing with his feet upon a paved walk as if it were a sapphire stone;
nor even in the God of the fifty-third chapter of Isaiah who in his
compassion for the sheep who had gone astray, having turned everyone to
his own way, laid on the Man of Sorrows the iniquity of us all."
(_Walter Lippmann: "A Preface to Morals."_)

It is one kind of god that is being set up in argument, and it is really
another god that is being depended upon and believed. The philosophical
conception of a deity that may be in control of phenomena is an
impersonal physical law, and has nothing to do with the conception of a
personal deity to whom people pray for active intervention in their
troubles. Religious belief is a monstrous apparition; the philosophy of
atheism is a solid structure laboriously founded on solid rock.

The philosophy of atheism had temporarily failed in previous ages, since
the knowledge of those ages did not furnish facts enough upon which to
build. At the present, although our knowledge is far from complete and
the surface has only been scratched, yet sufficient facts have been
unearthed to reveal that there is no supernatural and the greatest hope
of advancement lies in the philosophy of atheism. A philosophy that
builds upon a foundation of purely secular thought, that leaves the
idea of God completely discarded as a useless and false relic of bygone
days, is the essence of atheism. "Atheism is more than the speculative
philosophy of a few, that it is in sober truth the logical outcome of
mental growth. So far as any phase of human life can be called
inevitable, atheism may lay claim to being inescapable. All mental
growth can be seen leading to it, just as we can see one stage of social
development giving a logical starting point for another stage, and which
could have been foretold had our knowledge of all the forces in
operation been precise enough. Atheism is, so to speak, implicit in the
growth of knowledge, its complete expression is the consummation of a
process that began with the first questionings of religion. And the
completion of the process means the death of supernaturalisms in all
forms. Circumstances may obstruct its universal acceptance as a reasoned
mental attitude, but that merely delays, it does not destroy the
certainty of its final triumph." (_C. Cohen._)

The philosophy of atheism leads man to a critical, analytical, and
logical examination of his environment, and it is this that has lead to
all of our advances. Religion creates a stunted standard of reasoning.
The pathetic cry of St. Augustine, "But if I was shapen in iniquity, and
in sin did my mother conceive me, where I pray thee, O my God, where,
Lord, or when was I, thy servant innocent?" typifies the major concern
of the narrow, egotistical mystic. From the time that the ideas of the
later Greek philosophers had been forgotten until the present time, man
has floundered in a sea of supernaturalism. It is high time that man
faced his realities with fortitude in his own mentality, and when he
does this, there will be produced a race of men who will seek for truth,
for truth's sake, a race of supermen who will lead the world
intellectually.

It is to Russia that all eyes will turn in the next few generations. At
the present, she is going through the throes of childbirth. She is
immature, and as a child she staggers. The abuse and ridicule heaped
upon her now is but the repetition of that given by all frightened
societies of past ages, when they contemplated new ideas which their
immature minds could not fathom. But Russia will emerge in the not too
distant future, and the infant will shortly reach maturity; and that
maturity may set a standard for those timid and frightened societies
that at present look with dilated eyes upon her daring.

The age is approaching when the god idea in its entirety will be classed
with the gods of the Egyptians and Babylonians, when surplices and
sacramental plate will be exhibited in museums; when nurses will relate
to children the legends of the Christian mythology, as they now tell
them fairy tales. The gods of monotheism will join the gods of
polytheism and Yahveh and his associates will occupy in the minds of men
the position now held by the gods of Olympus. To our ancestors Jupiter
and Yahveh will have the same significance. "In a little time the
cathedrals and churches will have taken upon themselves the proud,
poetical glamour of abandoned temples. Men and women will enter them
with reverent indulgence as they now in meditative mood visit the few
remaining pantheons of the pagan worship." (_Llewelyn Powys_: "_An Hour
On Christianity._")

The age is approaching when the current idea of the hereafter will be
accounted a strange and selfish idea, just as we smile at the savage
chief who believes that his station will be continued in the world
beneath the ground, and that he will there be attended by his concubines
and slaves. The age is fast approaching when love, not fear, will unite
the human race. In that age, the _ideal_, not the _idol_, will be truth,
and the one faith, not religion, but a sincere and lofty conception of
the dignity and resourcefulness of the human mind; and an overwhelming
desire to aid in the progress of all mankind, the extinction of disease,
the perfection of genius, the perfection of love, and, therefore, the
abolition of war, the exploration of the infinite, and the conquest of
creation.

Such an age can never come to be during the maljurisdiction of a
theistic philosophy. It can only come into being when the vast majority
of men are by the force of advancing knowledge made aware of the truth
of the atheistic philosophy.

An English observer, C. E. M. Joad, remarks: "The churches, no doubt,
will continue to function for a time, but they will be attended
increasingly, and in the end exclusively, by ignorant men, women, and
children. Already, a stranger attending an average church of England
service would almost be justified in assuming that the churches, like
theatre matinees, were kept up for the benefit of women and children. So
far as present indications go, it seems not unlikely that science will
deliver the coup de grace to organized Christianity within the next
hundred years."

We have caught a glimpse of what theism has done, and what the
philosophy of atheism might have done, and will yet achieve. Has man
profited by having remained in his mental infancy so long? Atheism is an
emancipating system of thought that frees the mind from myths, fables,
and childish fancies. There can be no inquisition, no witchcraft
delusion, no religious wars, no persecutions of one sect by another, no
impediment to science and progress, no stultification of the mind, as a
result of its teachings.

The philosophy of atheism teaches man to stand on his own feet, instills
confidence in his reasoning powers, and forces him to conquer his
environment. It teaches him not to subject himself and debase himself
before mythical superhuman powers, for his reason is his power. The
march from faith to reason is the march on which dwells the future hope
of a really civilized mankind.

Atheism teaches man to endeavor constantly to better his own condition
and that of all of his fellowmen, to make his children wiser and
happier; it supplies the powerful urge to add something new to the
knowledge of mankind. And all this, not in the vain hope of being
rewarded in another world, but from a pure sense of duty as a citizen of
nature, as a patriot of the planet on which he dwells. This is no cold
and cheerless philosophy; it is an elevating and ennobling ideal which
may console him in his afflictions and teach him how to live and how to
die. It is a self-reliant philosophy that makes a man intellectually
free, and this mental emancipation allows him to face the world without
fear of ghosts and gods. It relates solely to facts, while theism
resorts to opinions that are grounded only upon emotionalism. Joseph
Lewis has well noted that, "Atheism does not believe that man's mission
on earth is to love and glorify God, but it does believe in living this
life so that when you pass on, the world will be better for your having
lived."

The history of the past ages informs us what the world was like with
God. The progress of secular knowledge and science have given us
measures by which we could produce a better society than has ever
existed under the obstructionism of the Gods.

"The knowledge exists by which universal happiness can be secured, the
chief obstacle to its utilization for that purpose is the teaching of
religion. Religion prevents our children from having a rational
education; religion prevents us from removing the fundamental causes of
war; religion prevents us from teaching the ethics of scientific
cooperation in place of the old fierce doctrines of sin and punishment.
It is possible that mankind is on the threshold of a golden age, but if
so, it will be necessary to slay the dragon that guards the door, and
this dragon is religion." (_Bertrand Russell._)

It is interesting to contemplate the changes that may occur in our
civilization in the next few centuries. On the one hand we have that
long period of sterile time, 15,000 years, for the stage of neolithic
man, and on the other the vast material progress of the past three
hundred years. We may not be able to discern with clarity in what
direction changes will occur, but in one aspect we can discern a
well-marked tendency. That is the inevitable conquest of the philosophy
of atheism. And with this conquest can be clearly seen that it would
give to this earth a much sounder foundation upon which to build our
progress, and that long-delayed freedom, the emancipation of the mind
from all myths and fables. The inevitableness of atheism has been well
summed up by Chapman Cohen:

"Looking at the whole course of Human History, and noting how the vilest
and most ruinous practices have been ever associated with religion, and
have ever relied upon religion for support, the cause for speculation
is, not what will happen to the world when religion dies out, but how
human society has managed to flourish while the belief in the Gods
ruled....

"Substantially, we have by searching found out God. We know the origin
and history of one of the greatest delusions that ever possessed the
human mind. God has been found out; analytically and synthetically we
understand the God-idea as previous generations could not understand it.
It has been explained, and the logical consequence of the explanation is
Atheism."

Man is fast attaining a mastery of his environment, and his religious
creeds are becoming as irrational to him as the witchcraft delusion.
Religion with its burden of fear ties him to the dead ages. But
knowledge not only supplies him with power, but also furnishes him with
courage, and that courage will aid him in freeing himself from that
fear--religion. Religion is doomed to occupy the same place in history
as the institution of slavery. Lies and imposture, no matter how
powerfully sustained, can be dispelled by knowledge. The Church will
destroy itself with its own poison. Knowledge and courage spell the doom
of religion.




CHAPTER XX

CONTEMPORARY OPINION

     _The Vanguard_

     _Let us make no mistake--great minds are skeptical.... The strength
     and the freedom which arise from exceptional power of thought
     express themselves in skepticism.... A mind which aspires to great
     things and is determined to achieve them is of necessity
     skeptical_.

     NIETZSCHE.


BERTRAND RUSSELL

My own view on religion is that of Lucretius. I regard it as a disease
born of fear and as a source of untold misery to the human race. I
cannot, however, deny that it has made _some_ contributions to
civilization. It helped in early days to fix the calendar, and it caused
Egyptian priests to chronicle eclipses with such care that in time they
became able to predict them. These two services I am prepared to
acknowledge, but I do not know of any others.


MAX CARL OTTO

It is my conviction that the happiest and noblest life attainable by men
and women is jeopardized by reliance upon a superhuman, cosmic being for
guidance and help. I know, of course, that God has been defined in
various terms. I do not choose among them. For it seems to me
indisputable that those who turn to God, however God be defined, do so
because, consciously or unconsciously, they seek there the satisfaction
of wants, the worth of living, and security for what they passionately
prize, which they have not found and despair of finding in the human
venture as they know it. Reliance upon God for what life does not
afford, has, in my opinion, harmful consequences. It diverts attention
from the specific conditions upon which a better or a worse life
depends; it leads men to regard themselves as spectators of a course of
events which they in reality help to determine; it makes the highest
human excellence consist in acquiescence in the supposed will of a being
that is defined as not human, a being that is above the driving force of
impulse, that does not experience vacillating moods or conflicting
desires, that is never harassed by doubts or misled by ignorance....
Theism is in essence repressive, prohibitory, ascetic. The outcome of
its influence is that expertness in practical living and expertness in
evaluating life, instead of uniting to take advantage of a common
opportunity, are set against each other. This is the profound dualism
which remains to be mastered. It can be mastered by the concentration
upon human needs and powers.


JOHN DEWEY

The method we term "scientific" forms for the modern man (and a man is
not modern merely because he lives in 1931) the sole, dependable means
of disclosing the realities of existence. It is the sole authentic mode
of revelation. This possession of a new method, to the use of which no
limits can be put, signifies a new idea of the nature and possibilities
of experience. It imports a new morale of confidence, control, and
security.

C. E. M. JOAD

All through the century (nineteenth), whenever and wherever there is a
movement for change and betterment, the clergy are found opposing it. In
this they are merely carrying on the tradition of their order. When one
looks back over history, one realizes that there is scarcely any
discovery which science has made for human advancement and happiness
which churchmen and theologians have not violently opposed. Not content
with burning each other, they burnt the men who discovered the earth's
motion, burnt the men who made the first tentative beginnings of physics
and chemistry, burnt the men who laid the foundations of our medical
knowledge.... Bad as has been the church's record in the past, it is not
greatly improved in the present.... For two thousand years teachers and
preachers have striven, by inculcating the principles and precepts of
Christianity, to mould men's character and to improve their conduct; yet
we still have our prisons, our judges, and our wars, and it remains
today, as it has done for two thousand years past, an arguable question
whether men are better or worse than they were before Christianity was
introduced.


WILLIAM PEPPERELL MONTAGUE

If we will for a moment imagine the Bible to have come suddenly to our
attention today, unencumbered by a tradition of divine authority, and
with no more sacredness than a newly discovered writing of ancient China
or Egypt, we can see quite readily that it would occur to nobody who
took the work merely on its merits either to accept it as scientifically
and historically true, or to twist its statements into a far-fetched
allegory of the truth.

Religion will be _outmoded_; and its tidings of escape to another and
better world will ring cold in the ears of those who love this. The new
worldliness that religion must face is based on the faith that there is
not only no _place_ for heaven, but no _need_ for it. Humanity,
adolescent at last, has tasted the first fruits of the victory of
secular intelligence over nature, and dreams grandly of far greater
victories to come.


IRWIN EDMAN

The hope of the world certainly lies in intelligence. Certainly, there
is no hope anywhere else. I cannot look to anything so remotely
definable as God for aid, nor do I ever regret not being able to do so.


WALTER LIPPMANN

Many reasons have been adduced to explain why people do not go to church
as much as they once did. Surely the most important reason is that they
are not so certain that they are going to meet God when they go to
church. If they had that certainty they would go. If they really
believed that they were being watched by a Supreme Being who is more
powerful than all the kings of the earth put together, if they really
believed that not only their actions but their secret thoughts were
known and would be remembered by the creator, and ultimate judge of the
universe, there would be no complaint whatever about church attendance.
The most worldly would be in the front pews, and preachers would not
have to resort so often to their rather desperate expedients to attract
an audience. If the conviction were there that the creed professed was
invincibly true, the modern congregation would not come to church, as
they usually do today, to hear the preacher and to listen to the music.
They would come to worship God.
