    were deep and often poignant, still I kept myself aloof from all
    these parties, though I attended their several meetings as often
    as occasion would permit. In process of time my mind became
    somewhat partial to the Methodist sect, and I felt some desire
    to be united with them; but so great were the confusion and
    strife among the different denominations, that it was impossible
    for a person young as I was, and so unacquainted with men and
    things, to come to any certain conclusion who was right and who
    was wrong.

    "My mind at times was greatly excited, the cry and tumult were
    so great and incessant. The Presbyterians were most decided
    against the Baptists and Methodists, and used all the powers of
    either reason or sophistry to prove their errors, or, at least,
    to make the people think they were in error. On the other hand,
    the Baptists and Methodists in their turn were equally zealous
    in endeavoring to establish their own tenets and disprove all
    others.

    "In the midst of this war of words and tumult of opinions, I
    often said to myself, What is to be done? Who of all these
    parties are right; or, are they all wrong together? If any one
    of them be right, which is it, and how shall I know it?

    "While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by
    the contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day
    reading the Epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse,
    which reads: _If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God,
    that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it
    shall be given him._

    "Never did any passage of scripture come with more power to the
    heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to
    enter with great force into every feeling of my heart. I
    reflected on it again and again, knowing that if any person
    needed wisdom from God, I did; for how to act I did not know,
    and unless I could get more wisdom than I then had, I would
    never know; for the teachers of religion of the different sects
    understood the same passages of scripture so differently as to
    destroy all confidence in settling the question by an appeal to
    the Bible.

    "At length I came to the conclusion that I must either remain in
    darkness and confusion, or else I must do as James directs, that
    is, ask of God. I at length came to the determination to 'ask of
    God,' concluding that if He gave wisdom to them that lacked
    wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid, I might
    venture.

    "So, in accordance with this, my determination to ask of God, I
    retired to the woods to make the attempt. It was on the morning
    of a beautiful, clear day, early in the spring of eighteen
    hundred and twenty. It was the first time in my life that I had
    made such an attempt, for amidst all my anxieties I had never as
    yet made the attempt to pray vocally.

    "After I had retired to the place where I had previously
    designed to go, having looked around me, and finding myself
    alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of my
    heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was
    seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had
    such an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue so
    that I could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and
    it seemed to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden
    destruction.

    "But, exerting all my powers to call upon God to deliver me out
    of the power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the
    very moment when I was ready to sink into despair and abandon
    myself to destruction--not to an imaginary ruin, but to the
    power of some actual being from the unseen world, who had such
    marvelous power as I had never before felt in any being--just at
    this moment of great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over
    my head, above the brightness of the sun, which descended
    gradually until it fell upon me.

    "It no sooner appeared than I found myself delivered from the
    enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me I saw
    two personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description,
    standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling
    me by name, and said, pointing to the other--_This is my beloved
    Son, hear him!_

    "My object in going to inquire of the Lord was to know which of
    all the sects was right, that I might know which to join. No
    sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself, so as to be
    able to speak, than I asked the personages who stood above me in
    the light, which of all the sects was right--and which I should
    join.

    "I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were all
    wrong; and the personage who addressed me said that all their
    creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors
    were all corrupt; that 'they draw near to me with their lips,
    but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrines the
    commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny
    the power thereof.'

    "He again forbade me to join with any of them; and many other
    things did he say unto me, which I cannot write at this time.
    When I came to myself again, I found myself lying on my back,
    looking up into heaven.

    "Some few days after I had this vision, I happened to be in
    company with one of the Methodist preachers, who was very active
    in the before mentioned religious excitement; and, conversing
    with him on the subject of religion, I took occasion to give him
    an account of the vision which I had had. I was greatly
    surprised at his behavior; he treated my communication not only
    lightly, but with great contempt, saying, it was all of the
    devil, that there were no such things as visions or revelations
    in these days; that all such things had ceased with the
    apostles, and that there would never be any more of them.

    "I soon found, however, that my telling the story had excited a
    great deal of prejudice against me among professors of religion,
    and was the cause of great persecution, which continued to
    increase; and though I was an obscure boy, only between fourteen
    and fifteen years of age, and my circumstances in life such as
    to make a boy of no consequence in the world, yet men of high
    standing would take notice sufficient to excite the public mind
    against me, and create a bitter persecution; and this was common
    among all the sects--all united to persecute me.

    "It caused me serious reflection then, and often has since, how
    very strange it was that an obscure boy, of a little over
    fourteen years of age, and one, too, who was doomed to the
    necessity of obtaining a scanty maintenance by his daily labor,
    should be thought a character of sufficient importance to
    attract the attention of the great ones of the most popular
    sects of the day, and in a manner to create in them a spirit of
    the most bitter persecution and reviling. But strange or not, so
    it was, and it was often the cause of great sorrow to myself.

    "However, it was nevertheless a fact that I had beheld a vision.
    I have thought since, that I felt much like Paul, when he made
    his defense before King Agrippa, and related the account of the
    vision he had when he saw a light, and heard a voice; but still
    there were but few who believed him; some said he was dishonest,
    others said he was mad; and he was ridiculed and reviled. But
    all this did not destroy the reality of his vision. He had seen
    a vision, he knew he had, and all the persecution under heaven
    could not make it otherwise; and though they should persecute
    him unto death, yet he knew, and would know to his latest
    breath, that he had both seen a light, and heard a voice
    speaking unto him, and all the world could not make him think or
    believe otherwise.

    "So it was with me. I had actually seen a light, and in the
    midst of that light I saw two personages, and they did in
    reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for
    saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they
    were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of
    evil against me falsely for so saying, I was led to say in my
    heart: Why persecute me for telling the truth? I have actually
    seen a vision, and who am I that I can withstand God, or why
    does the world think to make me deny what I have actually seen?
    For I had seen a vision; I knew it, and I knew that God knew it,
    and I could not deny it, neither dared I do it, at least I knew
    that by so doing I would offend God, and come under
    condemnation.

    "I had now got my mind satisfied so far as the sectarian world
    was concerned; that it was not my duty to join with any of them,
    but to continue as I was until further directed. I had found the
    testimony of James to be true, that a man who lacked wisdom
    might ask of God, and obtain, and not be upbraided."[1523]

In this wise was ushered in the Dispensation of the Fulness of
Times.[1524] The darkness of the long night of apostasy was dispelled;
the glory of the heavens once more illumined the world; the silence of
centuries was broken; the voice of God was heard again upon the earth.
In the spring of A.D. 1820 there was one mortal, a boy not quite fifteen
years old, who knew as well as that he lived, that the current human
conception of Deity as an incorporeal essence of something possessing
neither definite shape nor tangible substance was as devoid of truth in
respect to both the Father and the Son as its statement in formulated
creeds was incomprehensible. The boy Joseph knew that both the Eternal
Father and His glorified Son, Jesus Christ, were in form and stature,
perfect Men; and that in Their physical likeness mankind had been
created in the flesh.[1525] He knew further that the Father and the Son
were individual Personages, each distinct from the other--a truth fully
attested by the Lord Jesus during His mortal existence, but which had
been obscured if not buried by the sophistries of human unbelief. He
realized that the unity of the Godhead was a oneness of perfection in
purpose, plan, and action, as the scriptures declare it to be, and not
an impossible union of personalities, as generations of false teachers
had tried to impress. This resplendent theophany confirmed the fact of a
universal apostasy, with the inevitable corollary--that the Church of
Christ was nowhere existent upon the earth. It effectively dissipated
the delusion that direct revelation from the heavens had forever ceased;
and affirmatively proved the actuality of personal communication between
God and mortals.

For the fourth time since the Savior's birth in the flesh, the voice of
the Father had attested the Son's authority in matters pertaining to
earth and man.[1526] In this latter-day revelation of Himself, as on the
earlier occasions, the Father did no more than affirm the fact of the
Son's identity, and command that He be obeyed.


"A MESSENGER SENT FROM THE PRESENCE OF GOD."[1527]

For about three and a half years following the glorious appearing of the
Father and the Son to Joseph Smith, the youthful revelator was left to
himself, so far as further manifestations from heaven were concerned.
The period was one of probation. He was subjected to the sneers of
youths of his age, and to aggressive persecution on the part of older
men, "who," as he very justly and somewhat accusingly remarks, "ought to
have been my friends and to have treated me kindly, and if they supposed
me to be deluded to have endeavored in a proper and affectionate manner
to have reclaimed me."[1528] He pursued his usual vocation, that of farm
work in association with his father and brothers, from whom he received
kindness, consideration, and sympathy; and in spite of raillery, abuse,
and denunciation from the community at large he remained firm and
faithful in his solemn avouchment that he had seen and heard both the
Eternal Father and Jesus the Christ, and that he had been instructed to
join none of the contending sects or churches because they were all
fundamentally wrong.

On the night of the 21st of September 1823, while engaged in fervent
prayer to God in the solitude of his chamber, Joseph observed the room
become illuminated until the light exceeded that of a cloudless noon. A
glorious personage appeared within the room, standing a little space
above the floor. Both the body of the visitant and the loose robe he
wore were of exquisite whiteness. Calling Joseph by name he announced
himself as Moroni, "a messenger sent from the presence of God"; and
informed the young man that the Lord had a work for him to do, and that
his name should come to be spoken of both for good and for evil among
all nations, kindreds, and tongues. The angel told of a record engraven
on plates of gold, which contained an account of the former inhabitants
of the American continent, and the fulness of the everlasting gospel as
delivered by the Savior to those ancient people; and furthermore, that
with the record were a breastplate, and the Urim and Thummim, which had
been prepared by divine instrumentality for use in translating the book.
The place at which the plates and the other sacred things were deposited
was shown to Joseph in vision, and so clear was the demonstration that
he readily recognized the spot when he visited it next day.

The angel quoted several passages from the Old and one from the New
Testament, some verbatim, and some with small variations from the
Biblical version. Joseph's statement concerning the scriptures cited by
Moroni is as follows:

    "He first quoted part of the third chapter of Malachi, and he
    quoted also the fourth or last chapter of the same prophecy,
    though with a little variation from the way it reads in our
    Bibles. Instead of quoting the first verse as it reads in our
    books, he quoted it thus:

    "_For behold, the day cometh that shall burn as an oven, and all
    the proud, yea, and all that do wickedly, shall burn as stubble;
    for they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of Hosts,
    that it shall leave them neither root nor branch._

    "And again, he quoted the fifth verse thus: _Behold, I will
    reveal unto you the Priesthood, by the hand of Elijah the
    prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of the
    Lord._

    "He also quoted the next verse differently: _And he shall plant
    in the hearts of the children the promises made to the fathers,
    and the hearts of the children shall turn to their fathers; if
    it were not so, the whole earth would be utterly wasted at his
    coming._

    "In addition to these, he quoted the eleventh chapter of Isaiah,
    saying that it was about to be fulfilled. He quoted also the
    third chapter of Acts, twenty-second and twenty-third verses,
    precisely as they stand in our New Testament. He said that that
    prophet was Christ; but the day had not yet come when they who
    would not hear his voice should be cut off from among the
    people, but soon would come.

    "He also quoted the second chapter of Joel, from the
    twenty-eighth verse to the last. He also said that this was not
    yet fulfilled but was soon to be. And he further stated that the
    fulness of the Gentiles was soon to come in."[1529]

The messenger departed, and the light disappeared with him. Twice during
the same night, however, the angel returned, each time repeating what
had been said at his first appearing and adding words of instruction and
caution. On the next day Moroni appeared to the young man again, and
directed him to inform his father of the visitations and commandments he
had received. Joseph's father instructed him to obey the messenger's
instructions and testified that they were given of God. Joseph then went
to the locality specified by the angel, on the side of a hill called in
the record Cumorah, and immediately identified the spot that had been
shown him in vision. By the aid of a lever he removed a large stone,
which proved to be the cover of a stone box wherein lay the plates and
other articles described by Moroni. The angel appeared at the place, and
forbade Joseph to remove the contents of the box at that time. The young
man replaced the massive stone lid and left the spot.

Four years later, the plates, the Urim and Thummim, and the breastplate
were delivered into Joseph's keeping by the angel Moroni. This Moroni,
who now came as a resurrected being, was the last survivor of the
Nephite nation; he had completed the record, and then shortly before his
death had hidden away the same in the hill Cumorah, whence it was
brought forth through his instrumentality and delivered to the modern
prophet and seer, Joseph Smith, September 22, 1827. That record, or,
strictly speaking a part thereof, is now accessible to all; it has been
translated through divine instrumentality and is now published in many
languages as the Book of Mormon.[1530]


THE AARONIC PRIESTHOOD CONFERRED BY JOHN THE BAPTIST.

On the 15th of May, 1829, Joseph Smith and his scribe in the work of
translating the Nephite record, Oliver Cowdery, retired to a secluded
glade to pray. Their special purpose was to inquire of the Lord
concerning the ordinance of baptism for the remission of sins, some
account of which they had found on the plates. Joseph writes:

    "While we were thus employed, praying and calling upon the Lord,
    a messenger from heaven descended in a cloud of light, and
    having laid his hands upon us, he ordained us, saying:

    "_Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer
    the Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering
    of angels, and of the Gospel of repentance, and of baptism by
    immersion for the remission of sins; and this shall never be
    taken again from the earth, until the sons of Levi do offer
    again an offering unto the Lord in righteousness."_[1531]

The angelic visitor stated that his name was John, the same who is
designated in the New Testament, John the Baptist; and that he had acted
in ordaining the two under the direction of Peter, James, and John, who
held the keys of the Higher or Melchizedek Priesthood. He explained that
the Aaronic Priesthood did not comprize "the power of laying on hands
for the gift of the Holy Ghost";[1532] but he predicted that the Higher
Priesthood, having this power, would be conferred later. By his express
direction, Joseph baptized Oliver, and the latter in turn baptized
Joseph, by immersion in water.


THE MELCHIZEDEK PRIESTHOOD CONFERRED BY PETER, JAMES, AND JOHN.

Shortly after their ordination to the Lesser or Aaronic Priesthood,
Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery were visited by the presiding apostles
of old, Peter, James, and John, who conferred upon them the Melchizedek
Priesthood and ordained them to the Holy Apostleship. In a later
revelation the Lord Jesus thus specifically acknowledges the respective
ordinations as having been done by His will and commandment:

    "Which John I have sent unto you, my servants, Joseph Smith,
    jun., and Oliver Cowdery, to ordain you unto this first
    priesthood which you have received, that you might be called and
    ordained even as Aaron.... And also with Peter, and James, and
    John, whom I have sent unto you, by whom I have ordained you and
    confirmed you to be apostles, and especial witnesses of my name,
    and bear the keys of your ministry, and of the same things which
    I revealed unto them: Unto whom I have committed the keys of my
    kingdom, and a dispensation of the gospel for the last times;
    and for the fulness of times, in the which I will gather
    together in one all things, both which are in heaven, and which
    are on the earth."[1533]


ESTABLISHMENT OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS.

On the sixth day of April A.D. 1830, the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints was formally organized, at Fayette, Seneca county, New
York, in accordance with the secular law governing the establishment of
religious associations. The persons actually participating in the
organization numbered but six, such being the minimum required by law in
such an undertaking; many others were present however, some of whom had
already received the ordinance of baptism for the remission of sins. By
revelation to Joseph Smith, the Lord had previously specified the day on
which the organization was to be effected, and had made known His plan
of Church government--with detailed instructions as to the requisite
conditions for membership; the indispensability of baptism by immersion,
and the precise manner in which the initiatory ordinance was to be
administered; the manner of confirming baptized believers as members of
the Church; the duties of elders, priests, teachers, and deacons in the
Church; the exact procedure to be followed in the administration of the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; the order of Church discipline, and the
method of transferring members from one branch to another.[1534] The
baptized converts present at the organization were called upon to
express their acceptance or rejection of Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery
as elders in the Church; and in accordance with the unanimous vote in
the affirmative the ordination or setting apart of these two men as
respectively first and second elder in the new organization was
performed.[1535]

While the Book of Mormon had been in course of translation, particularly
during the two years immediately preceding the organization of the
Church, several revelations had been given through Joseph the prophet
and seer, relating to the work of translation and to the preparatory
labor necessary to the establishment of the Church as an institution
among men. The Author of these several revelations declared Himself
definitely to be Jesus Christ, God, the Son of God, the Redeemer, the
Light and Life of the World, Alpha and Omega, Christ the Lord, the Lord
and Savior.[1536] As early as A.D. 1829, the calling of the Twelve
Apostles was indicated, and appointment was made for the searching out
of the Twelve who should stand before the world as special witnesses of
the Christ; these were subsequently ordained to the Holy Apostleship,
and the council or quorum of the Twelve has been recognized, and
instructions concerning their exalted duties have been given, in
numerous revelations of later dates.[1537]

In such manner has the Church of Jesus Christ been reestablished upon
the earth, with all the powers and authority pertaining to the Holy
Priesthood as committed by the Lord Jesus to His apostles in the period
of His personal ministry. The inauguration of a new dispensation of the
gospel, with a restoration of the Priesthood, was absolutely necessary;
since through the apostasy of the Primitive Church there lived not a man
empowered to speak or administer in the name of God or His Christ. John
the Revelator saw in his vision of the last days an angel bringing anew
"the everlasting gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the earth, and
to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, saying with a loud
voice, Fear God, and give glory to him; for the hour of his judgment is
come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the
fountains of waters."[1538]

Such an angelic embassage would have been but a needless and empty
display, and therefore an impossibility, had the everlasting gospel
remained upon the earth with its powers of priesthood perpetuated by
succession. The scriptural assurances of a restoration in the last days
through direct bestowal from the heavens is conclusive proof of the
actuality of the universal apostasy. Moroni came to Joseph Smith as "a
messenger sent from the presence of God," and delivered a record
containing "the fulness of the everlasting gospel," as it had been
imparted to the Lord's people in ancient times; and the world-wide
distribution of the Book of Mormon, and of other publications embodying
the revealed word in modern times, and the ministry of thousands who
labor in the authority of the Holy Priesthood combine as the loud voice
addressed to every nation, crying: "Fear God, and give glory to him; for
the hour of his judgment is come."


FURTHER COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE HEAVENS TO MAN.

Following the organization of the Church as heretofore described, direct
communication between the Lord Jesus Christ and His prophet Joseph was
frequent, as the needs of the Church required. Numerous revelations were
given, and these are accessible to all who will read.[1539] A marvelous
manifestation was granted to the prophet and his associate in the
presidency of the Church, Sidney Rigdon, the record of which appears as
follows:

    "We, Joseph Smith, jun., and Sidney Rigdon, being in the Spirit
    on the sixteenth of February, in the year of our Lord, one
    thousand eight hundred and thirty-two, by the power of the
    Spirit our eyes were opened and our understandings were
    enlightened, so as to see and understand the things of God--even
    those things which were from the beginning before the world was,
    which were ordained of the Father, through his Only Begotten
    Son, who was in the bosom of the Father, even from the
    beginning, of whom we bear record, and the record which we bear
    is the fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ, who is the Son,
    whom we saw and with whom we conversed in the heavenly vision;
    For while we were doing the work of translation, which the Lord
    had appointed unto us, we came to the twenty-ninth verse of the
    fifth chapter of John, which was given unto us as follows.
    Speaking of the resurrection of the dead, concerning those who
    shall hear the voice of the Son of Man, and shall come forth;
    they who have done good in the resurrection of the just, and
    they who have done evil in the resurrection of the unjust. Now
    this caused us to marvel, for it was given unto us of the
    Spirit; and while we meditated upon these things, the Lord
    touched the eyes of our understandings and they were opened, and
    the glory of the Lord shone round about; and we beheld the glory
    of the Son, on the right hand of the Father, and received of his
    fulness; and saw the holy angels, and they who are sanctified
    before his throne, worshiping God, and the Lamb, who worship him
    for ever and ever. And now, after the many testimonies which
    have been given of him, this is the testimony last of all, which
    we give of him, that he lives; for we saw him, even on the right
    hand of God, and we heard the voice bearing record that he is
    the Only Begotten of the Father--that by him and through him,
    and of him the worlds are and were created, and the inhabitants
    thereof are begotten sons and daughters unto God."[1540]

The vision was followed by further revelation both through sight and
hearing; and the Lord showed unto His servants and proclaimed aloud the
fate of the wicked and the characteristic features of the varied degrees
of glory provided for the souls of mankind in the hereafter. The several
states of graded honor and exaltation pertaining to the telestial, the
terrestrial, and the celestial kingdoms were revealed, and the ancient
scriptures relating thereto were illumined with the new light of
simplicity and literalness.[1541]


PERSONAL APPEARING OF THE LORD JESUS CHRIST IN THE KIRTLAND TEMPLE.

In less than three and a half years after its organization the Church
began the erection of the first temple of modern times at Kirtland,
Ohio. The work was undertaken in compliance with a revelation from the
Lord requiring this labor at the hands of His people. The Church
membership was small; the people were in poverty; the period was one of
determined opposition and relentless persecution.[1542] Be it understood
that to the Latter-day Saints a temple is more than chapel, church,
tabernacle, or cathedral; it is no place of common assembly even for
purposes of congregational worship, but an edifice sacred to the
ordinances of the Holy Priesthood--distinctively and essentially a House
of the Lord. The temple at Kirtland stands today, a substantial and
stately building; but it is no longer in possession of the people who
reared it by unmeasured sacrifice of time, substance, and effort
extending through years of self-denial and suffering. Its corner-stones
were laid July 23, 1833, and the completed structure was dedicated March
27, 1836. The dedicatory service was made ever memorable by a
Pentecostal outpouring of the Spirit of the Lord accompanied by the
visible presence of angels. In the evening of the same day the several
quorums of priesthood assembled in the house, and a yet greater
manifestation of divine power and glory was witnessed. On the succeeding
Sunday--April 3, 1836--after a service of solemn worship, including the
administration of the Lord's Supper, the prophet Joseph and his
counselor, Oliver Cowdery, retired for prayer within the veils enclosing
the platform and pulpit reserved for the presiding authorities of the
Melchizedek Priesthood. They bear this solemn testimony to the personal
appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ at that time and place:

    "The veil was taken from our minds, and the eyes of our
    understanding were opened. We saw the Lord standing upon the
    breast work of the pulpit, before us, and under his feet was a
    paved work of pure gold in color like amber. His eyes were as a
    flame of fire, the hair of his head was white like the pure
    snow, his countenance shone above the brightness of the sun, and
    his voice was as the sound of the rushing of great waters, even
    the voice of Jehovah, saying--I am the first and the last, I am
    he who liveth, I am he who was slain, I am your advocate with
    the Father. Behold, your sins are forgiven you, you are clean
    before me, therefore lift up your heads and rejoice, let the
    hearts of your brethren rejoice, and let the hearts of all my
    people rejoice, who have, with their might, built this house to
    my name. For behold, I have accepted this house, and my name
    shall be here, and I will manifest myself to my people in mercy
    in this house, Yea, I will appear unto my servants, and speak
    unto them with mine own voice, if my people will keep my
    commandments, and do not pollute this holy house, Yea the hearts
    of thousands and tens of thousands shall greatly rejoice in
    consequence of the blessings which shall be poured out, and the
    endowment with which my servants have been endowed in this
    house; and the fame of this house shall spread to foreign lands,
    and this is the beginning of the blessing which shall be poured
    out upon the heads of my people. Even so. Amen."[1543]

After the Savior's withdrawal, the two mortal prophets were visited by
glorified beings, each of whom had officiated on earth as a specially
commissioned servant of Jehovah, and now came to confer the authority of
his particular office upon Joseph and Oliver, thus uniting all the
powers and authorities of olden dispensations in the restored Church of
Christ, which characterizes the last and greatest dispensation of
history. This is the record:

    "After this vision closed, the heavens were again opened unto
    us, and Moses appeared before us, and committed unto us the keys
    of the gathering of Israel from the four parts of the earth, and
    the leading of the ten tribes from the land of the north. After
    this, Elias appeared, and committed the dispensation of the
    gospel of Abraham, saying, that in us, and our seed, all
    generations after us should be blessed. After this vision had
    closed, another great and glorious vision burst upon us, for
    Elijah the prophet, who was taken to heaven without tasting
    death, stood before us, and said--Behold, the time has fully
    come, which was spoken of by the mouth of Malachi, testifying
    that he (Elijah) should be sent before the great and dreadful
    day of the Lord come, to turn the hearts of the fathers to the
    children, and the children to the fathers, lest the whole earth
    be smitten with a curse. Therefore the keys of this dispensation
    are committed into your hands, and by this ye may know that the
    great and dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the
    doors."[1544]


JESUS THE CHRIST IS WITH HIS CHURCH TODAY.

Right gloriously has the Lord brought about a fulfilment of the promises
uttered through the mouths of His holy prophets in by-gone ages--to
restore the gospel with all its former blessings and privileges; to
bestow anew the Holy Priesthood with authority to administer in the name
of God; to reestablish the Church bearing His name and founded upon the
rock of divine revelation; and to proclaim the message of salvation to
all nations, kindreds, tongues, and peoples. In spite of persecution
both mobocratic and judicially sanctioned, in spite of assaults,
drivings, and slaughter, the Church has developed with marvelous
rapidity and strength since the day of its organization. Joseph, the
prophet, and his brother Hyrum, the patriarch of the Church, were
brutally slain as martyrs to the truth at Carthage, Illinois, June 27,
1844. But the Lord raised up others to succeed them; and the world
learned in part and yet shall know beyond all question that the Church
so miraculously established in the last days is not the church of Joseph
Smith nor of any other man, but in literal verity, the Church of Jesus
Christ. The Lord has continued to make known His mind and will through
prophets, seers, and revelators whom He has successively chosen and
appointed to lead His people; and the voice of divine revelation is
heard in the Church today. As provided for in its revealed plan and
constitution, the Church is blessed by the ministry of prophets,
apostles, high priests, patriarchs, seventies, elders, bishops, priests,
teachers, and deacons.[1545] The spiritual gifts and blessings of old
are again enjoyed in rich abundance.[1546] New scriptures, primarily
directed to present duties and current developments in the purposes of
God, yet which illuminate and make plain in simplicity the scriptures of
old, have been given to the world through the channel of the restored
priesthood; and other scriptures shall yet be written. The united
membership of the Church proclaims:

    "We believe all that God has revealed, all that He does now
    reveal, and we believe that He will yet reveal many great and
    important things pertaining to the Kingdom of God."[1547]

The predicted gathering of Israel from their long dispersion is in
progress under the commission given by the Lord through Moses. The
"mountain of the Lord's house" is already established in the top of the
mountains, and all peoples flow unto it; while the elders of the Church
go forth among the nations, saying: "Come ye, and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob; and he will
teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Zion
shall go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem."[1548]

Within sacred temples, the living are officiating vicariously in behalf
of the dead; and the hearts of mortal children are turned with
affectionate concern toward their departed ancestors, while disembodied
hosts are praying for the success of their posterity, yet in the flesh,
in the service of salvation.[1549] The saving gospel is offered freely
to all, for so hath its Author commanded. Through the medium of the
press, and by the personal ministrations of men invested with the Holy
Priesthood whom the Church sends out by thousands, this Gospel of the
Kingdom is today preached throughout the world. When such witness among
the nations is made complete, "then shall the end come"; and the nations
"shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven, with power and
great glory."[1550]


NOTES TO CHAPTER 41.

1. The Dispensation of the Fulness of Times.--"Now the thing to be known
is, what the fulness of times means, or the extent and authority
thereof. It means this, that the dispensation of the fulness of times is
made up of all the dispensations that ever have been given since the
world began, until this time. Unto Adam first was given a dispensation.
It is well known that God spake to him with His own voice in the garden,
and gave him the promise of the Messiah. And unto Noah also was a
dispensation given; for Jesus said, 'As it was in the days of Noah, so
shall it be also in the days of the coming of the Son of Man;' and as
the righteous were saved then, and the wicked destroyed, so it will be
now. And from Noah to Abraham, and from Abraham to Moses, and from Moses
to Elias, and from Elias to John the Baptist, and from then to Jesus
Christ, and from Jesus Christ to Peter, James, and John, the Apostles
all having received in their dispensation by revelation from God, to
accomplish the great scheme of restitution, spoken by all the holy
Prophets since the world began; the end of which is, the dispensation of
the fulness of times, in which all things shall be fulfilled that have
been spoken of since the earth was made."--See _Millennial Star_, vol.
16, p. 220.

2. Limitations of the Aaronic Priesthood.--After conferring the Lesser
or Aaronic Priesthood upon Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, the
officiating angel, who had been known while a mortal being as John the
Baptist, explained that the authority he had imparted did not extend to
the laying-on of hands for the bestowal of the Holy Ghost, the latter
ordinance being a function of the Higher or Melchizedek Priesthood.
Consider the instance of Philip, (not the apostle Philip), whose
ordination empowered him to baptize, though a higher authority than his
was requisite for the conferring of the Holy Ghost; and consequently the
apostles Peter and John went down to Samaria to officiate in the case of
Philip's baptized converts (Acts 8:5, 12-17). See Doc. and Cov. 20:41,
46.

3. Priesthood and Office Therein.--It is important to know that although
Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery had been ordained to the Holy
Apostleship, and therefore to a fulness of the Melchizedek Priesthood,
by Peter, James, and John, it was necessary that they be ordained as
elders in the Church. When they received the Melchizedek Priesthood from
the three ancient apostles, there was no organized Church of Jesus
Christ, and consequently no need of Church officers, such as elders,
priests, teachers, or deacons. As soon as the Church was established,
officers were chosen therein and these were ordained to the requisite
office or grade in the Priesthood. Moreover, the principle of common
consent in the conduct of Church affairs was observed in this early
action of the members in voting to sustain the men nominated for
official positions, and has continued to be the rule of the Church to
this day. It is pertinent to point out further that in conferring upon
Joseph and Oliver the Aaronic Priesthood, John the Baptist did not
ordain them to the office of priest, teacher, or deacon. These three
offices are included in the Aaronic, as are the offices of elder,
seventy, high priest, etc., in the Melchizedek Priesthood. Read Doc. and
Cov. 20:38-67; _The Articles of Faith_, xi.

4. Modern Temples.--The Lord's gracious promise given in the Kirtland
Temple--to appear unto His servants at times then future, and to speak
unto them with His own voice, provided the people would keep His
commandments and not pollute that holy house--has been in no wise
abrogated nor forfeited through the enforced relinquishment of the
Kirtland Temple by the Latter-day Saints. The people were compelled to
flee before the fury of mobocratic persecution; but they hastened to
erect another and yet more splendid sanctuary at Nauvoo, Illinois, and
were again dispossessed by lawless mobs. In the valleys of Utah the
Church has erected four great temples, each more stately than the last;
and in these holy houses the sacred ordinances pertaining to salvation
and exaltation of both the living and the dead are in uninterrupted
progress. The temples of the present dispensation, at the time of the
present writing designated according to location, are those of Kirtland,
Ohio; Nauvoo, Illinois; St. George, Logan, Manti, and Salt Lake City,
Utah; Cardston, Canada, and Laie, Hawaii. See _The House of the Lord_,
pp. 63-232.

5. Consistency of the Church's Claim to Authority.--The proofs of order
and system in the restoration of authority to officiate in particular
functions pertaining to the priesthood are striking, and go to prove the
continued validity, beyond the grave, of authoritative ordination on
earth. The keys of the Aaronic order, comprizing authority to baptize
for the remission of sins, were brought by John the Baptist, who had
been especially commissioned in that order of priesthood in the time of
Christ. The apostleship, comprizing all powers inherent in the
Melchizedek Priesthood, was restored by the presiding apostles of old,
Peter, James, and John. Then, as has been seen, Moses conferred the
authority to prosecute the work of gathering; and Elijah, who, not
having tasted death, held a peculiar relation to both the living and the
dead, delivered the authority of vicarious ministry for the departed. To
these appointments by heavenly authority should be added that given by
Elias, who appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery, and "committed
the dispensation of the gospel of Abraham." It is evident, then, that
the claims made by the Church with respect to its authority are complete
and consistent as to the source of the powers professed and the channels
through which such have been delivered again to earth. Scripture and
revelation, both ancient and modern, support as an unalterable law the
principle that no one can delegate to another an authority which the
giver does not possess.

6. Cessation of the Melchizedek Administration in Ancient Times.--The
Higher or Melchizedek Priesthood was held by the patriarchs from Adam to
Moses. Aaron was ordained to the priest's office, as were his sons; but
that Moses held superior authority is abundantly shown (Numb. 12:1-8).
After Aaron's death his son Eleazar officiated in the authority of the
Lesser Priesthood; and even Joshua had to take counsel and authority
from him (Numb. 27:18-23). From the ministry of Moses to that of Jesus
Christ, the Lesser Priesthood alone was operative upon the earth,
excepting only the instances of specially delegated authority of the
higher order such as is manifest in the ministrations of certain chosen
prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and others. It is evident that
these prophets, seers, and revelators were individually and specially
commissioned; but it appears that they had not authority to call and
ordain successors, for in their time the Higher Priesthood was not
existent on earth in an organized state with duly officered quorums. Not
so with the Aaronic and Levitical Priesthood, however. The matter is
made particularly plain through latter-day revelation. See Doc. and Cov.
84:23-28; read the entire section; also _The House of the Lord_ pp.
235-238.

FOOTNOTES:

[1523] P. of G.P., Joseph Smith 2:5-26; also "History of the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints," vol. 1, pp. 2-8.

[1524] Eph. 1:9, 10. Note 1, end of chapter.

[1525] See page 151 herein; Note 5, end of chapter.

[1526] For earlier instances, see pages 126, 371, and 725.

[1527] P. of G.P., Joseph Smith 2:29-54, 59; also "History of the
Church," vol. 1, pp. 10-16, 18.

[1528] P. of G.P., Joseph Smith 2:28.

[1529] P. of G.P., Joseph Smith 2:36-41; and "History of the Church,"
vol. 1. pp. 12, 13.

[1530] See B. of M., Mormon 6:6; Moroni 10:2.

[1531] P. of G.P., Joseph Smith 2:68, 69; Doc. and Cov. sec. 13;
"History of the Church," vol. 1, p. 39.

[1532] Notes 2 and 6. end of chapter.

[1533] Doc. and Cov. 27: 8, 12, 13.

[1534] Doc. and Cov. sec. 20.

[1535] Doc. and Cov. 20:2, 3; compare 21:11; see also "History of the
Church." vol. 1, pp. 40, 41. Note 3, end of chapter.

[1536] Doc. and Cov. sections 5, 6, 8, 10-12, 14-20.

[1537] Doc. and Cov. 18:27, 31-36; 20:38-44; 84:63, 64; 95:4; 107:23-25;
112:1, 14, 21; 118; 124:127-130.

[1538] Rev. 14:6, 7.

[1539] See Doctrine and Covenants, and "History of the Church."

[1540] Doc. and Cov. 76:11-24; also "History of the Church" under date
specified.

[1541] See Doc. and Cov. 76:25-119; also "The Articles of Faith," iv:29;
and xxii:18-27.

[1542] See "The House of the Lord," pages 114-123.

[1543] Doc. and Cov. 110:1-10; also "History of the Church" under date
specified. Note 4, end of chapter.

[1544] Doc. and Cov. 110:11-16. Note 5, end of chapter.

[1545] See "Plan of Government in the Restored Church," in "The Articles
of Faith," xi:13-32.

[1546] See "Spiritual Gifts" in "The Articles of Faith," xii.

[1547] No. 9 of "The Articles of Faith of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints."

[1548] Isa. 2:2, 3; compare Micah 4:1, 2; see also Doc. and Cov. 29:8.

[1549] See "The House of the Lord," pp. 63-109.

[1550] P. of G.P., Joseph Smith 1:31, 36; compare Matt 24:14, 30.




CHAPTER 42.

JESUS THE CHRIST TO RETURN.


THE LORD'S SECOND ADVENT PREDICTED IN ANCIENT SCRIPTURE.

"Ye men of Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into heaven? this same Jesus,
which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as
ye have seen him go into heaven."[1551] So spake the white-robed angels
to the eleven apostles as the resurrected Christ ascended from their
midst on Olivet. The scriptures abound in predictions of the Lord's
return.

By the "second advent" we understand not the personal appearing of the
Son of God to a few, such as His visitation to Saul of Tarsus, to Joseph
Smith in 1820, and again in the Kirtland Temple in 1836; nor later
manifestations to His worthy servants as specifically promised;[1552]
but His yet future coming in power and great glory, accompanied by hosts
of resurrected and glorified beings, to execute judgment upon the earth
and to inaugurate a reign of righteousness.

The prophets of both hemispheres, who lived prior to the meridian of
time, said comparatively little concerning the Lord's second coming;
their souls were too full of the merciful plan of redemption associated
with the Savior's birth into mortality to permit them to dwell upon the
yet more distant consummation appointed for the last days. Certain of
them, however, were permitted to behold in vision the working out of the
divine purposes even to the end of time; and these testified with
unsurpassed fervency concerning the glorious coming of Christ in the
final dispensation. Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied saying,
"Behold the Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints, to execute
judgment upon all."[1553] In a more extended account of the Lord's
revelations to Enoch than is included in the Bible, we read that after
this righteous prophet had been shown the scenes of Israel's history,
down to and beyond the death, resurrection and ascension of Jesus
Christ, he pleaded with God, saying: "I ask thee if thou wilt not come
again on the earth. And the Lord said unto Enoch: As I live, even so
will I come in the last days, in the days of wickedness and vengeance,
to fulfil the oath which I have made unto you concerning the children of
Noah.... And it came to pass that Enoch saw the day of the coming of the
Son of Man, in the last days, to dwell on the earth in righteousness for
the space of a thousand years."[1554] Isaiah, in rapturous contemplation
of the eventual triumph of righteousness, exclaimed: "Say to them that
are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear not: behold, your God will come
with vengeance, even God with a recompence; he will come and save you";
and again: "Behold, the Lord God will come with strong hand, and his arm
shall rule for him: behold, his reward is with him, and his work before
him."[1555] The conditions specified were not realized in the earthly
life of the Redeemer; moreover the context clearly shows that the
prophet's words are applicable to the last days only--the time of the
ransomed of the Lord, the time of restitution, and of the triumph of
Zion.

Of all Biblical scriptures relating to our subject, the utterances of
the Christ Himself in the course of His earthly ministry are most direct
and certain. Many of these we have already considered in the narrative
of the Savior's life; the few following are sufficient for present
demonstration. "For the Son of man shall come in the glory of his Father
with his angels; and then he shall reward every man according to his
works."[1556] To the apostles and the people generally He proclaimed:
"Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this
adulterous and sinful generation; of him also shall the Son of man be
ashamed, when he cometh in the glory of his Father with the holy
angels."[1557] When a bound prisoner before proud Caiaphas, Jesus
answered the unlawful adjuration of the corrupt high priest, by
affirming: "I say unto you, Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man
sitting on the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of
heaven."[1558]

The apostles had been so impressed with the Master's assurance that He
would return to earth in power and glory, that they eagerly questioned
as to the time and signs of His coming.[1559] He stated explicitly,
though at the time they failed to comprehend Him, that many great events
would intervene between His departure and return, including the long era
of darkness associated with the apostasy.[1560] But as to the certainty
of His advent in glory, as Judge, and Lord, and King, Jesus left no
excuse for dubiety in the minds of His apostles. After the ascension,
throughout the course of apostolic administration, the future coming of
the Lord was preached with earnest emphasis.[1561]

Book of Mormon prophecies concerning the advent of the Lord in the last
days are specific and definite. On the occasion of His appearing to the
Nephites on the American continent shortly after His ascension from the
Mount of Olives, Christ preached the gospel to assembled multitudes;
"And he did expound all things, even from the beginning until the time
that he should come in his glory"; and the events to follow, "even unto
the great and last day."[1562] In granting the wish of the three Nephite
disciples who desired to continue their ministry in the flesh throughout
the generations to come, the Lord said unto them:

    "Ye shall live to behold all the doings of the Father, unto the
    children of men, even until all things shall be fulfilled,
    according to the will of the Father, when I shall come in my
    glory, with the powers of heaven; And ye shall never endure the
    pains of death; but when I shall come in my glory, ye shall be
    changed in the twinkling of an eye from mortality to
    immortality: and then shall ye be blessed in the kingdom of my
    Father."[1563]


THE COMING OF THE LORD PROCLAIMED THROUGH MODERN REVELATION.

To the Church of Jesus Christ, restored and reestablished in these the
last days, the word of the Lord has come repeatedly, declaring the
actuality of His second advent and the nearness of that glorious yet
dreadful event. But a few months after the Church was organized, the
voice of Jesus Christ was heard, admonishing the elders to vigilance and
proclaiming as follows:

    "For the hour is nigh, and the day soon at hand when the earth
    is ripe: and all the proud, and they that do wickedly, shall be
    as stubble, and I will burn them up, saith the Lord of Hosts,
    that wickedness shall not be upon the earth; for the hour is
    nigh, and that which was spoken by mine apostles must be
    fulfilled; for as they spoke so shall it come to pass; for I
    will reveal myself from heaven with power and great glory, with
    all the hosts thereof, and dwell in righteousness with men on
    earth a thousand years, and the wicked shall not stand."[1564]

In the month following, the Lord gave instructions to certain elders,
concluding with these portentous words:

    "Wherefore, be faithful, praying always, having your lamps
    trimmed and burning, and oil with you, that you may be ready at
    the coming of the Bridegroom: for behold, verily, verily, I say
    unto you, that I come quickly. Even so. Amen."[1565]

Again we read in a later revelation:

    "And blessed are you because you have believed; and more blessed
    are you because you are called of me to preach my gospel, to
    lift up your voice as with the sound of a trump, both long and
    loud, and cry repentance unto a crooked and perverse generation,
    preparing the way of the Lord for his second coming; for behold,
    verily, verily, I say unto you, the time is soon at hand, that I
    shall come in a cloud with power and great glory, and it shall
    be a great day at the time of my coming, for all nations shall
    tremble."[1566]

The Lord Jesus addressed a general revelation to His Church in March
1831, through which His earlier predictions uttered to the Twelve
shortly before His betrayal were made plain, and the assurances of His
glorious coming were thus reiterated:

"Ye look and behold the fig-trees, and ye see them with your eyes, and
ye say when they begin to shoot forth, and their leaves are yet tender,
that summer is now nigh at hand; even so it shall be in that day when
they shall see all these things, then shall they know that the hour is
nigh. And it shall come to pass that he that feareth me shall be looking
forth for the great day of the Lord to come, even for the signs of the
coming of the Son of man: And they shall see signs and wonders, for they
shall be shown forth in the heavens above, and in the earth beneath; and
they shall behold blood, and fire, and vapors of smoke; and before the
day of the Lord shall come, the sun shall be darkened, and the moon be
turned into blood, and stars fall from heaven; and the remnant shall be
gathered unto this place, and then they shall look for me, and, behold,
I will come; and they shall see me in the clouds of heaven, clothed with
power and great glory, with all the holy angels; and he that watches not
for me shall be cut off."[1567]

So near is the consummation that the intervening period is called
"today"; and, in applying this time designation in the year 1831, the
Lord said:

"Behold, now it is called today (until the coming of the Son of man),
and verily it is a day of sacrifice, and a day for the tithing of my
people; for he that is tithed shall not be burned (at his coming); For
after today cometh the burning: this is speaking after the manner of the
Lord; for verily I say, tomorrow all the proud and they that do wickedly
shall be as stubble; and I will burn them up, for I am the Lord of
hosts: and I will not spare any that remain in Babylon. Wherefore, if ye
believe me, ye will labor while it is called today."[1568]


THE TIME AND ACCOMPANIMENTS OF THE LORD'S COMING.

The date of the future advent of Christ has never been revealed to man.
To the inquiring apostles who labored with the Master, He said: "But of
that day and hour knoweth no man, no, not the angels of heaven, but my
Father only."[1569] In the present age, a similar declaration has been
made by the Father: "I, the Lord God, have spoken it, but the hour and
the day no man knoweth, neither the angels in heaven, nor shall they
know until he comes."[1570] Only through watchfulness and prayer may the
signs of the times be correctly interpreted and the imminence of the
Lord's appearing be apprehended. To the unwatchful and the wicked the
event will be as sudden and unexpected as the coming of a thief in the
night.[1571] But we are not left without definite information as to
precedent signs. Biblical prophecies bearing upon this subject we have
heretofore considered.[1572] As later scriptures affirm: "Before the
great day of the Lord shall come, Jacob shall flourish in the
wilderness, and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose. Zion shall
flourish upon the hills and rejoice upon the mountains, and shall be
assembled together unto the place which I have appointed."[1573] War
shall become so general that every man who will not take arms against
his neighbor must of necessity flee to the land of Zion for
safety.[1574] Ephraim shall assemble in Zion on the western continent,
and Judah shall be again established in the east; and the cities of Zion
and Jerusalem shall be the capitals of the world empire, over which
Messiah shall reign in undisputed authority. The Lost Tribes shall be
brought forth from the place where God has hidden them through the
centuries and receive their long deferred blessings at the hands of
Ephraim. The people of Israel shall be restored from their scattered
condition.[1575]

In addressing the elders of His Church in 1832, the Lord urged upon them
the imperative need of devoted diligence, and said:

    "Abide ye in the liberty wherewith ye are made free; entangle
    not yourselves in sin but let your hands be clean, until the
    Lord come; For not many days hence and the earth shall tremble
    and reel to and fro as a drunken man, and the sun shall hide his
    face, and shall refuse to give light, and the moon shall be
    bathed in blood, and the stars shall become exceeding angry, and
    shall cast themselves down as a fig that falleth from off a fig
    tree. And after your testimony cometh wrath and indignation upon
    the people; For after your testimony cometh the testimony of
    earthquakes, that shall cause groanings in the midst of her, and
    men shall fall upon the ground, and shall not be able to stand.
    And also cometh the testimony of the voice of thunderings, and
    the voice of lightnings, and the voice of tempests, and the
    voice of the waves of the sea, heaving themselves beyond their
    bounds. And all things shall be in commotion; and surely, men's
    hearts shall fail them; for fear shall come upon all people; And
    angels shall fly through the midst of heaven, crying with a loud
    voice, sounding the trump of God, saying, Prepare ye, prepare
    ye, O inhabitants of the earth; for the judgment of our God is
    come: behold, and lo! the Bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet
    him."[1576]

A characteristic of present-day revelation is the reiteration of the
fact that the event is nigh at hand, "even at the doors." The fateful
time is repeatedly designated in scripture, "the great and dreadful day
of the Lord."[1577] Fearful indeed will it be to individuals, families,
and nations, who have so far sunk into sin as to have forfeited their
claim to mercy. The time is not that of the final judgment--when the
whole race of mankind shall stand in the resurrected state before the
bar of God--nevertheless it shall be a time of unprecedented blessing
unto the righteous and of condemnation and vengeance upon the
wicked.[1578] With Christ shall come those who have already been
resurrected; and His approach shall be the means of inaugurating a
general resurrection of the righteous dead, while the pure and just who
are still in the flesh shall be instantaneously changed from the mortal
to the immortal state and shall be caught up with the newly resurrected
to meet the Lord and His celestial company, and shall descend with Him.
To this effect did Paul prophesy: "Even so them also which sleep in
Jesus will God bring with him.... For the Lord himself shall descend
from heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the
trump of God: and the dead in Christ shall rise first: Then we which are
alive and remain shall be caught up together with them in the clouds, to
meet the Lord in the air."[1579] Compare the promise made to the Three
Nephites: "And ye shall never endure the pains of death; but when I
shall come in my glory, ye shall be changed in the twinkling of an eye
from mortality to immortality."[1580] Of the superlative glories
awaiting the righteous when the Lord shall come, we have received in
this day a partial description as follows: "And the face of the Lord
shall be unveiled; and the saints that are upon the earth, who are
alive, shall be quickened, and be caught up to meet him."[1581] The
heathen nations shall be redeemed and have part in the first
resurrection.[1582]


THE KINGDOM OF HEAVEN TO COME.

The coming of Christ in the last days, accompanied by the apostles of
old[1583] and by the resurrected saints, is to mark the establishment of
the Kingdom of Heaven upon earth. The faithful apostles who were with
Jesus in His earthly ministry are to be enthroned as judges of the whole
house of Israel;[1584] they will judge the Nephite Twelve, who in turn
will be empowered to judge the descendants of Lehi, or that branch of
the Israelitish nation which was established upon the western
continent.[1585]

While the expressions "Kingdom of God" and "Kingdom of Heaven" are used
in the Bible synonymously or interchangeably, later revelation gives to
each a distinctive meaning. The Kingdom of God is the Church established
by divine authority upon the earth; this institution asserts no claim to
temporal rule over nations; its sceptre of power is that of the Holy
Priesthood, to be used in the preaching of the gospel and in
administering its ordinances for the salvation of mankind living and
