and to him are all things; to whom be glory for ever. Amen." Romans xi.

Behold then, descendants of Israel, the Lamb of God who taketh away the
sin of the world! Behold in Jesus the Christ, the Messiah whom your
fathers crucified and pierced! Look to the Messenger Jehovah, who, when
the race in their primeval representative fell from the estate wherein
they were created, yielding to the will of the great Adversary,
renouncing their allegiance to God, and becoming heirs of his wrath and
condemnation, took their place as their representative and substitute,
entered the lists as their champion, assumed the responsibility of
encountering, counteracting, and finally subduing, vanquishing, and
triumphing over their destroyer, and by suffering in their stead, of
rescuing, sanctifying, and raising from the dead all who by faith
receive, trust, love, and obey him; the God-man, the only Mediator, to
whom, as Prophet, Priest, and King of Zion, King of Kings and Lord of
Lords, every knee must bow, and every tongue confess that He is
Jehovah.




NOTE A--Relating to the Exposition of the Apocalypse, by D. N. Lord.


Instead of tracing the illustrations thus furnished, or making the
requisite citations, the writer can barely refer to them, and express,
as far as may be fitting, his opinion of that work as an exposition,
upon clear and indubitable principles, of a portion of the sacred
oracles previously sealed and unintelligible, to the opening of which no
clew had been discovered, and towards a reliable or satisfactory
explanation of which, no progress had been made. And he cannot forbear
to speak of it, even at the hazard of being supposed to have a motive
inferior to that of impartial admiration of the work, as opening to the
view a clear vision of the inner sanctuary, and vividly portraying the
scenes, the agencies, and the events of the last great act of the drama
begun in Eden; and as surpassing all other efforts towards an exposition
of any portion of the prophetic oracles, in the scriptural authority of
its principles, the loftiness and grandeur of its conceptions, the
adequacy of its representations of the Person, titles, offices,
prerogatives, agency, purposes, dominion and glory of Jehovah the
Incarnate Word; the luminousness of its descriptions, the relevancy of
its proofs and illustrations, the clearness and brevity of its style,
the absence of every thing not pertinent, and the exhibition of every
thing requisite to an exposition of "The Revelation of Jesus Christ
which God gave unto him to show unto his servants."

Such being the character of the work, it can occasion no surprise to
those who consider the reigning notions and prejudices of the times
concerning the import of some of the symbols, that it should be
neglected by the many. It overturns prevailing theories and fixed
opinions. Had it, with no settled rules of interpretation, followed the
beaten track, in conformity with those theories and opinions; its
accurate scholarship, its thorough acquaintance with preceding authors,
with the records, institutions, import, and bearings of the earlier
dispensations, with ancient and modern history, with the Greek and Latin
Fathers, and with collateral branches of literature and sources of
illustration, would have insured it the ready suffrage of the learned
and the public.

But it is from beginning to end an innovation. Instead of being an echo
of prior expositions, it is wholly original. Instead of being a version
of the conjectures and fancies of others, without settled and uniform
principles of exposition, it differs from them very much as astronomy
differs from astrology. It is based upon axioms and rules which are well
defined, and of certain and universal application to the subjects to
which they relate. It lays down what no prior exposition ever attempted,
"The Laws of Symbolic Representation;" and by a rigid and consistent
adherence to those laws, as by a process of inductive demonstration,
brings out intelligibly to the reader the meaning of the successive
symbols: in each instance illustrating and confirming the exposition by
references to history, and contrasting it with the views advanced by
preceding writers. These laws of symbolic representation are neither
less evidently founded in the nature of that mode of revelation, nor
less essential as a clew to its meaning, than are the common rules of
grammar in relation to ordinary literal language; and they are
accordingly sanctioned, and their reality and truthfulness are
demonstrated by numerous references to inspired expositions of
prophetic symbols.

A revelation by symbol is not a statement or description in words of what
is foreshown, but a representative exhibition in a visible form; as for
example of a living agent, with certain known natural characteristics, and
certain official insignia or other accompaniments, between which agent, so
depicted in its appropriate attitude and sphere of action, and the agent
or class of agents of a different nature and sphere of action which is
represented and foreshown, there are such resemblances and analogies as to
render the first an expressive and fitting representative of the other.
Thus the beast described Rev. xiii. as emerging from the sea, having seven
heads and ten horns, and upon his horns ten crowns, and upon his heads the
names of blasphemy; his body being like a leopard, his feet like those of
a bear, and his mouth as that of a lion; is described chap. xvii. as
representing by its seven heads, seven kings, dynasties, or forms of
executive power in the Roman Empire prior to its division; and by its ten
horns ten kings which as yet had received no kingdom; the ten kings,
namely, between whom the western empire was to be divided, and who, with
the relentless ferocity of lions, bears and leopards, were by persecution
and otherwise to make war with the Lamb. So in the vision of Daniel, chap.
viii., the ram with two horns is declared to represent the Kings of Media
and Persia; and the goat with one horn, the King of Grecia.

These examples illustrate the laws of symbolic representation with
reference to one class of symbols; and with respect to those symbols of
which there is no inspired explanation, the expositor, under the control
and guidance of those laws, is liable to no mistake, unless it be in
his inadequate discernment of analogies and erroneous selection of
agents, events, or other phenomena, instead of those intended to be
foreshown, and in which congruity with the characteristics and adjuncts
of the symbol, harmony with other Scriptures and predictions, and
correspondence with historical events and testimonies are confidently to
be expected.

If the reader can imagine any thing of the awe and wonder which
overwhelmed the apostle in his visions, when, in his station on the
apocalyptic earth or in the heavenly sanctuary, he beheld the glorified
Person of his Lord in the effulgence of his Deity, seated on a throne,
from which, as at Sinai, proceeded lightnings and thunderings and
voices, and around which were exhibited the representative and
triumphant witnesses and trophies of his redemptive work; and beheld
that Person symbolizing himself in his aspect and relations as
incarnate, "a Lamb, standing as slain;" and saw, as on the revolving
canvas of a panorama, when the seals were opened, the symbolic forms
emerging into view one after another, each by its representative
character revealing, as in cipher, the agents and events of its future
appropriate and peculiar department; and witnessed the phenomena of
revolutions, tempests, earthquakes, darkness, fire and blood, foreshown
under the sounding of the trumpets; and successively the slaughter and
resurrection of the witnesses, the war of Michael and the Dragon, the
emergence of the ten-horned wild beast, the rise and career of the
two-horned wild beast and false prophet, the harvest and vintage of the
earth, the pouring out upon the earth of the plagues of the seven vials
of the wrath of God, the fall and destruction of great Babylon, and the
ensuing scenes of wonder and glory, retribution and judgment,
thanksgiving and triumph, he may in some degree conceive the effect of
converting the enigmatical portraitures of this panorama into
intelligible literal language, assigning each to its relative and
historical position, and reflecting on the version the light of earlier
revelations, that of ecclesiastical and secular history, and in a large
degree, in respect to the past, that of unmistakable events.

It is in respect to the result, as compared with that of preceding
efforts, like Daniel's interpretation of Nebuchadnezzar's dream,
compared with the fruitless endeavors of the magicians, astrologers, and
Chaldeans of Babylon; or like the finally successful effort to read the
hieroglyphics of Egypt, compared with the fruitless attempts,
bewildering theories, and abortive labors of preceding ages.

Had this work been published at some transition-period, when the human
mind was freeing itself from erroneous and long-cherished opinions; at
the revival of learning in Europe, when there were Luthers and Calvins
to welcome it; or in England, when there were Latimers and Ridleys,
Boyles and Newtons, or Owens and Howes; or in this country at the period
of Edwards, it would have superseded and prevented the expositions to
which it is opposed, or else it would have been answered in the same way
as were the doctrines of Galileo. Such men under their circumstances
would not have been content to say, as many at present seem to be:
"Though we consider the Apocalypse a part of the inspired Word of God,
and though it evidently relates to the future of the Church, the conduct
of the redeemed and the destruction of their enemies, and above all to
the crowning, ultimate and eternal manifestation of the Person,
prerogatives, supremacy, prophetical and sacerdotal works, and regal
majesty, glory, triumph and reign of Jesus Christ; yet we neither
understand it, nor believe it will be understood in advance of its
issues; and therefore are not disposed to examine anything new upon the
subject."

But the transition now going on is not against, but in favor of ancient
and erroneous opinions. It is retrograde towards Pelagianism, Pantheism,
Neology, Romanism, and among the best, to the omnivorous infection of
infidel Germanism. The partisans of these errors desire no lights but
such as are reflected from the satellites of their respective systems.
In those exclusive and dubious lights, each is secure alike against the
arguments and examples of every other. They can controvert the doctrines
of Scripture and those of each other upon all disputed points, without
the slightest danger of extorting concessions or producing conviction;
for no two of them see the same thing by the same light. All hope and
expectation of defeating or silencing any party by the arguments or
Scripture citations or interpretations of another, or of dislodging
cherished and fixed opinions by any means short of a universal deluge,
or an annihilation like that of the Egyptians by the Red Sea, or that of
Sodom and Gomorrha by fire, is given up. And so long as they nominally
agree in respect to certain future issues, towards which they think the
onward course of things in the physical, intellectual, scientific,
mechanical, social and religious world is wafting them, their theories
and their relative positions will allow them fearlessly to float down
with the current, without having in advance even the light of a moon.
There is a Millennium in prospect; a vast, undefinable Mediterranean of
something better than the present, into which all the turbid streams of
humanity are tending, and towards which the preaching of the gospel to
all nations is but a tributary.

The aspect of things, accordingly, is much like that in the days of
Noah, while the ark was preparing; as if Satan were already bound, and
no deluge of wrath or terrors of retribution were impending; and as if
with science and art, ancient relics and now inventions, gold mines and
traffic, steam and electricity, as pioneers, the Ethiopian were about to
change his skin, and the leopard his spots, the wolf to lie down with
the lamb, and the lion to eat straw like the ox. The more startling the
events of Providence, the shattering of political fabrics, the excision
and restoration of dynasties, the revival of Popish arrogations and
intolerance, the pitched battle of despotism against liberty, the more
sure they are to be construed as immediate signals of the universal
prevalence and triumph of human hopes. The purple and scarlet robes of
the Babylonish Sorceress are seemingly changed to vestal whiteness, as
gazed at through the spectrum of discolored glass, or seen in the
sepulchral, bewildering, superstitious twilight of Baalistic tapers;
while the murmurings of unearthly music, the chantings and mutterings of
unintelligible words, and the spell of imputed and pretended mysteries,
subdue the victim to whatever the spiritual operator may prescribe or
denounce. The nations in the four quarters of the globe seem to many to
be about to renounce their idolatries, and to be released without a
struggle on the part of Satan, who has held them in bondage hitherto,
and to be arranging to assume white robes and take their stations on the
glass-like expanse before the throne. The partisans of such views
neither realize nor believe that there is any thing to the contrary
revealed in Scripture; or if there is, it is so concealed in symbol and
figure as to preclude its being understood till all is over. And
accordingly, like the Pharisees of old, who scrupulously paid tithes of
mint and all manner of herbs, and omitted the weightier matters of
practical righteousness, faith, and the love of God, they resolve
religion into outward action, the love of God into eclectic sympathy
with his creatures, and faith into their theory of particular duties.

Formerly, in religious controversy, there was something positive on one
side, against which an opposing negative was asserted. In the great
controversy recorded in the Bible, the supremacy of Jehovah and the
authority of his Word were explicitly and constantly affirmed by one
party, and as directly and perseveringly denied by the other; and the two
parties were therefore broadly and unmistakably distinguished. But at
present the case is widely different. No active partisan, theological or
scientific, now denies the existence of a Supreme Being, or professes to
disbelieve the Scriptures. All claim to be believers in God and in the
Bible. What they differ about is as to what kind of Being that is whom
they call God; whether personality is one of his attributes, and what
works and purposes are to be ascribed to him: and as to what the
Scriptures teach, how they are to be understood; whether they are inspired
or not; whether they are all typical, or what portion or whether the whole
of them is in some way figurative; whether miracles were ever wrought;
whether the Mosaic account of the creation is to be understood literally,
and the like. And if there is at this moment, in the compass of the world,
or in the Protestant portion of it, one comprehensive error, conspicuous
above all others, it is that of inadequate, partial, defective
apprehensions, recognitions, and acknowledgments of what the Scriptures
reveal concerning the Person, prerogatives, offices, works, dominion,
triumph and glory of the Messiah, and concerning his yet unended conflict
with the Arch-apostate.




NOTE B--The primary ground of Mediation, &c.


The primary ground or reason of that mediation, in the economy of the
universe, which is affirmed of the one Mediator in all the relations of
God to the World, is the infinite difference between the Deity and
creatures in nature, attributes, and mode of existence and action. The
relations implied in the existence and agency of creatures are such as
cannot be conceived to subsist between beings so diverse in all respects
as the infinite and finite, except through an intermediate agent, in the
constitution of whose person and office the opposite extremes are
united. For in creating, upholding, and governing finite beings, the
agency of the Creator and Ruler connects itself with the conditions and
relations of time and space; the conditions and relations of matter; of
succession of thought, feeling, and action; of that which is external,
visible, limited; that which begins and ends.

It may therefore be said, that in the nature of things such mediation,
the interposition of such an official Person, is necessary; and
accordingly the agency of the Mediator in those relations is
presupposed, assumed, or expressly recognized, throughout the
Scriptures.

In this system, the moral government which is administered by the
Mediator is founded on the perfections, prerogatives and rights of the
Deity as manifested by him in the works of creation, providence and
grace, and applies to creatures in the relations which they sustain to
him.

The whole is therefore a system of manifestation; on his part of the
perfections and rights of the Deity, and on theirs of holiness and
happiness, or of sin and misery, in the relations in which they exist.
In the progress of this system, all intelligent creatures will be
instructed in all that is knowable by them concerning the Deity, and all
that respects themselves, and the nature, tendency, and consequences of
holiness on the one hand, and of apostasy and wickedness on the other.

The Deity thus made known will, by the holy, the unfallen and redeemed,
be eternally reverenced, supremely loved, and exclusively worshipped and
obeyed; his rights and prerogatives will be acknowledged, and his
perfections and the boundless emanations of his goodness be regarded
with ceaseless, adoring, grateful rapture and delight.

In the administration of his moral government over apostate creatures,
and in their future punishment, the Mediator's sceptre is a sceptre of
perfect righteousness.

The course of things eventually to be realized on earth will be such as
would have taken place from the beginning, had no apostasy occurred. The
apostasy and the curse on man and the earth will be overcome. The
antagonism between the Mediator and the Adversary will cease. The earth,
freed from the curse and from all enemies, renovated, restored to its
original beauty, will be the perpetual scene of holiness and happiness.

Under the past and present dispensations, the object has been to do away
the consequences of the fall of the first Adam as head of the race. When
the second Adam, ("the Lord from heaven,") as head of his elect people,
shall have accomplished this at his second advent, and destroyed all
enemies, he will be thenceforth _the head of the race_ for ever.

The apostasy was a violation of preexisting relations between the
Creator and creatures. The victory gained by Satan over the first Adam
as head of his race made him as much master of that Adam and his
descendants as he was of the angels who joined him in apostasy. By that
victory he had the power of death. Doubtless it was his object to
destroy, as to the purposes and mode of existence for which they were
created, the race with which, by the constitution of his official
Person, the Mediator was connected; and thereby to defeat him.

The victory of the second Adam over Satan, utterly despoils him of all
he had taken from the first Adam, destroys all his works, and ends in
