plans of escape which he suspected were uppermost in my mind. The
amulet, like a spiritual yeast, was silently at work within me.
Amidst the Himalayan snows, I hoped to find the master whose face
often appeared to me in visions.

The family was living now in Calcutta, where Father had been
permanently transferred. Following the patriarchal Indian custom,
Ananta had brought his bride to live in our home, now at 4 Gurpar
Road. There in a small attic room I engaged in daily meditations
and prepared my mind for the divine search.

The memorable morning arrived with inauspicious rain. Hearing the
wheels of Amar's carriage in the road, I hastily tied together a
blanket, a pair of sandals, Lahiri Mahasaya's picture, a copy of
the BHAGAVAD GITA, a string of prayer beads, and two loincloths.
This bundle I threw from my third-story window. I ran down the
steps and passed my uncle, buying fish at the door.

"What is the excitement?" His gaze roved suspiciously over my
person.

I gave him a noncommittal smile and walked to the lane. Retrieving
my bundle, I joined Amar with conspiratorial caution. We drove to
Chadni Chowk, a merchandise center. For months we had been saving
our tiffin money to buy English clothes. Knowing that my clever
brother could easily play the part of a detective, we thought to
outwit him by European garb.

On the way to the station, we stopped for my cousin, Jotin Ghosh,
whom I called Jatinda. He was a new convert, longing for a guru
in the Himalayas. He donned the new suit we had in readiness.
Well-camouflaged, we hoped! A deep elation possessed our hearts.

"All we need now are canvas shoes." I led my companions to a shop
displaying rubber-soled footwear. "Articles of leather, gotten
only through the slaughter of animals, must be absent on this holy
trip." I halted on the street to remove the leather cover from my
BHAGAVAD GITA, and the leather straps from my English-made SOLA
TOPEE (helmet).

At the station we bought tickets to Burdwan, where we planned to
transfer for Hardwar in the Himalayan foothills. As soon as the
train, like ourselves, was in flight, I gave utterance to a few of
my glorious anticipations.

"Just imagine!" I ejaculated. "We shall be initiated by the masters
and experience the trance of cosmic consciousness. Our flesh will
be charged with such magnetism that wild animals of the Himalayas
will come tamely near us. Tigers will be no more than meek house
cats awaiting our caresses!"

This remark-picturing a prospect I considered entrancing, both
metaphorically and literally-brought an enthusiastic smile from
Amar.  But Jatinda averted his gaze, directing it through the window
at the scampering landscape.

"Let the money be divided in three portions." Jatinda broke a long
silence with this suggestion. "Each of us should buy his own ticket
at Burdwan. Thus no one at the station will surmise that we are
running away together."

I unsuspectingly agreed. At dusk our train stopped at Burdwan.
Jatinda entered the ticket office; Amar and I sat on the platform.
We waited fifteen minutes, then made unavailing inquiries. Searching
in all directions, we shouted Jatinda's name with the urgency
of fright. But he had faded into the dark unknown surrounding the
little station.

I was completely unnerved, shocked to a peculiar numbness. That God
would countenance this depressing episode! The romantic occasion
of my first carefully-planned flight after Him was cruelly marred.

"Amar, we must return home." I was weeping like a child. "Jatinda's
callous departure is an ill omen. This trip is doomed to failure."

"Is this your love for the Lord? Can't you stand the little test
of a treacherous companion?"

Through Amar's suggestion of a divine test, my heart steadied
itself.  We refreshed ourselves with famous Burdwan sweetmeats,
SITABHOG (food for the goddess) and MOTICHUR (nuggets of sweet
pearl). In a few hours, we entrained for Hardwar, via Bareilly.
Changing trains at Moghul Serai, we discussed a vital matter as we
waited on the platform.

"Amar, we may soon be closely questioned by railroad officials.
I am not underrating my brother's ingenuity! No matter what the
outcome, I will not speak untruth."

"All I ask of you, Mukunda, is to keep still. Don't laugh or grin
while I am talking."

At this moment, a European station agent accosted me. He waved a
telegram whose import I immediately grasped.

"Are you running away from home in anger?"

"No!" I was glad his choice of words permitted me to make emphatic
reply. Not anger but "divinest melancholy" was responsible, I knew,
for my unconventional behavior.

The official then turned to Amar. The duel of wits that followed
hardly permitted me to maintain the counseled stoic gravity.

"Where is the third boy?" The man injected a full ring of authority
into his voice. "Come on; speak the truth!"

"Sir, I notice you are wearing eyeglasses. Can't you see that
we are only two?" Amar smiled impudently. "I am not a magician; I
can't conjure up a third companion."

The official, noticeably disconcerted by this impertinence, sought
a new field of attack.

"What is your name?"

"I am called Thomas. I am the son of an English mother and a
converted Christian Indian father."

"What is your friend's name?"

"I call him Thompson."

By this time my inward mirth had reached a zenith; I unceremoniously
made for the train, whistling for departure. Amar followed with
the official, who was credulous and obliging enough to put us into
a European compartment. It evidently pained him to think of two
half-English boys traveling in the section allotted to natives. After
his polite exit, I lay back on the seat and laughed uncontrollably.
My friend wore an expression of blithe satisfaction at having
outwitted a veteran European official.

On the platform I had contrived to read the telegram. From my brother,
it went thus: "Three Bengali boys in English clothes running away
from home toward Hardwar via Moghul Serai. Please detain them until
my arrival. Ample reward for your services."

"Amar, I told you not to leave marked timetables in your home." My
glance was reproachful. "Brother must have found one there."

My friend sheepishly acknowledged the thrust. We halted briefly
in Bareilly, where Dwarka Prasad awaited us with a telegram from
Ananta.  My old friend tried valiantly to detain us; I convinced him
that our flight had not been undertaken lightly. As on a previous
occasion, Dwarka refused my invitation to set forth to the Himalayas.

While our train stood in a station that night, and I was half asleep,
Amar was awakened by another questioning official. He, too, fell a
victim to the hybrid charms of "Thomas" and "Thompson." The train
bore us triumphantly into a dawn arrival at Hardwar. The majestic
mountains loomed invitingly in the distance. We dashed through the
station and entered the freedom of city crowds. Our first act was
to change into native costume, as Ananta had somehow penetrated
our European disguise. A premonition of capture weighed on my mind.

Deeming it advisable to leave Hardwar at once, we bought tickets to
proceed north to Rishikesh, a soil long hallowed by feet of many
masters. I had already boarded the train, while Amar lagged on
the platform. He was brought to an abrupt halt by a shout from a
policeman. Our unwelcome guardian escorted us to a station bungalow
and took charge of our money. He explained courteously that it was
his duty to hold us until my elder brother arrived.

Learning that the truants' destination had been the Himalayas, the
officer related a strange story.

"I see you are crazy about saints! You will never meet a greater
man of God than the one I saw only yesterday. My brother officer
and I first encountered him five days ago. We were patrolling by the
Ganges, on a sharp lookout for a certain murderer. Our instructions
were to capture him, alive or dead. He was known to be masquerading
as a SADHU in order to rob pilgrims. A short way before us, we
spied a figure which resembled the description of the criminal. He
ignored our command to stop; we ran to overpower him. Approaching
his back, I wielded my ax with tremendous force; the man's right
arm was severed almost completely from his body.

"Without outcry or any glance at the ghastly wound, the stranger
astonishingly continued his swift pace. As we jumped in front of
him, he spoke quietly.

"'I am not the murderer you are seeking.'

"I was deeply mortified to see I had injured the person of a
divine--looking sage. Prostrating myself at his feet, I implored
his pardon, and offered my turban-cloth to staunch the heavy spurts
of blood.

"'Son, that was just an understandable mistake on your part.' The
saint regarded me kindly. 'Run along, and don't reproach yourself.
The Beloved Mother is taking care of me.' He pushed his dangling
arm into its stump and lo! it adhered; the blood inexplicably ceased
to flow.

"'Come to me under yonder tree in three days and you will find me
fully healed. Thus you will feel no remorse.'

"Yesterday my brother officer and I went eagerly to the designated
spot. The SADHU was there and allowed us to examine his arm. It
bore no scar or trace of hurt!

"'I am going via Rishikesh to the Himalayan solitudes.' He blessed
us as he departed quickly. I feel that my life has been uplifted
through his sanctity."

The officer concluded with a pious ejaculation; his experience had
obviously moved him beyond his usual depths. With an impressive
gesture, he handed me a printed clipping about the miracle. In
the usual garbled manner of the sensational type of newspaper (not
missing, alas! even in India), the reporter's version was slightly
exaggerated: it indicated that the SADHU had been almost decapitated!

Amar and I lamented that we had missed the great yogi who could
forgive his persecutor in such a Christlike way. India, materially
poor for the last two centuries, yet has an inexhaustible fund of
divine wealth; spiritual "skyscrapers" may occasionally be encountered
by the wayside, even by worldly men like this policeman.

We thanked the officer for relieving our tedium with his marvelous
story. He was probably intimating that he was more fortunate than
we: he had met an illumined saint without effort; our earnest search
had ended, not at the feet of a master, but in a coarse police
station!

So near the Himalayas and yet, in our captivity, so far, I told
Amar I felt doubly impelled to seek freedom.

"Let us slip away when opportunity offers. We can go on foot to
holy Rishikesh." I smiled encouragingly.

But my companion had turned pessimist as soon as the stalwart prop
of our money had been taken from us.

"If we started a trek over such dangerous jungle land, we should
finish, not in the city of saints, but in the stomachs of tigers!"

Ananta and Amar's brother arrived after three days. Amar greeted
his relative with affectionate relief. I was unreconciled; Ananta
got no more from me than a severe upbraiding.

"I understand how you feel." My brother spoke soothingly. "All I
ask of you is to accompany me to Benares to meet a certain saint,
and go on to Calcutta to visit your grieving father for a few days.
Then you can resume your search here for a master."

Amar entered the conversation at this point to disclaim any intention
of returning to Hardwar with me. He was enjoying the familial
warmth.  But I knew I would never abandon the quest for my guru.

Our party entrained for Benares. There I had a singular and instant
response to my prayers.

A clever scheme had been prearranged by Ananta. Before seeing me
at Hardwar, he had stopped in Benares to ask a certain scriptural
authority to interview me later. Both the pundit and his son had
promised to undertake my dissuasion from the path of a SANNYASI.
{FN4-1}

Ananta took me to their home. The son, a young man of ebullient
manner, greeted me in the courtyard. He engaged me in a lengthy
philosophic discourse. Professing to have a clairvoyant knowledge
of my future, he discountenanced my idea of being a monk.

"You will meet continual misfortune, and be unable to find God, if
you insist on deserting your ordinary responsibilities! You cannot
work out your past karma {FN4-2} without worldly experiences."

Krishna's immortal words rose to my lips in reply: "'Even he with
the worst of karma who ceaselessly meditates on Me quickly loses
the effects of his past bad actions. Becoming a high-souled being,
he soon attains perennial peace. Arjuna, know this for certain:
the devotee who puts his trust in Me never perishes!'" {FN4-3}

But the forceful prognostications of the young man had slightly
shaken my confidence. With all the fervor of my heart I prayed
silently to God:

"Please solve my bewilderment and answer me, right here and now, if
Thou dost desire me to lead the life of a renunciate or a worldly
man!"

I noticed a SADHU of noble countenance standing just outside
the compound of the pundit's house. Evidently he had overheard
the spirited conversation between the self-styled clairvoyant and
myself, for the stranger called me to his side. I felt a tremendous
power flowing from his calm eyes.

"Son, don't listen to that ignoramus. In response to your prayer,
the Lord tells me to assure you that your sole path in this life
is that of the renunciate."

With astonishment as well as gratitude, I smiled happily at this
decisive message.

"Come away from that man!" The "ignoramus" was calling me from the
courtyard. My saintly guide raised his hand in blessing and slowly
departed.

"That SADHU is just as crazy as you are." It was the hoary-headed
pundit who made this charming observation. He and his son were
gazing at me lugubriously. "I heard that he too has left his home
in a vague search for God."

I turned away. To Ananta I remarked that I would not engage in
further discussion with our hosts. My brother agreed to an immediate
departure; we soon entrained for Calcutta.

[Illustration: I stand behind my elder brother, Ananta.--see
ananta.jpg]

[Illustration: Last Solstice Festival celebrated by Sri Yukteswar,
December, 1935. My Guru is seated in the center; I am at his
right, in the large courtyard of his hermitage in Serampore.--see
festival.jpg]

"Mr. Detective, how did you discover I had fled with two companions?"
I vented my lively curiosity to Ananta during our homeward journey.
He smiled mischievously.

"At your school, I found that Amar had left his classroom and had
not returned. I went to his home the next morning and unearthed a
marked timetable. Amar's father was just leaving by carriage and
was talking to the coachman.

"'My son will not ride with me to his school this morning. He has
disappeared!' the father moaned.

"'I heard from a brother coachman that your son and two others,
dressed in European suits, boarded the train at Howrah Station,'
the man stated. 'They made a present of their leather shoes to the
cab driver.'

"Thus I had three clues-the timetable, the trio of boys, and the
English clothing."

I was listening to Ananta's disclosures with mingled mirth and
vexation. Our generosity to the coachman had been slightly misplaced!

"Of course I rushed to send telegrams to station officials in all
the cities which Amar had underlined in the timetable. He had checked
Bareilly, so I wired your friend Dwarka there. After inquiries
in our Calcutta neighborhood, I learned that cousin Jatinda had
been absent one night but had arrived home the following morning
in European garb.  I sought him out and invited him to dinner. He
accepted, quite disarmed by my friendly manner. On the way I led him
unsuspectingly to a police station. He was surrounded by several
officers whom I had previously selected for their ferocious
appearance. Under their formidable gaze, Jatinda agreed to account
for his mysterious conduct.

"'I started for the Himalayas in a buoyant spiritual mood,' he
explained. 'Inspiration filled me at the prospect of meeting the
masters. But as soon as Mukunda said, "During our ecstasies in the
Himalayan caves, tigers will be spellbound and sit around us like
tame pussies," my spirits froze; beads of perspiration formed on
my brow.  "What then?" I thought. "If the vicious nature of the
tigers be not changed through the power of our spiritual trance,
shall they treat us with the kindness of house cats?" In my mind's
eye, I already saw myself the compulsory inmate of some tiger's
stomach-entering there not at once with the whole body, but by
installments of its several parts!'"

My anger at Jatinda's vanishment was evaporated in laughter. The
hilarious sequel on the train was worth all the anguish he had
caused me. I must confess to a slight feeling of satisfaction:
Jatinda too had not escaped an encounter with the police!

"Ananta, {FN4-4} you are a born sleuthhound!" My glance of amusement
was not without some exasperation. "And I shall tell Jatinda I am
glad he was prompted by no mood of treachery, as it appeared, but
only by the prudent instinct of self-preservation!"

At home in Calcutta, Father touchingly requested me to curb my roving
feet until, at least, the completion of my high school studies.
In my absence, he had lovingly hatched a plot by arranging for
a saintly pundit, Swami Kebalananda, {FN4-5} to come regularly to
the house.

"The sage will be your Sanskrit tutor," my parent announced
confidently.

Father hoped to satisfy my religious yearnings by instructions
from a learned philosopher. But the tables were subtly turned: my
new teacher, far from offering intellectual aridities, fanned the
embers of my God-aspiration. Unknown to Father, Swami Kebalananda
was an exalted disciple of Lahiri Mahasaya. The peerless guru had
possessed thousands of disciples, silently drawn to him by the
irresistibility of his divine magnetism. I learned later that Lahiri
Mahasaya had often characterized Kebalananda as RISHI or illumined
sage.

Luxuriant curls framed my tutor's handsome face. His dark eyes were
guileless, with the transparency of a child's. All the movements of
his slight body were marked by a restful deliberation. Ever gentle
and loving, he was firmly established in the infinite consciousness.
Many of our happy hours together were spent in deep KRIYA meditation.

Kebalananda was a noted authority on the ancient SHASTRAS or sacred
books: his erudition had earned him the title of "Shastri Mahasaya,"
by which he was usually addressed. But my progress in Sanskrit
scholarship was unnoteworthy. I sought every opportunity to forsake
prosaic grammar and to talk of yoga and Lahiri Mahasaya. My tutor
obliged me one day by telling me something of his own life with
the master.

"Rarely fortunate, I was able to remain near Lahiri Mahasaya for
ten years. His Benares home was my nightly goal of pilgrimage. The
guru was always present in a small front parlor on the first floor.
As he sat in lotus posture on a backless wooden seat, his disciples
garlanded him in a semicircle. His eyes sparkled and danced with
the joy of the Divine. They were ever half closed, peering through
the inner telescopic orb into a sphere of eternal bliss. He seldom
spoke at length. Occasionally his gaze would focus on a student in
need of help; healing words poured then like an avalanche of light.

"An indescribable peace blossomed within me at the master's glance.
I was permeated with his fragrance, as though from a lotus of
infinity.  To be with him, even without exchanging a word for days,
was experience which changed my entire being. If any invisible
barrier rose in the path of my concentration, I would meditate at
the guru's feet. There the most tenuous states came easily within
my grasp. Such perceptions eluded me in the presence of lesser
teachers. The master was a living temple of God whose secret doors
were open to all disciples through devotion.

"Lahiri Mahasaya was no bookish interpreter of the scriptures.
Effortlessly he dipped into the 'divine library.' Foam of words and
spray of thoughts gushed from the fountain of his omniscience. He
had the wondrous clavis which unlocked the profound philosophical
science embedded ages ago in the VEDAS. {FN4-6} If asked to explain
the different planes of consciousness mentioned in the ancient
texts, he would smilingly assent.

"'I will undergo those states, and presently tell you what I
perceive.' He was thus diametrically unlike the teachers who commit
scripture to memory and then give forth unrealized abstractions.

"'Please expound the holy stanzas as the meaning occurs to you.'
The taciturn guru often gave this instruction to a near-by disciple.
'I will guide your thoughts, that the right interpretation be
uttered.' In this way many of Lahiri Mahasaya's perceptions came
to be recorded, with voluminous commentaries by various students.

"The master never counseled slavish belief. 'Words are only shells,'
he said. 'Win conviction of God's presence through your own joyous
contact in meditation.'

"No matter what the disciple's problem, the guru advised KRIYA YOGA
for its solution.

"'The yogic key will not lose its efficiency when I am no longer
present in the body to guide you. This technique cannot be bound,
filed, and forgotten, in the manner of theoretical inspirations.
Continue ceaselessly on your path to liberation through KRIYA,
whose power lies in practice.'

"I myself consider KRIYA the most effective device of salvation through
self-effort ever to be evolved in man's search for the Infinite."
Kebalananda concluded with this earnest testimony. "Through its use,
the omnipotent God, hidden in all men, became visibly incarnated
in the flesh of Lahiri Mahasaya and a number of his disciples."

A Christlike miracle by Lahiri Mahasaya took place in Kebalananda's
presence. My saintly tutor recounted the story one day, his eyes
remote from the Sanskrit texts before us.

"A blind disciple, Ramu, aroused my active pity. Should he have no
light in his eyes, when he faithfully served our master, in whom
the Divine was fully blazing? One morning I sought to speak to
Ramu, but he sat for patient hours fanning the guru with a hand-made
palm-leaf PUNKHA. When the devotee finally left the room, I followed
him.

"'Ramu, how long have you been blind?'

"'From my birth, sir! Never have my eyes been blessed with a glimpse
of the sun.'

"'Our omnipotent guru can help you. Please make a supplication.'

"The following day Ramu diffidently approached Lahiri Mahasaya. The
disciple felt almost ashamed to ask that physical wealth be added
to his spiritual superabundance.

"'Master, the Illuminator of the cosmos is in you. I pray you
to bring His light into my eyes, that I perceive the sun's lesser
glow.'

"'Ramu, someone has connived to put me in a difficult position. I
have no healing power.'

"'Sir, the Infinite One within you can certainly heal.'

"'That is indeed different, Ramu. God's limit is nowhere! He who
ignites the stars and the cells of flesh with mysterious life-effulgence
can surely bring luster of vision into your eyes.'

"The master touched Ramu's forehead at the point between the eyebrows.
{FN4-7} "'Keep your mind concentrated there, and frequently chant
the name of the prophet Rama {FN4-8} for seven days. The splendor
of the sun shall have a special dawn for you.'

"Lo! in one week it was so. For the first time, Ramu beheld the
fair face of nature. The Omniscient One had unerringly directed his
disciple to repeat the name of Rama, adored by him above all other
saints. Ramu's faith was the devotionally ploughed soil in which
the guru's powerful seed of permanent healing sprouted." Kebalananda
was silent for a moment, then paid a further tribute to his guru.

"It was evident in all miracles performed by Lahiri Mahasaya that
he never allowed the ego-principle {FN4-9} to consider itself a
causative force. By perfection of resistless surrender, the master
enabled the Prime Healing Power to flow freely through him.

"The numerous bodies which were spectacularly healed through Lahiri
Mahasaya eventually had to feed the flames of cremation. But the
silent spiritual awakenings he effected, the Christlike disciples
he fashioned, are his imperishable miracles."

I never became a Sanskrit scholar; Kebalananda taught me a diviner
syntax.

{FN4-1} Literally, "renunciate." From Sanskrit verb roots, "to cast
aside."

{FN4-2} Effects of past actions, in this or a former life; from
Sanskrit KRI, "to do."

{FN4-3} BHAGAVAD GITA, IX, 30-31. Krishna was the greatest prophet
of India; Arjuna was his foremost disciple.

{FN4-4} I always addressed him as Ananta-da. DA is a respectful
suffix which the eldest brother in an Indian family receives from
junior brothers and sisters.

{FN4-5} At the time of our meeting, Kebalananda had not yet joined
the Swami Order and was generally called "Shastri Mahasaya." To avoid
confusion with the name of Lahiri Mahasaya and of Master Mahasaya
(../chapter 9), I am referring to my Sanskrit tutor only by his
later monastic name of Swami Kebalananda. His biography has been
recently published in Bengali. Born in the Khulna district of
Bengal in 1863, Kebalananda gave up his body in Benares at the age
of sixty-eight. His family name was Ashutosh Chatterji.

{FN4-6} The ancient four VEDAS comprise over 100 extant canonical
books. Emerson paid the following tribute in his JOURNAL to Vedic
thought: "It is sublime as heat and night and a breathless ocean.
It contains every religious sentiment, all the grand ethics which
visit in turn each noble poetic mind. . . . It is of no use to put
away the book; if I trust myself in the woods or in a boat upon the
pond, Nature makes a BRAHMIN of me presently: eternal necessity,
eternal compensation, unfathomable power, unbroken silence. . . .
This is her creed. Peace, she saith to me, and purity and absolute
abandonment--these panaceas expiate all sin and bring you to the
beatitude of the Eight Gods."

{FN4-7} The seat of the "single" or spiritual eye. At death the
consciousness of man is usually drawn to this holy spot, accounting
for the upraised eyes found in the dead.

{FN4-8} The central sacred figure of the Sanskrit epic, RAMAYANA.

{FN4-9} Ahankara, egoism; literally, "I do." The root cause of
dualism or illusion of MAYA, whereby the subject (ego) appears as
object; the creatures imagine themselves to be creators.



CHAPTER: 5

A "PERFUME SAINT" DISPLAYS HIS WONDERS

"To every thing there is a season, and a time to every purpose
under the heaven."

I did not have this wisdom of Solomon to comfort me; I gazed
searchingly about me, on any excursion from home, for the face of
my destined guru. But my path did not cross his own until after
the completion of my high school studies.

Two years elapsed between my flight with Amar toward the Himalayas,
and the great day of Sri Yukteswar's arrival into my life. During
that interim I met a number of sages-the "Perfume Saint," the "Tiger
Swami," Nagendra Nath Bhaduri, Master Mahasaya, and the famous
Bengali scientist, Jagadis Chandra Bose.

My encounter with the "Perfume Saint" had two preambles, one
harmonious and the other humorous.

"God is simple. Everything else is complex. Do not seek absolute
values in the relative world of nature."

These philosophical finalities gently entered my ear as I stood
silently before a temple image of Kali. Turning, I confronted a
tall man whose garb, or lack of it, revealed him a wandering SADHU.

"You have indeed penetrated the bewilderment of my thoughts!" I
smiled gratefully. "The confusion of benign and terrible aspects
in nature, as symbolized by Kali, {FN5-1} has puzzled wiser heads
than mine!"

"Few there be who solve her mystery! Good and evil is the challenging
riddle which life places sphinxlike before every intelligence.
Attempting no solution, most men pay forfeit with their lives,
penalty now even as in the days of Thebes. Here and there, a towering
lonely figure never cries defeat. From the MAYA {FN5-2} of duality
he plucks the cleaveless truth of unity."

"You speak with conviction, sir."

"I have long exercised an honest introspection, the exquisitely
painful approach to wisdom. Self-scrutiny, relentless observance of
one's thoughts, is a stark and shattering experience. It pulverizes
the stoutest ego. But true self-analysis mathematically operates
to produce seers. The way of 'self-expression,' individual
acknowledgments, results in egotists, sure of the right to their
private interpretations of God and the universe."

"Truth humbly retires, no doubt, before such arrogant originality."
I was enjoying the discussion.

"Man can understand no eternal verity until he has freed himself
from pretensions. The human mind, bared to a centuried slime, is
teeming with repulsive life of countless world-delusions. Struggles
of the battlefields pale into insignificance here, when man first
contends with inward enemies! No mortal foes these, to be overcome
by harrowing array of might! Omnipresent, unresting, pursuing man
even in sleep, subtly equipped with a miasmic weapon, these soldiers
of ignorant lusts seek to slay us all. Thoughtless is the man who
buries his ideals, surrendering to the common fate. Can he seem
other than impotent, wooden, ignominious?"

"Respected Sir, have you no sympathy for the bewildered masses?"

The sage was silent for a moment, then answered obliquely.

"To love both the invisible God, Repository of All Virtues, and
visible man, apparently possessed of none, is often baffling! But
ingenuity is equal to the maze. Inner research soon exposes a unity
in all human minds-the stalwart kinship of selfish motive. In one
sense at least, the brotherhood of man stands revealed. An aghast
humility follows this leveling discovery. It ripens into compassion
for one's fellows, blind to the healing potencies of the soul
awaiting exploration."

"The saints of every age, sir, have felt like yourself for the
sorrows of the world."

"Only the shallow man loses responsiveness to the woes of others'
lives, as he sinks into narrow suffering of his own." The SADHU'S
austere face was noticeably softened. "The one who practices a
scalpel self-dissection will know an expansion of universal pity.
Release is given him from the deafening demands of his ego. The
love of God flowers on such soil. The creature finally turns to
his Creator, if for no other reason than to ask in anguish: 'Why,
Lord, why?' By ignoble whips of pain, man is driven at last into
the Infinite Presence, whose beauty alone should lure him."

The sage and I were present in Calcutta's Kalighat Temple, whither
I had gone to view its famed magnificence. With a sweeping gesture,
my chance companion dismissed the ornate dignity.

"Bricks and mortar sing us no audible tune; the heart opens only
to the human chant of being."

We strolled to the inviting sunshine at the entrance, where throngs
of devotees were passing to and fro.
