of His mysterious providence, and the unbounded sweep of His
long-suffering forgiveness. His forgiving forbearance reaches further
than the limits of the heavens. Not till these can be measured will it
be exhausted, and the seed of Israel cast off for what they have done.

He, the Infinite Father, above all creation, mightier than it, is our
true home, and living in Him we have an abode which can never be
'dissolved,' and above us stretch far-shining glories, unapproached
masses of brightness, nebulae of blessedness, spaces where the eye
fails and the imagination faints. All is ours, our eternal possession,
the inexhaustible source of our joy. Astronomers tell of light which
has been travelling for millenniums and has not yet reached this globe;
but what is that to the flashing glories which through eternity shall
pour on us from Him? So, then, our confidence should be firm and
inexhaustible.

God has written wondrous lessons in His creation. But they are
hieroglyphs, of which the key is lost, till we hear Christ and learn of
Him. God has set His glories in the heavens and the earth is full of
His mercy, but these are lesser gifts than that which contains them all
and transcends them all, even His Son by whom He made the worlds,
and--mightier still--by whom He redeemed man. God has written His mercy
in the heavens and His faithfulness in the clouds, but His mercy and
His faithfulness are more commended to us in Him who was before all
things, and of whom it is written: 'As a vesture shalt Thou fold them
up, but Thou art the same and Thy years shall not fail.' God has
confirmed the covenant of His love to us by the faithful witnesses in
the heavens, but the love shall abide when they have perished. The
heavens bend above us all, and over the head of every man the zenith
stands. Every spot of this low earth is smiled upon by that serene
apocalypse of the loving will of God. No lane is so narrow and foul in
the great city, no spot is so bare and lonely in the waste desert, but
that thither the sunlight comes, and there some patch of blue above
beckons the downcast eye to look up. The day opens its broad bosom
bathed in light, and shows the sun in the heavens, the Lord of light,
to preach to us of the true light. The night opens deeper abysses and
fills them with stars, to preach to us how fathomless and immense His
loving kindnesses and tender mercy are. They are witnesses to thee,
dear friend, whatsoever thy heart, whatsoever thy sins, whatsoever thy
memories. No iniquity can shut out God's forgiving love. You cannot
build out the heavens. He will not be sent away; you cannot measure,
you cannot conceive, you cannot exhaust, His pardoning love. No storms
disturb that serene sky. It is always there, blazing down upon us
unclouded with all its orbs. Trust Christ; and then as years roll on,
you will find that infinite love growing ever greater to your loving
eyes, and through eternity will move onwards in the happy atmosphere
and boundless heaven of the inexhaustible, deep heart and changeless
love of God.




A THREEFOLD DISEASE AND A TWOFOLD CURE.

'I will cleanse them from all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned
against Me; and I will pardon all their iniquities, whereby they have
sinned, and whereby they have transgressed against Me.'--JER. xxxiii. 8.


Jeremiah was a prisoner in the palace of the last King of Judah. The
long, national tragedy had reached almost the last scene of the last
act. The besiegers were drawing their net closer round the doomed city.
The prophet had never faltered in predicting its fall, but he had as
uniformly pointed to a period behind the impending ruin, when all
should be peace and joy. His song was modulated from a saddened minor
to triumphant jubilation. In the beginning of this chapter he has
declared that the final struggles of the besieged will only end in
filling the land with their corpses, and then, from that lowest depth,
he soars in a burst of lyrical prophecy conceived in the highest poetic
style. The exiles shall return, the city shall be rebuilt, its desolate
streets shall ring with hymns of praise and the voices of the
bridegroom and the bride. The land shall be peopled with peaceful
husbandmen, and white with flocks. There shall be again a King upon the
throne; sacrifices shall again be offered. 'In those days, and at that
time, will I cause the branch of righteousness to grow up unto
David.... In those days shall Judah be saved, and Jerusalem shall dwell
safely; and this is the name wherewith she shall be called, the Lord
our righteousness.' That fair vision of the future begins with the
offer of healing and cure, and with the exuberant promise of my text.
The first thing to be dealt with was Judah's sin; and that being taken
away, all good and blessing would start into being, as flowerets will
spring when the baleful shadow of some poisonous tree is removed. Now,
my text at first reading seems to expend a great many unnecessary words
in saying the same thing over and over again, but the accumulation of
synonyms not only emphasises the completeness of the promise, but also
presents different aspects of that promise. And it is to these that I
crave your attention in this sermon. The great words of my text are as
true a gospel for us--and as much needed by us, God knows!--as they
were for Jeremiah's contemporaries; and we can understand them better
than either he or they did, because the days that were to come then
have come now, and the King who was to reign in righteousness is
reigning to-day, and His Name is Christ. My object now is, as simply as
I can, to draw your attention to the two points in this text: a
threefold view of our sad condition, and a twofold bright hope.

Now for the first of these. There is here--

I. A threefold view of the sad condition of humanity.

Observe the recurrence of the same idea in our text in different words:
'Their iniquity whereby they have sinned against Me.' ... 'Their
iniquity whereby they have sinned, and whereby they have transgressed
against Me.' You see there are three expressions which roughly may be
taken as referring to the same ugly fact, but yet not meaning quite the
same--'iniquity, or iniquities, sin, transgression.' These three all
speak of the same sad element in your experience and mine, but they
speak it from somewhat different points of view, and I wish to try to
bring out that difference for you.

Suppose that three men were to describe a snake. One of them fixes his
attention on its slimy coils, and describes its sinuous gliding
movements. Another of them is fascinated by its wicked beauty, and
talks about its livid markings and its glittering eye. The third thinks
only of the swift-darting fangs, and of the poison-glands. They all
three describe the snake, but they describe it from different points of
view; and so it is here. 'Iniquity,' 'sin,' 'transgression' are
synonyms to some extent, but they do not cover the same ground. They
look at the serpent from different points of view.

First, a sinful life is a twisted or warped life. The word rendered
'iniquity,' in the Old Testament, in all probability literally means
something that is not straight, but is bent, or, as I said, twisted or
warped. That is a metaphor that runs through a great many languages. I
suppose 'right' expresses a corresponding image, and means that which
is straight and direct; and I suppose that 'wrong' has something to do
with 'wrung'--that which has been forcibly diverted from a right line.
We all know the conventional colloquialism about a man being
'straight,' and such-and-such a thing being 'on the straight.' All sin
is a twisting of the man from his proper course. Now there underlies
that metaphor the notion that there is a certain line to which we are
to conform. The schoolmaster draws a firm, straight line in the child's
copybook; and then the little unaccustomed hand takes up on the second
line its attempt, and makes tremulous, wavering pot-hooks and hangers.
There is a copyhead for us, and our writing is, alas! all uneven and
irregular, as well as blurred and blotted. There is a law, and you know
it. You carry in yourself--I was going to say, the standard measure,
and you can see whether when you put your life by the side of that, the
two coincide. It is not for me to say; I know about my own, and you may
know about yours, if you will be honest. The warped life belongs to us
all.

The metaphor may suggest another illustration. A Czar of Russia was
once asked what should be the course of the railway from St. Petersburg
to Moscow, and he took up a ruler and drew a straight line upon the
chart, and said, 'There; that is the course.' There is a straight road
marked out for us all, going, like the old Roman roads, irrespective of
physical difficulties in the contour of the country, climbing right
over Alps if necessary, and plunging down into the deepest valleys,
never deflecting one hairsbreadth, but going straight to its aim. And
we--what are we? what are 'our crooked, wandering ways in which we
live,' by the side of that straight path? This very prophet has a
wonderful illustration, in which he compares the lives of men who have
departed from God to the racing about in the wilderness of a wild
dromedary, 'entangling her ways,' as he says, crossing and recrossing,
and getting into a maze of perplexity. Ah, my friend, is that not
something like your life? Here is a straight road, and there are the
devious footpaths that we have made, with many a detour, many a bend,
many a coming back instead of going forward. 'The labour of the foolish
wearieth every one of them, because he knoweth not how to go to the
city.' All sin is deflection from the straight road, and we are all
guilty of that.

Let me urge you to consult the standard that you carry within
yourselves. If you never have done it before, do it now; or, better,
when you are alone by yourselves. It is easy to imagine that a line is
straight. But did you ever see the point of a needle under a
microscope? However finely it is polished, and apparently tapering
regularly, the scrutinising investigation of the microscope shows that
it is all rough and irregular. What would a builder do if he had not a
T-square and a level? His wall would be ever so far out, whilst he
thought it perfectly perpendicular. And remember that a line at a very
acute angle of deflection only needs to be carried out far enough to
diverge so widely from the other line that you could put the whole
solar system in between the two. The smallest departure from the line
of right will end, unless it is checked, away out in the regions of
darkness beyond. That is the lesson of the first of the words here.

The second of them, rendered in our version 'sin,' if I may recur to my
former illustration, looks at the snake from a different point of view,
and it declares that all sin misses the aim. The meaning of the word in
the original is simply 'that which misses its mark.' And the meaning of
the prevalent word in the New Testament for 'sin' means, in accordance
with the ethical wisdom of the Greek, the same thing. Now, there are
two ways in which that thought may be looked at. Every wrong thing that
we do misses the aim, if you consider what a man's aim ought to be. We
have grown a great deal wiser than the Puritans nowadays, and people
make cheap reputations for advanced thought by depreciating their
theology. We have not got beyond the first answer of the Shorter
Catechism, 'Man's chief end is to glorify God, and to enjoy Him for
ever.' That is the only aim which corresponds to our constitution, to
our circumstances. A palaeontologist will pick up part of a skeleton
embedded in the rocks, and from the study of a bone or two will tell
you whether that creature was meant to swim, or to fly, or to walk;
whether its element was sea, or sky, or land. Our destination for God
is as plainly stamped on heart, mind, will, practical powers, as is the
destination of such a creature deducible from its skeleton. 'Whose
image and superscription hath it?' God's, stamped deep upon us all. And
so, brother, whatever you win, unless you win God, you have missed the
aim. Anything short of knowing Him and loving Him, serving Him, being
filled and inspired by Him, is contrary to the destiny stamped upon us
all. And if you have won God, then, whatever other human prizes you may
have missed, you have made the best of life. Unless He is yours, and
you are His, you have made a miss, and if I might venture to add, a
mess, of yourself and of your life.

Then there is another side to this. The solemn teaching of this word is
not confined to that thought, but also opens out into this other, that
all godlessness, all the low, sinful lives that so many of us live,
miss the shabby aim which they set before themselves. I do not believe
that any men or women ever got as much good, even of the lowest kind,
out of a wrong thing as they expected to get when they ventured on it.
If they did, they got something else along with it that took all the
gilt off the gingerbread. Take the lowest kind of gross evil--sins of
lust or of drunkenness. Well, no doubt the physical satisfaction
desired is secured. Yes; and what about what comes after, in addition,
that was not aimed at? The drunkard gets his pleasurable oblivion, his
desired excitement. What about the corrugated liver, the palsied hand,
the watery eye, the wrecked life, the broken hearts at home, and all
the other accompaniments? There is an old Greek legend about a certain
messenger that came to earth with a box, in which were all manner of
pleasant gifts, and down at the bottom was a speckled pest that, when
the box was emptied, crawled out into the sunshine and infected the
land. That Pandora's box is like 'the good things' that sin brings to
men. You gain, perhaps, your advantage, and you get something that
spoils it all. Is not that your experience? I do not deny that you may
satisfy your lower desires by a godless life. I know only too well how
hard it is to get people to have higher tastes, and how all we
ministers of religion are spending our efforts in order to win people
to love something better than the world can give them. I also know
that, if I could get to the very deepest recess of your hearts, you
would admit that pleasures or advantages that are complete, that is to
say, that satisfy you all round, and that are lasting, and that can
front conscience and God who is at the back of conscience, are not to
be won on the paths of sin and godlessness.

There is an old story that speaks of a knight and his company who were
travelling through a desert, and suddenly beheld a castle into which
they were invited and hospitably welcomed. A feast was spread before
them, and each man ate and drank his fill. But as soon as they left the
enchanted halls, they were as hungry as before they sat at the magic
table. That is the kind of food that all our wrongdoing provides for
us. 'He feedeth on ashes,' and hungers after he has fed. So, dear
friends, learn this ancient wisdom, which is as true today as it ever
was; and be sure, of this, that there is only one course in this world
which will give a man true, lasting satisfaction; that there is only
one life, the life of obedience to and love of God, about which, at the
end, there will not need to be said, 'This their way is their folly.'

And now, further, there is yet another word here, carrying with it
important lessons. The expression which is translated in our text
'transgressed,' literally means 'rebelled.' And the lesson of it is,
that all sin is, however little we think it, a rebellion against God.
That introduces a yet graver thought than either of the former have
brought us face to face with. Behind the law is the Lawgiver. When we
do wrong, we not only blunder, we not only go aside from the right
line, but also we lift up ourselves against our Sovereign King, and we
say, 'Who is the Lord that we should serve Him? Our tongues are our
own. Who is Lord over us? Let us break His bands asunder, and cast away
His cords from us.' There are crimes against law; there are faults
against one another. Sins are against God; and, dear friends, though
you do not realise it, this is plain truth, that the essence, the
common characteristic, of all the acts which, as we have seen, are
twisted and foolish, is that in them we are setting up another than the
Lord our God to be our ruler. We are enthroning ourselves in His place.
Do you not feel that that is true, and that in some small thing in
which you go wrong, the essence of it is that you are seeking to please
yourself, no matter what duty--which is only a heathen name for
God--says to you?

Does not that thought make all these apparently trivial and
insignificant deeds terribly important? Treason is treason, no matter
what the act by which it is expressed. It may be a little thing to haul
down a union-jack from a flagstaff, or to tear off a barn-door a
proclamation with the royal arms at the top of it, but it may be
rebellion. And if it is, it is as bad as to turn out a hundred thousand
men in the field, with arms in their hands. There are small faults,
there are trivial crimes; there are no small sins. An ounce of arsenic
is arsenic, just as much as a ton; and it is a poison just as surely.

Now I have enlarged perhaps unduly on this earlier part of my subject,
and can but briefly turn to the second division which I suggested,
viz.:--

II. The twofold bright hope which shines through this darkness.

'I will cleanse ... I will pardon.'

If sin combines in itself all these characteristics that I have touched
upon, then clearly there is guilt, and clearly there are stains; and
the gracious promise of this text deals with both the one and the other.

'I will pardon.' What is pardon? Do not limit it to the analogy of a
criminal court. When the law of the land pardons, or rather when the
administrator of the law pardons, that simply means that the penalty is
suspended. But is that forgiveness? Certainly it is only a part of it,
even if it is a part. What do you fathers and mothers do when you
forgive your child? You may use the rod or you may not, that is a
question of what is best for the child. Forgiveness does not lie in
letting him off the punishment; but forgiveness lies in the flowing to
the child, uninterrupted, of the love of the parent heart, and that is
God's forgiveness. Penalties, some of them, remain--thank God for it!
'Thou wast a God that forgavest them, though Thou tookest vengeance of
their inventions,' and the chastisement was part of the sign of the
forgiveness. The great penalty of all, which is separation from God, is
taken away; but the essence of that pardon, which it is my blessed work
to proclaim to all men, is, that in spite of the prodigal's rags and
the stench of the sty, the Father's love is round about him. It is
round about you, brother.

Do you need pardon? Do you not? What does conscience say? What does the
sense of remorse that sometimes blesses you, though it tortures, say?
There are tendencies in this generation, as always, but very strong at
present, to ignore the fact that all sin must necessarily lead to
tremendous consequences of misery. It does so in this world, more or
less. A man goes into another world as he left this one, and you and I
believe that 'after death is the judgment.' Do you not require pardon?
And how are you to get it? 'Himself bore our sins in His own body on
the tree.' Jesus Christ, the Son of God, died that the loving
forgiveness of God might find its way to every heart, and might take
all men to its bosom, whilst yet the righteousness of God remained
untarnished. I know not any gospel that goes deep enough to touch the
real sore place in human nature, except the gospel that says to you and
me and all of us, 'Behold the Lamb of God that taketh away the sin of
the world.'

But forgiveness is not enough, for the worst results of past sin are
the habits of sin which it leaves within us; so that we all need
cleansing. Can we cleanse ourselves? Let experience answer. Did you
ever try to cure yourself of some little trick of gesture, or manner,
or speech? And did you not find out then how strong the trivial habit
was? You never know the force of a current till you try to row against
it. 'Can the Ethiopian change his skin?' No; but God can change it for
him. So, again, we say that Jesus Christ who died for 'the remission of
sins that are past,' lives that He may give to each of us His own
blessed life and power, and so draw us from our evil, and invest us in
His good. Dear brother, I beseech you to look in the face the fact of
your rebellion, of your missing your aim, of your perverted life, and
to ask yourself the question, 'Can I deal either with the guilt of the
past, or with the imperative tendency to repeated sin in the future?'
You may have your leprous flesh made 'like the flesh of a little
child.' You may have your stained robe washed and made lustrous 'white
in the blood of the Lamb.' Pardon and cleansing are our two deepest
needs. There is one hand from which we can receive them both, and one
only. There is one condition on which we shall receive them, which is
that we trust in Him, 'Who was crucified for our offences, and lives to
hallow us into His own likeness.'




THE RECHABITES

'The sons of Jonadab the son of Rechab have performed the commandment
of their father, which he commanded them; but this people have not
hearkened unto Me.'--JER. xxxv. 16.


The Rechabites had lived a nomad life, dwelling in tents, not
practising agriculture, abstaining from intoxicants. They were therein
obeying the command of their ancestor, Jonadab. They had been driven by
the Babylonian invasion to take refuge in Jerusalem, and, no doubt,
were a nine days' wonder there, with their strange ways. Jeremiah
seized on their loyalty to their dead ancestor's command as an
object-lesson, by which he put a still sharper edge on his rebukes. The
Rechabites gave their ancestral law an obedience which shamed Judah's
disobedience to Jehovah. God asks from us only what we are willing to
give to one another, and God is often refused what men have but to ask
and it is given. The virtues which we exercise to each other rebuke us,
because we so often refuse to exercise them towards God.

I. Men's love to men condemns their lovelessness towards God.

These Rechabites witnessed to the power of loyal love to their
ancestor. Think of the wealth of love which we have all poured out on
husbands, wives, parents, children, and of the few drops that we have
diverted to flow towards God. What a full flood fills the one channel;
what a shrunken stream the other!

Think of the infinitely stronger reasons for loving God than for loving
our dearest.

II. Men's faith in men condemns their distrust of God.

However you define faith, you find it abundantly exercised by us on the
low plane of earthly relations. Is it belief in testimony? You men of
business regulate your course by reports of markets on the other side
of the world, and in a hundred ways extend your credence to common
report, with but little, and often with no examination of the evidence.
'If we believe the witness of men, the witness of God is greater.' And
how do we treat it? We are ready to accept and to act on men's
testimony; we are slow to believe God's, and still slower to act on it,
and to let it mould our lives.

Is faith the realising of the unseen? We exercise it in reference to
the earthly unseen; we are slow to do so in reference to the heavenly
things which are invisible.

Is faith the act of trust? Life is impossible without it. Not only is
commerce a great system of credit, but no relations of life could last
for a day without mutual confidence. We depend on one another, like a
row of slightly built houses that help to hold each other up. These
earthly exercises of trust should make it easier for us to rise to
trusting God as much as we do each other. They ought to reveal to us
the heavenly things. For indeed our human trust in one another should
be a sample and shadow of our wise trust in the adequate Object of
trust.

III. Men's obedience to human authority condemns their rebellion
against God.

Jonadab's commandment evoked implicit obedience from his descendants
for generations. Side by side in man's strange nature, with his
self-will and love of independence, lies an equally strong tendency to
obey and follow any masterful voice that speaks loudly and with an
assumption of authority. The opinions of a clique, the dogmas of a
sect, the habits of a set, the sayings of a favourite author, the
fashions of our class--all these rule men with a sway far more absolute
than is exercised on them by the known will of God. The same man is a
slave to usurped authority and a rebel against rightful and divine
dominion.

Whether we consider the law of God in its claims or its contents, or
its ultimate object, it is worthy of entire obedience. And what does it
receive?

God asks from us only what we willingly give to men. Even the qualities
and acts, such as love, trust, obedience, which as exercised towards
men give dignity and beauty and strength, rise up in judgment to
condemn us. There is a sense in which Augustine's often-denounced
saying that they are 'splendid vices' is true, for they are turned in
the wrong direction, and very often their being directed so completely
towards men and women is the reason why they are not directed towards
God, who alone deserves and alone can satisfy and reward them. Then
they become sins and condemn us.




JEREMIAH'S ROLL BURNED AND REPRODUCED

'Then took Jeremiah another roll, and gave it to Baruch ... who wrote
therein ... all the words of the book which Jehoiakim king of Judah had
burned in the fire, and there were added besides unto them many like
words.'--JER. xxxvi. 32.


This story brings us into the presence of the long death agony of the
Jewish monarchy. The wretched Jehoiakim, the last king but two who
reigned in Jerusalem, was put on the throne by the King of Egypt, as
his tributary, and used by him as a buffer to bear the brunt of the
Babylonian invasion. He seems to have had all the vices of Eastern
sovereigns. He was covetous, cruel, tyrannous, lawless, heartless,
senseless. He was lavishing money on a grand palace, built with cedar
and painted in vermilion, when the nation was in its death-throes. He
had neither valour nor goodness, and so little did he understand the
forces at work in his times that he held by the rotten support of Egypt
against the grim power of Babylon, and of course, when the former was
driven like chaff before the assault of the latter, he shared the fate
of his principal, and Judaea was overrun by Babylon, Jerusalem
captured, and the poor creature on the throne bound in chains to be
carried to Babylon, but, as would appear, discovered by Nebuchadnezzar
to be pliable enough to make it safe to leave him behind, as his
vassal. His capture took place but a few months after the incident with
which I am dealing now. It would appear probable that the confusion and
alarm of the Babylonian assault on Egypt had led to a solemn fast in
Jerusalem, at which the nation assembled. Jeremiah, who had been
prophesying for some thirty years, and had already been in peril of his
life from the godless tyrant on the throne, was led to collect, in one
book, his scattered prophecies and read them in the ears of the people
gathered for the fast. That reading had no effect at all on the people.
The roll was then read to the princes, and in them roused fear and
interested curiosity, and kindly desire for the safety of Jeremiah and
Baruch, his amanuensis. It was next read to the king, and he cut the
roll leaf by leaf and threw it on the brasier, not afraid, nor
penitent, but enraged and eager to capture Jeremiah and Baruch. The
burnt roll was reproduced by God's command, 'and there were added
besides ... many like words.'

I. The love of God necessarily prophesying evil.

As a matter of fact, the prophets of the Old Testament were all
prophets of evil. They were watchmen seeing the sword and giving
warning. No one ever spoke more plainly of the penalties of sin than
did Christ. The authoritative revelation of the consequences of
wrongdoing is an integral part of the gospel.

It is not the highest form of appeal. It would be higher to say, 'Do
right because it is right; love Christ because Christ is lovely.' The
purpose of such an appeal is to prepare us for the true gospel. But the
appeal to a reasonable self-love, by warnings of the death which is the
wages of sin, is perfectly legitimate. Dehortations from sin on the
ground of its consequences is part of God's message.

Further, the warning comes from love. Punishment must needs follow on
sin. Even His love must compel God to punish, and to warn before He
does. Surely that is kind. His punishments are made known beforehand
that we may be sure that caprice and anger have no part in inflicting
them, but that they are the settled order of an inviolable law, and
constitutional procedure of a just kind. Whether is it better to live
under a despot who smites as he will, or under a constitutional king
whose code is made public.

Surely it is needful to have clearly set forth the consequences of sin,
in view of the sophistries buzzing round us all and nestling in our own
hearts, of the deceitfulness of sin, of siren voices whispering, 'Ye
shall not surely die.'

God's prophecies of evil are all conditional. They are sent on purpose
that they may not be fulfilled.

II. The loving warnings disregarded and disliked. Jehoiakim's behaviour
is very human and like what we all do. We see the same thing repeated
in all similar crises. Cassandra. Jewish prophets. Christ. English
Commonwealth. French Revolution. Blindness to all signs and hostility
to the men that warn.

We see it in the attitude to the gospel revelation. The Scripture
doctrine of punishment always rouses antagonism, and in this day
revolts men. There is much in present tendencies to weaken the idea of
future retribution. Modern philanthropy makes it hard sometimes to
administer even human laws. The feeling is good, but this exaggeration
of it bad. It is a reaction to some extent against an unchristian way
of preaching Christian truth, but even admitting that, it still remains
true that an integral part of the Christian revelation is the
revelation of death as the wages of sin.

We see the same recoil of feeling operating in individual cases. How
many of you are quite indifferent to the preaching of a judgment to
come, or only conscious of a movement of dislike! But how foolish this
is! If a man builds a house on a volcano, is it not kind to tell him
that the lava is creeping over the side? Is it not kind to wake, even
violently, a traveller who has fallen asleep on the snow, before
drowsiness stiffens into death?

III. The impotent rejection and attempted destruction of the message.

The roll is destroyed, but it is renewed. You do not alter facts by
neglecting them, nor abrogate a divine decree by disbelieving it. The
awful law goes on its course. It is not pre-eminent seamanship to put
the look-out man in irons because he sings out, 'Breakers ahead.' The
crew do not abolish the reef _so_, but they end their last chance of
avoiding it, and presently the shock comes, and the cruel coral tears
through the hull.

IV. The neglected message made harder and heavier.

Every rejection makes a man more obdurate. Every rejection increases
criminality, and therefore increases punishment. Every rejection brings
the punishment nearer.

The increased severity of the message comes from love.

Oh, think of the infinite 'treasures of darkness' which God has in
reserve, and let the words of warning lead you to Jesus, that you may
only hear and never experience the judgments of which they warn. Give
Christ the roll of judgment and He will destroy it, nailing it to His
cross, and instead of it will give you a book full of blessing.




ZEDEKIAH

'Zedekiah the son of Josiah reigned as king ... whom Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon made king'--JER. xxxvii. 1.


Zedekiah was a small man on a great stage, a weakling set to face
circumstances that would have taxed the strongest. He was a youth at
his accession to the throne of a distracted kingdom, and if he had had
any political insight he would have seen that his only chance was to
adhere firmly to Babylon, and to repress the foolish aristocracy who
hankered after alliance with the rival power of Egypt. He was mad
enough to form an alliance with the latter, which was constructive
rebellion against the former, and was strongly reprobated by Jeremiah.
Swift vengeance followed; the country was ravaged, Zedekiah in his
fright implored Jeremiah's prayers and made faint efforts to follow his
counsels. The pressure of invasion was lifted, and immediately he
forgot his terrors and forsook the prophet. The Babylonian army was
back next year, and the final investment of Jerusalem began. The siege
lasted sixteen months, and during it, Zedekiah miserably vacillated
between listening to the prophet's counsels of surrender and the
truculent nobles' advice to resist to the last gasp. The miseries of
the siege live for ever in the Book of Lamentations. Mothers boiled
their children, nobles hunted on dunghills for food. Their delicate
complexions were burned black, and famine turned them into living
skeletons. Then, on a long summer day in July came the end. The king
tried to skulk out by a covered way between the walls, his few
attendants deserted him in his flight, he was caught at last down by
the fords of the Jordan, carried prisoner to Nebuchadnezzar at Riblah
away up in the north beyond Baalbec, and there saw his sons slain
before his eyes, and, as soon as he had seen that last sight, was
blinded, fettered, and carried off to Babylon, where he died. His
career teaches us lessons which I may now seek to bring out.

I. A weak character is sure to become a wicked one.

Moral weakness and inability to resist strong pressure was the keynote
of Zedekiah's character. There were good things in him; he had kindly
impulses, as was shown in his emancipation of the slaves at a crisis of
Jerusalem's fate. Left to himself, he would at least have treated
Jeremiah kindly, and did rescue him from lingering death in the foul
dungeon to which the ruffian nobility had consigned him, and he
provided for his being at least saved from dying of starvation during
the siege. He listened to him secretly, and would have accepted his
counsel if he had dared. But he yielded to the stronger wills of the
nobles, though he sometimes bitterly resented their domination, and
complained that 'the king is not he that can do anything against you.'

Like most weak men, he found that temptations to do wrong abounded more
than visible inducements to do right, and he was afraid to do right,
and fancied that he was compelled by the force of circumstances to do
wrong. So he drifted and drifted, and at last was smashed to fragments
on the rocks, as all men are who do not keep a strong hand on the helm
and a steady eye on the compass. The winds are good servants but bad
masters. If we do not coerce circumstances to carry us on the course
which conscience has pricked out on the chart, they will wreck us.

II. A man may have a good deal of religion and yet not enough to mould
his life.

Zedekiah listened to the prophet by fits and starts. He was eager to
have the benefit of the prophet's prayers. He liberated the slaves in
Jerusalem. He came secretly to Jeremiah more than once to know if there
were any message from God for him. Yet he had not faith enough nor
submission enough to let the known will of God rule his conduct,
whatever the nobles might say.

Are there not many of us who have a belief in God and a general
acquiescence in Christ's precepts, who order our lives now and then by
these, and yet have not come up to the point of full and final
surrender? Alas, alas, for the multitudes who are 'not far from the
kingdom,' but who never come near enough to be actually _in_ it! To be
not far from _is_ to be out of, and to be out of is to be, like
Zedekiah, blinded and captived and dead in prison at last.

III. God's love is wonderfully patient.

Jeremiah was to Zedekiah the incarnation of God's unwearied pleadings.
During his whole reign, the prophet's voice sounded in his ears,
through all the clamours and cries of factions, and mingled at last
with the shouts of the besiegers and the groans of the wounded, like
the sustained note of some great organ, persisting through a babel of
discordant noises. It was met with indifference, and it sounded on. It
provoked angry antagonism and still it spoke. Violence was used to
stifle it in vain. And it was not only Jeremiah's courageous
pertinacity that spoke through that persistent voice, but God's
unwearied love, which being rejected is not driven away, being
neglected becomes more beseeching, 'is not easily provoked 'to cease
its efforts, but 'beareth all' despite, and hopeth for softened hearts
till the last moment before doom falls.

That patient love pleads with each of us as persistently as Jeremiah
did with Zedekiah.

IV. The long-delayed judgment falls at last.

With infinite reluctance the divine love had to do what God Himself has
called 'His strange work.' Divine Justice travels slowly, but arrives
at last. Her foot is 'leaden' both in regard to its tardiness and its
weight. There is no ground in the long postponement of retribution for
the fond dream that it will never come, though men lull themselves to
sleep with that lie. 'Because sentence against an evil work is not
executed speedily, therefore the heart of the sons of men is thoroughly
set in them to do evil.' But the sentence will be executed. The
pleading love, which has for many returning autumns spared the barren
tree and sought to make it fit to bear fruit, does not prevent the
owner saying at last to his servant with the axe in his hand, 'Now!
thou shalt cut it down.'




THE WORLD'S WAGES TO A PROPHET

'And it came to pass, that when the army of the Chaldeans was broken up
from Jerusalem for fear of Pharaoh's arm, 12. Then Jeremiah went forth
out of Jerusalem to go into the land of Benjamin, to separate himself
thence in the midst of the people. 13. And when he was in the gate of
Benjamin, a captain of the ward was there, whose name was Irijah, the
son of Shelemiah, the son of Hananiah; and he took Jeremiah the
prophet, saying, Thou fallest away to the Chaldeans. 14. Then said
Jeremiah, It is false; I fall not away to the Chaldeans. But he
hearkened not to him: so Irijah took Jeremiah, and brought him to the
princes. 15. Wherefore the princes were wroth with Jeremiah, and smote
him, and put him in prison in the house of Jonathan the scribe: for
they had made that the prison. 16. When Jeremiah was entered into the
dungeon, and into the cabins, and Jeremiah had remained there many
days; 17. Then Zedekiah the king sent, and took him out: and the king
asked him secretly in his house, and said, Is there any word from the
Lord? And Jeremiah said, There is: for, said he, thou shalt be
delivered into the hand of the king of Babylon. 18. Moreover, Jeremiah
said unto king Zedekiah, What have I offended against thee, or against
thy servants, or against this people, that ye have put me in prison?
19. Where are now your prophets which prophesied unto you, saying, The
king of Babylon shall not come against you, nor against this land? 20.
Therefore hear now, I pray thee, O my lord the king: let my
supplication, I pray thee, be accepted before thee; that thou cause me
not to return to the house of Jonathan the scribe, lest I die there.
21. Then Zedekiah the king commanded that they should commit Jeremiah
into the court of the prison, and that they should give him daily a
piece of bread out of the bakers' street, until all the bread in the
city were spent. Thus Jeremiah remained in the court of the
prison.'--JER. xxxvii. 11-21.


SOME sixteen years had passed since Jehoiakim had burned the roll,
during all of which the slow gathering of the storm, which was to break
over the devoted city, had been going on, and Jeremiah had been vainly
calling on the people to return to Jehovah. The last agony was now not
far off. But there came a momentary pause in the siege, produced by the
necessity of an advance against a relieving army from Egypt, which
created fallacious hopes in the doomed city. It was only a pause. Back
came the investing force, and again the terrible, lingering process of
starving into surrender was resumed. Our text begins with the raising
of the siege, and extends to some point after its resumption. It needs
little elucidation, so clearly is the story told, and so natural are
the incidents; but perhaps we shall best gather its instruction if we
look at the three sets of actors separately, and note the hostile
authorities, the patient prophet and prisoner, and the feeble king. The
play of these strongly contrasted characters is full of vividness and
instruction.

I. We have that rough 'captain of the ward,' who laid hands on the
prophet at the gate on the north side of the city, leading to the road
to the territory of Benjamin. No doubt there was a considerable exodus
from Jerusalem when the Assyrian lines were deserted, and common
prudence would have facilitated it, as reducing the number of mouths to
be fed, in case the siege were renewed; but malice is not prudent, and,
instead of letting the hated Jeremiah slip quietly away home to
Anathoth, and so getting rid of his prophecies and him, Irijah ('the
Lord is a beholder') arrested him on a charge of meditating desertion
to the enemy. It was a colourable accusation, for Jeremiah's constant
exhortation had been to 'go out to the Chaldeans,' and so secure life
and mild treatment. But it was clearly false, for the Chaldeans were
for the moment gone, and the time was the very worst that could have
been chosen for a contemplated flight to their camp.

The real reason for the prophet's wish to leave the city was only too
simple. It was to see if he could get 'a portion'--some of his
property, or perhaps rather some little store of food--to take back to
the famine-scourged city, which, he knew, would soon be again at
starvation-point. There appears to have been a little company of
fellow-villagers with him, for 'in the midst of the people' (v. 12) is
to be construed with 'to go into the land of Benjamin.' The others seem
to have been let pass, and only Jeremiah detained, which makes the
charge more evidently a trumped-up excuse for laying hands on him.
Jeremiah calls it in plain words what it was--'a lie'--and protests his
innocence of any such design. But the officious Irijah knew too well
how much of a feather in his cap his getting hold of the prophet would
be, to heed his denials, and dragged him off to the princes.

Sixteen years ago 'the princes' round Jehoiakim had been the prophet's
friends; but either a new generation had come with a new king, or else
the tempers of the men had changed with the growing misery. Their
behaviour was more lawless than the soldiers' had been. They did not
even pretend to examine the prisoner, but blazed up at once in anger.
They had him in their power now, and did their worst, lawlessly
scourging him first, and then thrusting him into 'the house of the
pit'--some dark, underground hole, below the house of an official,
where there were a number of 'cells'--filthy and stifling, no doubt;
and there they left him. What for?

The charge of intended desertion was a mere excuse for wreaking their
malice on him. They hated Jeremiah because he had steadily opposed the
popular determination to fight, and had foretold disaster. Add to this
that he had held up a high standard of religion and morality to a
corrupt and idolatrous people, and his 'unpopularity' is sufficiently
explained.

Would that the same causes did not produce the same effects now!
Individuals still think an honest rebuke of their faults an insult, and
