the creatures of sense; and the accompaniments of dissolution and
departure fill up our hearts and our eyes. Think them all away,
believe them all away, love them all away. Stand in the light of
Christ's life, and Christ's death, and Christ's rising, till you
feel, 'Thou art a shadow, not a substance--no real thing at all.'
Yes, a shadow; and where a shadow falls there must be sunlight above
to cast it. Look up, then, above the shadow Death, above the sin and
separation from God, of which it is the shadow! Look up to the
unsetting light of the Eternal life on the throne of the universe,
and see bathed in it the living dead in Christ!

God has taken them to Himself, and we ought not to think (if we
would think as the Bible speaks) of death as being anything else
than the transitory thing which breaks down the brazen walls and
lets us into liberty. For, indeed, if you will examine the New
Testament on this subject, I think you will be surprised to find how
very seldom--scarcely ever--the word  'death' is employed to express
the mere fact of the dissolution of the connection between soul and
body. It is strange, but significant, that the Apostles, and Christ
Himself, so rarely use the word to express that which we exclusively
mean by it. They use all manner of other expressions as if they felt
that the _fact_ remains, but that all that made it death has
gone away. In a real sense, and all the more real because the
external fact continues, Christ 'hath abolished death.' Two men may go
down to the grave together: of one this may be the epitaph, 'He that
believeth in Christ shall never die'; and of the other--passing through
precisely the same physical experience and appearance, the dissolution
of soul and body, we may say,--'There, that is death--death as God
sent it, to be the punishment of man's sin.' The outward fact remains
the same, the whole inner character of it is altered. As to them that
believe, though they have passed through the experience of painful
separation--slow, languishing departure, or suddenly being caught up
in some chariot of fire; not only are they living now, but they never
died at all! Have you understood 'death' in the full, pregnant sense
of the expression, which means not only that _shadow_, the
separation of the body from the soul; but that _reality_, the
separation of the soul from life, because of the separation of the
soul from God?

Then, secondly, this text, indeed the whole incident, may set before
us the other consideration that since they have died, they live a
better life than ours.

I am not going to enter here, at any length, or very particularly,
into what seem to me to be the irrefragable scriptural grounds for
holding the complete, uninterrupted, and even intensified
consciousness of the soul of man, in the interval between death and
the Resurrection. 'Absent from the body, present with the Lord.'
'This day shalt thou be with Me in Paradise.' These words, if there
were none other, are surely enough; seeing that of all that dark
region we know only what it pleases God to tell us in the Bible, and
seeing that it does not please Him to give us more than hints and
glimpses of any part of it. But putting aside all attempts to
elaborate a full doctrine of the intermediate state from the few
Scripture expressions that bear on it, I merely allege, in general
terms, that the present life of departed saints is fuller and nobler
than that which they possessed on earth. They are even now, whatever
be the details of their condition, 'the spirits of just men made
perfect.' As yet the body is not glorified--but the spirits of the
perfected righteous are now parts of that lofty society whose head
is Christ, whose members are the angels of God, the saints on earth
and the equally conscious redeemed who 'sleep in Jesus.'

In what particulars is their life now higher than it was? First,
they have close fellowship with Christ; then, they are separated
from this present body of weakness, of dishonour, of corruption;
then, they are withdrawn from all the trouble, and toil, and care of
this present life; and then, and not least surely, they have death
behind them, not having that awful figure standing on their horizon
waiting for them to come up with it. These are some of the elements
of the life of the sainted dead. What a wondrous advance on the life
of earth they reveal if we think of them! They are closer to Christ;
they are delivered from the body, as a source of weakness; as a
hinderer of knowledge;  as a dragger-down of all the aspiring
tendencies of the soul; as a source of sin; as a source of pain.
They are delivered from all the necessity of labour which is agony,
of labour which is disproportionate to strength, of labour which
often ends in disappointment, of labour which is wasted so often in
mere keeping life in, of labour which at the best is a curse, though
it be a merciful curse too. They are delivered from that 'fear of
death' which, though it be stripped of its sting, is never
extinguished in any soul of man that lives; and they can smile at
the way in which that narrow and inevitable passage bulked so large
before them all their days, and after all, when they came to it, was
so slight and small! If these are parts of the life of them that
'sleep in Jesus,' if they are fuller of knowledge, fuller of wisdom,
fuller of love and capacity of love, and object of love; fuller of
holiness, fuller of energy, and yet full of rest from head to foot;
if all the hot tumult of earthly experience is stilled and quieted,
all the fever beating of this blood of ours for ever at an end; all
the 'slings and arrows of outrageous fortune' done with for ever,
and if the calm face which we looked last upon, and out of which the
lines of sorrow, and pain, and sickness melted away, giving it a
nobler nobleness than we had ever seen upon it in life, is only an
image of the restful and more blessed being into which they have
passed,--if the dead are thus, then 'Blessed are the dead!'

No wonder that one aspect of that blessedness--the '_sleeping_
in Jesus'--has been the one that the weary have laid hold of at all
times; but do not let us forget what lies even in that figure of
sleep, or distort it as if it meant to express a less vivid life
than that here below. I think we sometimes misunderstand what the
Bible means when it speaks about death as a sleep, by taking it to
express the idea that that intermediate state is one of a kind of
depressed consciousness, and of a less full vitality than the
present. Not so. Sleep is rest, that is one reason for the
scriptural application of the word to death. Sleep is the cessation
of all connection with the external world, that is another reason.
As we play with the names of those that are familiar to us, so a
loving faith can venture to play, as it were, with the awful name of
Him who is King of Terrors, and to minimise it down to that shadow
and reflection of itself which we find in the nightly act of going
to rest. That may be another reason. But sleep is not unconsciousness;
sleep does not touch the spirit. Sleep sets us free from relations to
the outer world but the soul works as hard, though in a different way,
when we slumber as when we wake. People who know what it is to dream,
ought never to fancy that when the Bible talks about death as sleep, it
means to say to us that death is unconsciousness. By no means. Strip the
man of the disturbance that comes from a fevered body, and he will have
a calmer soul. Strip him of the hindrances that come from a body which
is like an opaque tower around his spirit, with only a narrow slit here
and a narrow door there--five poor senses, with which he can come into
connection with an outer universe; and, then surely, the spirit will have
wider avenues out to God, and larger powers of reception, because it
has lost the earthly tabernacle which, just in proportion as it brought
the spirit into connection with the earth to which the tabernacle
belongs, severed its connection with the heavens that are above.
They who have died in Christ live a fuller and a nobler life, by the
very dropping away of the body; a fuller and a nobler life, by the
very cessation of care, change, strife and struggle; and, above all,
a fuller and nobler life, because they 'sleep _in Jesus_,' and
are gathered into His bosom, and wake with Him yonder beneath the
altar, clothed in white robes, and with palms in their hands,
'waiting the adoption--to wit, the redemption of the body.' For
though death be a progress--a progress to the spiritual existence;
though death be a birth to a higher and nobler state; though it be
the gate of life, fuller and better than any which we possess;
though the present state of the departed in Christ is a state of
calm blessedness, a state of perfect communion, a state of rest and
satisfaction;--yet it is not the final and perfect state, either.

And, therefore, in the last place, the better life, which the dead
in Christ are living now, leads on to a still fuller life when they
get back their glorified bodies.

The perfection of man is body, soul, and spirit. That is man, as God
made him. The spirit perfected, the soul perfected, without the
bodily life, is but part of the whole. For the future world, in all
its glory, we have the firm basis laid that it, too, is to be in a
real sense a material world, where men once more are to possess
bodies as they did before, only bodies through which the spirit
shall work conscious of no disproportion, bodies which shall be fit
servants and adequate organs of the immortal souls within, bodies
which shall never break down, bodies which shall never hem in nor
refuse to obey the spirits that dwell in them, but which shall add
to their power, and deepen their blessedness, and draw them closer
to the God whom they serve and the Christ after the likeness of
whose glorious body they are fashioned and conformed. 'Body, soul,
and spirit,' the old combination which was on earth, is to be the
perfect humanity of heaven. The spirits that are perfected, that are
living in blessedness, that are dwelling in God, that are sleeping
in Christ, at this moment are waiting, stretching out (I say, not
longing, but) expectant hands of faith and hope; for that they would
not be unclothed, but clothed upon with their house which is from
heaven, that mortality might be swallowed up of life.

We have nothing to say, now and here, about what that bodily
condition may be--about the differences and the identities between
it and our present earthly house of this tabernacle. Only
_this_ we know-reverse all the weakness of flesh, and you get
some faint notion of the glorious body. It is sown in corruption,
dishonour, and weakness. It is raised in incorruption, glory, and
power. Nay, more, it is sown a natural body, fit organ for the
animal life or nature, which stands connected with this material
universe; 'it is raised a spiritual body,' fit servant for the
spirit that dwells in it, that works through it, that is perfected
in its redemption.

Why, then, seek the living among the dead? 'God giveth His beloved
sleep'; and in that peaceful sleep, realities, not dreams, come
round their quiet rest, and fill their conscious spirits and their
happy hearts with blessedness and fellowship. And when thus lulled
to sleep in the arms of Christ they have rested till it please Him
to accomplish the number of His elect, then, in His own time, He
will make the eternal morning to dawn, and the hand that kept them
in their slumber shall touch them into waking, and shall clothe them
when they arise according to the body of His own glory; and they
looking into His face, and flashing back its love, its light, its
beauty, shall each break forth into singing as the rising light of
that unsetting day touches their transfigured and immortal heads, in
the triumphant thanksgiving 'I am satisfied, for I awake in Thy
likeness.'

'Therefore, comfort one another with these words,' and remember that
_we_ are of the day, not of the night; let us not, then, sleep
as do others; but let us reckon that Christ hath died for us, that
whether we wake on earth or sleep in the grave, or wake in heaven,
we may live together with Him!




THE RISEN LORD'S SELF-REVELATION TO WAVERING DISCIPLES


    'And, behold, two of them went that same day to a
    village called Emmaus, which was from Jerusalem about
    threescore furlongs. 14. And they talked together of
    all these things which had happened. 15. And it came
    to pass, that, while they communed together and
    reasoned, Jesus Himself drew near, and went with them.
    16. But their eyes were holden that they should not
    know Him. 17. And He said unto them, What manner of
    communications are these that ye have one to another,
    as ye walk, and are sad? 18. And the one of them,
    whose name was Cleopas, answering said unto Him, Art
    Thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known
    the things which are come to pass there in these days?
    19. And He said unto them, What things? And they said
    unto Him, Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a
    prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the
    people: 20. And how the chief priests and our rulers
    delivered Him to be condemned to death, and have
    crucified Him. 21. But we trusted that it had been He
    which should have redeemed Israel: and besides all
    this, to-day is the third day since these things were
    done. 22. Yea, and certain women also of our company
    made us astonished, which were early at the sepulchre;
    23. And when they found not His body, they came,
    saying, that they had also seen a vision of angels,
    which said that He was alive. 24. And certain of them
    which were with us went to the sepulchre, and found it
    even so as the women had said: but Him they saw not.
    26. Then He said unto them, O fools, and slow of heart
    to believe all that the prophets have spoken: 26. Ought
    not Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter
    into His glory? 27. And beginning at Moses and all the
    prophets, He expounded unto them in all the scriptures
    the things concerning Himself. 28. And they drew nigh
    unto the village, whither they went: and He made as
    though He would have gone further. 29. But they
    constrained Him, saying, Abide with us: for it is
    toward evening, and the day is far spent. And He went
    in to tarry with them. 30. And it came to pass, as He
    sat at meat with them, He took bread, and blessed it,
    and brake, and gave to them. 31. And their eyes were
    opened, and they knew Him; and He vanished out of
    their sight. 32 And they said one to another, Did not
    our heart burn within us, while He talked with us by
    the way and while He opened to us the scriptures?'
    --LUKE xxiv. 13-32.

These two disciples had left their companions after Peter's return
from the sepulchre and before Mary Magdalene hurried in with her
tidings that she had seen Jesus. Their coming away at such a crisis,
like Thomas's absence that day, shows that the scattering of the
sheep was beginning to follow the smiting of the shepherd. The
magnet withdrawn, the attracted particles fall apart. What arrested
that process? Why did not the spokes fall asunder when the centre
was removed? John's disciples crumbled away after his death. When
Theudas fell, all his followers 'were dispersed' and came to nought.
The Church was knit more closely together after the death that,
according to all analogy, should have scattered it. Only the fact
of the Resurrection explains the anomaly. No reasonable men would
have held together unless they had known that their Messianic hopes
had not been buried in Christ's grave. We see the beginnings of the
Resurrection of these hopes in this sweet story.

I. We have first the two sad travellers and the third who joins
them. Probably the former had left the group of disciples on purpose
to relieve the tension of anxiety and sorrow by walking, and to get
a quiet time to bring their thoughts into some order. They were like
men who had lived through an earthquake; they were stunned, and
physical exertion, the morning quiet of the country, and the absence
of other people, would help to calm their nerves, and enable them to
realise their position. Their tone of mind will come out more
distinctly presently. Here it is enough to note that the 'things
which had come to pass' filled their minds and conversation. That
being so, they were not left to grope in the dark. 'Jesus Himself
drew near, and went with them.' Honest occupation of mind with the
truth concerning Him, and a real desire to know it, are not left
unhelped. We draw Him to our sides when we wish and try to grasp the
real facts concerning Him, whether they coincide with our
prepossessions or not.

It is profoundly interesting and instructive to note the
characteristics of the favoured ones who first saw the risen Lord.
They were Mary, whose heart was an altar of flaming and fragrant
love; Peter, the penitent denier; and these two, absorbed in
meditation on the facts of the death and burial. What attracts
Jesus? Love, penitence, study of His truth. He comes to these with
the appropriate gifts for them, as truly--yea, more closely--as of
old. Perhaps the very doubting that troubled them brought Him to
their help. He saw that they especially needed Him, for their faith
was sorely wounded. Necessity is as potent a spell to bring Jesus as
desert. He comes to reward fixed and fervent love, and He comes,
too, to revive it when tremulous and cold.

'Their eyes were holden,' says Luke; and similarly 'their eyes were
opened' (ver. 31). He makes the reason for His not being recognised
a subjective one, and his narrative affords no support to the theory
of a change in our Lord's resurrection body. How often does Jesus
still come to us, and we discern Him not! Our paths would be less
lonely, and our thoughts less sad, if we realised more fully and
constantly our individual share in the promise,' I am with you
always.'

II. We have next the conversation (vs. 17-28). The unknown new-comer
strikes into the dialogue with a question which, on some lips, would
have been intrusive curiosity, and would have provoked rude retorts.
But there was something in His voice and manner which unlocked
hearts. Does He not still come close to burdened souls, and with a
smile of love on His face and a promise of help in His tones, ask us
to tell Him all that is in our hearts? 'Communications' told to Him
cease to sadden. Those that we cannot tell to Him we should not
speak to ourselves.

Cleopas naively wonders that there should be found a single man in
Jerusalem ignorant of the things which had come to pass. He forgot
that the stranger might know these, and not know that they were
talking about them. Like the rest of us, he fancied that what was
great to him was as great to everybody. What _could_ be the
subject of their talk but the one theme? The stranger assumes
ignorance, in order to win to a full outpouring. Jesus wishes us to
put all fears and doubts and shattered hopes into plain words to
Him. Speech to Christ cleanses our bosoms of much perilous stuff.
Before He speaks in answer we are lightened.

Very true to nature is the eager answer of the two. The silence once
broken, out flows a torrent of speech, in which love and grief,
disciples' pride in their Master, and shattered hopes, incredulous
bewilderment and questioning wonder, are blended.

That long speech (vs. 19-24) gives a lively conception of the two
disciples' state of mind. Probably it fairly represented the thought
of all. We note in it the limited conception of Jesus as but a
prophet, the witness to His miracles and teaching (the former being
set first, as having more impressed their minds), the assertion of
His universal appreciation by the 'people,' the charging of the
guilt of Christ's death on 'our rulers,' the sad contrast between
the officials' condemnation of Him and their own fond Messianic
hopes, and the despairing acknowledgment that these were shattered.

The reference to 'the third day' seems to imply that the two had
been discussing the meaning of our Lord's frequent prophecy about
it. The connection in which they introduce it looks as if they were
beginning to understand the prophecy, and to cherish a germ of hope
in His Resurrection, or, at all events, were tossed about with
uncertainty as to whether they dared to cherish it. They are chary
of allowing that the women's story was true; naively they attach
more importance to its confirmation by men. 'But Him they saw not,'
and, so long as He did not appear, they could not believe even
angels saying 'that He was alive.'

The whole speech shows how complete was the collapse of the
disciples' Messianic hopes, how slowly their minds opened to admit
the possibility of Resurrection, and how exacting they were in the
matter of evidence for it, even to the point of hesitating to accept
angelic announcements. Such a state of mind is not the soil in which
hallucinations spring up. Nothing but the actual appearance of the
risen Lord could have changed these sad, cautious unbelievers to
lifelong confessors. What else could have set light to these rolling
smoke-clouds of doubt, and made them flame heaven-high and world-wide?

'The ingenuous disclosure of their bewilderment appealed to their
Companion's heart, as it ever does. Jesus is not repelled by doubts
and perplexities, if they are freely spoken to Him. To put our
confused thoughts into plain words tends to clear them, and to bring
Him as our Teacher. His reproach has no anger in it, and inflicts no
pain, but puts us on the right track for arriving at the truth. If
these two had listened to the 'prophets,' they would have understood
their Master, and known that a divine 'must' wrought itself out in
His Death and Resurrection. How often, like them, do we torture
ourselves with problems of belief and conduct of which the solution
lies close beside us, if we would use it?

Jesus claimed 'all the prophets' as His witnesses. He teaches us to
find the highest purpose of the Old Testament in its preparation for
Himself, and to look for foreshadowings of His Death and
Resurrection there. What gigantic delusion of self-importance that
was, if it was not the self-attestation of the Incarnate Word, to
whom all the written word pointed! He will still, to docile souls,
be the Interpreter of Scripture. They who see Him in it all are
nearer its true appreciation than those who see in the Old Testament
everything but Him.

III. We have finally the disclosure and disappearance of the Lord.
The little group must have travelled slowly, with many a pause on
the road, while Jesus opened the Scriptures; for they left the city
in the morning, and evening was near before they had finished their
'threescore furlongs' (between seven and eight miles). His presence
makes the day's march seem short.

'He made as though He would have gone further,' not therein assuming
the appearance of a design which He did not really entertain, but
beginning a movement which He would have carried out if the
disciples' urgency had not detained Him. Jesus forces His company on
no man. He 'would have gone further' if they had not said 'Abide
with us.' He will leave us if we do not keep Him. But He delights to
be held by beseeching hands, and our wishes 'constrain' Him. Happy
are they who, having felt the sweetness of walking with Him on the
weary road, seek Him to bless their leisure and to add a more
blissful depth of repose to their rest!

The humble table where Christ is invited to sit, becomes a sacred
place of revelation. He hallows common life, and turns the meals
over which He presides into holy things. His disciples' tables
should be such that they dare ask their Lord to sit at them. But
how often He would be driven away by luxury, gross appetite, trivial
or malicious talk! We shall all be the better for asking ourselves
whether we should like to invite Jesus to our tables. He is there,
spectator and judge, whether invited or not.

Where Jesus is welcomed as guest He becomes host. Perhaps something
in gesture or tone, as He blessed and brake the bread, recalled the
loved Master to the disciples' minds, and, with a flash, the glad
'It is He!' illuminated their souls. That was enough. His bodily
presence was no longer necessary when the conviction of His risen
life was firmly fixed in them. Therefore He disappeared. The old
unbroken companionship was not to be resumed. Occasional
appearances, separated by intervals of absence, prepared the
disciples gradually for doing without His visible presence.

If we are sure that He has risen and lives for ever, we have a
better presence than that. He is gone from our sight that He may be
seen by our faith. That 'now we see Him not' is advance on the
position of His first disciples, not retrogression. Let us strive to
possess the blessing of 'those who have not seen, and yet have
believed.'




DETAINING CHRIST


    'And they drew nigh unto the village, whither they
    went: and He made as though He would have gone further.
    29. But they constrained Him, saying, Abide with us:
    for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent.
    And He went in to tarry with them.'--LUKE xxiv. 28, 29.

Of course, a chance companion, picked up on the road, is dropped when
the journey's end is reached. When these two disciples had come to
Emmaus, perhaps arriving at some humble inn or caravanserai, or
perhaps at the home of one of them, it would have been an unmannerly
intrusion for the Stranger who had met them on the road, and could
accompany them there without rudely forcing Himself on them, to have
inflicted His company further on them unless they had wished it. And so
'He made as though He would have gone further,' not pretending what
He did not mean, but doing what was but natural and proper in the
circumstances. But Jesus had a further motive for showing His intention
of parting company at the door of t he house in Emmaus. He desired to
evoke the expression of the desire of His two fellow-walkers that He
should tarry with them. Having evoked it, then with infinite
willingness omnipotence lets itself be controlled by feebleness, and
Jesus suffers Himself to be constrained by those whom, unknown to
themselves, He was gently and mightily constraining. 'He _made as
though,'_ unfortunately suggests to an English reader the idea of
acting a part, and of seeming to intend what was not really intended.
But there is no such thought in Luke's mind.

The first suggestion that strikes one from this incident is just
this: Jesus Christ will certainly leave us if we do not detain Him.

It is no more certain that that walk to Emmaus had its end, and that
that first day of the week, day of Resurrection though it was, was
destined to close in sunset and evening darkness, than that all
seasons of quickened intercourse with Jesus Christ, all times when
duty and grace and privilege seem to be very great and real, all
times when we awake more than ordinarily to the recognition of the
Presence of the Lord with us and of the glories that lie beyond,
tend to end and to leave us bare and deprived of the vision, unless
there be on our parts a distinct and resolute effort to make
perpetual that which in its nature is transient and comes to a
close, unless we avert its cessation. All motion tends to rest, and
Christian feeling falls under the same law. Nay, the more thrilling
the moment's experience the more exhausting is it, and the more
certain to be followed by depression and collapse. 'Action and
reaction are equal and contrary.' The height of the wave determines
the depth of the trough. Therefore Christian people have to be
specially careful towards the end of a time of special vitality and
earnestness; because, unless they by desire and by discipline of
their minds interpose, the natural result will be deadness in
proportion to the previous excitement. 'He made as though He would
have gone further,' and He certainly will unless His retreating
skirts be grasped at by the outstretched hands of faith and desire,
and the prayer go after Him, 'Abide with us for it is toward
evening.'

That is quite true, too, in another application of the incident.
Convictions, spiritual experiences of a rudimentary sort, certainly
die away and leave people harder and worse than they were before,
unless they be fostered and cherished and brought to maturity and
invested with permanence by the honest efforts of the subjects of
the same. The grace of God, in the preaching of His Gospel, is like
a flying summer shower. It falls upon one land and then passes on
with its treasures and pours them out somewhere else. The religious
history of many countries and of long centuries is a commentary
written out in great and tragic characters on the profound truth
that lies in the simple incident of my text. Look at Palestine, look
at Asia Minor, at the places where the Gospel first won its
triumphs; look at Eastern Europe. What is the present condition of
these once fair lands but an illustration of this principle, that
Christ who comes to men in His grace is kept only by the earnestness
and faithfulness and desire of the men to whom He comes?

And you and I, dear brethren, both as members of a Christian
community and in our individual capacity, have our religious
blessings on the same conditions as Ephesus and Constantinople had
theirs, and may fling them away by the same negligence as has ruined
large tracts of the world through long ages of time. Christ will
certainly go unless you keep Him.

Then further, notice from my text this other thought, that Christ
seeks by His action to stimulate our desires for Him.

'He made as though He would have gone further.' But while His feet were
directed to the road His heart remained with His two fellow-travellers
whom He was apparently leaving, and His wish was that the sight of His
retiring figure might kindle in their hearts great outgoings of desire
to which He would so gladly yield. It is the same action on His part,
only under a slightly different form, but actuated by the same motive
and the same in substance, as we find over and over again in the
gospels. You remember the instances. I need only refer to them in a word.

Here is one: the dark lake, the rising moon behind the Eastern
hills, a figure coming out of the gloom across the stormy sea, and
when He reached the tossing fishing cobble it seemed as if He would
have passed by; and He would, but that the cry flung out over the
dark water stopped Him.

Here are two blind men sitting by the roadside crying 'Thou Son of
David, have mercy upon us.' Not a word, not even a glance over His
shoulder, no stopping of His resolved stride; onwards towards
Jerusalem, Pilate, and Calvary. Because He did not heed their cry?
Because He did not infinitely long to help them? No. The purpose of
His apparent indifference was attained when 'they cried the more
earnestly, Thou Son of David, have mercy upon us.'

Here is another. A woman half mad with anguish for her demon-ridden
daughter, calling after Him with the shrill shriek of Eastern sorrow
and disturbing the fine nerves of the disciples, but causing no
movements nor any sign that He even heard, or if He heard, heeded,
the ear-piercing and heart-moving cries. Why was that ear which was
always open to the call of misery closed now? Because He wished to
bring her to such an agony of desire as might open her heart very
wide for an amplitude of blessing; and so He let her cry, knowing
that the longer she called the more she would wish, and that the
more she wished the more He would bestow.

And that is what He does with us all sometimes: seeming to leave our
wishes and our yearnings all unnoticed. Then the devil says to us,
'What's the use of crying to Him? He does not hear you.' But faith
hears the promise: 'Open thy mouth wide and I will fill it,' though
to sense there seems to be 'no voice nor any that answered.'

Christ has no other reason in any of the delays and trying
prolongations of His answers than to make us capable of larger
blessing, because delay deepens our longing. He is infinitely
wishful to-day, as He was on that Resurrection evening, to draw near
to every heart and pour upon it the whole sunlit cataract of the
mighty fact that He lives to bless. But He cannot come to us unless
we desire Him, and He cannot give to us more of Himself than we
wish; and therefore He is obliged, as the first thing, to make our
desires larger and fuller, and then He will answer them. 'He could
there do no mighty works because of their unbelief.'

Our faithlessness limits His power; our faith is the measure of our
capacity.

Lastly, the text reminds us that Jesus Christ is glad to be forced.

'They _constrained_': a very strong word, kindred to the other
one which our Lord Himself employs when He speaks about the 'kingdom
of heaven suffering violence, and the violent taking it by force.'
That bold expression gives emphatic utterance to the truth that
there is a real power lodged in the desires of humble hearts that
desire Him, so as that they can prescribe to Him what He shall do
for them and how much of Himself He shall give them. Our feebleness
can in a measure set in motion and regulate the energy of
Omnipotence. 'They constrained Him.'

Do you remember who it was that was called 'a prince with God' and
how he won the title and was able to prevail? We, too, have the
charter given to us that we can--I speak it reverently--guide God's
hand and compel Omnipotence to bless us. We master Nature by
yielding to it and utilising its energies. We have power with God by
yielding to Him and conforming our desires to the longings of His
heart and asking the things that are according to His will.
'Concerning the work of My hands _command_ ye Me.' And what we,
leaning on His promise and in unison with His mighty purpose of
love, desire, _that_ will as certainly come down to us as every
stream must pour into the lowest levels and fill the depressions in
its course.

You can make sure of Christ if two things are yours. He will always
remain with us if, on the one hand, we wish for Him honestly and
really to be with us all the day long, which would be extremely
inconvenient for some of us; and if, on the other hand, we take care
not to do the acts nor cultivate the tempers which drive Him away.
For 'How can two walk together except they be agreed?' And how can
we ask Him to come in and sit down in a house which is all full of
filth and worldliness? Turn the demons out and open the door, and
anything is more likely than that the door will stand gaping and the
doorway be unfilled by the meek presence of the Christ that enters
in.

The old prayer is susceptible of application to our community and to
our individual hearts. When Israel prayed, 'Arise, O Lord, into Thy
rest; Thou and the Ark of Thy strength,' the answer was prompt and
certain. 'This is My rest for ever; here will I dwell, for I have
desired it.' But the divine desire was not accomplished till the
human desire opened the Temple gates for the entrance of the Ark.

'He made as though He would have gone further'; but they constrained
Him, and then He entered in.




THE MEAL AT EMMAUS


    'And it came to pass, as He sat at meat with them, He
    took bread, and blessed it, and brake, and gave to
    them. 31. And their eyes were opened, and they knew Him;
    and He vanished out of their sight.'--LUKE xxiv. 30, 31.

Perhaps the most striking characteristic of the Gospel accounts of
our Lord's intercourse with His disciples, in the interval between
the Resurrection and His Ascension, is the singular union of mystery
and simplicity which they present. There is a certain air of
remoteness and depth over all the intercourse, as if it meant more,
and was intended to teach more, than appears on the surface, as I
believe it was intended. And yet, at the same time, there is, along
with that, in most singular combination, the very utmost simplicity,
amounting almost sometimes to baseness and rudeness, as for
instance, here. Some poor house of entertainment, possibly, at any
rate, some poor man's house, in a little country village; the
company these two talkative, and yet despondent disciples; the fare
and the means of manifestation a bit of barley-bread; and out of
these materials are woven lessons that will live in the Church in
all ages. 'He took bread and blessed it, and brake.' These are the
words, almost verbatim, of the institution of the Lord's Supper.
They are the words, almost verbatim, with which more than one of the
Evangelists describes the miraculous feeding of the four and the
five thousand; and it was the old familiar act, expressed by the
Evangelist by the old familiar words, that opened the disciples'
eyes, and they knew Him. How simply the process of discovery is
told! It was quite natural that a casual stranger upon the road
should not say who He was; it was quite as natural that when He
entered into the closer relationship of sitting with the disciples
at the table, and sharing their hospitality, they should expect, as
indeed they did expect, that as they had been frank with Him, He
would be frank with them, and they would find out now who this
unknown teacher and apparent Rabbi was. And so, as it would seem, in
silence, or at least with nothing of any moment, the meal went on,
but all at once, at some point in the meal, the guest assumes the
position of the master of the house, takes upon Himself the function
and office of host, interrupts the progress of the meal by the
solemn prayer of blessing; and whilst the singularity of the action
drew their attention, perhaps some little peculiarity in His way of
doing it, or something else, opened the door for a whole stream of
associations and half-dormant remembrances to rush in, and they
remembered what they had heard of the last supper,--for these two
were not at it,--and they remembered what they had seen,--miraculous
feedings; and they remembered no doubt how He had always done with
them in the happy old days when He communed with them. At all
events, by the natural action of breaking the bread and sharing
it amongst them, the subjective hindrances which had stood in the
way of their recognising Him dropped away like scales from their
eyes, and they beheld Him, and then, without a word, He vanished out
of their sight, and the wearied, hungry men girded up their loins
and rushed back to Jerusalem to tell the brethren the story.

Now, I think that, taking the event as it stands before us, and
especially marking the obviously intended parallelism in expression,
and I hare no doubt in action, between former miracles, the
institution of the Lord's Supper, and this neither sacramental nor
religious meal in the little village--I think we may get some
lessons worth pondering.

I confine myself quite simply to the three points of the narrative:--

  The distribution of the bread;
  The discovery;
  And the disappearance.

'He took bread and blessed it, and brake and gave to them, and their
eyes were opened, and they knew Him; and He vanished out of their
sight.'

I. Look, then, for a moment or two at the thoughts which I think are
intended to be conveyed to us by that first point--the action of
breaking and distributing the bread.

I have said, incidentally, in my previous remarks, that there is a
singular air of remoteness, removedness, mystery, reticence, about
our Lord's relations to His disciples in the interval of these forty
days; and I suppose that that change from the frankness of His
former relations and the close contact in which the Apostles and
disciples had been brought during all the previous three years--I
suppose that that was intended to be the beginning of the
preparation of weaning and preparing them to do without Him
altogether. And along with that removedness, there is also, as I
take it, and as I have already said, a great depth of significance
about the whole of these events which lead people to deal with them
as being symbols, types, exhibitions on a material platform of great
spiritual truths; and although the habit of finding symbolical
meaning in historical events, especially as applied to the Gospels,
has been full of all manner of mischief, yet that there is that
element is not to be denied; and whilst we have to keep it down and
be very careful in our application of it, lest in finding ingenious
fanciful meanings, we lose the plain prose, which is always the best
and the most important, yet that element is there, and we have to
take heed that we do not push the denial of it to excess, as the
recognition of it has often been pushed. And so, from these two
points of view. I think the thing should be looked at. The plain
prose, then, of the matter is this--that at a given point in this
humble road-side meal, our Lord having been guest, having been
constrained to enter in by the loving importunity of these people,
becomes the host, takes upon Himself the position of the head of the
household, and in that position so acts as to bring to the disciples'
remembrance former deeds of miracles, and the institution of the
ordinance of the Lord's Supper, and that was the means of their
recognition.

Well, then, if so, I think that we may say fairly that in this
breaking and distribution of the bread, there is first of all this
lesson--the old familiar blessed intercourse between Him and them
had not been put an end to then by all that had passed during these
three mysterious days; but they were as they used to be in regard to
the closeness of their relationship and the reality of their
intercourse. No doubt, in the former years, Christ had been in the
habit of always acting as the Head of the little family. When they
gathered for their frugal meals, He was the master, they the
disciples; He the elder brother, and they gathered about Him. And He
assumes the old position; and if we will try for a moment to throw
ourselves into their position and to see with their eyes, we shall
understand the pathetic beauty--I was going to say the poetic
beauty, but perhaps you would not like that word to be applied to
the history of our Redeemer--the pathetic beauty of the deed. They
had been thinking of themselves as forsaken of Him; the grave had
broken off all their sweet and blessed intercourse; they were alone
now. 'We trusted that it had been He which should have redeemed
Israel.' He is gone! Even the poor consolation of looking upon the
place where He lies is denied us; for whatever may be doubtful this
is certain, that the grave is open and the body is not there. And so
they felt lost and scattered; and there comes to them this gleam of
consolation--I take my place amongst you just as I used to do; 'I am
He that liveth and was dead, and behold, I am alive for evermore.'
We used to sit together at the table; let that be repeated here once
more that you may learn, and all the world through you may learn,
that the accident of death, which affects only the externals of
society, has no power over the reality of the bond that knits even
two human hearts with love together, still less a power over the
reality of the bond that binds us to our Master. Death vanishes as a
nothing in their intercourse;  they stand where they were; the
fellowship is unbroken; the society is the same; all that there used
to be of love and friendship, of peaceful concord, of true
association; it abides for ever!

Thus, heavy with meaning and full of immortal hope may be the
simplest act wrought with the simplest materials, when the dead
Christ who lives takes His old place in the midst of His disciples,
and once again as He used to do, parts the bread between them. And,
dear brethren, though it has nothing to do with my present purpose,
may this thought not add a wider application to our text; may it not
be a comfort and hope to many of us to remember that the grim shadow
that stretches athwart our path, and gathers into its blackness so
many of our sunny sparkling joys, and takes the light and the
movement and the colour out of them, is only a shadow, and that the
substance lives in the shadow as it used to live in the sunshine,
and passes through the shadow and comes out on the other side,
blazing in more than its former lustre, and rich with more than its
former preciousness? For all whom we have loved and lost, the death
which was a nothing in regard to Christ's intercourse with His
disciples, is a nothing, too, in regard to our real intercourse and
sense of society and unity with them. They live in Him, and they are
more worthy to be loved than ever they were before. He who has
conquered Death for Himself has conquered it for us all; and every
true and pure human affection rooted in Him is as immortal as the
love that binds souls to Himself. Therefore, let us remember that
they sit at His table, and that we shall sit there some day too.

II. Well, then, still further, another idea that I think belongs to
this first part of our thoughts as to the profound significance of our
Lord's here assuming the office and function of host, is this--we are
thereby taught the same lesson that we are taught by His institution
of the Communion, and taught by the whole details of His relation to
His disciples upon earth--that the true idea of the relation which
results from Him and His Presence is that of the Family.

He takes His place at the head of the table; He is the Lord of the
household, though it be but a household of two men, and they belong
to the family and the society which He founds. Now it seems to me
that next to the great lesson which the Lord's Supper teaches us in
reference to our individual dependence upon Him, His death as being
all our hope and all our life, this is the most important lesson
that it teaches--the simplicity of the rite, the fact that it was
based upon the Jewish rite, which was a purely domestic one; the
fact that our Lord steps into the place of the head of the household
by His very presiding at the Passover service amongst His disciples;
the fact that He parts the common materials of the common meal and
uses them and it as the symbols of His death, and of our life
thereby--all that teaches us the same thing which the whole strain
of His teaching and the whole strain of the New Testament sets
forth--that the Church of Christ is then understood when we think of
it as being one family in Him, bound together by the bands of a
close brotherhood, relying upon Him as the fountain of its life;
having fellowship with one Father through that elder Brother;
pledged, therefore, to all fraternal kindness and frankness of
communion and of mutual help, and gladdened by the hope of
journeying onwards to Him. We cannot, of course, apply the analogy
round and round; but of all the forms of human association which
Christ has honoured and glorified by laying His hand upon them, and
showing that they are symbols of the society that He founds, and of
which He is the centre, it is not the kingdom, but the family that
is the nearest approach to the Church of the living God.

And you and I, Christian men and women, if we come and sit at that
table of our Lord, let us remember that we thereby declare, not only
for ourselves that we enter into individual relations of reliance
upon Him, and draw our life from Him, but that we pledge ourselves
to the family bond, to be true to the brotherhood, that we declare
ourselves the sons of God and the brethren of all that are partakers
of the like precious faith. The thing has become a word, a name
amongst us. I wonder if any of you remember the bitter saying of one
of our modern teachers; he says that he found out somehow or other
how much less 'brethren' in the Church meant than 'brothers' out of
it. Let us learn the lesson and take the rebuke, and remember that
if the Lord's Supper means anything, it means that we belong to the
household of faith, and are members of the great family in heaven
and in earth.
