fifty-nine and the number of slokas composed by the great Vyasa--the
spreader of the fame of the Kauravas--is three thousand, two hundred and
twenty.

"Then shall I describe the Parva called Sauptika of frightful incidents.
On the Pandavas having gone away, the mighty charioteers, Kritavarman,
Kripa, and the son of Drona, came to the field of battle in the evening
and there saw king Duryodhana lying on the ground, his thighs broken, and
himself covered with blood. Then the great charioteer, the son of Drona,
of terrible wrath, vowed, 'without killing all the Panchalas including
Drishtadyumna, and the Pandavas also with all their allies, I will not
take off armour.' Having spoken those words, the three warriors leaving
Duryodhana's side entered the great forest just as the sun was setting.
While sitting under a large banian tree in the night, they saw an owl
killing numerous crows one after another. At the sight of this,
Aswatthaman, his heart full of rage at the thought of his father's fate,
resolved to slay the slumbering Panchalas. And wending to the gate of the
camp, he saw there a Rakshasa of frightful visage, his head reaching to
the very heavens, guarding the entrance. And seeing that Rakshasa
obstructing all his weapons, the son of Drona speedily pacified by worship
the three-eyed Rudra. And then accompanied by Kritavarman and Kripa he
slew all the sons of Draupadi, all the Panchalas with Dhrishtadyumna and
others, together with their relatives, slumbering unsuspectingly in the
night. All perished on that fatal night except the five Pandavas and the
great warrior Satyaki. Those escaped owing to Krishna's counsels, then the
charioteer of Dhrishtadyumna brought to the Pandavas intelligence of the
slaughter of the slumbering Panchalas by the son of Drona. Then Draupadi
distressed at the death of her sons and brothers and father sat before her
lords resolved to kill herself by fasting. Then Bhima of terrible prowess,
moved by the words of Draupadi, resolved, to please her; and speedily
taking up his mace followed in wrath the son of his preceptor in arms. The
son of Drona from fear of Bhimasena and impelled by the fates and moved
also by anger discharged a celestial weapon saying, 'This is for the
destruction of all the Pandavas'; then Krishna saying. 'This shall not be',
neutralised Aswatthaman's speech. Then Arjuna neutralised that weapon by
one of his own. Seeing the wicked Aswatthaman's destructive intentions,
Dwaipayana and Krishna pronounced curses on him which the latter returned.
Pandava then deprived the mighty warrior-in-chariot Aswatthaman, of the
jewel on his head, and became exceedingly glad, and, boastful of their
success, made a present of it to the sorrowing Draupadi. Thus the tenth
Parva, called Sauptika, is recited. The great Vyasa hath composed this in
eighteen sections. The number of slokas also composed (in this) by the
great reciter of sacred truths is eight hundred and seventy. In this Parva
has been put together by the great Rishi the two Parvas called Sauptika
and Aishika.

"After this hath been recited the highly pathetic Parva called Stri,
Dhritarashtra of prophetic eye, afflicted at the death of his children,
and moved by enmity towards Bhima, broke into pieces a statue of hard iron
deftly placed before him by Krishna (as substitute of Bhima). Then Vidura,
removing the distressed Dhritarashtra's affection for worldly things by
reasons pointing to final release, consoled that wise monarch. Then hath
been described the wending of the distressed Dhritarashtra accompanied by
the ladies of his house to the field of battle of the Kauravas. Here
follow the pathetic wailings of the wives of the slain heroes. Then the
wrath of Gandhari and Dhritarashtra and their loss of consciousness. Then
the Kshatriya ladies saw those heroes,--their unreturning sons, brothers,
and fathers,--lying dead on the field. Then the pacification by Krishna of
the wrath of Gandhari distressed at the death of her sons and grandsons.
Then the cremation of the bodies of the deceased Rajas with due rites by
that monarch (Yudhishthira) of great wisdom and the foremost also of all
virtuous men. Then upon the presentation of water of the manes of the
deceased princes having commenced, the story of Kunti's acknowledgment of
Karna as her son born in secret. Those have all been described by the
great Rishi Vyasa in the highly pathetic eleventh Parva. Its perusal
moveth every feeling heart with sorrow and even draweth tears from the
eyes. The number of sections composed is twenty-seven. The number of
slokas is seven hundred and seventy-five.

"Twelfth in number cometh the Santi Parva, which increaseth the
understanding and in which is related the despondency of Yudhishthira on
his having slain his fathers, brothers, sons, maternal uncles and
matrimonial relations. In this Parva is described how from his bed of
arrows Bhishma expounded various systems of duties worth the study of
kings desirous of knowledge; this Parva expounded the duties relative to
emergencies, with full indications of time and reasons. By understanding
these, a person attaineth to consummate knowledge. The mysteries also of
final emancipation have been expatiated upon. This is the twelfth Parva
the favourite of the wise. It consists of three hundred and thirty-nine
sections, and contains fourteen thousand, seven hundred and thirty-two
slokas.

"Next in order is the excellent Anusasana Parva. In it is described how
Yudhishthira, the king of the Kurus, was reconciled to himself on hearing
the exposition of duties by Bhishma, the son of Bhagirathi. This Parva
treats of rules in detail and of Dharma and Artha; then the rules of
charity and its merits; then the qualifications of donees, and the supreme
ride-regarding gifts. This Parva also describes the ceremonials of
individual duty, the rules of conduct and the matchless merit of truth.
This Parva showeth the great merit of Brahmanas and kine, and unraveleth
the mysteries of duties in relation to time and place. These are embodied
in the excellent Parva called Anusasana of varied incidents. In this hath
been described the ascension of Bhishma to Heaven. This is the thirteenth
Parva which hath laid down accurately the various duties of men. The
number of sections, in this is one hundred and forty-six. The number of
slokas is eight thousand.

"Then comes the fourteenth Parva Aswamedhika. In this is the excellent
story of Samvarta and Marutta. Then is described the discovery (by the
Pandavas) of golden treasuries; and then the birth of Parikshit who was
revived by Krishna after having been burnt by the (celestial) weapon of
Aswatthaman. The battles of Arjuna the son of Pandu, while following the
sacrificial horse let loose, with various princes who in wrath seized it.
Then is shown the great risk of Arjuna in his encounter with Vabhruvahana
the son of Chitrangada (by Arjuna) the appointed daughter of the chief of
Manipura. Then the story of the mongoose during the performance of the
horse-sacrifice. This is the most wonderful Parva called Aswamedhika. The
number of sections is one hundred and three. The number of slokas composed
(in this) by Vyasa of true knowledge is three thousand, three hundred and
twenty.

"Then comes the fifteenth Parva called Asramvasika. In this, Dhritarashtra,
abdicating the kingdom, and accompanied by Gandhari and Vidura went to the
woods. Seeing this, the virtuous Pritha also, ever engaged in cherishing
her superiors, leaving the court of her sons, followed the old couple. In
this is described the wonderful meeting through the kindness of Vyasa of
the king (Dhritarashtra) with the spirits of his slain children, grand-
children, and other princes, returned from the other world. Then the
monarch abandoning his sorrows acquired with his wife the highest fruit of
his meritorious actions. In this Parva, Vidura after having leaned on
virtue all his life attaineth to the most meritorious state.

"The learned son of Gavalgana, Sanjaya, also of passions under full
control, and the foremost of ministers, attained, in the Parva, to the
blessed state. In this, Yudhishthira the just met Narada and heard from
him about the extinction of the race of Vrishnis. This is the very
wonderful Parva called Asramvasika. The number of sections in this is
forty-two, and the number of slokas composed by Vyasa cognisant of truth
is one thousand five hundred and six.

"After this, you know, comes the Maushala of painful incidents. In this,
those lion-hearted heroes (of the race of Vrishni) with the scars of many
a field on their bodies, oppressed with the curse of a Brahmana, while
deprived of reason from drink, impelled by the fates, slew each other on
the shores of the Salt Sea with the Eraka grass which (in their hands)
became (invested with the fatal attributes of the) thunder. In this, both
Balarama and Kesava (Krishna) after causing the extermination of their
race, their hour having come, themselves did not rise superior to the sway
of all-destroying Time. In this, Arjuna the foremost among men, going to
Dwaravati (Dwaraka) and seeing the city destitute of the Vrishnis was much
affected and became exceedingly sorry. Then after the funeral of his
maternal uncle Vasudeva the foremost among the Yadus (Vrishnis), he saw
the heroes of the Yadu race lying stretched in death on the spot where
they had been drinking. He then caused the cremation of the bodies of the
illustrious Krishna and Balarama and of the principal members of the
Vrishni race. Then as he was journeying from Dwaraka with the women and
children, the old and the decrepit--the remnants of the Yadu race--he was
met on the way by a heavy calamity. He witnessed also the disgrace of his
bow Gandiva and the unpropitiousness of his celestial weapons. Seeing all
this, Arjuna became despondent and, pursuant to Vyasa's advice, went to
Yudhishthira and solicited permission to adopt the Sannyasa mode of life.
This is the sixteenth Parva called Maushala. The number of sections is
eight and the number of slokas composed by Vyasa cognisant of truth is
three hundred and twenty.

"The next is Mahaprasthanika, the seventeenth Parva.

"In this, those foremost among men the Pandavas abdicating their kingdom
went with Draupadi on their great journey called Mahaprasthana. In this,
they came across Agni, having arrived on the shore of the sea of red
waters. In this, asked by Agni himself, Arjuna worshipped him duly,
returned to him the excellent celestial bow called Gandiva. In this,
leaving his brothers who dropped one after another and Draupadi also,
Yudhishthira went on his journey without once looking back on them. This
the seventeenth Parva is called Mahaprasthanika. The number of sections in
this is three. The number of slokas also composed by Vyasa cognisant of
truth is three hundred and twenty.

"The Parva that comes after this, you must know, is the extraordinary one
called Svarga of celestial incidents. Then seeing the celestial car come
to take him, Yudhishthira moved by kindness towards the dog that
accompanied him, refused to ascend it without his companion. Observing the
illustrious Yudhishthira's steady adherence to virtue, Dharma (the god of
justice) abandoning his canine form showed himself to the king. Then
Yudhishthira ascending to heaven felt much pain. The celestial messenger
showed him hell by an act of deception. Then Yudhishthira, the soul of
justice, heard the heart-rending lamentations of his brothers abiding in
that region under the discipline of Yama. Then Dharma and Indra showed
Yudhishthira the region appointed for sinners. Then Yudhishthira, after
leaving the human body by a plunge in the celestial Ganges, attained to
that region which his acts merited, and began to live in joy respected by
Indra and all other gods. This is the eighteenth Parva as narrated by the
illustrious Vyasa. The number of slokas composed, O ascetics, by the great
Rishi in this is two hundred and nine.

"The above are the contents of the Eighteen Parvas. In the appendix
(Khita) are the Harivansa and the Vavishya. The number of slokas contained
in the Harivansa is twelve thousand.

"These are the contents of the section called Parva-sangraha." Sauti
continued, "Eighteen Akshauhinis of troops came together for battle. The
encounter that ensued was terrible and lasted for eighteen days. He who
knows the four Vedas with all the Angas and Upanishads, but does not know
this history (Bharata), cannot be regarded as wise. Vyasa of immeasurable
intelligence, has spoken of the Mahabharata as a treatise on Artha, on
Dharma, and on Kama. Those who have listened to his history can never bear
to listen to others, as, indeed, they who have listened to the sweet voice
of the male Kokila can never hear the dissonance of the crow's cawing. As
the formation of the three worlds proceedeth from the five elements, so do
the inspirations of all poets proceed from this excellent composition. O
ye Brahman, as the four kinds of creatures (viviparous, oviparous, born of
hot moisture and vegetables) are dependent on space for their existence,
so the Puranas depend upon this history. As all the senses depend for
their exercise upon the various modifications of the mind, so do all acts
(ceremonials) and moral qualities depend upon this treatise. There is not
a story current in the world but doth depend on this history, even as body
upon the food it taketh. All poets cherish the Bharata even as servants
desirous of preferment always attend upon masters of good lineage. Even as
the blessed domestic Asrama can never be surpassed by the three other
Asramas (modes of life) so no poets can surpass this poem.

"Ye ascetics, shake off all inaction. Let your hearts be fixed on virtue,
for virtue is the one only friend of him that has gone to the other world.
Even the most intelligent by cherishing wealth and wives can never make
these their own, nor are these possessions lasting. The Bharata uttered by
the lips of Dwaipayana is without a parallel; it is virtue itself and
sacred. It destroyeth sin and produceth good. He that listeneth to it
while it is being recited hath no need of a bath in the sacred waters of
Pushkara. A Brahmana, whatever sins he may commit during the day through
his senses, is freed from them all by reading the Bharata in the evening.
Whatever sins he may commit also in the night by deeds, words, or mind, he
is freed from them all by reading Bharata in the first twilight (morning).
He that giveth a hundred kine with horns mounted with gold to a Brahmana
well-posted up in the Vedas and all branches of learning, and he that
daily listeneth to the sacred narrations of the Bharata, acquireth equal
merit. As the wide ocean is easily passable by men having ships, so is
this extensive history of great excellence and deep import with the help
of this chapter called Parva sangraha."

Thus endeth the section called Parva-sangraha of the Adi Parva of the
blessed Mahabharata.


SECTION III

(Paushya Parva)

Sauti said, "Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit, was, with his brothers,
attending his long sacrifice on the plains of Kurukshetra. His brothers
were three, Srutasena, Ugrasena, and Bhimasena. And as they were sitting
at the sacrifice, there arrived at the spot an offspring of Sarama (the
celestial bitch). And belaboured by the brothers of Janamejaya, he ran
away to his mother, crying in pain. And his mother seeing him crying
exceedingly asked him, 'Why criest thou so? Who hath beaten thee?' And
being thus questioned, he said unto his mother, 'I have been belaboured by
the brothers of Janamejaya.' And his mother replied, 'Thou hast committed
some fault for which hast thou been beaten!' He answered, 'I have not
committed any fault. I have not touched the sacrificial butter with my
tongue, nor have I even cast a look upon it.' His mother Sarama hearing
this and much distressed at the affliction of her son went to the place
where Janamejaya with his brothers was at his long-extending sacrifice.
And she addressed Janamejaya in anger, saying, 'This my son hath committed
no fault: he hath not looked upon your sacrificial butter, nor hath he
touched it with his tongue. Wherefore hath he been beaten?' They said not
a word in reply; whereupon she said, 'As ye have beaten my son who hath
committed no fault, therefore shall evil come upon ye, when ye least
expect it.'

"Janamejaya, thus addressed by the celestial bitch, Sarama, became
exceedingly alarmed and dejected. And after the sacrifice was concluded
returned to Hastinapura, and began to take great pains in searching for a
Purohita who could by procuring absolution for his sin, neutralise the
effect of the curse.

"One day Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit, while a-hunting, observed in a
particular part of his dominions a hermitage where dwelt a certain Rishi
of fame, Srutasrava. He had a son named Somasrava deeply engaged in
ascetic devotions. Being desirous of appointing that son of the Rishi as
his Purohita, Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit, saluted the Rishi and
addressed him, saying, 'O possessor of the six attributes, let this thy
son be my purohita.' The Rishi thus addressed, answered Janamejaya, 'O
Janamejaya, this my son, deep in ascetic devotions, accomplished in the
study of the Vedas, and endued with the full force of my asceticism, is
born of (the womb of) a she-snake that had drunk my vital fluid. He is
able to absolve thee from all offences save those committed against
Mahadeva. But he hath one particular habit, viz. he would grant to any
Brahmana whatever might be begged of him. If thou canst put up with it,
then thou take him.' Janamejaya thus addressed replied to the Rishi, 'It
shall be even so.' And accepting him for his Purohita, he returned to his
capital; and he then addressed his brothers saying, 'This is the person I
have chosen for my spiritual master; whatsoever he may say must be
complied with by you without examination.' And his brothers did as they
were directed. And giving these directions to his brothers, the king
marched towards Takshyashila and brought that country under his authority.

"About this time there was a Rishi, Ayoda-Dhaumya by name. And Ayoda-
Dhaumya had three disciples, Upamanyu, Aruni, and Veda. And the Rishi bade
one of these disciples, Aruni of Panchala, to go and stop up a breach in
the water-course of a certain field. And Aruni of Panchala, thus ordered
by his preceptor, repaired to the spot. And having gone there he saw that
he could not stop up the breach in the water-course by ordinary means. And
he was distressed because he could not do his preceptor's bidding. But at
length he saw a way and said, 'Well, I will do it in this way.' He then
went down into the breach and lay down himself there. And the water was
thus confined.

"And some time after, the preceptor Ayoda-Dhaumya asked his other
disciples where Aruni of Panchala was. And they answered, 'Sir, he hath
been sent by yourself saying, "Go, stop up the breach in the water-course
of the field."' Thus reminded, Dhaumya, addressing his pupils, said, 'Then
let us all go to the place where he is.'

"And having arrived there, he shouted, 'Ho Aruni of Panchala! Where art
thou? Come hither, my child.' And Aruni hearing the voice of his preceptor
speedily came out of the water-course and stood before his preceptor. And
addressing the latter, Aruni said, 'Here I am in the breach of the water-
course. Not having been able to devise any other means, I entered myself
for the purpose of preventing the water running out. It is only upon
hearing thy voice that, having left it and allowed the waters to escape, I
have stood before thee. I salute thee, Master; tell me what I have to do.'

"The preceptor, thus addressed, replied, 'Because in getting up from the
ditch thou hast opened the water-course, thenceforth shalt thou be called
Uddalaka as a mark of thy preceptor's favour. And because my words have
been obeyed by thee, thou shalt obtain good fortune. And all the Vedas
shall shine in thee and all the Dharmasastras also.' And Aruni, thus
addressed by his preceptor, went to the country after his heart.

"The name of another of Ayoda-Dhaumya's disciples was Upamanyu. And
Dhaumya appointed him saying, 'Go, my child, Upamanyu, look after the
kine.' And according to his preceptor's orders, he went to tend the kine.
And having watched them all day, he returned in the evening to his
preceptor's house and standing before him he saluted him respectfully. And
his preceptor seeing him in good condition of body asked him, 'Upamanyu,
my child, upon what dost thou support thyself? Thou art exceedingly plump.'
And he answered, 'Sir, I support myself by begging.' And his preceptor
said, 'What is obtained in alms should not be used by thee without
offering it to me.' And Upamanyu, thus told, went away. And having
obtained alms, he offered the same to his preceptor. And his preceptor
took from him even the whole. And Upamanyu, thus treated, went to attend
the cattle. And having watched them all day, he returned in the evening to
his preceptor's abode. And he stood before his preceptor and saluted him
with respect. And his preceptor perceiving that he still continued to be
of good condition of body said unto him, 'Upamanyu, my child, I take from
thee even the whole of what thou obtainest in alms, without leaving
anything for thee. How then dost thou, at present, contrive to support
thyself?' And Upamanyu said unto his preceptor, 'Sir, having made over to
you all that I obtain in alms, I go a-begging a second time for supporting
myself.' And his preceptor then replied, 'This is not the way in which
thou shouldst obey the preceptor. By this thou art diminishing the support
of others that live by begging. Truly having supported thyself so, thou
hast proved thyself covetous.' And Upamanyu, having signified his assent
to all that his preceptor said, went away to attend the cattle. And having
watched them all day, he returned to his preceptor's house. And he stood
before his preceptor and saluted him respectfully. And his preceptor
observing that he was still fat, said again unto him, 'Upamanyu, my child,
I take from thee all thou obtainest in alms and thou dost not go a-begging
a second time, and yet art thou in healthy condition. How dost thou
support thyself?' And Upamanyu, thus questioned, answered, 'Sir, I now
live upon the milk of these cows.' And his preceptor thereupon told him,
'It is not lawful for thee to appropriate the milk without having first
obtained my consent.' And Upamanyu having assented to the justice of these
observations, went away to tend the kine. And when he returned to his
preceptor's abode, he stood before him and saluted him as usual. And his
preceptor seeing that he was still fat, said, 'Upamanyu, my child, thou
eatest no longer of alms, nor dost thou go a-begging a second time, not
even drinkest of the milk; yet art thou fat. By what means dost thou
contrive to live now?' And Upamanyu replied, 'Sir, I now sip the froth that
these calves throw out, while sucking their mother's teats.' And the
preceptor said, 'These generous calves, I suppose, out of compassion for
thee, throw out large quantities of froth. Wouldst thou stand in the way
of their full meals by acting as thou hast done? Know that it is unlawful
for thee to drink the froth.' And Upamanyu, having signified his assent to
this, went as before to tend the cows. And restrained by his preceptor, he
feedeth not on alms, nor hath he anything else to eat; he drinketh not of
the milk, nor tasteth he of the froth!

"And Upamanyu, one day, oppressed by hunger, when in a forest, ate of the
leaves of the Arka (Asclepias gigantea). And his eyes being affected by
the pungent, acrimonious, crude, and saline properties of the leaves which
he had eaten, he became blind. And as he was crawling about, he fell into
a pit. And upon his not returning that day when the sun was sinking down
behind the summit of the western mountains, the preceptor observed to his
disciples that Upamanyu was not yet come. And they told him that he had
gone out with the cattle.

"The preceptor then said, 'Upamanyu being restrained by me from the use of
everything, is, of course, tired, and therefore, doth not come home until
it be late. Let us then go in search of him.' And having said this, he went
with his disciples into the forest and began to shout, saying, 'Ho
Upamanyu, where art thou?' And Upamanyu hearing his preceptor's voice
answered in a loud tone, 'Here I am at the bottom of a well.' And his
preceptor asked him how he happened to be there. And Upamanyu replied,
'Having eaten of the leaves of the Arka plant I became blind, and so have
I fallen into this well.' And his preceptor thereupon told him, 'Glorify
the twin Aswins, the joint physicians of the gods, and they will restore
thee thy sight.' And Upamanyu thus directed by his preceptor began to
glorify the twin Aswins, in the following words of the Rig Veda:

"'Ye have existed before the creation! Ye first-born beings, ye are
displayed in this wondrous universe of five elements! I desire to obtain
you by the help of the knowledge derived from hearing, and of meditation,
for ye are Infinite! Ye are the course itself of Nature and intelligent
Soul that pervades that course! Ye are birds of beauteous feathers perched
on the body that is like to a tree! Ye are without the three common
attributes of every soul! Ye are incomparable! Ye, through your spirit in
every created thing, pervade the Universe!

"'Ye are golden Eagles! Ye are the essence into which all things disappear!
Ye are free from error and know no deterioration! Ye are of beauteous
beaks that would not unjustly strike and are victorious in every
encounter! Ye certainly prevail over time! Having created the sun, ye
weave the wondrous cloth of the year by means of the white thread of the
day and the black thread of the night! And with the cloth so woven, ye
have established two courses of action appertaining respectively to the
Devas and the Pitris. The bird of Life seized by Time which represents the
strength of the Infinite soul, ye set free for delivering her unto great
happiness! They that are in deep ignorance, as long as they are under
delusions of their senses, suppose you, who are independent of the
attributes of matter, to be gifted with form! Three hundred and sixty cows
represented by three hundred and sixty days produce one calf between them
which is the year. That calf is the creator and destroyer of all. Seekers
of truth following different routes, draw the milk of true knowledge with
its help. Ye Aswins, ye are the creators of that calf!

"'The year is but the nave of a wheel to which is attached seven hundred
and twenty spokes representing as many days and nights. The circumference
of this wheel represented by twelve months is without end. This wheel is
full of delusions and knows no deterioration. It affects all creatures
whether to this or of the other worlds. Ye Aswins, this wheel of time is
set in motion by you!

"'The wheel of Time as represented by the year has a nave represented by
the six seasons. The number of spokes attached to that nave is twelve as
represented by the twelve signs of the Zodiac. This wheel of Time
manifests the fruits of the acts of all things. The presiding deities of
Time abide in that wheel. Subject as I am to its distressful influence, ye
Aswins, liberate me from that wheel of Time. Ye Aswins, ye are this
universe of five elements! Ye are the objects that are enjoyed in this and
in the other world! Make me independent of the five elements! And though
ye are the Supreme Brahma, yet ye move over the Earth in forms enjoying
the delights that the senses afford.

"'In the beginning, ye created the ten points of the universe! Then have ye
placed the Sun and the Sky above! The Rishis, according to the course of
the same Sun, perform their sacrifices, and the gods and men, according to
what hath been appointed for them, perform their sacrifices also enjoying
the fruits of those acts!

"'Mixing the three colours, ye have produced all the objects of sight! It
is from these objects that the Universe hath sprung whereon the gods and
men are engaged in their respective occupations, and, indeed, all
creatures endued with life!

"'Ye Aswins, I adore you! I also adore the Sky which is your handiwork! Ye
are the ordainers of the fruits of all acts from which even the gods are
not free! Ye are yourselves free from the fruits of your acts!

"'Ye are the parents of all! As males and females it is ye that swallow the
food which subsequently develops into the life creating fluid and blood!
The new-born infant sucks the teat of its mother. Indeed it is ye that
take the shape of the infant! Ye Aswins, grant me my sight to protect my
life!'

"The twin Aswins, thus invoked, appeared and said, 'We are satisfied. Here
is a cake for thee. Take and eat it.' And Upamanyu thus addressed, replied,
'Your words, O Aswins, have never proved untrue. But without first
offering this cake to my preceptor I dare not take it.' And the Aswins
thereupon told him, 'Formerly, thy preceptor had invoked us. We thereupon
gave him a cake like this; and he took it without offering it to his
master. Do thou do that which thy preceptor did.' Thus addressed, Upamanyu
again said unto them, 'O Aswins, I crave your pardon. Without offering it
to my preceptor I dare not apply this cake.' The Aswins then said, 'O, we
are pleased with this devotion of thine to thy preceptor. Thy master's
teeth are of black iron. Thine shall be of gold. Thou shall be restored to
sight and shall have good fortune.'

"Thus spoken to by the Aswins he recovered his sight, and having gone to
his preceptor's presence he saluted him and told him all. And his
preceptor was well-pleased with him and said unto him, 'Thou shalt obtain
prosperity even as the Aswins have said. All the Vedas shall shine in thee
and all the Dharma-sastras.' And this was the trial of Upamanyu.

"Then Veda the other disciple of Ayoda-Dhaumya was called. His preceptor
once addressed him, saying, 'Veda, my child, tarry some time in my house
and serve thy preceptor. It shall be to thy profit.' And Veda having
signified his assent tarried long in the family of his preceptor mindful
of serving him. Like an ox under the burthens of his master, he bore heat
and cold, hunger and thirst, at all times without a murmur. And it was not
long before his preceptor was satisfied. And as a consequence of that
satisfaction, Veda obtained good fortune and universal knowledge. And this
was the trial of Veda.

"And Veda, having received permission from his preceptor, and leaving the
latter's residence after the completion of his studies, entered the
domestic mode of life. And while living in his own house, he got three
pupils. And he never told them to perform any work or to obey implicitly
his own behests; for having himself experienced much woe while abiding in
the family of his preceptor, he liked not to treat them with severity.

"After a certain time, Janamejaya and Paushya, both of the order of
Kshatriyas, arriving at his residence appointed the Brahman, Veda, as
their spiritual guide (Upadhyaya). And one day while about to depart upon
some business related to a sacrifice, he employed one of his disciples,
Utanka, to take charge of his household. 'Utanka', said he, 'whatsoever
should have to be done in my house, let it be done by thee without
neglect.' And having given these orders to Utanka, he went on his journey.

"So Utanka always mindful of the injunction of his preceptor took up his
abode in the latter's house. And while Utanka was residing there, the
females of his preceptor's house having assembled addressed him and said,
'O Utanka, thy mistress is in that season when connubial connection might
be fruitful. The preceptor is absent; then stand thou in his place and do
the needful.' And Utanka, thus addressed, said unto those women, 'It is
not proper for me to do this at the bidding of women. I have not been
enjoined by my preceptor to do aught that is improper.'

"After a while, his preceptor returned from his journey. And his preceptor
having learnt all that had happened, became well-pleased and, addressing
Utanka, said, 'Utanka, my child, what favour shall I bestow on thee? I
have been served by thee duly; therefore hath our friendship for each
other increased. I therefore grant thee leave to depart. Go thou, and let
thy wishes be accomplished!'

"Utanka, thus addressed, replied, saying, 'Let me do something that you
wish, for it hath been said, "He who bestoweth instruction contrary to
usage and he who receiveth it contrary to usage, one of the two dieth, and
enmity springeth up between the two." I, therefore, who have received thy
leave to depart, am desirous of bringing thee some honorarium due to a
preceptor.' His master, upon hearing this, replied, 'Utanka, my child, wait
a while.' Sometime after, Utanka again addressed his preceptor, saying,
'Command me to bring that for honorarium, which you desire.' And his
preceptor then said, 'My dear Utanka, thou hast often told me of your
desire to bring something by way of acknowledgment for the instruction
thou hast received. Go then in and ask thy mistress what thou art to bring.
And bring thou that which she directs.' And thus directed by his preceptor
Utanka addressed his preceptress, saying, 'Madam, I have obtained my
master's leave to go home, and I am desirous of bringing something
agreeable to thee as honorarium for the instruction I have received, in
order that I may not depart as his debtor. Therefore, please command me
what I am to bring.' Thus addressed, his preceptress replied, 'Go unto
King Paushya and beg of him the pair of ear-rings worn by his Queen, and
bring them hither. The fourth day hence is a sacred day when I wish to
appear before the Brahmanas (who may dine at my house) decked with these
ear-rings. Then accomplish this, O Utanka! If thou shouldst succeed, good
fortune shall attend thee; if not, what good canst thou expect?'

"Utanka thus commanded, took his departure. And as he was passing along
the road he saw a bull of extraordinary size and a man of uncommon stature
mounted thereon. And that man addressed Utanka and said, 'Eat thou of the
dung of this bull.' Utanka, however, was unwilling to comply. The man said
again, 'O Utanka, eat of it without scrutiny. Thy master ate of it before.'
And Utanka signified his assent and ate of the dung and drank of the
urine of that bull, and rose respectfully, and washing his hands and mouth
went to where King Paushya was.

"On arriving at the palace, Utanka saw Paushya seated (on his throne). And
approaching him Utanka saluted the monarch by pronouncing blessings and
said, 'I am come as a petitioner to thee.' And King Paushya, having
returned Utanka's salutations, said, 'Sir, what shall I do for thee?' And
Utanka said, 'I came to beg of thee a pair of ear-rings as a present to my
preceptor. It behoveth thee to give me the ear-rings worn by the Queen.'

"King Paushya replied, 'Go, Utanka, into the female apartments where the
Queen is and demand them of her.' And Utanka went into the women's
apartments. But as he could not discover the Queen, he again addressed the
king, saying, 'It is not proper that I should be treated by thee with
deceit. Thy Queen is not in the private apartments, for I could not find
her.' The king thus addressed, considered for a while and replied,
'Recollect, Sir, with attention whether thou art not in a state of
defilement in consequence of contact with the impurities of a repast. My
Queen is a chaste wife and cannot be seen by any one who is impure owing
to contact with the leavings of a repast. Nor doth she herself appear in
sight of any one who is defiled.'

"Utanka, thus informed, reflected for a while and then said, 'Yes, it must
be so. Having been in a hurry I performed my ablutions (after meal) in a
standing posture.' King Paushya then said, 'Here is a transgression,
purification is not properly effected by one in a standing posture, nor by
one while he is going along.' And Utanka having agreed to this, sat down
with his face towards the east, and washed his face, hands, and feet
thoroughly. And he then, without a noise, sipped thrice of water free from
scum and froth, and not warm, and just sufficient to reach his stomach and
wiped his face twice. And he then touched with water the apertures of his
organs (eyes, ears, etc.). And having done all this, he once more entered
the apartments of the women. And this time he saw the Queen. And as the
Queen perceived him, she saluted him respectfully and said, 'Welcome, Sir,
command me what I have to do.' And Utanka said unto her, 'It behoveth thee
to give me those ear-rings of thine. I beg them as a present for my
preceptor.' And the Queen having been highly pleased with Utanka's conduct
and, considering that Utanka as an object of charity could not be passed
over, took off her ear-rings and gave them to him. And she said, 'These
ear-rings are very much sought after by Takshaka, the King of the serpents.
Therefore shouldst thou carry them with the greatest care.'

"And Utanka being told this, said unto the Queen, 'Lady, be under no
apprehension. Takshaka, Chief of the serpents, is not able to overtake me.'
And having said this, and taking leave of the Queen, he went back into
the presence of Paushya, and said, 'Paushya, I am gratified.' Then Paushya
said to Utanka, 'A fit object of charity can only be had at long intervals.
Thou art a qualified guest, therefore do I desire to perform a sraddha.
Tarry thou a little.' And Utanka replied, 'Yes, I will tarry, and beg that
the clean provisions that are ready may be soon brought in.' And the king
having signified his assent, entertained Utanka duly. And Utanka seeing
that the food placed before him had hair in it, and also that it was cold,
thought it unclean. And he said unto Paushya, 'Thou givest me food that is
unclean, therefore shalt thou lose thy sight.' And Paushya in answer said,
'And because dost thou impute uncleanliness to food that is clean,
therefore shalt thou be without issue.' And Utanka thereupon rejoined, 'It
behoveth thee not, after having offered me unclean food, to curse me in
return. Satisfy thyself by ocular proof.'

"And Paushya seeing the food alleged to be unclean satisfied himself of
its uncleanliness. And Paushya having ascertained that the food was truly
unclean, being cold and mixed with hair, prepared as it was by a woman
with unbraided hair, began to pacify the Rishi Utanka, saying, 'Sir, the
food placed before thee is cold, and doth contain hair, having been
prepared without sufficient care. Therefore I pray thee pardon me. Let me
not become blind.' And Utanka answered, 'What I say must come to pass.
Having become blind, thou mayst, however, recover the sight before long.
Grant that thy curse also doth not take effect on me.' And Paushya said
unto him, 'I am unable to revoke my curse. For my wrath even now hath not
been appeased. But thou knowest not this. For a Brahmana's heart is soft
as new-churned butter, even though his words bear a sharp-edged razor. It
is otherwise in respect of these with the Kshatriya. His words are soft as
new-churned butter, but his heart is like a sharp-edged tool, such being
the case, I am unable, because of the hardness of my heart, to neutralise
my curse. Then go thou thy own way.' To this Utanka made answer, 'I showed
thee the uncleanliness of the food offered to me, and I was even now
pacified by thee. Besides, saidst thou at first that because I imputed
uncleanliness to food that was clean I should be without issue. But the
food truly unclean, thy curse cannot affect me. Of this I am sure.' And
Utanka having said this departed with the ear-rings.

"On the road Utanka perceived coming towards him a naked idle beggar
sometimes coming in view and sometimes disappearing. And Utanka put the
ear-rings on the ground and went for water. In the meantime the beggar
came quickly to the spot and taking up the ear-rings ran away. And Utanka
having completed his ablutions in water and purified himself and having
also reverently bowed down to the gods and his spiritual masters pursued
the thief with the utmost speed. And having with great difficulty
overtaken him, he seized him by force. But at that instant the person
seized, quitting the form of a beggar and assuming his real form, viz.,
that of Takshaka, speedily entered a large hole open in the ground. And
having got in, Takshaka proceeded to his own abode, the region of the
serpents.

"Now, Utanka, recollecting the words of the Queen, pursued the Serpent,
and began to dig open the hole with a stick but was unable to make much
progress. And Indra beholding his distress sent his thunder-bolt (Vajra)
to his assistance. Then the thunder-bolt entering that stick enlarged that
hole. And Utanka began to enter the hole after the thunder-bolt. And
having entered it, he beheld the region of the serpents infinite in extent,
filled with hundreds of palaces and elegant mansions with turrets and
domes and gate-ways, abounding with wonderful places for various games and
entertainments. And Utanka then glorified the serpents by the following
slokas:

"'Ye Serpents, subjects of King Airavata, splendid in battle and showering
weapons in the field like lightning-charged clouds driven by the winds!
Handsome and of various forms and decked with many coloured ear-rings, ye
children of Airavata, ye shine like the Sun in the firmament! On the
northern banks of the Ganges are many habitations of serpents. There I
constantly adore the great serpents. Who except Airavata would desire to
move in the burning rays of the Sun? When Dhritarashtra (Airavata's
brother) goes out, twenty-eight thousand and eight serpents follow him as
his attendants. Ye who move near him and ye who stay at a distance from
him, I adore all of you that have Airavata for your elder brother.

"'I adore thee also, to obtain the ear-rings, O Takshaka, who formerly
dwelt in Kurukshetra and the forest of Khandava! Takshaka and Aswasena, ye
are constant companions who dwell in Kurukshetra on the banks of the
Ikshumati! I also adore the illustrious Srutasena, the younger brother of
Takshaka, who resided at the holy place called Mahadyumna with a view to
obtaining the chiefship of the serpents.'

"The Brahmana Rishi Utanka having saluted the chief serpents in this
manner, obtained not, however, the ear-rings. And he thereupon became very
thoughtful. And when he saw that he obtained not the ear-rings even though
he had adored the serpents, he then looked about him and beheld two women
at a loom weaving a piece of cloth with a fine shuttle; and in the loom
were black and white threads. And he likewise saw a wheel, with twelve
spokes, turned by six boys. And he also saw a man with a handsome horse.
And he began to address them the following mantras:

"'This wheel whose circumference is marked by twenty-four divisions
representing as many lunar changes is furnished with three hundred spokes!
It is set in continual motion by six boys (the seasons)! These damsels
representing universal nature are weaving without intermission a cloth
with threads black and white, and thereby ushering into existence the
manifold worlds and the beings that inhabit them! Thou wielder of the
thunder, the protector of the universe, the slayer of Vritra and Namuchi,
thou illustrious one who wearest the black cloth and displayest truth and
untruth in the universe, thou who ownest for thy carrier the horse which
was received from the depths of the ocean, and which is but another form
of Agni (the god of fire), I bow to thee, thou supreme Lord, thou Lord of
the three worlds, O Purandara!'

"Then the man with the horse said unto Utanka, 'I am gratified by this thy
adoration. What good shall I do to thee?' And Utanka replied, 'Even let
the serpents be brought under my control.' Then the man rejoined, 'Blow
into this horse.' And Utanka blew into that horse. And from the horse thus
blown into, there issued, from every aperture of his body, flames of fire
with smoke by which the region of the Nagas was about to be consumed. And
Takshaka, surprised beyond measure and terrified by the heat of the fire,
hastily came out of his abode taking the ear-rings with him, and said unto
Utanka, 'Pray, Sir, take back the ear-rings.' And Utanka took them back.

"But Utanka having recovered his ear-rings thought, 'O, this is that
sacred day of my preceptress. I am at a distance. How can I, therefore,
show my regard for her?' And when Utanka was anxious about this, the man
addressed him and said, 'Ride this horse, Utanka, and he will in a moment
carry thee to thy master's abode.' And Utanka having signified his assent,
mounted the horse and presently reached his preceptor's house.

"And his preceptress that morning after having bathed was dressing her
hair sitting, thinking of uttering a curse on Utanka if he should not
return within time. But, in the meantime, Utanka entered his preceptor's
abode and paid his respects to his preceptress and presented her the ear-
rings. 'Utanka', said she, 'thou hast arrived at the proper time at the
proper place. Welcome, my child; thou art innocent and therefore I do not
curse thee! Good fortune is even before thee. Let thy wishes be crowned
with success!'

"Then Utanka waited on his preceptor. And his preceptor said, 'Thou art
welcome! What hath occasioned thy long absence?' And Utanka replied to his
preceptor, 'Sir, in the execution of this my business obstruction was
offered by Takshaka, the King of serpents. Therefore I had to go to the
region of the Nagas. There I saw two damsels sitting at a loom, weaving a
fabric with black and white threads. Pray, what is that? There likewise I
beheld a wheel with twelve spokes ceaselessly turned by six boys. What too
doth that import? Who is also the man that I saw? And what the horse of
extraordinary size likewise beheld by me? And when I was on the road I
also saw a bull with a man mounted thereon, by whom I was endearingly
accosted thus, "Utanka, eat of the dung of this bull, which was also eaten
by thy master?" So I ate of the dung of that bull according to his words.
Who also is he? Therefore, enlightened by thee, I desire to hear all about
them.'

"And his preceptor thus addressed said unto him, 'The two damsels thou
hast seen are Dhata and Vidhata; the black and white threads denote night
and day; the wheel of twelve spokes turned by the six boys signified the
