Meran and of Theman, the authors of fables, and searchers out of
understanding; none of these have known the way of wisdom, or
remember her paths.

Bar 3:24
O Israel, how great is the house of God! and how large is the
place of his possession!

Bar 3:25
Great, and hath none end; high, and unmeasurable.

Bar 3:26
There were the giants famous from the beginning, that were of
so great stature, and so expert in war.

Bar 3:27
Those did not the Lord choose, neither gave he the way of
knowledge unto them:

Bar 3:28
But they were destroyed, because they had no wisdom, and
perished through their own foolishness.

Bar 3:29
Who hath gone up into heaven, and taken her, and brought her
down from the clouds?

Bar 3:30
Who hath gone over the sea, and found her, and will bring her
for pure gold?

Bar 3:31
No man knoweth her way, nor thinketh of her path.

Bar 3:32
But he that knoweth all things knoweth her, and hath found
her out with his understanding: he that prepared the earth for
evermore hath filled it with fourfooted beasts:

Bar 3:33
He that sendeth forth light, and it goeth, calleth it again,
and it obeyeth him with fear.

Bar 3:34
The stars shined in their watches, and rejoiced: when he
calleth them, they say, Here we be; and so with cheerfulness
they shewed light unto him that made them.

Bar 3:35
This is our God, and there shall none other be accounted of
in comparison of him

Bar 3:36
He hath found out all the way of knowledge, and hath given it
unto Jacob his servant, and to Israel his beloved.

Bar 3:37
Afterward did he shew himself upon earth, and conversed with
men.

Bar 4:1
This is the book of the commandments of God, and the law that
endureth for ever: all they that keep it shall come to life; but
such as leave it shall die.

Bar 4:2
Turn thee, O Jacob, and take hold of it: walk in the presence
of the light thereof, that thou mayest be illuminated.

Bar 4:3
Give not thine honour to another, nor the things that are
profitable unto thee to a strange nation.

Bar 4:4
O Israel, happy are we: for things that are pleasing to God
are made known unto us.

Bar 4:5
Be of good cheer, my people, the memorial of Israel.

Bar 4:6
Ye were sold to the nations, not for [your] destruction: but
because ye moved God to wrath, ye were delivered unto the
enemies.

Bar 4:7
For ye provoked him that made you by sacrificing unto devils,
and not to God.

Bar 4:8
Ye have forgotten the everlasting God, that brought you up;
and ye have grieved Jerusalem, that nursed you.

Bar 4:9
For when she saw the wrath of God coming upon you, she said,
Hearken, O ye that dwell about Sion: God hath brought upon me
great mourning;

Bar 4:10
For I saw the captivity of my sons and daughters, which the
Everlasting brought upon them.

Bar 4:11
With joy did I nourish them; but sent them away with weeping
and mourning.

Bar 4:12
Let no man rejoice over me, a widow, and forsaken of many,
who for the sins of my children am left desolate; because they
departed from the law of God.

Bar 4:13
They knew not his statutes, nor walked in the ways of his
commandments, nor trod in the paths of discipline in his
righteousness.

Bar 4:14
Let them that dwell about Sion come, and remember ye the
captivity of my sons and daughters, which the Everlasting hath
brought upon them.

Bar 4:15
For he hath brought a nation upon them from far, a shameless
nation, and of a strange language, who neither reverenced old
man, nor pitied child.

Bar 4:16
These have carried away the dear beloved children of the
widow, and left her that was alone desolate without daughters.

Bar 4:17
But what can I help you?

Bar 4:18
For he that brought these plagues upon you will deliver you
from the hands of your enemies.

Bar 4:19
Go your way, O my children, go your way: for I am left
desolate.

Bar 4:20
I have put off the clothing of peace, and put upon me the
sackcloth of my prayer: I will cry unto the Everlasting in my
days.

Bar 4:21
Be of good cheer, O my children, cry unto the Lord, and he
will deliver you from the power and hand of the enemies.

Bar 4:22
For my hope is in the Everlasting, that he will save you; and
joy is come unto me from the Holy One, because of the mercy
which shall soon come unto you from the Everlasting our Saviour.

Bar 4:23
For I sent you out with mourning and weeping: but God will
give you to me again with joy and gladness for ever.

Bar 4:24
Like as now the neighbours of Sion have seen your captivity:
so shall they see shortly your salvation from our God which
shall come upon you with great glory, and brightness of the
Everlasting.

Bar 4:25
My children, suffer patiently the wrath that is come upon you
from God: for thine enemy hath persecuted thee; but shortly thou
shalt see his destruction, and shalt tread upon his neck.

Bar 4:26
My delicate ones have gone rough ways, and were taken away as
a flock caught of the enemies.

Bar 4:27
Be of good comfort, O my children, and cry unto God: for ye
shall be remembered of him that brought these things upon you.

Bar 4:28
For as it was your mind to go astray from God: so, being
returned, seek him ten times more.

Bar 4:29
For he that hath brought these plagues upon you shall bring
you everlasting joy with your salvation.

Bar 4:30
Take a good heart, O Jerusalem: for he that gave thee that
name will comfort thee.

Bar 4:31
Miserable are they that afflicted thee, and rejoiced at thy
fall.

Bar 4:32
Miserable are the cities which thy children served: miserable
is she that received thy sons.

Bar 4:33
For as she rejoiced at thy ruin, and was glad of thy fall: so
shall she be grieved for her own desolation.

Bar 4:34
For I will take away the rejoicing of her great multitude,
and her pride shall be turned into mourning.

Bar 4:35
For fire shall come upon her from the Everlasting, long to
endure; and she shall be inhabited of devils for a great time.

Bar 4:36
O Jerusalem, look about thee toward the east, and behold the
joy that cometh unto thee from God.

Bar 4:37
Lo, thy sons come, whom thou sentest away, they come gathered
together from the east to the west by the word of the Holy One,
rejoicing in the glory of God.

Bar 5:1
Put off, O Jerusalem, the garment of mourning and
affliction, and put on the comeliness of the glory that cometh
from God for ever.

Bar 5:2
Cast about thee a double garment of the righteousness which
cometh from God; and set a diadem on thine head of the glory of
the Everlasting.

Bar 5:3
For God will shew thy brightness unto every country under
heaven.

Bar 5:4
For thy name shall be called of God for ever The peace of
righteousness, and The glory of God's worship.

Bar 5:5
Arise, O Jerusalem, and stand on high, and look about toward
the east, and behold thy children gathered from the west unto
the east by the word of the Holy One, rejoicing in the
remembrance of God.

Bar 5:6
For they departed from thee on foot, and were led away of
their enemies: but God bringeth them unto thee exalted with
glory, as children of the kingdom.

Bar 5:7
For God hath appointed that every high hill, and banks of
long continuance, should be cast down, and valleys filled up, to
make even the ground, that Israel may go safely in the glory of
God,

Bar 5:8
Moreover even the woods and every sweetsmelling tree shall
overshadow Israel by the commandment of God.

Bar 5:9
For God shall lead Israel with joy in the light of his glory
with the mercy and righteousness that cometh from him.




The Epistle [or Letter] of Jeremiah [Jeremy]
[The Epistle of Jeremy [sometimes Chapter Six of Baruch]]


EpJer 6:1
A copy of an epistle, which Jeremy sent unto them which were
to be led captives into Babylon by the king of the Babylonians,
to certify them, as it was commanded him of God.

EpJer 6:2
Because of the sins which ye have committed before God, ye
shall be led away captives into Babylon by Nabuchodonosor king
of the Babylonians.

EpJer 6:3
So when ye be come unto Babylon, ye shall remain there many
years, and for a long season, namely, seven generations: and
after that I will bring you away peaceably from thence.

EpJer 6:4
Now shall ye see in Babylon gods of silver, and of gold, and
of wood, borne upon shoulders, which cause the nations to fear.

EpJer 6:5
Beware therefore that ye in no wise be like to strangers,
neither be ye and of them, when ye see the multitude before them
and behind them, worshipping them.

EpJer 6:6
But say ye in your hearts, O Lord, we must worship thee.

EpJer 6:7
For mine angel is with you, and I myself caring for your
souls.

EpJer 6:8
As for their tongue, it is polished by the workman, and they
themselves are gilded and laid over with silver; yet are they
but false, and cannot speak.

EpJer 6:9
And taking gold, as it were for a virgin that loveth to go
gay, they make crowns for the heads of their gods.

EpJer 6:10
Sometimes also the priests convey from their gods gold and
silver, and bestow it upon themselves.

EpJer 6:11
Yea, they will give thereof to the common harlots, and deck
them as men with garments, [being] gods of silver, and gods of
gold, and wood.

EpJer 6:12
Yet cannot these gods save themselves from rust and moth,
though they be covered with purple raiment.

EpJer 6:13
They wipe their faces because of the dust of the temple, when
there is much upon them.

EpJer 6:14
And he that cannot put to death one that offendeth him
holdeth a sceptre, as though he were a judge of the country.

EpJer 6:15
He hath also in his right hand a dagger and an ax: but cannot
deliver himself from war and thieves.

EpJer 6:16
Whereby they are known not to be gods: therefore fear them
not.

EpJer 6:17
For like as a vessel that a man useth is nothing worth when
it is broken; even so it is with their gods: when they be set up
in the temple, their eyes be full of dust through the feet of
them that come in.

EpJer 6:18
And as the doors are made sure on every side upon him that
offendeth the king, as being committed to suffer death: even so
the priests make fast their temples with doors, with locks, and
bars, lest their gods be spoiled with robbers.

EpJer 6:19
They light them candles, yea, more than for themselves,
whereof they cannot see one.

EpJer 6:20
They are as one of the beams of the temple, yet they say
their hearts are gnawed upon by things creeping out of the
earth; and when they eat them and their clothes, they feel it
not.

EpJer 6:21
Their faces are blacked through the smoke that cometh out of
the temple.

EpJer 6:22
Upon their bodies and heads sit bats, swallows, and birds,
and the cats also.

EpJer 6:23
By this ye may know that they are no gods: therefore fear
them not.

EpJer 6:24
Notwithstanding the gold that is about them to make them
beautiful, except they wipe off the rust, they will not shine:
for neither when they were molten did they feel it.

EpJer 6:25
The things wherein there is no breath are bought for a most
high price.

EpJer 6:26
They are borne upon shoulders, having no feet whereby they
declare unto men that they be nothing worth.

EpJer 6:27
They also that serve them are ashamed: for if they fall to
the ground at any time, they cannot rise up again of themselves:
neither, if one set them upright, can they move of themselves:
neither, if they be bowed down, can they make themselves
straight: but they set gifts before them as unto dead men.

EpJer 6:28
As for the things that are sacrificed unto them, their
priests sell and abuse; in like manner their wives lay up part
thereof in salt; but unto the poor and impotent they give
nothing of it.

EpJer 6:29
Menstruous women and women in childbed eat their sacrifices:
by these things ye may know that they are no gods: fear them
not.

EpJer 6:30
For how can they be called gods? because women set meat
before the gods of silver, gold, and wood.

EpJer 6:31
And the priests sit in their temples, having their clothes
rent, and their heads and beards shaven, and nothing upon their
heads.

EpJer 6:32
They roar and cry before their gods, as men do at the feast
when one is dead.

EpJer 6:33
The priests also take off their garments, and clothe their
wives and children.

EpJer 6:34
Whether it be evil that one doeth unto them, or good, they
are not able to recompense it: they can neither set up a king,
nor put him down.

EpJer 6:35
In like manner, they can neither give riches nor money:
though a man make a vow unto them, and keep it not, they will
not require it.

EpJer 6:36
They can save no man from death, neither deliver the weak
from the mighty.

EpJer 6:37
They cannot restore a blind man to his sight, nor help any
man in his distress.

EpJer 6:38
They can shew no mercy to the widow, nor do good to the
fatherless.

EpJer 6:39
Their gods of wood, and which are overlaid with gold and
silver, are like the stones that be hewn out of the mountain:
they that worship them shall be confounded.

EpJer 6:40
How should a man then think and say that they are gods, when
even the Chaldeans themselves dishonour them?

EpJer 6:41
Who if they shall see one dumb that cannot speak, they bring
him, and intreat Bel that he may speak, as though he were able
to understand.

EpJer 6:42
Yet they cannot understand this themselves, and leave them:
for they have no knowledge.

EpJer 6:43
The women also with cords about them, sitting in the ways,
burn bran for perfume: but if any of them, drawn by some that
passeth by, lie with him, she reproacheth her fellow, that she
was not thought as worthy as herself, nor her cord broken.

EpJer 6:44
Whatsoever is done among them is false: how may it then be
thought or said that they are gods?

EpJer 6:45
They are made of carpenters and goldsmiths: they can be
nothing else than the workmen will have them to be.

EpJer 6:46
And they themselves that made them can never continue long;
how should then the things that are made of them be gods?

EpJer 6:47
For they left lies and reproaches to them that come after.

EpJer 6:48
For when there cometh any war or plague upon them, the
priests consult with themselves, where they may be hidden with
them.

EpJer 6:49
How then cannot men perceive that they be no gods, which can
neither save themselves from war, nor from plague?

EpJer 6:50
For seeing they be but of wood, and overlaid with silver and
gold, it shall be known hereafter that they are false:

EpJer 6:51
And it shall manifestly appear to all nations and kings that
they are no gods, but the works of men's hands, and that there
is no work of God in them.

EpJer 6:52
Who then may not know that they are no gods?

EpJer 6:53
For neither can they set up a king in the land, nor give rain
unto men.

EpJer 6:54
Neither can they judge their own cause, nor redress a wrong,
being unable: for they are as crows between heaven and earth.

EpJer 6:55
Whereupon when fire falleth upon the house of gods of wood,
or laid over with gold or silver, their priests will flee away,
and escape; but they themselves shall be burned asunder like
beams.

EpJer 6:56
Moreover they cannot withstand any king or enemies: how can
it then be thought or said that they be gods?

EpJer 6:57
Neither are those gods of wood, and laid over with silver or
gold, able to escape either from thieves or robbers.

EpJer 6:58
Whose gold, and silver, and garments wherewith they are
clothed, they that are strong take, and go away withal: neither
are they able to help themselves.

EpJer 6:59
Therefore it is better to be a king that sheweth his power,
or else a profitable vessel in an house, which the owner shall
have use of, than such false gods; or to be a door in an house,
to keep such things therein, than such false gods, or a pillar
of wood in a a palace, than such false gods.

EpJer 6:60
For sun, moon, and stars, being bright and sent to do their
offices, are obedient.

EpJer 6:61
In like manner the lightning when it breaketh forth is easy
to be seen; and after the same manner the wind bloweth in every
country.

EpJer 6:62
And when God commandeth the clouds to go over the whole
world, they do as they are bidden.

EpJer 6:63
And the fire sent from above to consume hills and woods doeth
as it is commanded: but these are like unto them neither in shew
nor power.

EpJer 6:64
Wherefore it is neither to be supposed nor said that they are
gods, seeing, they are able neither to judge causes, nor to do
good unto men.

EpJer 6:65
Knowing therefore that they are no gods, fear them not,

EpJer 6:66
For they can neither curse nor bless kings:

EpJer 6:67
Neither can they shew signs in the heavens among the heathen,
nor shine as the sun, nor give light as the moon.

EpJer 6:68
The beasts are better than they: for they can get under a
cover and help themselves.

EpJer 6:69
It is then by no means manifest unto us that they are gods:
therefore fear them not.

EpJer 6:70
For as a scarecrow in a garden of cucumbers keepeth nothing:
so are their gods of wood, and laid over with silver and gold.

EpJer 6:71
And likewise their gods of wood, and laid over with silver
and gold, are like to a white thorn in an orchard, that every
bird sitteth upon; as also to a dead body, that is east into the
dark.

EpJer 6:72
And ye shall know them to be no gods by the bright purple
that rotteth upon them: and they themselves afterward shall be
eaten, and shall be a reproach in the country.

EpJer 6:73
Better therefore is the just man that hath none idols: for he
shall be far from reproach.




The Book of Susanna  [in Daniel]
[The History of Susanna [in Daniel]]

Set apart from the beginning of Daniel, because it is not in
the Hebrew, as neither the Narration of Bel and the Dragon.


Sus 1:1
There dwelt a man in Babylon, called Joacim:

Sus 1:2
And he took a wife, whose name was Susanna, the daughter of
Chelcias, a very fair woman, and one that feared the Lord.

Sus 1:3
Her parents also were righteous, and taught their daughter
according to the law of Moses.

Sus 1:4
Now Joacim was a great rich man, and had a fair garden
joining unto his house: and to him resorted the Jews; because he
was more honourable than all others.

Sus 1:5
The same year were appointed two of the ancients of the
people to be judges, such as the Lord spake of, that wickedness
came from Babylon from ancient judges, who seemed to govern the
people.

Sus 1:6
These kept much at Joacim's house: and all that had any suits
in law came unto them.

Sus 1:7
Now when the people departed away at noon, Susanna went into
her husband's garden to walk.

Sus 1:8
And the two elders saw her going in every day, and walking;
so that their lust was inflamed toward her.

Sus 1:9
And they perverted their own mind, and turned away their
eyes, that they might not look unto heaven, nor remember just
judgments.

Sus 1:10
And albeit they both were wounded with her love, yet durst
not one shew another his grief.

Sus 1:11
For they were ashamed to declare their lust, that they
desired to have to do with her.

Sus 1:12
Yet they watched diligently from day to day to see her.

Sus 1:13
And the one said to the other, Let us now go home: for it is
dinner time.

Sus 1:14
So when they were gone out, they parted the one from the
other, and turning back again they came to the same place; and
after that they had asked one another the cause, they
acknowledged their lust: then appointed they a time both
together, when they might find her alone.

Sus 1:15
And it fell out, as they watched a fit time, she went in as
before with two maids only, and she was desirous to wash herself
in the garden: for it was hot.

Sus 1:16
And there was no body there save the two elders, that had hid
themselves, and watched her.

Sus 1:17
Then she said to her maids, Bring me oil and washing balls,
and shut the garden doors, that I may wash me.

Sus 1:18
And they did as she bade them, and shut the garden doors, and
went out themselves at privy doors to fetch the things that she
had commanded them: but they saw not the elders, because they
were hid.

Sus 1:19
Now when the maids were gone forth, the two elders rose up,
and ran unto her, saying,

Sus 1:20
Behold, the garden doors are shut, that no man can see us,
and we are in love with thee; therefore consent unto us, and lie
with us.

Sus 1:21
If thou wilt not, we will bear witness against thee, that a
young man was with thee: and therefore thou didst send away thy
maids from thee.

Sus 1:22
Then Susanna sighed, and said, I am straitened on every side:
for if I do this thing, it is death unto me: and if I do it not
I cannot escape your hands.

Sus 1:23
It is better for me to fall into your hands, and not do it,
than to sin in the sight of the Lord.

Sus 1:24
With that Susanna cried with a loud voice: and the two elders
cried out against her.

Sus 1:25
Then ran the one, and opened the garden door.

Sus 1:26
So when the servants of the house heard the cry in the
garden, they rushed in at the privy door, to see what was done
unto her.

Sus 1:27
But when the elders had declared their matter, the servants
were greatly ashamed: for there was never such a report made of
Susanna.

Sus 1:28
And it came to pass the next day, when the people were
assembled to her husband Joacim, the two elders came also full
of mischievous imagination against Susanna to put her to death;

Sus 1:29
And said before the people, Send for Susanna, the daughter of
Chelcias, Joacim's wife. And so they sent.

Sus 1:30
So she came with her father and mother, her children, and all
her kindred.

Sus 1:31
Now Susanna was a very delicate woman, and beauteous to
behold.

Sus 1:32
And these wicked men commanded to uncover her face, (for she
was covered) that they might be filled with her beauty.

Sus 1:33
Therefore her friends and all that saw her wept.

Sus 1:34
Then the two elders stood up in the midst of the people, and
laid their hands upon her head.

Sus 1:35
And she weeping looked up toward heaven: for her heart
trusted in the Lord.

Sus 1:36
And the elders said, As we walked in the garden alone, this
woman came in with two maids, and shut the garden doors, and
sent the maids away.

Sus 1:37
Then a young man, who there was hid, came unto her, and lay
with her.

Sus 1:38
Then we that stood in a corner of the garden, seeing this
wickedness, ran unto them.

Sus 1:39
And when we saw them together, the man we could not hold: for
he was stronger than we, and opened the door, and leaped out.

Sus 1:40
But having taken this woman, we asked who the young man was,
but she would not tell us: these things do we testify.

Sus 1:41
Then the assembly believed them as those that were the elders
and judges of the people: so they condemned her to death.

Sus 1:42
Then Susanna cried out with a loud voice, and said, O
everlasting God, that knowest the secrets, and knowest all
things before they be:

Sus 1:43
Thou knowest that they have borne false witness against me,
and, behold, I must die; whereas I never did such things as
these men have maliciously invented against me.

Sus 1:44
And the Lord heard her voice.

Sus 1:45
Therefore when she was led to be put to death, the Lord
raised up the holy spirit of a young youth whose name was
Daniel:

Sus 1:46
Who cried with a loud voice, I am clear from the blood of
this woman.

Sus 1:47
Then all the people turned them toward him, and said, What
mean these words that thou hast spoken?

Sus 1:48
So he standing in the midst of them said, Are ye such fools,
ye sons of Israel, that without examination or knowledge of the
truth ye have condemned a daughter of Israel?

Sus 1:49
Return again to the place of judgment: for they have borne
false witness against her.

Sus 1:50
Wherefore all the people turned again in haste, and the
elders said unto him, Come, sit down among us, and shew it us,
seeing God hath given thee the honour of an elder.

Sus 1:51
Then said Daniel unto them, Put these two aside one far from
another, and I will examine them.

Sus 1:52
So when they were put asunder one from another, he called one
of them, and said unto him, O thou that art waxen old in
wickedness, now thy sins which thou hast committed aforetime are
come to light.

Sus 1:53
For thou hast pronounced false judgment and hast condemned
the innocent and hast let the guilty go free; albeit the Lord
saith, The innocent and righteous shalt thou not slay.

Sus 1:54
Now then, if thou hast seen her, tell me, Under what tree
sawest thou them companying together? Who answered, Under a
mastick tree.

Sus 1:55
And Daniel said, Very well; thou hast lied against thine own
head; for even now the angel of God hath received the sentence
of God to cut thee in two.

Sus 1:56
So he put him aside, and commanded to bring the other, and
said unto him, O thou seed of Chanaan, and not of Juda, beauty
hath deceived thee, and lust hath perverted thine heart.

Sus 1:57
Thus have ye dealt with the daughters of Israel, and they for
fear companied with you: but the daughter of Juda would not
abide your wickedness.

Sus 1:58
Now therefore tell me, Under what tree didst thou take them
companying together? Who answered, Under an holm tree.

Sus 1:59
Then said Daniel unto him, Well; thou hast also lied against
thine own head: for the angel of God waiteth with the sword to
cut thee in two, that he may destroy you.

Sus 1:60
With that all the assembly cried out with a loud voice, and
praised God, who saveth them that trust in him.

Sus 1:61
And they arose against the two elders, for Daniel had
convicted them of false witness by their own mouth:

Sus 1:62
And according to the law of Moses they did unto them in such
sort as they maliciously intended to do to their neighbour: and
they put them to death. Thus the innocent blood was saved the
same day.

Sus 1:63
Therefore Chelcias and his wife praised God for their
daughter Susanna, with Joacim her husband, and all the kindred,
because there was no dishonesty found in her.

Sus 1:64
From that day forth was Daniel had in great reputation in the
sight of the people.




The Prayer of Azariah


PrAzar 1
And they walked in the midst of the fire, praising God, and
blessing the Lord.
