word could secure unhesitating submission. One good thing about the
devilish trade of war is that it teaches the might of authority and the
virtue of absolute obedience. And even his profession, with all its
roughness and wickedness, had taught the centurion this precious lesson,
a jewel that he had found in a dunghill, the lesson that, given the
authoritative lip, a word is omnipotent. The commander speaks and the
legion goes, though it be to dash itself to death.

So he turns to Christ. Does he mean to parallel or to contrast his
subordination and Christ's position? The 'also,' which, as I remarked,
the Revised Version has rightly replaced in the text here, is in favour
of the former supposition, that he means to parallel Christ's position
with his own. And it is much more natural to suppose that a heathen man,
with little knowledge of Christ and of the depths of the divine
revelation in the past, should have attained to the conception of Jesus
as possessing a real but subordinate and derived authority, than to
suppose that he had grasped, at that early stage, the truth which
Christ's nearest friends took long years to understand, and which some
of them do not understand yet, viz. that Christ possessed as His own the
power which He wielded.

But if we take this point of view, and consider that the centurion's
conception falls beneath the lofty Christian ideal of Christ's power in
the universe, as it is set forth to us in the New Testament, even then
His words set forth a truth. For if we believe on the one hand in the
divinity of our Lord and Saviour, we also believe that 'the Son is
subject to the Father' and listen to His own words when He says, 'All
power is _given_ unto Me in heaven and in earth.' So that whatever
difference there may be between His relation to the power which He
wields and that of a prophet or miracle-worker, who derives his power
from Him, this is true, that Christ's power, too, is a power given to
Him. But the other side is one that I desire to emphasise in a few
words, viz. that the centurion's conception falls short of the truth,
inasmuch as, if we believe in Christ's witness to Himself, we must
believe that the power which acted through His word, dwelt in Him, in an
altogether different relation to His person from that in which an
analogous power may have dwelt in any other man. 'He spake and it was
done, He commanded and it stood fast.' Diseases fled at His word. 'By
the breath of His mouth He slew' these enemies of men. He rebuked the
storm, and the howling of the wind and the dashing of the waves were
less loud than His calm voice. He flung a word into the depths of the
grave, strangely speaking to, and yet more strangely heard by, the dull
cold ear of death, and Lazarus, dazzled, stumbles out into the light.
Who is this, that commandeth the waves, and the seas, and the
sicknesses, and they obey Him? My brother, I pray that you and I, in
these days of hesitation, when many a truth is clouded by doubt, may be
able to answer with the full assent and consent of understanding and
heart, 'this is God manifest in the flesh.'

And remember that this prerogative of dealing with physical nature, by
the bare forth-putting of His word, is not only a doctrine of
Christianity, but that more and more physical investigation is coming to
the unifying of all forces in one, and to the resolving of that one into
the force of a will, and that all that will, as the Christian scheme
teaches us, is lodged in Jesus Christ. His lip speaks, and it is power.
He moves in nature, in providence, in history, in grace, because in Him
abides now in the form of a man, that same everlasting Word which was
with the Father, and by whom all things were made. The centurion bows
before the Commander, and the Christ says, 'as Captain of the Lord's
host am I now come.' Such, then, is the faith of this soldier taught him
by the Legion.

II. Now a word next as to our Lord's eulogium on his faith.

Jesus Christ accepts and endorses the centurion's estimate of Him, as He
always accepts the highest place offered Him. No one ever proffered to
Jesus Christ honours that He put by. No one ever brought to Him a trust
which He said was either excessive or misdirected. 'Speak the word and
my servant shall be healed,' said the centurion. Contrast Christ's
acceptance of this confidence in his power with Elijah's 'Am I a God, to
kill and to make alive, that they send this man to me to recover him of
his leprosy?' Or contrast it with Peter's 'Why look ye so earnestly on
us, as though by our own power or holiness we had made this man to
walk?' Christ takes as His due all the honour, love, and trust, which
any man can give Him--either an exorbitant appetite for adulation, or
the manifestation of conscious divinity.

'And He marvelled.' Twice we read in Scripture that Christ
wondered--once at this heathen's faith, so strongly grown, with so few
advantages of culture; once at Jewish unbelief, so feeble and fruitless,
after so much expenditure of patience and care. But passing from that,
notice how much lies in these sad and yet astonished words of His:
'Verily I say unto you, I have not _found_ so great faith, no, not in
Israel.' Then, He came _seeking_ faith from this people whom God had
cared for during centuries. The one fruit that He desired was trust in
Him. That is what He is seeking for in us--not lives of profession, not
orthodoxy of conception, not even fruits in work, but before all this,
and productive of all that is good in any of them, He desires to find in
our hearts the child's trust that casts itself wholly on His Omnipotent
word, and is sure of an answer. This man's faith was great, great in the
rapidity of its growth, great in the difficulties which it had overcome,
great in the clearness of its conception, great in the firmness of its
affiance, great in the humility with which it was accompanied. Such a
faith He seeks as the thirsty traveller seeks grapes in the wilderness,
and when He finds it growing in our hearts, then He is satisfied and
glad.

Still further, there is brought out the dignity of faith as being not
only the great desire of Christ's heart for each of us, but also as
being the one means of admission into the kingdom. 'I say unto you, many
shall come from the east and the west, and shall sit down with Abraham
and Isaac and Jacob, in the Kingdom of Heaven; but the children of the
Kingdom shall be cast out into outer darkness.' Strange that Matthew's,
the Jewish gospel, should record that saying. Strange that Luke's, the
universal human gospel, should omit it. But it was relevant to Matthew's
great purpose to make very plain this truth--which the nation were
forgetting, and which was gall and wormwood to them,--that hereditary
descent and outward privileges had no power to open the door of Christ's
Kingdom to any man, and that the one thing which had, was the one thing
which the centurion possessed and the Jews did not, a simple trust in
that divine Lord.

My brethren, there are many of us who attach precisely the same value as
these Jews did, in slightly different forms, to external connection with
religion and religious institutions. What blunts the sharpest words that
come from pulpits, and prevents them from getting to hearts and
consciences, is just that pestilent old Jewish error, that because men
have always had a kind of outward hold on the Kingdom, therefore they do
not need the teaching that the publicans and the harlots want.

My dear friend, nothing binds a man to Christ but trust. Nothing opens
the doors of His Kingdom, either here on earth or yonder, but reliance
upon Him. And although you were steeped to the eye-brows in religious
privileges, and high in place in His church, it would avail nothing. The
Kingdom of Christ is a Kingdom into which faith, and faith only, admits
a man. Therefore from the furthest corners of the world Christ's sad
prescience saw the Gentiles flocking, and the Jews who trusted in
externals, cast out.

I need not dwell on the two halves of the picture here, the radiant glow
of the one, the tragic darkness of the other. The feast expresses
abundance, joy, rest, companionship. 'They shall come' says Christ; then
He is there, and sitting at the head of the table; and the Master's
welcome makes the feast. On the other hand, that which is without the
banqueting hall is dark. That darkness is but the making visible of the
nature of the men. Hell comes out of a man before it surrounds him. They
'were sometime darkness,' and now they are in the darkness. I say no
more about that, I dare not; but I pray you to remember that the lips
which said this 'spake that He did know'; and to take heed lest,
speculating and arguing, and sometimes quarrelling, about the nature and
the duration of future retribution, we should lose our sense of the
awfulness and certainty of the fact.

III. So one word lastly as to the answer that faith brings.

'Go thy way; as thou hast believed, so be it done unto thee.' He heals
at a distance, and shapes His gift by the man's desire. The form of the
vase that is dipped into the sea settles the quantity and the shape of
the water that is taken out. There is a wide truth in that, on which I
do not now enlarge. The measure of my faith is the measure of my
possession of Christ. He puts the key of the treasure-house into our
hands and says, 'Go in, and take as much as you like'; and some of us
come out with a halfpenny as all that we care to bring away. You are
starving, some of you, whilst you are sitting in a granary bursting with
plenty. Suppose a proclamation were made, 'There will be given away gold
to anybody that likes to come. Let them bring a purse, and it will be
filled.' How large a purse do you think you would like to take? A sack,
I should think. Christ says that to you; and you bring a tiny thing like
what they keep sovereigns in, that will scarcely hold a farthing, with
such a narrow throat is it provided, and so small its interior
accommodation. 'Ye have not because ye ask not.' 'Open thy mouth wide
and I will fill it.'


SWIFT HEALING AND IMMEDIATE SERVICE

     'And when Jesus was come into Peter's house, He saw his wife's
     mother laid, and sick of a fever. 15. And He touched her hand, and
     the fever left her: and she arose and ministered unto them.'--MATT.
     viii. 14-15.

Other accounts give a few additional points.

Mark:--

That the house was that of Peter and Andrew.

That Christ went with James and John.

That He was told of the sickness.

That He lifted her up.

Luke, physician-like, diagnoses the fever as 'great.' He also tells us
that the sick woman's friends _besought_ Jesus and did not merely 'tell'
Him of her. May we infer that to His ear the telling of His servants'
woes is a prayer for His help? He does not mention Christ's touch,
which Mark here and elsewhere delights to record, and which Matthew also
specifies. He fixes attention on the all-powerful word which was the
vehicle of Christ's healing might.

Both evangelists put this miracle in its chronological order, from which
it appears that it was done on the Sabbath day, which explains our verse
16, 'when the _even_ was come.'

I. The scene of the miracle.

The domestic privacy of the great event seems to have struck the
evangelists. It stands between the narrative of Christ's public work in
the synagogue, and the story of the eager crowds who came round the
doors. So it gives us a glimpse of the uniformity of that life of
blessing as being the same in public and in private.

Again, it suggests the characteristic absence of all ostentation in His
works. We can scarcely suppose this miracle done for the sake of showing
His divinity. It was pure goodness and sympathy which moved Him.

It occurred in a household of His disciples. There, too, sorrow will
come. But there, if they tell Him of it, His help will not be far away.
This is one of the few miracles wrought on one of His more immediate
followers. The Resurrection of Lazarus, so like this in many respects,
is the only other.

This scene of the healing Christ in His disciples' household suggests
the whole subject of the effect on domestic life of Christianity, or
more truly of Christ Himself. It is scarcely too much to say that the
home, as many of us blessedly know, is the creation of Christ. Cana of
Galilee--The household at Bethany.

II. The time.

After His long day's toil--the unwearied mercy. On the Sabbath--the Lord
of the Sabbath.

III. The person.

The woman. How Christianity embodies the true emancipation of women.
They are participants in an equal gift, honoured by admission to equal
service.

IV. The effect.

'She ministered'; testimony of the completeness of the cure. Which
completeness is also real in the spiritual region.

How the basis of all our service must be His healing. Ours second, not
first.

How the end of His healing is our service. We are bound to render it: He
desires it. How each one's character and circumstances determine his
service. How common duties may be sanctified. He accepts our service
whatever it be.

The Sabbath. The services of love come before ritual observance, in
Jesus and in the cured woman.


THE HEALING CHRIST

     'Himself took our infirmities, and bare our sicknesses.'--MATT.
     viii. 17.

You will remember, probably, that in our Old Testament translation of
these words they are made to refer to man's mental and spiritual evils:
'He bare our griefs and carried our sorrows.' Our evangelist takes them
to refer, certainly not exclusively, but in part, to men's corporeal
evils--'our infirmities' (bodily weaknesses, that is) 'and our
sicknesses.' He was distinctly justified in so doing, both by the
meaning of the original words, which are perfectly general and capable
of either application, and by the true and deep view of the
comprehensiveness of our Lord's mission and purpose. Christ is the
antagonist of all the evils that affect man's life, whether his
corporeal or his spiritual; and no less true is it that, in His deep
sympathy, 'He bare our sicknesses' than that, in the mystery of His
atoning death, 'He was wounded for our transgressions.'

It is, therefore, this point of view of Christ, as the Healer, which I
desire to bring before you now.

I. First, I ask you to look at the plain facts as to our Lord's ministry
which are contained in these words:--'Himself took our infirmities, and
bare our sicknesses.'

Now, there are two points that I desire to emphasise very briefly. One
is the prominence in Christ's life which is given to His healing energy.
We are accustomed to think of His cures as miracles. We are accustomed
to think of them in that aspect as evidences of His mission, or as
difficulties and stumbling-blocks, as the case may be. But I ask you to
put away all such thoughts for a minute, and think about the miracles
simply as being cures. Remember how enormous a proportion of our Lord's
time and pains and sympathy and thoughts was directed to that one
purpose of healing people of their bodily infirmities. We may almost say
that to an outsider He would look a great deal liker a man who, as the
Apostle Peter painted Him in one of his earliest addresses, 'went about
doing good and healing,' than as a teacher of divine wisdom, to say
nothing of an incarnation of the divine nature. His miracles of healing
were certainly the most conspicuous part of His life's work.

And then, remember, that whilst the great proportion of our Lord's
miracles are miracles of healing, we are sure that the whole of the
recorded miraculous works of our Lord are the smallest fraction of what
He really did. You remember how there crop up, here and there, in the
Gospels, general _resumes_ of our Lord's work, of such a kind as
this:--'And Jesus went about all Galilee, teaching in their synagogues,
and preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and healing all manner of
sickness and all manner of disease among the people. And they brought
unto Him all sick people that were taken with divers diseases and
torments, and those which were possessed with devils, and those which
were lunatic, and those that had the palsy and He healed them.' Or,
again:--'And Jesus departed from thence, and came nigh unto the sea of
Galilee, and went up into a mountain, and sat down there. And great
multitudes came unto Him, having those that were lame, blind, dumb,
maimed, and many others, and cast them down at Jesus' feet, and He
healed them.' Now these are but specimens of the occasional
generalisations which we find in the Gospels, which warrant us in saying
that, according to the New Testament record, Christ's works of healing
were to be numbered, not by tens, but by hundreds, and perhaps by
thousands.

That is the first fact calling for notice. The words of our text suggest
a second thought as to the cost at which these cures were wrought.
'Himself took and bare' does not mean only 'took away.' It includes
that, as a consequence, but it points to something before the removal of
the sicknesses. It points to the fact that Christ in some real sense
endured the loads which He removed. Of course, His cross is the highest
exemplification of the great law which runs through His whole life, that
He identifies Himself with all the evil which He takes away, and is able
to take it away only because He identifies Himself with it. But whilst
the cross is the highest exemplification of this, every miracle of mercy
which He wrought is an illustration of the same principle in its
appropriate fashion, and upon a lower level. And although we cannot say
that the physical sufferings which He alleviated were physically laid
upon Him, yet we can say that He so identified Himself with all
sufferers by His swift sympathy as that He bore, and therefore bore
away, the diseases as well as the sins of the men for whose healing He
lived, and for whose redemption He died.

The proof of this crops up now and then. What did it mean that, when He
stood beside one poor sufferer, before He could utter from His
authoritative lips the divine word of power, 'Ephphatha, be opened,' the
same lips had to shape themselves for the utterance of an altogether
human and brotherly sigh? Did it not mean that the condition of His
healing power was sympathy, that He must bring Himself to feel the
burden that He will roll away? That sigh proves that His cures were the
works, not without cost to the doer, of a sympathising heart, and not
the mere passionless acts of a miracle-monger.

In like manner, what meant that strange tempest of agitation that swept
across the pacific ocean of His nature ere He stood by the grave of
Lazarus? Why that being 'troubled in Himself' before He raised him?
Wherefore the tears that heralded the restoration of the man to life?
They could not be shed for the loss that was so soon to be repaired.
They can only have been the emotion and tears of One who saw, as massed
in one black whole, the entire sorrows that affected physical humanity,
and rose in a holy passion of indignation and of sorrow at the sight of
that enemy, Death, with whose beginnings He had wrestled in many a
miracle of restoration, and whose sceptre He was now about to pluck from
his bony clutch. Therefore I say that Christ the healer bore, and
thereby bore away, the sicknesses and the infirmities of men.

Amidst mountains of rubbish and chaff, the Rabbis have a grain of wheat
in their legend which tells us that Messias is to come as a leper, and
to be found sitting amongst the lepers at the city's gate; which is a
picturesque and symbolical way of declaring the same truth that I am now
insisting upon, the participation by the Redeemer in all burdens and
sorrows of body and of spirit which He takes away.

II. And now with these facts--for I take them to be such--for the basis
of our thoughts, let me ask you to turn, in the second place, to some
plain practical conclusions that come from them.

The first of these that I would suggest is the lesson as to the proper
sweep and sphere of Christian beneficence. As I said in my introductory
remarks, we do not rightly measure the whole circumference of Christ's
work unless we regard it as covering and including all forms of human
evil. He is the antagonist of everything that is antagonistic to
man--pain, misery, sickness, death itself. All these are excrescences on
the divine design, transient accompaniments of disordered relations
between God and man. And this great physician of souls fights the
disease and does not neglect the symptoms; deals with the central evil
and is not so absorbed with that as to omit from His view or His
treatment the merely superficial manifestations of it.

So that if Christian people, individually and as Churches, are justly
exposed, in any measure, to the sarcasm which is freely cast upon them,
that they neglect the temporal well-being of men in order to attend
exclusively to their spiritual wants, they have not learned the example
of such partial treatment from their Master; nor have they taken in the
significance and the power of His life in its relation to human sorrow.
All that makes the heart bleed Christ comes to take away. 'All the ills
that _flesh_ is heir to,' as well as those which each spirit, by
rebellion, brings upon itself--are the foes with whom Christ has left
His Church in the world in order to wage incessant warfare. If we
Christians, oppressed with the sense of the depth and central nature of
the evil of man's sin, have so devoted ourselves to preaching and
evangelising, that we are, in any measure, rightly chargeable with
neglecting hospitals and infirmaries and other forms of relief for
temporal necessities, just in that proportion have we departed from our
Master's spirit. But I do not, for my part, much believe, either in the
good faith of the accusers or in the applicability of the charge which
men, who never do anything for the religious improvement of their
fellows, are apt to bring against us. My little experience, I think,
teaches me that the folk who say to us 'Do not waste your money on
Bibles and missionaries, give it to hospitals and schools,' are not
usually the people that 'waste their money' on either; and that the
largest portion of all the work that is done in England to-day, for the
temporal well-being of men, comes from the Christians who also do work
for their spiritual well-being.

But let us learn the lesson, if we need it, from our enemies and our
critics; and see to it that the more we feel the lofty and transcendent
importance of carrying Christ's salvation to men's souls, the more we
endeavour, likewise, to live amongst them as He did, the embodiment of
pity, wide-eyed and comprehensive, for every evil that racks their
hearts and every pain that tortures their nerves. As a fact, hospitals
are found within the limits of Christianity, and not outside it; and so
far, Christendom, though it is largely professing Christendom only, has
learned that it follows a Christ who is the Saviour of the body and the
Physician of the soul.

In the next place, another practical lesson which I would draw from this
is, as to the sole conditions upon which any form of Christian help can
be rendered. The condition for the elevation of men is that the lever
which lifts them must have its point below them. That is to say, you
have to go down if you would heave up. You have to go amongst if you
would deliver; you have to make your own, by a sympathy which you have
learned of your Master, the sorrows and the sins of humanity, if you
would effectually remedy them. A guinea to an hospital is not your
contribution to the Christ-like relief of human suffering. It wants, and
He wants, your heart, your sympathy. Think for a moment of the universe
of anguish that may lie within the narrow limits of one human body--that
awful mystery of pain which holds in its red-hot pincers hundreds and
thousands of men and women in this city at this moment. Try to imagine
the mass of bodily agony, an enormous percentage of which is utterly
innocent, and a still larger percentage of it perfectly remediable,
which at this hour, whilst we sit here, is torturing mankind. And oh!
brethren, do not let any thought of the transcendent importance of
Christ's gospel, and what it does to men's hearts, make us careless
about these real, though lesser, evils which lie beside us, and which we
can remedy and help.

Only, remember the condition of help for them all. The newspapers went
into raptures some years since, and wisely, over a Roman Catholic priest
who shut himself up in a little island with a colony of lepers. Some
Protestant martyrs have done the same before him, without any chorus of
newspaper praise. Whoever did it had penetrated to the secret of
Christian help--identification with the evil. If we would take away any
misery or sin, we must act like that doctor who shut himself up in the
wards of an hospital, and kept a diary of the symptoms of his disease,
till the pen dropped from his fingers and the film came over his eyes.
Are we ready to do anything like that for our brethren? Until we are, we
have yet to learn and to practise the pattern which He has set, 'Who,
though He was rich, for our sins became poor': and who, 'forasmuch as
the children were partakers of flesh and blood, Himself likewise'--in
their own fashion of weakness, and weariness, and sorrow, and pain, and
ultimately death--'took part of the same.' 'He bore our sicknesses,'
therefore He bore them away, and, in so doing, taught us the law of
Christian help.

And lastly, let me not pass from this subject without leaving on your
hearts, dear friends, the other thought, of the connection and the
relative importance of these two hemispheres of Christ's work. The
sicknesses are symbols of the sins; the removal of the bodily pain and
disease is a prophecy and a visible parable proclaiming the removal of
all the harassment and abnormal action that afflict intellect, will, or
spirit. Christ Himself has taught us to regard His miracles of healing
as the making visible, in the outward sphere, of the analogous miracles
of healing in the spiritual realm. And although I have been saying a
great deal about the preciousness and the sacredness of the curative
influences which flow from Christ, and deal with outward diseases and
evils, let us not forget that a sound body is of small worth as compared
with a sound mind; that the body is the servant of the spirit, meant
mainly to do its behests, bring it knowledge, and express its will; and
that high above, and pointed to by, the lower, though precious work of
healing men's sicknesses, towers that work which we all of us need, and
the robustest of us, perhaps, need most, the healing of our sick souls
and their deliverance from death.

Every one of these manifold miracles which the Saviour wrought may be
taken as parabolical. You and I grope in darkness as the blind. You and
I have ears deaf to hear, and lips dumb to speak, the praises and the
love and the word of God. We are lame in the powers of mind and spirit
to run in the way of His commandments, and to walk unfainting in the
paths of duty. The fever of hot, passionate, foolish desires burns in
the veins of us all with its poison. The paralysis of a will that is
slothful to good infests and hinders us all. But there comes to us that
great hope and promise that Christ has the Spirit of the Lord upon Him
to bring liberty to the captive, sight to the blind, hearing to the
deaf, healing to the fevered, vigour to the palsied, activity to the
lame. Only let us set our trust in Him, carry our weaknesses to Him,
acknowledge our sins to Him, seek the touch of His healing and
quickening hand, and the miracle shall be wrought.

The old-fashioned surgery used to believe in the transfusion of blood
from a sound to a diseased person, and the consequent expulsion of
disease. That is the fact about our relation to Christ. Put your arm
side by side with His by simple faith in Him. Come into contact with
Him, and the blood of Jesus Christ, the 'law of the spirit of life that
was in Him,' will pass into the veins of your spirits, and make you
whole of whatsoever disease you have. 'Then shall the eyes of the blind
be opened, and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped; then shall the
lame man leap as a hart, and the tongue of the dumb shall sing.' And so
shall you begin that course of healing and purifying, which will know no
pause nor natural termination until, redeemed in body, soul, and spirit,
you reach the land 'where the inhabitant thereof shall no more say, I am
sick,'--'and there shall be no more death, neither shall there be any
more pain.'


CHRIST REPRESSING RASH DISCIPLESHIP

     'And a certain scribe came, and said unto Him, Master, I will
     follow Thee whithersoever Thou goest. 20. And Jesus saith unto him,
     The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests; but the
      Son of Man hath not where to lay His head.'--MATT. viii. 19-20.

Our Lord was just on the point of leaving Capernaum for the other side
of the lake. His intended departure from the city, in which He had spent
so long a time, and wrought so many miracles, produced precisely
opposite effects on two of the crowd around Him, both of whom seem to
have been, in the loose sense of the word, disciples. One was this
scribe, whom the prospect of losing the Master from his side, hurried
into a too lightly formed and too confidently expressed undertaking. The
other presented exactly the opposite fault. That other man in the crowd,
at the prospect of losing sight of the Christ, began to think that there
were imperative duties at home which would prevent his following the
Master, and said, 'Suffer me first to go and bury my father.' A sacred
obligation, and one which Christ would not have desired him to suspend,
unless there had been something more behind it!

These two men, then, represent the two opposite poles of weakness, the
one too swift, the other too slow, to take a decisive step. And Christ's
treatment of them is, in like manner, a representation of the two
opposite methods which He adopts for curing opposite diseases, and
bringing both back to the same state of health. He stimulates the too
sluggish, He represses the too willing (if such a paradox may be
allowed). His treatment is at once spur and bridle. To the one man He
administers a sobering representation of what he is undertaking with so
light a heart; to the other He gives the commandment that sounds so
stern: 'Leave the highest duty, if you cannot do it without conflicting
with your higher to Me.'

And so I think that Matthew's arrangement of this pair of companion
pictures is to be preferred to that which we find in Luke, who
localises the incident in a different part of our Lord's ministry, and
on a different occasion. I deal now only with the first of these two
contrasted pictures, and consider the lightly-made vow, and Christ's
sobering treatment of it.

I. The too lightly uttered vow.

There is a certain almost jaunty air of self-complacence about the man
and his facile promise. What he promised was no more than what Christ
requires from each of us, no more than what Christ was infinitely glad
to have laid at His feet. And he promised it with absolute sincerity,
meaning every word that he said, and believing that he could fulfil it
all. What was the fault? There were three: taking counsel of a
transitory feeling; making a vow with a very slight knowledge of what it
meant; and relying with foolish confidence on his own strength.

Vows which rest on no firmer foundation than these are sure to sink and
topple over into ruin. Discipleship which is the result of mere emotion
must be evanescent, for all emotion is so. Effervescence cannot last,
and when the cause ceases the effect ceases too. Discipleship which
enlists in Christ's army, in ignorance of the hard marching and fighting
which have to be gone through, will very soon be skulking in the rear or
deserting the flag altogether. Discipleship which offers faithful
following because it relies on its own fervour and force will, sooner or
later, feel its unthinkingly undertaken obligations too heavy, and be
glad to shake off the yoke which it was so eager to put on.

These three things, singly or combined, are the explanations, as they
are the causes, of half the stagnant Christianity that chokes our
churches. Men have vowed, and did not know what they were vowing,
pledging themselves, in a moment of excitement, to what after years
discover to them to be a hard and uncongenial course of life. They have
been carried into the position of professed disciples on the top of a
wave of emotion which has long since broken and retreated, leaving them
stranded and motionless in a place where they have no business to be.
Every community of professing Christians is weakened, and its vitality
is lowered, by the presence and influence of members who have said, 'I
will follow Thee whithersoever Thou goest,' but whose vow was but a
flash in the pan, and never meant anything. They did not know what they
were saying. They had not stopped to think why they were saying it,
still less did they take the advice of the Master to count their forces
before they went into the battle, and see whether their ten thousand
could meet him that would come against them with twenty thousand.

I do not suppose that much of our modern religionism is in great danger
from too fervid emotion. That, certainly, is not the side on which our
average Christianity is defective. No feeling can be too fervid which
has been kindled by profound contemplation and hearty acceptance of
Christ's redeeming love. The facts to which sound religious emotion
looks, warrant, and the work in the Christian life which it has to do,
needs that it shall be at white-heat, if it is to be worthy of its
object and equal to its tasks. But there very often is emotion which is
too fervid for the convictions which are presumed to kindle it, and
which burns itself out quickly because it neither comes from principle
nor leads to action. No resolution to follow Christ can be too
enthusiastic, nor any renunciation for His sake too absolute, to
correspond to His supreme authority. But there may very easily be brave
words much too great for the real determination which is in them. A
half-empty bottle makes more noise, if you shake it, than a full one. We
cannot estimate the hindrances of the Christian life too lightly; if we
do so knowing them, and thinking little of them because we think so
joyfully of Christ our helper. But there may very easily be a
presumptuous contempt of these, which is only the result of ignorance
and self-confidence, and will soon be abased into dread of them, and
probably end in desertion of Him.

A sadly large number of professing Christians may see their own faces in
this mirror. How many of us are exactly like this man? Long, long ago we
vowed to follow Christ. Have we advanced a yard on the Christian course
since then, or do we stand very much at the same point as on that
far-off day? Some of us, who spent no breath in saying what we were
going to do, but used it in the prayer, 'Draw me, and I will run after
Thee,' have followed the Captain. Some of us have been like clumsy
recruits, who have only been marking time all the while, one foot up and
the other down, but always in the same place. That is the kind of
advance that the lightly formed resolution--formed in ignorance of what
it involved, and in foolish confidence in the resolver's strength--is
too apt to lead to. Is it not so in all life? No caravan ever starts
from a port on the coast to go up-country, but there is a percentage of
deserters in the first week. There are always, in every good work,
adherents, easily moved, pushing themselves into the front, full of
resolves in the beginning, and then, when the tug comes, they drop out
of the ranks and leave the quiet ones, that did not say, 'I am going to
do it,' but thought to themselves, 'I should uncommonly like to _try_
whether I can.' to bear the burden and heat of the march. A sad, wise,
self-distrustful valour is the temper that wins.

Let us see to it, dear brethren, not that our fervour be less--I do not
know how the fervour of some of you could be less and keep alive at
all--but that our principle be more; not that our resolutions be less
noble, but that they be more deeply engrained. You can light a fire of
the chips and paper in an instant, and the flimsier the material the
more quickly it will crackle; it takes a longer time to get coals in a
blaze, and they will last longer. Be your resolves slow to begin and
never-ending,' especially when you say, as we are all bound to say,
'Lord! I will follow Thee whithersoever Thou goest.'

II. Note our Lord's treatment of this too lightly uttered vow.

It is wonderfully gentle and lenient. He speaks no rebuke. He does not
reject the proffered devotion. He does not even say that there was
anything defective in it, but simply answers by a quiet statement of
what the vow was pledging the rash utterer to do. Christ's words are a
douche of cold water to condense the steam which was so noisily
escaping, to turn the vaporous enthusiasm into something more solid,
with the particles nearer each other. His object was not to repel, but
to turn an ignorant, somewhat bragging vow into a calm, humble
determination, with a silent 'God helping me' for its foundation. To
repel is sometimes the way to attract. Jesus Christ would not have any
one coming after Him on a misunderstanding of where he is going, or
what he will have to do. It shall be all fair and above board, and the
difficulties and sacrifices and necessary restrictions and
inconveniences shall all be stated. He does not need to hide from His
recruits the black side of the war for which He seeks to enlist them,
but He tells it all to them to begin with, and then waits--and He only
knows how longingly He waits--for their repeating, with full knowledge
and humble determination, the vow that sprang so lightly to their lips
when they did not understand what they were saying. Of course our Lord's
words had literal truth, and their original intention was to bring
clearly before this man the hard fact that following Jesus meant
homelessness. It is as if He had said, 'You are ready to follow Me
wherever I go--are you? You will have to go far, and to be always going.
Creatures have their burrows and their roosting-places, but I, the Lord
of creatures, the Son of Man, whose kingdom prophets proclaimed, am
houseless in My own realm, and My followers must share My wandering
life. Are you ready for that?' Jesus was homeless. He was born in a
hired stable, cradled in a manger, owed shelter to faithful friends, was
buried in a borrowed grave; He had 'not where to lay His head,' living
or dying. And His servants, in literal truth, had to tramp after Him,
through the length and breadth of the land. And if this man was meaning
to follow Him whithersoever He went, he had not before him a little
pleasure-journey across the lake, to come back again in a day or two,
but he was enlisting for a term of service, that extended over a life.

But then, beyond that, there is a deeper lesson here. 'The Son of Man'
on our Lord's lips not only expressed His dignity as Messiah, but His
relation to the whole race of men; and declared that He was what we
nowadays call ideal manhood. And that is the point, as I take it, of the
contrast between the restful lives of the lower creatures, who all have
a place fitted to them, where they curl themselves up, and go to sleep,
and are comfortable, and the higher life of men, which is homeless in
the deepest sense. 'The Son of Man,' He in whom the whole essence of
humanity is, as it were, concentrated; and who, in His own person,
presents the very type and perfection of manhood, cannot but be
homeless.

Ah, yes I man's prerogative is unrest, and he should recognise it as a
blessing. It is the condition of all noble life; it is the condition of
all growth. 'The foxes have holes,' and the fox's hole fits it, and
therefore the hole of the fox to-day is what it was in the beginning,
and ever shall be. Man has no such abode, therefore he grows. Man is
blessed with that great 'discourse that looks before and after,' and his
thoughts wander through eternity, and therefore he is capable of endless
advance, and if he is in the path where his Maker has meant him to be,
sure of endless growth. The more a man gets like a beast, the more has
he of the beast's lot of happy contentment in this world. And the more
he gets like a man, like the 'Son of Man,' the more has he to realise
that he is a pilgrim and a sojourner, as all his fathers were.

And so, dear friends, because disciples must follow the Son of Man who
is the King, and whose life is the perfect mirror of manhood, restless
homelessness is our lot, if we are His disciples. Ay! and it is our
blessing. It is better to sleep beneath the stars than beneath golden
canopies, and to lay the head upon a stone than upon a lace pillow, if
the ladder is at our side and the face of God above it. Better be out in
the fields, a homeless stranger with the Lord, than huddling together
and perfectly comfortable in houses of clay that perish before the
moth.

Do not let us repine; let us be thankful that we cannot, if we are
Christ's, but be strangers here; for all the bitterness and pain of
unrest and homelessness pass away, and all sweetness and gladness is
breathed into them, when we can say, 'I am a sojourner and a stranger
_with Thee_,' and when in our unrest we are 'following the Lamb
whithersoever He goeth.'


CHRIST STIMULATING SLUGGISH DISCIPLESHIP

     'And another of His disciples said unto Him, Lord, suffer me first
     to go and bury my father. 22. But Jesus said unto him, Follow Me;
     and let the dead bury their dead.'--MATT. viii. 21-22.

The very first words of these verses, 'And another of His disciples,'
show us that the incident recorded in them is only half of a whole. We
have already considered the other half, and supplement our former
remarks by a glance at the remaining portion now. The two men, whose
treatment by Christ is narrated, are the antipodes of each other. The
former is a type of well-meaning, lightly formed, and so, probably,
swiftly abandoned purposes. This man is one of the people who always see
something else to be done first, when any plain duty comes before them.
Sluggish, hesitating, keenly conscious of other possibilities and
demands, he needs precisely the opposite treatment from his
light-hearted and light-purposed brother. Some plants want putting into
a cold house to be checked, some into a greenhouse to be forwarded.
Diversity of treatment, even when it amounts to opposition of treatment,
comes from the same single purpose. And so here the spur is applied,
whilst in the former incident it was the rein that was needed.

I. Note, then, first of all, this apparently most laudable and
reasonable request.

'Lord, suffer me first to go and bury my father.' Nature says 'Go,' and
religion enjoins it, and everything seems to say that it is the right
thing for a man to do. The man was perfectly sincere in his petition,
and perfectly sincere in the implied promise that, as soon as the
funeral was over, he would come back. He meant it, out and out. If he
had not, he would have received different treatment; and if he had not,
he would have ceased to be the valuable example and lesson that he is to
us. So we have here a disciple quite sincere, who believes himself to
have already obeyed in spirit and only to be hindered from obeying in
outward act by an imperative duty that even a barbarian would know to be
imperative.

And yet Jesus Christ read him better than he read himself; and by His
answer lets us see that the tone of mind into which we are all tempted
to drop, and which is the characteristic natural tendency of some of us,
that of being hindered from doing the plain thing that lies before us,
because something else crops up, which we also think is imperative upon
us, is full of danger, and may be the cover of a great deal of
self-deception; and, at any rate, is not in consonance with Christ's
supreme and pressing and immediate claims.

The temper which says, 'Suffer me first to go and bury my father,' is
full of danger. One never knows but that, after he has got his father
buried, there will be something else turning up equally important.
There was the will to be read afterwards, and if he was, as probably he
was, the eldest son, he would most likely be the executor. There would
be all sorts of affairs to settle up before he might feel that it was
his duty to leave everything and follow the Master.

And so it always is. 'Suffer me _first_, and when we get to the top of
that hill, there is another one beyond. And so we go on from step to
step, getting ready to do the duties that we know are most imperative
upon us, by sweeping preliminaries out of the way, and so we go on until
our dying day, when somebody else buries us. Like some backwoodsman in
the American forests who should say to himself, 'Now, I will not sow a
grain of wheat until I have cleared all the land that belongs to me. I
will do that first and then begin to reap,' he would be a great deal
wiser if he cleared and sowed a little bit first, and lived upon it, and
then cleared a little bit more. Mark the plain lesson that comes out of
this incident, that the habit, for it is a habit with some of us, of
putting other pressing duties forward, before we attend to the highest
claims of Christ, is full of danger, because there will be no end to
them if we once admit the principle. And this is true not only in regard
to Christianity, but in regard to everything that is worth doing in this
world. Whenever some great and noble task presents itself with its
solemn call for consecration, some dwarf of an apparent duty thrusts
itself in between and perks up in our faces with its demand, 'Attend to
me first, and then I will let you go on to that other.'

