and nobler than themselves.

There be two great conceptions smelted together in the revelation of God
in Jesus Christ, of which neither attains its supremest beauty except by
the juxtaposition of the other. Power is harsh, and scarcely worthy to
be called divine, unless it be linked with love. Love is not glorious
unless it be braced and energised by power. And, says Paul, these two
are brought together in Jesus; and therefore each is heightened by the
other. It is the love of God that lifts His power to its highest height;
it is the revelation of Him as stooping that teaches us His loftiness.
It is because He has come within the grasp of our humanity in Jesus
Christ that we can hymn our highest and noblest praises to 'the King
eternal, the invisible God.'

The sunshine falls upon the snow-clad peaks of the great mountains and
flushes them with a tender pink that makes them nobler and fairer by far
than when they were veiled in clouds. And so all the divine majesty
towers higher when we believe in the divine condescension, and there is
no god that men have ever dreamed of so great as the God who stoops to
sinners and is manifest in the flesh and Cross of the Man of Sorrows.

Take these characteristics of the divine nature as get forth in the text
one by one, and consider how the Revelation in Jesus Christ, and its
power on sinful men, raises our conceptions of them. 'The King of the
ages'--and do we ever penetrate so deeply into the purpose which has
guided His hand, as it moulded and moved the ages, as when we can say
with Paul that His 'good pleasure' is that, 'in the dispensation of the
fulness of times, He might gather together in one all things in Christ.'
The intention of the epochs as they emerge, the purpose of all their
linked intricacies and apparently diverse movements, is this one thing,
that God in Christ may be manifest to men, a nd that humanity may be
gathered, like sheep round the Shepherd, into the one fold of the one
Lord. For that the world stands; for that the ages roll, and He who is
the King of the epochs hath put into the hands of the Lamb that was
slain the Book that contains all their events; and only His hand,
pierced upon Calvary, is able to open the seals, to read the Book. The
King of the ages is the Father of Christ.

And in like manner, that incorruptible God, far away from us because He
is so, and to whom we look up here doubtingly and despairingly and often
complainingly and ask, 'Why hast Thou made us thus, to be weighed upon
with the decay of all things and of ourselves?' comes near to us all in
the Christ who knows the mystery of death, and thereby makes us
partakers of an inheritance incorruptible. Brethren, we shall never
adore, or even dimly understand, the blessedness of believing in a God
who cannot decay nor change, unless from the midst of graves and griefs
we lift our hearts to Him as revealed in the face of the dying Christ.
He, though He died, did not see corruption, and we through Him shall
pass into the same blessed immunity.

'The King . . . the God invisible.' No man hath seen God 'at any time, nor
can see Him.' Who will honour and glorify that attribute which parts Him
wholly from our sense, and so largely from our apprehension, as will he
who can go on to say, 'the only begotten Son which is in the bosom of
the Father, He hath declared Him.' We look up into a waste Heaven;
thought and fear, and sometimes desire, travel into its tenantless
spaces. We say the blue is an illusion; there is nothing there but
blackness. But 'he that hath seen Me hath seen the Father.' And we can
lift thankful praise to Him, the King invisible, when we hear Jesus
saying, 'thou hast both seen Him, and it is He that talketh with thee.'

'The only God.' How that repels men from His throne! And yet, if we
apprehend the meaning of Christ's Cross and work, we understand that the
solitary God welcomes my solitary soul into such mysteries and sacred
sweetnesses of fellowship with Himself that, the humanity remaining
undisturbed, and the divinity remaining unintruded upon, we yet are one
in Him, and partakers of a divine nature. Unless we come to God through
Jesus Christ, the awful attributes in the text spurn a man from His
throne, and make all true fellowship impossible.

So let me remind you that the religion which does not blend together in
indissoluble union these two, the majesty and the lowliness, the power
and the love, the God inaccessible and the God who has tabernacled with
us in Jesus Christ, is sure to be almost an impotent religion. Deism in
all its forms, the religion which admits a God and denies a revelation;
the religion which, in some vague sense, admits a revelation and denies
an incarnation; the religion which admits an incarnation and denies a
sacrifice; all these have little to say to man as a sinner; little to
say to man as a mourner; little power to move his heart, little power to
infuse strength into his weakness. If once you strike out the thought of
a redeeming Christ from your religion, the temperature will go down
alarmingly, and all will soon be frost bound.

Brethren, there is no real adoration of the loftiness of the King of the
ages, no true apprehension of the majesty of the God incorruptible,
invisible, eternal, until we see Him in the face and in the Cross of
Jesus Christ. The truths of this gospel of our salvation do not in the
smallest degree impinge upon or weaken, but rather heighten, the glory
of God. The brightest glory streams from the Cross. It was when He was
standing within a few hours of it, and had it full in view, that Jesus
Christ broke out into that strange strain of triumph, 'Now is God
glorified.' 'The King of the ages, incorruptible, invisible, the only
God,' is more honoured and glorified in the forgiveness that comes
through Jesus Christ, and in the transforming power which He puts forth
in the Gospel, than in all besides.

III. Lastly, let me draw your attention to the praise which should fill
the lives of those who know these facts.

I said that this Apostle seems always, when he refers to his own
individual conversion, to have been melted into fresh outpourings of
thankfulness and of praise. And that is what ought to be the life of all
of you who call yourselves Christians; a continual warmth of
thankfulness welling up in the heart, and not seldom finding utterance
in the words, but always filling the life.

Not seldom, I say, finding utterance in the words. It is a delicate
thing for a man to speak about himself, and his own religious
experience. Our English reticence, our social habits, and many other
even less worthy hindrances rise in the way; and I should be the last
man to urge Christian people to cast their pearls before swine, or too
fully to

          'Open wide the bridal chamber of the heart,'

to let in the day. There is a wholesome fear of men who are always
talking about their own religious experiences. But there are times and
people to whom it is treason to the Master for us not to be frank in the
confession of what we have found in Him. And I think there would be less
complaining of the want of power in the public preaching of the Word if
more professing Christians more frequently and more simply said to those
to whom their words are weighty, 'Come and hear and I will tell you what
God hath done for my soul.' 'Ye are my witnesses,' saith the Lord. It is
a strange way that Christian people in this generation have of
discharging their obligations that they should go, as so many of them
do, from the cradle of their Christian lives to their graves, never
having opened their lips for the Master who has done all for them.

Only remember, if you venture to speak you will have to live your
preaching. 'There is no speech nor language, their voice is not heard,
their sound is gone out through all the earth.' The silent witness of
life must always accompany the audible proclamation, and in many cases
is far more eloquent than it. Your consistent thankfulness manifested in
your daily obedience, and in the transformation of your character, will
do far more than all my preaching, or the preaching of thousands like
me, to commend the Gospel of Jesus Christ.

One last word, brethren. This revelation is made to us all. What is God
to you, friend? Is He a remote, majestic, unsympathising, terrible
Deity? Is He dim, shadowy, unwelcome; or is He God whose love softens
His power; Whose power magnifies his love? Oh! I beseech you, open your
eyes and your hearts to see that that remote Deity is of no use to you,
will do nothing for you, cannot help you, may probably judge you, but
will never heal you. And open your hearts to see that 'the only God'
whom men can love is God in Christ. If here we lift up grateful praise
'unto Him that loveth us and hath loosed us from our sins in His blood,'
we, too, shall one day join in that great chorus which at last will be
heard saying, 'Blessing and honour and glory and power be unto Him that
sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever.'




WHERE AND HOW TO PRAY

          'I will therefore that men pray every where,
          lifting up holy hands without wrath and
          doubting.'--1 TIM. ii. 8.


The context shows that this is part of the Apostle's directory for
public worship, and that, therefore, the terms of the first clause are
to be taken somewhat restrictedly. They teach the duty of the male
members of the Church to take public, audible part in its worship.

Everywhere, therefore, must here properly be taken in the restricted
signification of 'every place of Christian assembly.' And from the whole
passage there comes a picture of what sort of thing a meeting of the
primitive Church for worship was, very different from anything that we
see nowadays. 'Every one of you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath an
exhortation.' I fancy that some of the eminently respectable and utterly
dead congregations which call themselves Christian Churches would be
very much astonished if they could see what used to be the manner of
Christian worship nineteen hundred years ago, and would get a new notion
of what was meant by 'decently, and in order.'

But we may fairly, I suppose, if once we confess that this is so, widen
somewhat the scope of these words, and take them rather as expressive of
the Apostle's desire and injunction, for the word that he used here, 'I
will,' is a very strong one, to all Christian people, be they men or
women, that they pray 'everywhere,' in the widest sense of that
expression, 'lifting up holy hands without wrath or doubting.'

I do not attempt anything more than just to go, step by step, through
the Apostle's words and gather up the duties which each enjoins.

'I will that men pray everywhere.' That is the same in spirit as the
Apostle's other command: 'Pray without ceasing; in everything give
thanks.' A very high ideal, but a very reasonable one, for unless we can
find some place where God is not, and where the telegraph between heaven
and earth is beyond our reach, there is no place where we should not
pray. And unless we can find a place where we do not want God, nor need
Him, there is no place where we should not pray. Because, then,
'everywhere' is equally near Him, and the straight road to His throne is
of the same length from every hole and corner of the world; therefore,
wherever men are, they ought to be clinging to His skirts, and reaching
out their open hands for His benefits; and because, wherever a man is,
there he utterly depends upon God, and needs the actual intervention of
His love, and the energising of His power for everything, even for his
physical life, so that he cannot wink his eyelashes without God's help,
therefore, 'In every place I will that men pray.'

And how is that to be done? First of all, by keeping out of all places
where it is impossible that we should pray; for although He is
everywhere, and we want Him everywhere, there are places--and some of us
know the roads to them but too well, and are but too often in
them--where prayer would be a strange incongruity. A man will not pray
over the counter of a public-house. A man will not pray over a sharp
bargain. A man will not pray that God may bless his outbursts of anger,
or sensuality and the like. A man will not pray when he feels that he is
deep down in some pit of self-caused alienation from God. The
possibility of praying in given circumstances is a sharp test, although
a very rough and ready one, whether we ought to be in these
circumstances or not. Do not let us go where we cannot take God with us;
and if we feel that it would be something like blasphemy to call to Him
from such a place, do not let us trust ourselves there. Jonah could pray
out of the belly of the fish, and there was no incongruity in that; but
many a professing Christian man gets swallowed up by monsters of the
deep, and durst not for very shame send up a prayer to God. Get out of
all such false positions.

But if the Apostle wills 'that men pray alway,' it must be possible
while going about business, study, daily work, work at home amongst the
children, work in the factory amongst spindles, work in the
counting-house amongst ledgers, work in the study amongst lexicons, not
only to pray whilst we are working, but to make work prayer, which is
even better. The old saying that is often quoted with admiration, 'work
is worship,' is only half true. There is a great deal of work that is
anything but worship. But it is true that if, in all that I do, I try to
realise my dependence on God for power; to look to Him for direction,
and to trust to Him for issue, then, whether I eat, or drink, or pray,
or study, or buy and sell, or marry or am given in marriage, all will be
worship of God. 'I will that men pray everywhere.' What a noble ideal,
and not an impossible or absurd one! This was not the false ideal of a
man that had withdrawn himself from duty in order to cultivate his own
soul, but the true ideal of one of the hardest workers that ever lived.
Paul could say 'I am pressed above measure, insomuch that I despair of
life, and that which cometh upon me daily is the care of all the
churches,' and yet driven, harassed beyond his strength with business
and cares as he was, he did himself what he bids us do. His life was
prayer, therefore his life was Christ, therefore he was equal to all
demands. None of us are as hard-worked, as heavily pressed, as much
hunted by imperative and baying dogs of duties as Paul was. It is
possible for us to obey this commandment and to pray everywhere. A
servant girl down on her knees doing the doorsteps may do that task from
such a motive, and with such accompaniments, as she dips her cloth into
the hot-water bucket, as to make even it prayer to God. We each can lift
all the littlenesses of our lives into a lofty region, if only we will
link them on to the throne of God by prayer.

There is another way by which this ideal can be attained, and that is to
cultivate the habit, which I think many Christian people do not
cultivate, of little short swallow-flights of prayer in the midst of our
daily work. 'They cried unto God in the battle, and He was entreated of
them.' If a Philistine sword was hanging over the man's head, do you
think he would have much time to drop down upon his knees, to make a
petition, divided into all the parts which divines tell us go to make up
the complete idea of prayer? I should think not; but he could say, 'Save
me, O Lord!' 'They cried to God in the battle--little, sharp, short
shrieks of prayer--and He was entreated of them.' If you would cast
swift electric flashes of that kind more frequently up to heaven, you
would bring down the blessings that very often do not come after the
most elaborate and proper and formal petitions. 'Lord, save or I
perish!' It did not take long to say that, but it made the difference
between drowning and deliverance.

Still further, notice the conditions of true prayer that are here
required. I will that men pray everywhere 'lifting up _holy_ hands.'
That is a piece of symbolism, of course. Apparently the Jewish attitude
of prayer was unlike ours. They seem to have stood during devotion and
to have elevated their hands with open, empty, upturned palms to heaven.
We clasp ours in entreaty, or fold them as a symbol of resignation and
submission. They lifted them, with the double idea, I suppose, of
offering themselves to God thereby, and of asking Him to put something
into the empty hand, just as a beggar says nothing, but holds out a
battered hat, in order to get a copper from a passer-by. The psalmist
desired that the lifting up of his hands might be as the 'evening
sacrifice.'

If a man stands with his open, empty palm held up to God, it is as much
as to say 'I need, I desire, I expect.' And these elements are what we
must have in our prayers; the sense of want, the longing for supply, the
anticipation of an answer. What do you hold out your hand for? Because
you expect me to drop something into it, because you want to get
something. How do you hold out your hand? Empty. And if I am clasping my
five fingers round some earthly good it is of no use to hold up that
hand to God. Nothing will come into it. How can it? He must first take
the imitation diamonds out of it or we must turn it round and shake them
out before He can fill it with real jewels. As for him who continues to
clutch worldly goods, 'let not that man think that he shall receive
anything of the Lord.' Empty the palm before you lift it.

Still further, says Paul, 'lifting up _holy_ hands.' That, of course,
needs no explanation. One of the psalms, you may remember, says 'I will
wash mine hands in innocency, so will I compass Thine altar.' The
psalmist felt that unless there was a previous lustration and cleansing,
it was vain for him to go round the altar. And you may remember how
sternly and eloquently the prophet Isaiah rebukes the hypocritical
worshippers in Jerusalem when he says to them, 'Your hands are full of
blood. Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your doings,' and
_then_ come and pray. A foul hand gets nothing from God. How can it?
God's best gift is of such a sort as cannot be laid upon a dirty palm. A
little sin dams back the whole of God's grace, and there are too many
men that pray, pray, pray, and never get any of the things that we pray
for, because there is something stopping the pipe, and they do not know
what it is, and perhaps would be very sorry to clear it out if they did.
But all the same, the channel of communication is blocked and stopped,
and it is impossible that any blessing should come. Geographers tell us
that a microscopic vegetable grows rapidly in one of the upper affluents
of the Nile, and makes a great dam across the river which keeps back the
water, and so makes one of the lakes which have recently been explored;
and then, when the dam breaks, the rising of the Nile fertilises Egypt.
Some of us have growing, unchecked, and unnoticed, in the innermost
channels of our hearts, little sins that mat themselves together and
keep increasing until the grace of God is utterly kept from permeating
the parched recesses of our spirits. 'I will that men pray, lifting up
holy hands,' and unless we do, alas! for us.

If these are the requirements, you will say, 'How can I pray at all?'
Well, do you remember what the Psalmist says? 'If I regard iniquity in
my heart, the Lord will not hear me,' but then he goes on, 'Blessed be
God, who hath not turned away my prayer nor His mercy from me.' It is
always true that if we regard iniquity in our hearts, if in our inmost
nature we love the sin, that stops the prayer from being answered. But,
blessed be God, it is not true that our having done the sin prevents our
petitions being granted. For the sin that is not regarded in the heart,
but is turned away from with loathing hath no intercepting power. So,
though the uplifted hands art stained, He will cleanse them if, as we
lift them to Him, we say, 'Lord, they are foul, if thou wilt Thou canst
make them clean.'

But the final requirement is: 'Without wrath or doubting.' I do not
think that Christian people generally recognise with sufficient
clearness the close and inseparable connection which subsists between
their right feelings towards their fellow-men and the acceptance of
their prayers with God. It is very instructive that here, alongside of
requirements which apply to our relations to God, the Apostle should put
so emphatically and plainly one which refers to our relations to our
fellows. An angry man is a very unfit man to pray, and a man who
cherishes in his heart any feelings of that nature towards anybody may
be quite sure that he is thereby shutting himself out from blessings
which otherwise might be his. We do not sufficiently realise, or act on
the importance, in regard to our relations with God, of our living in
charity with all men. 'First, go and be reconciled to thy brother,' is
as needful to-day as when the word was spoken.

'Without . . . doubting.' Have I the right to be perfectly sure that my
prayer will be answered? Yes and no. If my prayer is, as all true prayer
ought to be, the submission of my will to God's and not the forcing of
my will upon God, then I have the right to be perfectly sure. But if I
am only asking in self-will, for things that my own heart craves, that
is not prayer; that is dictation. That is sending instructions to
heaven; that is telling God what He ought to do. That is not the kind of
prayer that may be offered 'without doubting.' It might, indeed, be
offered, if offered at all, with the certainty that it will not be
answered. For this is the assurance on which we are to rest--and some of
us may think it is a very poor one--'we know that, if we ask anything
_according to His will_, He heareth us.' To get what we want would often
be our ruin. God loves His children a great deal too well to give them
serpents when they ask for them, thinking they are fish, or to give them
stones when they beseech Him for them, believing them to be bread. He
will never hand you a scorpion when you ask Him to give it you, because,
with its legs and its sting tucked under its body, it is like an egg.

We make mistakes in our naming of things and in our desires after
things, and it is only when we have learned to say 'Not my will but
Thine be done,' that we have the right to pray, 'without doubting.' If
we do so pray, certainly we receive. But a tremulous faith brings little
blessing, and small answer. An unsteady hand cannot hold the cup still
for Him to pour in the wine of His grace, but as the hand shakes, the
cup moves, and the precious gift is spilled. The still, submissive soul
will be filled, and the answer to its prayer will be, 'Whatsoever things
ye desire believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have them.'




SPIRITUAL ATHLETICS

          'Exercise thyself unto Godliness.'--1 TIM. iv. 7.


Timothy seems to have been not a very strong character: sensitive,
easily discouraged, and perhaps with a constitutional tendency to
indolence. At all events, it is very touching to notice how the old
Apostle--a prisoner, soon to be a martyr--forgot all about his own
anxieties and burdens, and, through both of his letters to his young
helper, gives himself to the task of bracing him up. Thus he says to
him, in my text, amongst other trumpet-tongued exhortations, 'Exercise
thyself unto godliness.'

If I were preaching to ministers, I should have a good deal to say about
the necessity of this precept for them, and to remind them that it was
first spoken, not to a private member of the Church, as an injunction
for the Christian life in general, but as having a special bearing on
the temptations and necessities of those who stand in official positions
in the Church. For there is nothing that is more likely to sap a man's
devotion, and to eat out the earnestness and sincerity of a Christian
life, than that he should be--as I, for instance, and every man in my
position has to be--constantly occupied with presenting God's Word to
other people. We are apt to look upon it as, in some sense, our
stock-in-trade, and to forget to apply it to ourselves. So it was with a
very special bearing on the particular occupation and temptation of his
correspondent that Paul said 'Exercise thyself unto godliness' before
you begin to talk to other people.

But that would not be appropriate to my present audience. And I take
this injunction as one of universal application.

I. Notice, then, here expressed the ever-present and universal aim of
the Christian life.

Paul does not say 'be godly'; but 'exercise thyself unto'--with a view
towards--'godliness.' In other words, to him godliness is the great aim
which every Christian man should set before him as the one supreme
purpose of his life.

Now I am not going to spend any time on mere verbal criticism, but I
must point to the somewhat unusual word which the Apostle here employs
for 'godliness.' It is all but exclusively confined to these last
letters of the Apostle. It was evidently a word that had unfolded the
depth and fulness and comprehensiveness of its meaning to him in the
last stage of his religious experience. For it is only once employed in
the Acts of the Apostles, and some two or three times in the doubtful
second Epistle of St. Peter. And all the other instances of its use lie
in these three letters--the one to Titus and two to Timothy; and eight
of them are in this first one. The old Apostle keeps perpetually
recurring to this one idea of 'godliness.' What does he mean by it? The
etymological meaning of the word is 'well-directed reverence,' but it is
to be noticed that the context specifically points to one form of
well-directed reverence, viz. as shown in conduct. 'Active godliness' is
the meaning of the word; religion embodied in deeds, emotions, and
sentiments, and creeds, put into fact.

This noble and pregnant word teaches us, first of all, that all true
religion finds its ultimate sphere and best manifestation in the conduct
of daily life. That sounds like a platitude. I wish it were. If we
believed that, and worked it out, we should be very different people
from what the most of us are; and our chapels would be very different
places, and the professing Church would have a new breath of life over
it. Religion must have its foundation laid deep in the truths revealed
by God for our acceptance. And does God tell us anything simply that we
may believe it, and there an end? What is the purpose of all the
principles and facts which make up the body of the Christian revelation?
To enlighten us? Yes! To enlighten us only? A hundred times no! The
destination of a principle, of a truth, is to pass out from the
understanding into the whole nature of man.

And if, as I said, the foundation of religion is laid in truths,
principles, facts, the second story of the building is certain emotions,
sentiments, feelings, desires, and affections, and 'experiences'--as
people call them--which follow from the acceptance of these truths and
principles. And is that all? A thousand times no! What do we get the
emotions for? What does God give you a Revelation of Himself for, that
kindles your love if you believe it? That you may love? Yes! Only that
you may love? Certainly not. And so the top story is conduct, based upon
the beliefs, and inspired by the emotions.

In former centuries, the period between the Reformation and our fathers'
time, the tendency of the Protestant Church was very largely to let the
conception of religion as a body of truths overshadow everything else.
And nowadays, amongst a great many people, the temptation is to take the
second story for the main one, and to think that if a man loves, and has
the glow at his heart of the conscious reception of God's love, and has
longings and yearnings, and Christian hopes and desires, and passes into
the sweetnesses of communion with God, in his solitary moments, and
plunges deep into the truths of God's Word, that is godliness. But the
true exhortation to us is--Do not stop with putting in the foundations
of a correct creed, nor at the second stage of an emotional religion.
Both are needful. Number one and number two are infinitely precious, but
both exist for number three. And true religion has its sphere in
conduct. 'Exercise thyself unto godliness.' That does not mean
_only_--for it does include that--cultivate devout emotions, or realise
the facts and the principles of the Gospel, but it means, take these
along with you into your daily life, and work them out there. Bring all
the facts and truths of your creed, and all the sweet and select, the
secret and sacred, emotions which you have felt, to bear upon your daily
life. The soil in which the tree grows, and the roots of the tree, its
stem and its blossoms, are all means to the end--fruit. What is the use
of the clearest conceptions, and of the most tender, delicate, holy
emotions, if they do not drive the wheels of action? God does not give
us the Gospel to make us wise, nor even to make us blessed, but He gives
it to us to make us good men and women, working His work in our daily
tasks. All true religion has its sphere in conduct.

But then there is another side to that. All true conduct must have its
root in religion, and I, for my part--though of course it is extremely
'narrow' and 'antiquated' to profess it--I, for my part, do not believe
that in the long-run, and in general, you will get noble living apart
from the emotions and sentiments which the truths of Christianity,
accepted and fed upon, are sure to produce. And so this day, with its
very general depreciation of the importance of accurate conceptions of
revealed truth, and its exaltation of conduct, is on the verge of a very
serious error. Godliness, well-directed reverence, is the parent of all
noble living, and the one infallible way to produce a noble life is
faith in Christ, and love which flows from the faith.

If all that is so, if godliness is, not singing psalms, not praying, not
saying 'How sweet it is to feel the love of God,' still less saying 'I
accept the principles of Christianity as they are laid down in the
Bible'; but carrying out beliefs and emotions in deeds, then the true
aim which we should have continually before us as Christians is plain
enough. We may not reach it completely, but we can approximate
indefinitely towards it. Aim is more important than achievement.
Direction is more vital in determining the character of a life than
progress actually made. Note the form of the exhortation, 'exercise
thyself _towards_ godliness,' which involves the same thought as is
expressed in Paul's other utterance of irrepressible aspiration and
effort, 'Not as if I had already attained, either were already perfect,
but I follow after,' or as he had just said, 'press towards the mark,'
in continual approximation to the ideal. A complete penetration of all
our actions by the principles and emotions of the Gospel is what is set
before us here.

And that is the only aim that corresponds to what and where I am and to
what I need. I fall back upon the grandly simple old words, very dear to
some of us, perhaps, by boyish associations, 'Man's chief end is to
glorify God, and (so) to enjoy Him for ever.' 'Unto Godliness' is to be
the aim of every true life, and it is the only aim which corresponds to
our circumstances and our relations, our powers and possibilities.

II. Notice the discipline which such an aim demands.

'Exercise thyself.' Now, I have no doubt that the bulk of my hearers
know that the word here rendered 'exercise' is drawn from the athlete's
training-ground, and is, in fact, akin to the word which is transported
into English under the form 'gymnasium.' The Apostle's notion is that,
just as the athlete, racer, or boxer goes through a course of training,
so there is a training as severe, necessary for the godliness which Paul
regards as the one true aim of life.

You Christian people ought to train your spirits at least as carefully
as the athlete does his muscles. There are plenty of people, calling
themselves Christians, who never give one-hundredth part as much
systematic and diligent pains to fulfil the ideal of their Christian
life as men will take to learn to ride a bicycle or to pull the stroke
oar in a college boat. The self-denial and persistence and concentration
which are freely spent upon excellence in athletic pursuits might well
put to shame the way in which Christians go about the task of 'doing'
their religion.

I suppose there never was a time, in England's history at any rate,
whatever it may have been in Greece, when modern instances might give
more point to an old saw than to-day does for this text, when athletic
sports of all kinds are taking up so much of the time and the energy of
our young men. I do not want to throw cold water on that, but I do say
it is a miserable thing to think that so many professing Christians will
give a great deal more pains to learn to play lawn tennis than ever they
did to learn to be good, Christian people.

'Exercise thyself unto godliness.' Make a business of living your
Christianity. Be in earnest about it. A tragically large number of
professing Christians never were in earnest about mending themselves.
And that is why they are so far, far behind. 'Exercise thyself.' You
say, How?

'Well, I say, first of all, concentration. 'This _one_ thing I do.' That
does not mean narrowing, because this 'one thing' can be done by means
of all the legitimate things that we have to do in the world. Next
Friday, when you go on 'Change, you can be exercising yourself to
godliness there. Whatever may be the form of our daily occupation, it is
the _gymnasium_ where God has put us to exercise our muscles in, and so
to gain 'the wrestling thews that throw the world.' 'Be strong in the
Lord, and in the power of His might.' The concentration for which I
plead does not shut us out from any place but the devil's
wrestling-ground. All that is legitimate, all that is innocent, may be
made a means for manifesting and for increasing our godliness. Only you
have to take God with you into your life, and to try, more and more
consciously, to make Him the motive-power of all that you do. Then the
old saying which is profoundly true as it was originally meant, and has
of late years been so misused as to become profoundly false, will be
true again, '_Laborare est orare_.' Yes! it is; if worship underlies the
work, but not else.

Again I say, exercise yourselves by abstinence. How many things did the
athlete at Corinth do without in his training? How many things do
prizefighters and rowing men do without when in training to-day? How
rigidly, for a while at any rate, they abstain--whether they recompense
themselves afterwards or not has nothing to do with my present purpose.
And is it not a shame that some sensual man shall, for the sake of
winning a medal or a cup, be able gladly to abandon the delights of
sense--eating, drinking, and the like--and content himself with a
hermit's Spartan fare, and that Christian people so seldom, and so
reluctantly, and so partially turn away from the poisoned cups and the
indigestible dainties which the world provides for them? I think that
any Christian man who complains of the things which he is shut out from
doing if he is to cultivate the godliness which should be his life need
only go to any place where horse-jockeys congregate to get a lesson that
he may well lay to heart. 'Exercise thyself,' for it is unto godliness.

And then what I said in a former part of this sermon about the various
stages of religion may suggest another view of the method of discipline
proper to the Christian life. The strenuous exercise of all our powers
is called for. But if it is true that the godliness of my text is the
last outcome of the emotions which spring from the reception of certain
truths, then if we work backwards, as it were, we shall get the best way
of producing the godliness. That is to say, the main effort for all men
who are in earnest in regard to their own growth in Christlikeness is to
keep themselves in touch with the truths of the Gospel, and in the
exercise of the sentiments and emotions which flow from these. Or, to
put it into other words, the 'gymnastic' is to be, mainly, the man's
clinging, with all his might of mind and heart, to Christ, and the
truths that are wrapped up in Him; and the cultivation of the habit of
continual faith and love turned to that Lord. If I see to number
one--the creed, and to number two--the emotions, they will see to number
three--the conduct. Keep the truths of the Gospel well in your minds,
and keep yourselves well in the attitude of contact with Jesus Christ,
and power for life will come into you. But if the fountain is choked,
the bed of the stream will be dry. They tell us that away up in
Abyssinia there form across the bed of one of the branches of the Nile
great fields of weed. And as long as they continue unbroken the lower
river is shrunken. But when the stream at the back of them bursts its
way through them, then come the inundations down in Egypt, and bring
fertility. And there are hundreds of professing Christians whose fields
lie barren and baked in the sunshine, because they have stopped with
weeds, far away up amongst the hills, the stream that would water them.
Clear out the weeds, and the water will do the rest.

And 'exercise thyself unto godliness' by keeping the crown and the prize
often and clear in view. 'Paul the aged' in this very letter says: 'I
have finished my course, henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of
glory.' He had said, in the midst of the strife: 'Not as though I had
already attained--I press toward the mark for the prize.' And the prize
which gleamed before him through all the dust of the arena now shone
still more brightly when his hand had all but clasped it. If we desire
to 'run with perseverance the race that is set before us' we must keep
our eyes fixed on Jesus, and see in Him, not only the Rewarder, but the
Reward, of the 'exercise unto godliness.'




ONE WITNESS, MANY CONFESSORS

          'Thou . . . hast professed a good profession before
          many witnesses. 13. I give thee charge in the
          sight of God, who quickeneth all things, and
          before Christ Jesus, who before Pontius Pilate
          witnessed a good confession, 14. That thou keep
          this commandment. . . .'--1 TIM. vi. 12-14.


You will observe that 'a good confession,' or rather 'the good
confession,' is said here to have been made both by Timothy and by
Christ. But you will observe also that whilst the subject-matter is the
same, the action of Timothy and Jesus respectively is different. The
former professes, or rather confesses, the good confession; the latter
witnesses. There must be some reason for the significant variation of
terms to indicate that the relation of Timothy and Jesus to the good
confession which they both made was, in some way, a different one, and
that though what they said was identical, their actions in saying it
were different.

Then there is another point of parallelism to be noticed. Timothy made
his profession 'before many witnesses,' but the Apostle calls to his
remembrance, and summons up before the eye of his imagination, a more
august tribunal than that before which he had confessed his faith, and
says that he gives him charge 'before God' (for the same word is used in
the original in both verses), 'who quickeneth all things, and before
Christ Jesus.' So the earthly witnesses of the man's confession dwindle
into insignificance when compared with the heavenly ones. And upon these
thoughts is based the practical exhortation, 'Keep the commandment
without spot.' So, then, we have three things: the great Witness and His
confession, the subordinate confessors who echo His witness, and the
practical issue that comes out of both thoughts.

I. We have the great Witness and His confession.

Now, you will remember, perhaps, that if we turn to the Gospels, we find
that all of them give the subject-matter of Christ's confession before
Pilate, as being that He was the King of the Jews. But the Evangelist
John expands that conversation, and gives us details which present a
remarkable verbal correspondence with the words of the Apostle here, and
must suggest to us that, though John's Gospel was not written at the
date of this Epistle, the fact that is enshrined for us in it was
independently known by the Apostle Paul.

For, if I may for a moment recall the incident to you, you will remember
that when Pilate put to the Saviour the question, 'Art Thou a King?'
our Lord, before He would answer, took pains to make quite clear the
sense in which the judge asked Him of His royal state. For He said,
'Sayest thou this thing of thyself, or did others tell it thee of Me? If
it is your Roman idea of a king, the answer must be, "No." If it is the
Jewish Messianic idea, the answer must be, "Yes." I must know first what
the question means, in the mind of the questioner, before I answer it.'
And when Pilate brushes aside Christ's question, with a sort of
impatient contempt, and returns to the charge, 'What hast Thou done?'
our Lord, whilst He makes the claim of sovereignty, takes care to make
it in such a way as to show that Rome need fear nothing from Him, and
that His dominion rested not upon force. 'My Kingdom is not of this
world.' And then, when Pilate, like a practical Roman, bewildered with
all these fine-spun distinctions, sweeps them impatiently out of the
field, and comes back to 'Yes, or No; are you a King?' our Lord gives a
distinct affirmative answer, but at once soars up into the region where
Pilate had declined to follow Him: 'To this end was I born, and for this
cause came I into the world, that I might bear witness to the truth.'
'Before Pontius Pilate he witnessed the good confession.' And His
confession was His royalty, His relation to the truth, and His
pre-existence. 'To this end was I born,' and the next clause is no mere
tautology, nor a non-significant parallelism, 'and for this cause came I
into the world.' Then He was before He came, and birth to Him was not
the beginning of being, but the beginning of a new relation.

So, then, out of this great word of our text, which falls into line with
a great many other words of the New Testament, we may gather important
and significant truths with regard to two things, the matter and the
manner of Christ's witnessing. You remember how the same Apostle
John--for whom that word 'witness' has a fascination in all its manifold
applications--in that great vision of the Apocalypse, when to his
blessed sight the vision of the Master was once given, extols Him as
'the faithful witness, and the First-begotten from the dead, and the
Prince of the kings of the earth.' And you may remember how our Lord
Himself, after His conversation with Nicodemus, says, 'We speak that we
do know, and bear witness to that we have seen,' and how again, in
answer to the taunts of the Jews, He takes the taunt as the most
intimate designation of the peculiarity of His person and of His work,
when He says, 'I am one that bear witness of Myself.' So, then, we have
to interpret his declaration before Pilate in the light of all these
other sayings, and to remember that He who said that He came to bear
witness to the truth, said also, 'I am the truth,' and therefore that
his great declaration that He was the witness-bearer to the truth is
absolutely synonymous with His other declaration that He bears witness
of Himself.

Now, here we come upon one of the great peculiarities of Christ as a
religious teacher. The new thing, the distinctive peculiarity, the
differentia between Him and all other teachers, lies just here, that His
theme is not so much moral or religious principles, as His own nature
and person. He was the most egotistical man that ever lived on the face
of the earth, with an egotism only to be accounted for, if we believe,
as He Himself said, that in His person was the truth that He proclaimed,
and that when He witnessed to Himself He revealed God. And thus He
stands, separate from all other teachers, by this, that He is His own
theme and His own witness.

So much for the matter of the good confession to which we need only add
here its pendant in the confession before the High Priest. To the
representative of the civil government He said, 'I am a king,' and then,
as I remarked, He soared up into regions where no Roman official could
rise to follow Him, and to the representative of the Theocratic
government He said, 'Hereafter ye shall see the Son of Man sitting at
the right hand of God, and coming in the clouds of heaven.' These two
truths, that He is the Son of God, who by His witness to the truth, that
is, Himself, lays the foundations of a Monarchy which shall stretch far
further than the pinions of the Roman eagles could ever fly, and that he
is the Son of Man who, exalted to the right hand of God, is to be the
Judge of mankind--these are the good confessions to which the Lord
witnessed.

Then with regard to the manner of His witness. That brings us to another
of the peculiarities of Christ's teaching. I have said that He was the
most egotistical of men. I would say, too, that there never was another
who clashed down in the front of humanity such tremendous assertions,
with not the faintest scintilla of an attempt to prove them to our
understandings, or commend them by any other plea than this, 'Verily,
verily, I say unto you!'

A witness does not need to argue. A witness is a man who reports what he
has seen and heard. The whole question is as to his veracity and
competency. Jesus Christ states it for the characteristic of His work,
'We speak that we do know, and bear witness to that we have seen.' His
relation to the truth which He brings to us is not that of a man who has
thought it out, who has been brought to it by experience, or by feeling,
or by a long course of investigation; still less is it the relation
which a man would bear to a truth that he had learnt from others
originally, however much he had made it his own thereafter: but it is
that of one who is not a thinker, or a learner, or a reasoner, but who
is simply an attester, a witness. And so He stands before us, and says,
'The words that I speak unto you, they are spirit, they are life.
Believe Me, and believe the words, for no other reason, primarily, than
because I speak them.' In these two respects, then, the matter and the
manner of His witness, He stands alone, and we have to bow before Him
and say, 'Speak, Lord! for thy servant heareth.' 'Before Pontius Pilate
He witnessed a good confession.'

II. We have here suggested to us the subordinate confessors who echo the
Lord's witness.

It is a matter of no consequence when, and before whom, this Timothy
professed his good profession. It may have been at his baptism. It may
have been when he was installed in his office. It may have been before
some tribunal of which we know nothing. That does not matter. The point
