wondering at the news that earlier in the day Jesus had appeared to Peter.

No story tells us more impressively the truth that a divine Saviour walks
beside us all the way of our earthly journey. It is pathetic that our eyes
are so often dimmed by unbelief that we fail to realize his presence. We
walk and are sad while we might be rejoicing in his companionship. It may
be as the Scriptures are opened to us, or as we meet to break bread in his
name, that our blindness will be removed; and surely when the journey ends
and we enter the home toward which we are moving, we shall see him face to
face, and the vision will not fade in deepening twilight, but grow more
glorious through the eternal day.




M. Jesus Appearing To The Apostles. Ch. 24:36-43


    36 And as they spake these things, he himself stood in the midst
    of them, and saith unto them, Peace _be_ unto you. 37 But they
    were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they beheld a
    spirit. 38 And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled? and
    wherefore do questionings arise in your heart? 39 See my hands and
    my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit
    hath not flesh and bones, as ye behold me having. 40 And when he
    had said this, he showed them his hands and his feet. 41 And while
    they still disbelieved for joy, and wondered, he said unto them,
    Have ye here anything to eat? 42 And they gave him a piece of a
    broiled fish. 43 And he took it, and ate before them.


The incidents of the day on which Jesus rose from the dead, as recorded by
Luke, form not only a sequence in time, but also move in logical order.
The empty tomb can be explained by no other theory than that of a
resurrection; but this was only negative proof. To it was added the actual
appearance of Jesus to two disciples on their way to Emmaus. Yet this was
not evidence enough. Some persons might believe that such an appearance
had been a mere vision, a phantom, a ghost; therefore, as Luke relates the
appearance of Jesus to the eleven disciples in the upper room, after night
had fallen, he lays stress upon the fact that Jesus appeared in bodily
form. When the disciples saw him they thought that they did see a mere
specter, an apparition, a spirit, just as many persons have thought, even
to the present day; but to forever dispel such a false impression, Jesus,
by every possible appeal to the senses, made it evident that he possessed
not an "immaterial," or "spiritual," or "celestial" body, but the
identical body of flesh and blood which on Friday had been crucified and
laid in the tomb; in that actual body, scarred by the cruel nails, a body
capable of eating food, a material body which could be touched and felt,
he appeared to his disciples. Moreover, he solemnly declared that he was
not a disembodied spirit; he showed them the wounds in his hands and feet;
he declared that a spirit does not have flesh and bones which they saw he
had; and finally, to remove every lingering doubt, he took "a piece of a
broiled fish" and "ate before them." The appearances and disappearances of
Jesus after his resurrection may have been mysterious or miraculous as was
his walking upon the sea in the days of his previous ministry; but he gave
his disciples to understand by every conceivable, sensible sign that he
had risen from the dead in his actual, physical, human body. The theory
that the resurrection can be explained as a hallucination, a vision, or an
apparition is forever silenced by the testimony of Luke, the careful
historian, the intelligent physician. Upon the foundation of the
established fact of a literal, bodily resurrection, this superstructure of
our Christian faith firmly stands.




N. The Last Words. Ch. 24:44-49


    44 And he said unto them, These are my words which I spake unto
    you, while I was yet with you, that all things must needs be
    fulfilled, which are written in the law of Moses, and the
    prophets, and the psalms, concerning me. 45 Then opened he their
    mind, that they might understand the scriptures; 46 and he said
    unto them, Thus it is written, that the Christ should suffer, and
    rise again from the dead the third day; 47 and that repentance and
    remission of sins should be preached in his name unto all the
    nations, beginning from Jerusalem. 48 Ye are witnesses of these
    things. 49 And behold, I send forth the promise of my Father upon
    you: but tarry ye in the city, until ye be clothed with power from
    on high.


It need not be supposed that the last words of Jesus as recorded by Luke
were spoken on the day of the resurrection or at any one time or place.
They more probably indicate the general substance of those teachings which
are given by the risen Christ to his disciples during the forty days
between his resurrection and his ascension.

They are luminous with truths which are needed by the disciples of Christ
to-day. Among them are such facts as these: The Scriptures contain
authoritative messages concerning Christ; these messages can be understood
only by those who believe in Christ and are guided by him; the essential
truths concerning Christ center in the facts of his death and
resurrection; in virtue of the salvation thus secured, repentance and
forgiveness of sins can be preached; this salvation is to be proclaimed in
all the world; the followers of Christ are the messengers by whom this
good news is to be made known; the power for such proclamation is imparted
by the Spirit of Christ who was manifested in new power on the Day of
Pentecost, and who is now an abiding Presence and a source of limitless
strength to all who seek to do the will of Christ and to glorify his name.




O. The Ascension. Ch. 24:50-53


    50 And he led them out until _they were_ over against Bethany: and
    he lifted up his hands, and blessed them. 51 And it came to pass,
    while he blessed them, he parted from them, and was carried up
    into heaven. 52 And they worshipped him, and returned to Jerusalem
    with great joy: 53 and were continually in the temple, blessing
    God.


The ascension of our Lord was an event quite distinct from the
resurrection; it occurred nearly six weeks later, and indicates a number
of supremely important truths.

1. Jesus then withdrew from the sphere of the seen and physical to the
sphere of the unseen and spiritual. He did not pass up or down through
vast spaces of the skies. We are not to think of him as far away. He is an
unseen, divine Presence, superior to the limitations of time and space,
and capable of being manifest in any period or place. The ascension should
make us feel that Jesus is near rather than far away.

2. Jesus then assumed universal power; not at the time of his
resurrection, but at the time of his ascension, he was seated "on the
right hand of the Majesty on high." This indicates divine omnipotence. It
is the continual representation of the New Testament that Jesus Christ has
all authority in heaven and on earth. The ascension should therefore
remind us of the limitless power of Christ.

3. It was therefore at the time of the ascension that Jesus entered "into
his glory." Then it was that his body was transformed, made deathless,
"spiritual," celestial, immortal; and then he again began to share the
divine glory which he had with the Father "before the world was." The
ascension, therefore, is a pledge and type of the glory which yet awaits
his followers. It is an assurance that he yet will fulfill his promises
and will again appear; emerging from the sphere of the unseen he will be
manifested to all mankind as both the ideal Man and as the Saviour of the
world.






***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOSPEL OF LUKE, AN EXPOSITION***



CREDITS


October 11, 2008

            Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1
            Produced by Stephen Hope, Fox in the Stars, David King, and
            the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
            <http://www.pgdp.net/>.



A WORD FROM PROJECT GUTENBERG


This file should be named 26881.txt or 26881.zip.

This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:


    http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/6/8/8/26881/


Updated editions will replace the previous one -- the old editions will be
renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no one
owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation (and
you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without permission
and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the
General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works to protect the Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered
trademark, and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you
receive specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of
this eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given away
-- you may do practically _anything_ with public domain eBooks.
Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


"Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preserve free future access to
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.


1.C.


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or
PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual
work is in the public domain in the United States and you are located in
the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from copying,
distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on
the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of
course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of
promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project
Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for
keeping the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} name associated with the work. You can
easily comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License when you
share it without charge with others.


1.D.


The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you
can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant
state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of
your country in addition to the terms of this agreement before
downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or creating
derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work.
The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of
any work in any country outside the United States.


1.E.


Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:


1.E.1.


The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access
to, the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License must appear prominently whenever
any copy of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work (any work on which the phrase
"Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or
distributed:


    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
