my belief would take me to heaven, as I did not have these "signs
following"--and this had always troubled me; so, when I heard that an old
acquaintance living at a distance had not only been raised from a dying
condition to health, but her life had been changed and purified through
Christian Science, I could hardly wait to know more of this Christlike
religion which was casting out evils and healing the sick. I searched
every bookstore in the city for Science and Health, at last found a copy,
and was delighted to get hold of it, but little realized what a treasure
it was to be to me and my household.

At first it was like Greek to me, and I could not understand much of it,
but gleaned enough to keep on reading, and longed for some one to talk to
me of it.

After I had been reading it about a year's time, I suddenly became almost
blind. I knew no Scientist to go to, so went to physicians; they told me
that my case was hopeless, that it was certain my sight never could be
restored, and the probabilities were that I would soon be totally blind.

I felt sure that Christian Science would help me if I could only fully
understand it; but there was no one from whom I could ask help, that I
knew of. I gave all the time that I could use my eyes to studying Science
and Health,--which at first was not more than five minutes two, and
sometimes three, times a day; gradually my sight returned, until it was
fully restored.

During this time God and the "little book" were my only help. My
understanding was very limited; but like the prodigal son, I had turned
away from the husks, towards my Father's house, and while I "was yet a
great way off" my Father came to meet me. When this great cloud of
darkness was banished by the light of Truth, could I doubt that Christian
Science was indeed the "Comforter" that would lead us "into all truth"?

Again I lay at the point of death; but holding steadfastly to the truth,
knowing, from the teaching of this precious book, that God is Life and
there is no death, I was raised up to health,--restored to my husband and
little children, all of whom I am thankful to say are now with me in
Science.

I had no one to talk with on this subject, knew no one of whose
understanding I felt sure enough to ask for help; but I was careful from
the first not to read or inquire into anything except genuine Christian
Science, and how thankful I am for it! Since then, I have been through a
class.

I cannot express in words what Christian Science has done for my children,
or my gratitude that the light of Truth has come to them in their innocent
childhood,--healing all claims of sickness, and showing us how to overcome
the more stubborn claims of sin.--L. F. B.

                  -------------------------------------

It is a little over one year since a very esteemed friend, of this city,
invited me to partake of the heavenly manna contained in the revelation of
"Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures." I had, up to that time,
been for fifteen years a victim of hip-joint disease; this eventually
confining me to my bed, where I had been ten months when the "book of
prophecy" was opened for me. I was not long in finding the light I
needed,--that gave "feet to the lame," enabling me now to go, move, and
walk, where I will, without crutch or support of any description, save the
staff of divine Science.

In proportion as my thoughts are occupied with the work in Science, does
the peace and joy come inwardly that transforms the blight of error
externally.

T. G. K, Tacoma, Wash.

                  -------------------------------------

I wish to acknowledge the blessings which Christian Science has brought to
me through reading "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures." My
first demonstration was over the tobacco habit; I had smoked for at least
fifteen years: I have now no desire for tobacco.

I was then healed of two claims which had bound me for ten years. My
prayer is that I may be so filled with the truth that I can carry the
message to my brother man.

F. W. K, Angelica, N.Y.

                  -------------------------------------

I take advantage of the great privilege granted us, to give my testimony
for Christian Science through the pages of our much loved _Journal_. The
blessing has been so bountiful that words can but poorly express my
gratitude.

A little over six years ago, a relative came from Denver, Colorado, to
visit us. She was a Christian Scientist, having herself been healed of a
severe claim that M. D.'s, drugs, and climate could not relieve; and her
husband having been in the drug business, she had had a chance to give
them a fair trial.

My sister-in-law did not talk much on the subject, as I remember; but what
was better, lived the truth before us as she realized it.

One day (a blessed day to me), I ventured to open Science and Health, and
read the first sentence in the Preface. I closed the book, wondering what
more it could contain, this seeming to cover the whole ground. When my
sister-in-law returned to the room, I asked her if I might read it. Her
reply was, "Yes; but begin at the first."

That night, after all had retired, I began to read; within forty-eight
hours I destroyed all drugs, applications, etc., notwithstanding the fact
that my husband had just paid fifty dollars to a travelling specialist for
part of a treatment. With the drugs disappeared ailments of nine years'
standing, which M. D.'s had failed to relieve.

I now understand that my sudden healing was due to my turning completely
away from material methods; for I was convinced I should never use them
again. I realized that God was my health, my strength, my Life, therefore
All. As I read Science and Health, I wondered why others had not discerned
this truth,--physicians, ministers, and others who had devoted their lives
to benefit mankind. Yes! why? Because they had been seeking in the
opposite direction to Truth, namely, for cause and effect in matter, when
all cause and effect are mental.

I mention physicians and ministers, because one class claims to heal
disease, the other claims to heal sin; but Christian Science heals
physically and morally,--it contains all; "its leaves are for the healing
of the nations."

L. B. A., Memphis, Tenn.

                  -------------------------------------

I was for years a great sufferer. I called doctor after doctor, getting no
help. The last one, after treating me for one year, told me he would give
me one year more to live.

One evening a near neighbor came in and asked me to go home with her; and
as it was only a few steps, I did so.

She took up a new book, Science and Health, read me a few chapters, and
then gave me some Christian Science tracts, which I read, and one of them
I almost committed to memory.

I bought a copy of "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures," and
studied it carefully. I am healed of all those claims which troubled me so
long. I was lifted out of darkness into light.

M. J. P., Burns, Oregon

                  -------------------------------------

Chicago, March 19, 1894

_Rev. Mary B. G. Eddy, Boston, Mass.:_--I wish to thank you for the true
light that was revealed to me by reading your book, "Science and Health
with Key to the Scriptures," and at once adopting its teaching. It was one
year ago to-day that I put on the armor, determined never to surrender to
the enemy; and you may know I have looked forward to this day with a great
deal of pleasure, to show my friends that the Lord is constantly with me
to help overcome all evil.

Some said, when I first started in this new path, "Wait until you get one
of your stomach attacks, and you will change your mind." For months they
have waited, and are beginning to see the truth in my actions, that speak
for themselves, and show that all is _Mind_.

For nearly thirty years I had been a sufferer from throat and stomach
troubles; bronchitis, dyspepsia, gastralgia, and gastritis, etc., were the
terms applied by my physicians. About eighteen years of that time I was
engaged in the drug business, had constant opportunities for consulting
the best physicians, and took such medicine as I felt assured would cure
me; but only to be disappointed each time.

The last few years I had been living on oatmeal crackers and hot water;
suffering more or less all the time, and could not eat anything else
without suffering intense pain. I felt as though I could not live many
months more, and was getting ready to give up the fight when a dear friend
and neighbor, Mrs. Corning, left a copy of Science and Health at our home.
At first I did not care to read it; having been educated, for many years,
in the belief that medicine can cure all diseases, I could not conceive of
anything else to cure the sick.

One Sunday I had the curiosity to know something about this Christian
Science, and read Science and Health. The more I read, the more interested
I became, and finally said to myself, "I will try it." I took a large
porous plaster and four thicknesses of flannel off my stomach, and threw
them in the corner, saying, "Now it shall be Mind over matter; no more
matter over Mind." I filled a large basket full of bottles containing
medicine, and put it in the shed (where all medicine should be). From that
day I have eaten of everything on the table, and all I wished. Coffee was
my worst enemy, and I had not tasted it for years without suffering untold
agony. Several days passed before I cared to drink it; then, one morning,
I told my family I would commence to use it; I did, and have used it every
day since, and don't know that I have a stomach, as it never has caused me
any trouble since that morning.

I am happy to say I have not used a drop of any kind of medicine,
internally or externally, from that day, and _I know that all is Mind_. I
read the Bible and Science and Health nearly every day, thanking the Lord
for the years of suffering which have led me to the truth as taught by our
Saviour; for I feel it was only through its victory over the suffering
that the truth could have been revealed in my case.

I have had some demonstrations to make over error, but each time it
becomes easier. God is ever present and ready to help me, and I trust in
Him; my faith is planted on a rock that is immovable.

Yours truly, FRANK S. EBERHART

P. S. If you think this letter, or any part of it, will help some one out
of darkness into the light of Truth, you are at liberty to have it
published.

                  -------------------------------------

Having so many occupations and interruptions, I have not found time to
read "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures" sufficiently, but
will not on that account delay thanking you for its excellence.

HENRY W. LONGFELLOW, Cambridge, Mass.

                  -------------------------------------

I am an old-school practitioner; have served as surgeon in two European
wars; practised medicine for about ten years in New York city and
Brooklyn, until my health compelled me to relinquish my profession. I
became a victim of the morphia habit, taking daily thirty grains of that
drug. My physicians declared me consumptive, and abandoned all hopes of
recovery. Shortly after this I made the acquaintance of a student of the
author of "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures," who presented
me with her works; and as drugs did me no good, I stopped taking any
whatever, save morphia, without which I thought it impossible to get
along, and to my astonishment began to gain in flesh, and my ambition
returning in proportion. I finally felt that I would stop my loathsome
habit of morphia-eating, and did so in one week, without any discomfort
worth mentioning. For a test I administered one fourth of a grain of
morphia to the aforesaid Scientist, hypodermically, without the slightest
physiological effect, clearly proving the existence of metaphysical laws.
I have read Science and Health carefully, and consider my present improved
health solely due to mental influence.

OTTO ANDERSON, M.D., Cincinnati, Ohio

                  -------------------------------------

The profound truths which you announce, sustained by facts of the immortal
life, give to your work the seal of inspiration--reaffirm in modern phrase
the Christian revelations. In times like these, so sunk in sensualism, I
hail with joy your voice, speaking an assured word for God and
immortality, and my joy is heightened that these words are of woman's
divinings.

A. BRONSON ALCOTT, Concord, Mass.

                  -------------------------------------

I was sick six years; tried many physicians and remedies, but received no
lasting benefit from any of them, and concluded I must remain sick the
rest of my life. In this condition, I purchased the book "Science and
Health with Key to the Scriptures," read it, was deeply interested, and
noticed that my health began to improve; and the more I read the book, the
better I became in health. This I can say truly: it did more for my health
than all the physicians and remedies that I had ever tried.--DR. S. G.
TODD, 11 School St., Newburyport

                  -------------------------------------

I had been a nervous sufferer for nine years; had a belief of incurable
disease of the heart, and was subject to severe nervous prostration if I
became the least weary. I was told that if I should read your books they
would cure me. I commenced reading them: in ten days I was surprised to
find myself overcoming my nervous spasms without the aid of medicine; and
ever since then I have been improving, and I now can walk twenty miles
without fatigue, and have been able to rise above all ailments.

MRS. JULIA A. B. DAVIS,
Central Village, Westport, Mass.

                  -------------------------------------

I would inform my friends and the public, that after twelve years of
sickness I am restored to health; and, with renewed vigor and keen
enjoyment, take up the pleasures and duties of life once more; all labor
now seems less arduous, and all happiness more perfect. To Christian
Science, as taught in "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures," I
am indebted for my restoration. I can cordially recommend this book to
all.

ROSE A. WIGGLESWORTH, Lowell, Mass.

                  -------------------------------------

When I commenced reading "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures,"
I could sit up but a very short time, and could not eat the most simple
food without great distress. In a few days there was a great change, and I
have been growing better ever since.

E. D. RICHARDSON, Merrimac, Mass.

                  -------------------------------------

I have not been as well for years as I have been since reading "Science
and Health with Key to the Scriptures," all of which I impute to its
teaching.

(MRS.) MARY A. WILLIAMS, Freeport, Ill.

                  -------------------------------------

Had been in ill-health for several years; had been confined to my bed
three months, when I got your book and read it. At first I was unable to
read it myself, and others read it to me, and the truth revealed in your
book restored me to health.

(COL.) E. J. SMITH, Washington, D.C.

                  -------------------------------------

I have been perusing with great interest your work on metaphysical
Science, for the last four months, and to great advantage; you make the
path to health so plain, that a wayfaring man, though a fool, cannot err
therein.

R. I. BARKER, Bethel, Me.

                  -------------------------------------

"Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures" "is a lamp unto my feet,
and a light unto my path;" your missiles of Mind have battered down the
illusions of sense, allowing Life to appear an eternal monument, whose
spirited hieroglyphics, Truth and Love, unlike those cut in marble, shall
grow more luminous to consciousness as sickness, sin and death fade out of
belief.

ARTHUR T. BUSWELL,
_Office of Associated Charities_, Cincinnati, O.

                  -------------------------------------

"Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures" is beautiful in its form
of thought and expression. I have perused it with interest. Your book
tends to lead us to new thoughts and practices in the healing art, and for
many maladies I have no doubt the treatment your excellent work introduces
will be the only remedy.

(COL.) ROB'T B. CAVERLY, Centralville, Mass.

                  -------------------------------------

Undoubtedly "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures" is the
greatest and grandest book ever published; and that by pulpit and press it
will be so acknowledged, is only a question of time. Yours has, indeed,
been a pioneer work, and will be; and I believe that you, of all the
millions, are selected and chosen because of your peculiar fitness for
this great work--this grand work of opening the gates and leading the way,
that fallen humanity may follow step by step; reach up to Christ, and be
made whole! That all this should be systematized and proven with
mathematical precision,--that there can be no guesswork or quackery,--is
simply astounding. Science and Health has given me a new impetus
heavenward.

M. A. HINKLEY, Williamsport, Pa.

                  -------------------------------------

The book "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures" is the most
wonderful work that has been written in the past five thousand years. I
wish you could get ten dollars per copy. I am of the opinion that I can
heal the sick on its basis, from reading the work.

H. D. DEXTER, M. D., Dundee, N.Y.

                  -------------------------------------

Rev. Mary B. G. Eddy's book, "Science and Health with Key to the
Scriptures," has been duly catalogued and placed on our shelves for use.
In behalf of the trustees, let me convey cordial thanks to the
earnest-minded author for this interesting contribution. My own idea is,
that the power of Mind or Spirit is supreme in character, and destined to
supremacy over all that is adverse to divine order.

WILLIAM H. KIMBALL,
_Librarian New Hampshire State Library_

                  -------------------------------------

I am reading the work, "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures,"
for the third time; and I am convinced of the truth of the Science of
which it treats,--instructing us how to attain holiness of heart, purity of
life, and the sublime ascendency of soul over body.

C. CLEMENT, McMinnville, Warren Co., Tenn.

                  -------------------------------------

I was sick for a number of years with what some of the most skilful
physicians pronounced an incurable disease. The more I tried to get help,
the worse I became, until a life of pain and helplessness seemed
unavoidable. Two years ago I heard of "Science and Health with Key to the
Scriptures," began reading it and trying to live up to its teachings. At
first, my beliefs were so strong I made but little progress; but gradually
my disease gave way, and finally disappeared, and to-day I am a well
woman. I cannot express the gratitude I feel for what the light shining
through the teachings of that book did for me.

(MRS.) EMILY T. HOWE, Norway, Me.

                  -------------------------------------

I have been reading "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures," and
feasting--like a starving, ship-wrecked mariner, on the food that was to
sustain him--on truths which ages to come will appreciate, understand, and
accept. Many of the theories which at first appear abstruse and obscure,
at length become clear and lucid. The candle of intellect requires
occasional snuffing to throw the clear light of penetration on the page.

(MRS.) S. A. ORNE, Malden, Mass.

                  -------------------------------------

The mother of a little girl about eight years old told me her child was
having a severe attack of cold, and was delicate and easy to take cold. I
told her the little girl would be all right; not to give her any medicine,
but read Science and Health to her. When I next saw the mother, she told
me the little girl was entirely well; that the cold had all disappeared,
and with it a claim of night-sweats that the child had been under for more
than a year. The little girl had been out sliding down-hill in the snow a
number of times; had her feet very wet, but it did not affect her at all.
They were all pleased,--especially the child; her face was beaming with
happiness and smiles. This is just one little instance of the good that
comes from reading Science and Health.

T. W. H.

                  -------------------------------------

Opinions Of The Press

This is, perhaps, the most remarkable book on health, in some respects,
which has appeared in this country. The author evidently discards
physiology, hygiene, mesmerism, magnetism, and every form of medication,
bathing, dieting, etc.,--all go by the board; no medicine, manipulation, or
external applications are permitted; everything is done through the mind.
Applied to certain conditions, this method has great value: even the
reading of the author's book has cured hopeless cases. The author claims
that her methods are those used by Christ and his apostles, and she has
established a church and school to propagate them.--_Herald of Health_, N.
Y. (M. L. HOLBROOK, _Publisher_)

                  -------------------------------------

The Christian Scientists claim that the power of healing is not lost, and
have supported that claim by inducing cures astonishingly like those
quoted from the New Testament. And even more good they hope to achieve, as
this power which they possess is better understood and the new light gains
strength in the world. Experience has taught us that the nearer we
approach to the source of a report of miraculous power, the smaller does
the wonder grow. In the instance of the Christian Scientists, the result
has been rather the reverse; if third parties have related a remarkable
circumstance, the person of whom the fact was alleged has been found to
make the assertion still stronger.--_Boston Sunday Globe_

                  -------------------------------------

"Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures," by Mary Baker G. Eddy,
President of the Massachusetts Metaphysical College, is a remarkable
publication, claiming to elucidate the influence of mentality over matter.
Mrs. Eddy announces herself as the discoverer of this metaphysical
Science, and receives students, to whom she imparts so much of her
metaphysics as their minds are capable of receiving. The volumes are a
vigorous protest against the materialism of our modern scientists, Darwin,
Huxley, Tyndall, etc. Her Science of Mind was first self-applied: having
been ill and treated by doctors of the various schools without benefit,
she discovered the grand Principle of all healing to be God, or Mind.
Relying on this Principle alone, she regained her health, and for the last
sixteen years has taught this theory to others, and has healed the sick in
all cases where the patient's mentality was sufficiently strong to
understand her teachings and act upon them.--_Brooklyn Eagle_

                  -------------------------------------

The book "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures" is certainly
original, and contains much that will do good. The reader will find this
work not influenced by superstition or pride, but striking out
boldly,--full of self-sacrifice and love towards God and man.--_Christian
Advocate_, Buffalo, N. Y.

                  -------------------------------------

The doctrines of "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures" are high
and pure, wholly free from those vile theories about love and marriage
which have been so prevalent among the spiritualists. This new sect
devotes itself to a study of the Bible, and a practice of curing disease
without mesmerism or spiritualism. It treats Darwin and materialists with
a lofty scorn.--_Springfield Republican_

                  -------------------------------------

"Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures" is indisputably a
wonderful work. It has no equal. No one can read the book and not be
benefited by it in mind and body. The work is endorsed by some of the best
men of the age.--_Star-Spangled Banner_

                  -------------------------------------

We shall watch with keen interest the promised results of "Science and
Health with Key to the Scriptures." The work shows how the body can be
cured, and how a better state of Christianity can be introduced (which is
certainly very desirable). It likewise has a hard thrust at spiritualism;
and, taken altogether, it is a very rare book.--_Boston Investigator_

                  -------------------------------------

The author of "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures," which is
attracting much attention, shows her ability to defend her cause with
vigor.--_Boston Weekly Journal_

(_By permission_)

How To Understand Science And Health

_My Dear Friend H.:_--Your good letter of the 26th ult. came duly to hand
several days ago, and I am not greatly surprised at its contents. You say,
in substance, that you procured the book, "Science and Health with Key to
the Scriptures," which I recommended, and that to your surprise and
disgust you found it to be a work on faith-cure, and ask by what process
of reasoning I could possibly bring myself to adopt or accept such
visionary theories. In answer to your very natural question, I will try,
in my own way, to give you what appears to me to be a reason for the hope
that is in me.

My religious views of fifteen years ago are too familiar to you to need
any exposition at my hands at this time. Suffice it to say that the
religion of the Bible, as taught by the churches, to my mind appeared to
be self-contradictory and confusing, and their explanations failed to
explain. During the next eleven years my convictions underwent little
change. I read everything that came in my way that had any bearing upon,
or pretended in any degree to explain, the problem of life; and while I
gained some knowledge of a general nature, I was no nearer the solution of
life's problem than when I began my investigations years ago, and I had
given up all hope of ever being able to come to a knowledge of the truth,
or a satisfactory explanation of the enigma of life.

In all my intellectual wanderings I had never lost my belief in a great
First Cause, which I was as well satisfied to call God as anything else;
but the orthodox explanations of His or its nature and power were to my
mind such a mixture of truth and error, that I could not tell where fact
left off and fancy began. The whole effort of the pulpit being put forth,
seemed directed to the impossible task of harmonizing the teachings of
Jesus Christ with the wisdom of the world; and the whole tendency of our
religious education was to befog the intellect and produce scepticism in a
mind that presumed to think for itself and to inquire into the why and the
wherefore. I fully believe that the agnosticism of yourself and myself was
produced by the futile attempt to mix and harmonize the wisdom of the
world with the philosophy of the Christ.

In my investigations into the researches of the savants and philosophers I
found neither any satisfactory explanation of things as they seemed to
exist, nor any solution of the great and all-absorbing question, "What is
Truth?" Their premises appeared to be sound, and their reasonings
faultless; but in the nature of things, no final conclusion of the whole
matter could be reached from premises based wholly on material knowledge.
They could explain "matter" and its properties to their own satisfaction,
but the intelligence that lay behind or beyond it, and which was
manifested in and through it, was to them as much of a mystery as it was
to the humblest of God's creatures. They could prove pretty conclusively
that many of the generally accepted theories had no basis in fact; but
they left us as much in the dark regarding Life and its governing
Principle as had the divines before them.

About four years ago, while still in the mental condition above indicated,
my attention was called to what at that time appeared to me to be a new
phase of spiritism, and which was called by those who professed to believe
in it, _Christian Science_. I thought that I had given some attention to
about all the _isms_ that ever existed, and that this was only another
phantasm of some religionist lost in the labyrinths of mental
hallucination.

In my reflections at that time it seemed to me that life was an
incomprehensible enigma; that the creator had placed us on this earth, and
left us entirely in the dark as to His purpose in so doing. We seemed to
be cast upon the ocean of time, and left to drift aimlessly about, with no
exact knowledge of what was required of us or how to attain unto the
truth, which must certainly have an existence somewhere. It seemed to me
that in the very nature of things there must be a great error somewhere in
our understanding, or that the creator Himself had slipped a cog when He
fitted all things into their proper spheres. That there had been a grand
mistake somewhere I had no doubt; but I still had doubt enough of my own
capabilities and understanding to believe that the mistake, whatever it
was, was in me and not in the creator. I knew that, in a fair measure at
least, I had an honest desire to live aright, as it was given me to see
the right, and to strive to some extent to do the will of God, if I could
only know certainly just what it was.

While in this frame of mind, I inwardly appealed to the great unseen power
to enlighten my understanding, and to lead me into a knowledge of the
truth, promising mentally to follow wherever it might lead, if I could
only do so understandingly.

My wife had been investigating Christian Science to some extent, but
knowing my natural antipathy to such vagaries, as I then thought them, had
said very little to me about it; but one day, while discussing the
mysteries of life with a judge of one of our courts, he asked me whether I
had ever looked into the teachings of the Christian Scientists. I told him
that I had not, and he urged me very strongly to do so. He claimed to have
investigated their teachings, and said that he had become a thorough
believer in them. This aroused my curiosity, and I procured the book
called "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures," and read it.
Before reading very far in it, I became pretty thoroughly nauseated with
what I thought the chimerical ideas of the author, but kept on
reading,--more because I had promised to read the book than because of
interest in its teachings; but before I had gotten through with it, I did
become interested in the Principle that I thought I discovered the author
was striving to elucidate; and when I got through it, I began again and
reread it very carefully. When I had finished reading this book the second
time, I had become thoroughly convinced that her explanation of the
religion taught by Jesus Christ, and what he did teach, afforded the only
explanation which, to my mind, came anywhere near harmonizing and making
cohesive what had always seemed contradictory and inexplicable in the
Bible. I became satisfied that I had found the truth for which I had long
been seeking, and I arose from the reading of the book a changed man;
doubt and uncertainty had fled, and my mind has never been troubled with a
