West with my family in the spring of the year, but instead of growing
better I grew steadily worse, until at last I was obliged to keep my bed
for nearly three years, - a great sufferer. My ailments were, it seemed,
all that flesh is heir to, and were called incurable by the doctors;
viz., Bright's disease, and many others, - in the last stages. My case
was known among physicians, many of whom were prominent specialists, as
a most extreme one. Many, upon looking at me, would turn away with a
wise shake of the head and say, "What keeps her alive?" My physicians,
who were exceedingly kind and did all that lay within their power for
me, gave me up and the death sentence was pronounced on me by all who
attended me.

It was then I realized that "man's extremity is God's opportunity." The
"little book" was handed me at this hour of great need. I read it, not
thinking it would heal me, but, like a drowning man, I grasped at it. I
read it, read it again, and soon found myself growing stronger; then I
kept on reading and was perfectly healed of all the supposedly incurable
diseases. - L. B., Austin, Minn.

TRUTH MAKES FREE

As the son of a physician, a graduate in pharmacy, and an ex-druggist, I
had a perfect contempt for what I thought Christian Science to be. About
six and a half years ago, however, having exhausted all material means
at my command, - /materia medica/, electricity, gymnastics, cycling, and
so on, - and being in a hopeless state, the study of Christian Science
was taken up. I had been a sufferer from catarrh and sore throat for
over thirty years, and in the last five were added several others,
including dyspepsia, and bronchitis, and a loss in flesh of sixty
pounds. I was completely healed, and regained health, strength, and
flesh through the spiritual understanding of Christian Science, the
result of about six weeks' study. This good and perfect gift came to me
through the careful and prayerful study of Christian Science, as
revealed to the world to-day through Science and Health. The promise of
Christ Jesus, "the truth shall make you free," was fulfilled, and the
past six years of health and harmony have been spent in striving to
"hold fast that which is good."

While most grateful for the physical
healing, my gratitude for the mental and spiritual regeneration is
beyond expression. When I learned that Jesus' mission of healing
sickness as well as sin did not end with his short stay upon earth, but
is practical in all ages, my joy was unbounded. Having spent thousands
in the old way, it seemed wonderful to be healed at such small cost as
the price of the "little book" and a few weeks' study. Every thought of
prejudice immediately vanished before the proofs that Christian Science
is indeed the elucidation and practical application of Jesus' teachings,
which are demonstrable truth, "The same yesterday, and to-day, and
forever." - C. N. C., Memphis, Tenn.

DEAF EARS UNSTOPPED

As a mother of a family my heart goes out in love and gratitude to that
good woman we are privileged to call our Leader, for all she has done
through her book for me and mine.

Ten years ago I was healed of hereditary deafness and catarrh of the
head, simply through reading the book, Science and Health. For years
previous I had consulted and taken treatment from some of the best
specialists for the ear and throat, both in England and America, but
grew worse all the time. I was then urged by a lady who had been healed
through Christian Science to buy this book and study it. I did so very
reluctantly, but had not read fifty pages before I felt I had indeed
found the truth which makes free, and can truly say, from that time I
have never had a return of the ailment.

That for which I am, however, most grateful, is the daily help it is to
me in my household of young children. I am sure if mothers only knew
what Christian Science truly means they would give all they possess to
know it. We have seen croup, measles, fever, and various other
children's complaints, so-called, disappear like dew before the morning
sun, through the application of Christian Science, - the understanding
of God as ever-present and omnipotent. It has been proven to me without
a doubt that God is a very present help in trouble, and what a blessed
help this wonderful truth is in the training of our children, and how
quickly the child grasps it.

Some time ago my little girl, then three years old, dislocated her
shoulder. I was alone in the house at the time. The pain was so intense
that she became faint. I treated her the best I knew how, but kept
holding the thought that just as soon as some one came I would run for
help. She seemed to grow worse and cried very much. I undressed her and
tried to twist the arm into place, but it caused such suffering that I
began to get afraid. Then like a flash came the thought, What would you
do if you were out of the reach of a practitioner? Now is your time to
prove God's power and presence. With these thoughts came such a sense of
calm and trustfulness that I lost all fear. I then asked the child if I
should read to her; she said "Yes, mamma, read the truth-book." I began
reading aloud to her from Science and Health. In about half an hour I
noticed she tried to lift the arm but screamed and became very pale. I
continued to read aloud and again she made an effort to put some candy
into her mouth. This time I noticed with joy that she almost reached her
mouth before she felt the pain. I kept reading aloud to her until my
sister and two boys came in, when she jumped off her bed, so delighted
to see her brothers that she forgot her arm. She then began to tell her
aunt that she had broken her arm and mamma treated it with the
truth-book. When this happened, it was about 10.30 A. M. and by 3 P. M.
she was playing out doors as though nothing had ever happened. - Mrs. M.
G., Winnipeg, Man.

SAVED FROM INSANITY AND SUICIDE

A few years ago, while under a sense of darkness and despair caused by
ill health and an unhappy home, Science and Health was loaned me with a
request that I should read it.

At that time my daughter was given up by /materia medica/ to die of
lingering consumption, supposed to have been inherited. My own condition
seemed even more alarming, as insanity was being manifested, and rather
than go to an insane asylum, it seemed to me the only thing to do was to
commit suicide. Heart trouble, kidney complaint, and continual headaches
caused from female trouble were some of the many ailments I had to
contend with. My doctor tried to persuade me to undergo an operation as
a means of relief, but I had submitted to a severe operation ten years
previous, and found only additional suffering as a result, so I would
not consent.

When I began with Science and Health, I read the chapter on "Prayer"
first, and at that time did not suppose it possible for me to remember
anything I read, but felt a sweet sense of God's protection and power,
and a hope that I should at last find Him to be what I so much needed, -
a present help in time of trouble. Before that chapter on "Prayer" was
finished, my daughter was downstairs eating three meals a day, and daily
growing stronger. Before I had finished reading the textbook she was
well, but never having heard that the reading of Science and Health
healed any one, it was several months before I gave God the glory.

One by one my many ailments left me, all but the headaches; they were
less frequent, until at the end of three years the fear of them was
entirely overcome.

Neither myself nor my daughter have ever received treatments, but the
study of the Bible and Science and Health, the Christian Science
textbook by Mrs. Eddy, has healed us and keeps us well.

While Christian Science was very new to me, I attended an experience
meeting in First Church of Christ, Scientist, Chicago. A gentleman told
of an unhappy woman who was about to separate from her husband. This
gentleman had asked her if she did not love her husband. She replied,
"No; when I married him I did, but not now." He told her God made man in
His image and likeness, and that He is perfect. He said to her, "Go home
and see only God's perfect man; you don't need to love a sinful mortal
such as you have been looking upon." The lady followed his advice, as he
told her there is no separation in divine Mind. In a short time peace
and harmony were in her home, and both husband and wife became members
of a Christian Science church.

This testimony was like a message from heaven to me. I had received many
benefits from the study of Science and Health, but it had never dawned
upon my darkened consciousness till then how wonderful our God is. I
knew what had taken place in that home could take place in my unhappy
home where there was neither rest nor peace.

I hopefully took up my cross, and step by step my burden grew lighter,
as I journeyed along, realizing the presence of the Christ, Truth, that
indeed makes us free. Not all at once did any outward change appear, but
at the end of three years all was peace, all the members of the family
attending church together and realizing that there is but one Mind. - E.
J. B., Superior, Wis.

STOMACH TROUBLE HEALED

I was healed of stomach trouble of many years' standing by reading
Science and Health. My condition had reached the stage in which I had
periodical attacks, that came on with greater frequency. I was a
travelling salesman, and it was a common occurrence for me to have to
call a physician to my hotel to administer morphine for an acute form of
this disease. This became a regular thing at certain places, and these
attacks always left me worse than before. As a result of the last one I
lost a great deal in weight. I had tried many physicians and most of the
usual remedies during these years of suffering, without any good result.
Finally, as a last resort, I decided to try Christian Science, and I was
healed by reading "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures" by
Mrs. Eddy.

My health has been of the best since I was healed, now six years ago. In
the family we have depended entirely on Christian Science for our
healing, and have ever found it efficacious. We consider the physical
healing, however, only incidental to the understanding of God and His
goodness. This, together with our increased love for the Bible, is
proving most valuable to us. We are humbly trying to live the lives that
will prove our gratitude to God, and to our beloved Leader, Mrs. Eddy. -
Charles E. Peck, St. Johnsbury, Vt.

FREED FROM MANY YEARS OF SUFFERING

In the spring of 1880 I was taken down with a severe attack of stomach
trouble, was bedfast for three months, and not able to drive out for
nearly six months. During this time I had three good doctors treating
me. I gained a little in strength, but had very little relief from the
stomach trouble. I was recommended to try mineral springs and did so,
but with the same disappointment. I went to a sanitarium, but yet the
stomach trouble prevailed. I had some friends who recommended patent
medicines, but no healing came.

I worried along in this way for several years. Finally I read medicine
nearly two years with a good doctor friend, especially for my own
benefit, and during this time I had a severe attack of bladder trouble,
and for fifteen years I suffered so severely at times that I thought
life was not really worth living. In connection with these
troubles I suffered every winter with rheumatism and the grip. I also
had a growth coming on both eyes called cataract, which caused my eyes
to be inflamed nearly all the time, and this growth had made such
progress that it was causing my vision to be very dim when reading.
Corns were not forgotten, as I was reminded of them very frequently, and
for all these troubles I had tried every remedy I heard of that I was
able to get, specialists included, without relief.

Thanks to a friend who took me in this hopeless, discouraged condition
and led me to the light that never knows darkness, I got a copy of
Science and Health by Mrs. Eddy and was healed in a short time by
reading this work. - D. W. L., Anderson, Ind.

RELIEF FROM INTENSE SUFFERING

I became interested in Christian Science in 1901. For four or five years
I had suffered with severe attacks which nothing but an opiate seemed to
relieve. After one which I think was the worst I ever had, I consulted
our family physician, who diagnosed my case as a dangerous kidney
disease and said that no medicine could help me but that I must undergo
a surgical operation. I continued to grow worse and went to see the
physician again, and he advised me to consult a doctor who was connected
with the city hospital of Augusta. This doctor made an examination and
diagnosed the difficulty as something different but quite as serious.
Meanwhile a friend offered me a copy of Science and Health. I said I did
not care to read the book, but she was so urgent that I finally promised
to do so. I received the book on Saturday, and on Sunday morning I sat
down to read it. When I reached the place where Mrs. Eddy says she found
this truth in the Bible, I began comparing the two books. I read
passages which looked very reasonable to me, and said to myself, This is
nearer to the truth than anything I have ever seen. I continued to read
all day, stopping only long enough to eat my dinner. As I read on,
everything became clearer to me, and I felt that I was healed. During
the evening a neighbor came in, and I said, "I am healed, and that book
has healed me." I read on and was certainly healed. Eight days after my
healing I did my own washing. This occurred in February, 1901. About six
weeks after, I was called to care for my mother, who was under the care
of my former physician. I again let him examine my side, as he wished to
see if the trouble was still there. He said, "It is certainly gone." I
said to him, "Doctor, you told me I would never be a well woman unless I
was operated upon; what has healed me?" He replied, "God has healed
you." - S. H. L., North Pittston, Me.

GRATEFUL FOR MANY BLESSINGS

It is with sincere gratitude for the many blessings Christian Science
has brought me, that I give this testimony. I first heard of Christian
Science about fifteen years ago. A friend of mine was taking treatment
for physical troubles, and was reading the textbook of Christian
Science, Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures. The title of the
book appealed to me very strongly. I said to my friend, "If that is a
Key to the Scriptures, I must have it."

I had long been a member of a Bible class in an orthodox Sabbath school,
but I never felt satisfied with that which was taught; there was
something lacking, I did not understand then what it was. I purchased a
copy of Science and Health and began to study it. I wish I could express
in words what that book brought me. It illumined the Bible with a
glorious light and I began to understand some of the Master's sayings,
and tried to apply them.

I had had a longing to live a better Christian life for many years, and
often wondered why I failed so utterly to understand the Bible. Now I
knew; it was lack of spiritual apprehension.

I did not know at first that people were healed of disease and sin by
simply reading Science and Health, but found after a while that such was
the case. At that time I had many physical troubles, and one after
another of these ills simply disappeared and I found that I had no
disease, - I was perfectly free. The spiritual uplifting was glorious,
too, and as I go on in the study of this blessed Science, I find I am
gaining surely an understanding that helps me to overcome both sin and
disease in myself and in others. My faith in good is increased and I
know I am losing my belief in evil as a power equal to good. The pathway
is not wearisome, because each victory over self gives stronger faith
and a more earnest desire to press on. - E. J. R., Toledo, Ohio.

GRATEFUL FOR MORAL AND SPIRITUAL AWAKENING

About four years ago, after I had tried different ways and means to be
relieved from bodily suffering, a faithful friend called my attention to
the teaching of Christian Science. After some opposition, I decided to
investigate it, with the thoughtthat if this teaching would be helpful,
it was meant for me as well as for others; if it did not afford any help, I
could put it aside again, but that I would find out and be convinced.

After I had read Mrs. Eddy's work, Science and Health, a few days, I
found that my ailments had disappeared, and a rest had come to me which
I had never before known. I had smoked almost incessantly, although I
had often determined to use my will power and never smoke again, but had
always failed. This desire as well as the desire for drink simply
disappeared, and I wish to say here, that I received all these benefits
before I had gained much understanding of what I was reading. Like a
prisoner, who had been in chains for years, I was suddenly set free. I
did not then know how the chain had been removed, but I had to
acknowledge that it came through the reading of this book. I then felt
an ardent desire to read more, and to know what this power was that had
freed me in a few days of that which I had been trying for years to
shake off and had failed. It then became clear to me that this was the
truth which Jesus Christ taught and preached to free humanity almost two
thousand years ago. It did not, however, occur to me to apply it in my
business affairs; on the contrary, I first thought that if I continued
in my study I would have to retire from business.

This did not happen, however, for I gradually found that the little
understanding of this wonderful teaching which I had acquired became a
great help to me in my business. I became more friendly, more honest,
more loving to my fellow-men; and I also acquired better judgment and
was able to do the right thing at the right time. As a natural result my
business improved. Before I knew anything of Christian Science my
business had often been a burden to me, fear and worry deprived me of my
rest. How different it is now! Through the study of the Bible, which now
possesses unmeasurable treasures for me, and for our textbook, Science
and Health, and the other works of our Leader, I receive peace and
confidence in God and that insight into character which is necessary for
the correct management of any business. - W. H. H., Bloomfield, Neb.

HEREDITARY DISEASE OF THE LUNGS CURED

For a long time I have been impelled to contribute a testimony of the
healing power of Truth. As I read other testimonies and rejoice in them,
some one may rejoice in mine. I was healed by reading Science and
Health. By applying it, I found it to be the truth that Jesus taught, -
the truth that sets free.

From childhood I had never known a well day. I was healed of lung
trouble of long standing. Consumption was hereditary in our family, my
mother and three brothers having passed on with it. The law of/ materia
medica /said that in a short time I must follow them. I also had severe
stomach trouble of over eight years' standing, during which time I
always retired without supper, as the fear of suffering from my food was
so great that I denied myself food when hungry. For over twenty years I
had ovarian trouble, which was almost unbearable at times. It dated from
the birth of my first child, and at one time necessitated an operation.
I suffered with about all the ills that flesh is heir to: I had trouble
with my eyes from a child; wore glasses for fourteen years, several
oculists saying I would go blind, one declaring I would be blind in less
than a year if I did not submit to an operation, which I refused to do.

But thanks be to God whose Truth reached me through the study of our
textbook. Words fail to express what Christian Science has done for me
in various ways, for my children, my home, my all. The physical healing
is but a small part; the spiritual unfolding and uplifting is the "pearl
of great price," the half that has never been told. - Mrs. J. P. M.,
Kansas City, Mo.

TEXTBOOK APPRECIATED

It has been my privilege to have interviews with representatives of more
than sixty per cent of the nations of this earth, under their own vine
and fig-tree. I had never heard a principle understandingly advanced
that would enable mankind to obey the apostolic command, "prove all
things," until Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures was placed
in my hands. I believe that the honest study of this book in connection
with the Bible will enable one to "prove all things."

I make this unqualified statement because of what my eyes have seen and
my ears heard from my fellow-men of unquestioned integrity, and the
positive proofs I have gained by the study of these books. Many supposed
material laws that had been rooted and grounded in my mentality from
youth have been overcome. It required some time for me to wake up to our
Leader's words in Miscellaneous Writings, p. 206: "The advancing stages
of Christian Science are gained through growth, not accretion." I had
many disappointments and falls before I was willing to do the scientific
work required to prove this statement; yet notwithstanding the cost to
ourselves, I am convinced that we cannot do much credit to the cause we
profess to love until we place ourselves in a position to prove God as
He really is to us individually, and our relation to Him, by scientific
work.

I wish to express loving gratitude to our Leader for the new edition of
Science and Health. In studying this new edition one cannot help seeing
the wisdom, love, and careful and prayerful thought expressed in the
revision. Often the changing of a single word in a sentence makes the
scientific thought not only more lucid to him who is familiar with the
book, but also to those just coming into the blessed light. All honor to
that God-loving, God-fearing woman, Mary Baker G. Eddy, whose only work
is the work of love in the helping of mankind to help themselves; who
has placed before her fellow-men understandingly, what man's divine
rights are, and what God really is. - H. W. B., Hartford, Conn.

RUPTURE AND OTHER SERIOUS ILLS HEALED

When I took up the study of Christian Science nearly three years ago, I
was suffering from a very bad rupture of thirty-two years' standing.
Sometimes the pain was so severe that it seemed as if I could not endure
it. These spells would last four or five hours, and while everything was
done for me that could be done, no permanent relief came to me until I
commenced reading Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures. After I
had once looked into it I wanted to read all the time. I was so absorbed
in the study of the "little book" that I hardly realized when the
healing came, but I was healed, not only of the rupture, but also of
other troubles, - inflammatory rheumatism, catarrh, corns, and bunions.

I would never part with the book if I could not get another. I am
seventy-seven years old, and am enjoying very good health. - Mrs. M. E.
P., St. Johnsbury, Vt.

MOTHER AND DAUGHTER HEALED

When Christian Science came to me, I had been taking medicine every day
for twenty years, on account of constipation. I had been treated by
doctors and specialists; had taken magnetic treatments and osteopathy;
had tried change of climate; had an operation in a hospital, and when I
came out was worse than before. I was so discouraged, after I had tried
everything I ever heard of, and was no better but rather grew worse,
that it seemed as though I must give up trying to get well, when a
friend suggested that I try Christian Science. I had heard that
Christian Scientists healed by prayer, and I thought this must be the
way Jesus had healed. I felt that this was all there was left for me to
try. I sent for the book, Science and Health, and commenced to read it
out of curiosity, not thinking or knowing that I could be helped by the
reading, but thinking I must still take medicine and that I must also
have treatment by a Scientist. I, however, dropped my medicine and read
for three days; then a light began to shine in the darkness. I was
healed of the trouble and have never had to take medicine since. I have
studied Science and Health faithfully ever since, and other ailments
have disappeared. My little daughter has also been healed and has
learned to use this knowledge in her school work. - Mrs. O. R.,
Leadville, Col.

LIVER COMPLAINT HEALED

As my thoughts go back to the time when I believed I had nothing to live
for, and when each morning's awaking from sleep brought a sense of
disappointment to find myself still among the living (for I had hoped
each night that I closed my eyes in sleep that it would be the last
time), my heart overflows with love and gratitude to God for our dear
Leader who discovered this blessed truth and to the dear ones who have
helped me so lovingly and patiently over many rough places.

Twelve years ago, I consulted a physician because I had noticed some
odd-looking spots on one of my arms. He said they were liver spots, but
that it was not worth while prescribing for those few, that I should
wait until I was covered with them. About three months later, with the
exception of my face and hands, I was covered with them. Then I became
alarmed and called on another physician who prescribed for me, but be
finally said he could do no more for me. Other physicians were consulted
with no better results. Six years ago, friends advised me to see their
family physician, and when I called on him he said he was positive he
could cure me, so I asked him to prescribe for me. At the end of two
years, after prescribing steadily, he said I was so full of medicine
that he was afraid to have me take any more, and advised a rest. After
having paid out a small fortune, I was no better, and very much
discouraged.

Two years ago, having failed in business, I applied to one of my patrons
for a furnished room where I could meet the few I still had left. This
lady, who is a Christian Scientist, loaned me Science and Health, and
because she asked me so often how I was getting on with the book, I
began reading it. I also attended the Wednesday evening meetings which I
found very interesting. After hearing the testimonies at the meetings, I
decided to speak to some practitioner about these spots, but not until I
had at least a hundred dollars on hand, because I thought I would
require that amount for treatments, as I had been accustomed to paying
high prices. I had not inquired about prices, and in fact did not speak
to any one about my intentions, because I felt sensitive on this
subject. When I had read about half of Science and Health, I missed the
spots, and upon searching could find no trace of them. They had entirely
disappeared without treatment. In a few weeks the reading of that book
had accomplished what /materia medica/ had failed to accomplish in ten
years. It is impossible to express the feeling of relief and happiness
which came over me then. - C. K., Astoria, N. Y.

A CONVINCING INVESTIGATION

While I have testified to those around me and in many localities, of my
healing in Christian Science, I feel that it is high time I put the
candle in the candlestick where all who will may see. My earliest
recollection was a day of suffering, - a physical inheritance from my
mother, which gave simple interest for a time until years advanced and
compound interest was added. My father was a physician, and material
remedies were used for my mother without avail, consequently his
confidence in them for me was shaken, - in fact he often told me it was
better to suffer without medicine than become a chronic doser, without
pain.

I began teaching in early life and continued for more than twenty years,
and during that time not a day passed without pain, or fear of pain, and
only for my innate love of life it would have become an intolerable
burden. For five years oatmeal was my chief food and I became almost as
attached to it as Kaspar Hauser to his crust. I was early taught to have
faith in God, and many times was relieved of pain only to have it appear
again in an aggravated form.

At last my heart cried out for the living God, and the answer came by
one of His messengers, who told me of Christian Science. I replied that
I believed God could heal, but that I had no faith in the healing of
Christian Science, but would like to investigate its theology, as it
might aid in giving me some clue to the meaning of life. For three years
I had searched the works of the most scientific writers to find the
origin of life; many times I would think I had traced it to the
beginning, but it would elude my grasp every time. One day in talking
with my friend, she said she would like to loan me the textbook, Science
and Health, which I very willingly accepted. Not long afterward I felt a
severe attack of suffering. I opened the book for the first time and
found a paragraph near the middle which attracted my attention. I read
the same paragraph over and over for nearly two hours. When the tea bell
rang I closed the book and I shall never forget my perception of the new
heaven and the new earth, - everything in nature that I could see seemed
to have been washed and made clean. The flowers that I have always loved
so much, and that from childhood had told me such sweet stories, now
spoke to me of the All-in-all, the hearts of my friends seemed kinder, -
I had touched the hem of the garment of healing.

I ate my supper that evening forgetful of the preparations I had made
for suffering, and when the next day began I was more zealous of good
work than ever before. Since closing Science and Health at my first
reading I have never been able to find the paragraph which I had read so
many times over, the words seemed to have slipped away from me, but my
joy knew no bounds at having found the pearl of great price. By the
continued reading of the book I was entirely healed, and for fourteen
years I have not seen a day of physical suffering. - Miss L. M., Rome,
N. Y.

DEAFNESS AND DROPSY HEALED

I had been deaf from childhood. I suffered intensely after eating, and
dropsy was another of my complaints. This, with consumption, caused one
doctor to say, " It puzzles me; I have never seen such a case before as
yours."

I met a friend who had been cured in Christian
Science, and she said, "Try Christian Science." I got a copy of Science
and Health and in three weeks I was entirely cured. I felt uplifted. It
seemed as if God's arms were around and about me. I felt as if heaven
had come down to earth for me. After five years of suffering can any one
wonder at my unspeakable gratitude? - A. B., Pittsburg, Pa.

GRATEFUL FOR MANY BLESSINGS

In 1894 I began the study of Christian Science. At that time I was
greatly in need of its healing truth. For a number of years previous I
had been a semi-invalid with no hope of ever being well and strong
again. Several years before this time I had undergone an operation which
resulted in peritonitis. For three years previous to my study of Science
and Health by Mrs. Eddy, I was scarcely ever free from headache caused
by the weakened and diseased condition of the internal organs. At the
time I began the study of Christian Science I was taking five kinds of
medicine.

I began to read Science and Health, and did not take treatment, for I
thought, "If this is truth, I shall be healed; if it is not, I shall be
able to detect it, and will have nothing to do with it." I became a
devoted student and gradually my bodily diseases left me, - I was free,
and since that time, nearly ten years ago, neither my two children nor
myself have taken any medicine; and our understanding of truth has been
able to meet and overcome any suggestion of illness.

I was a devoted member of an orthodox church, but as I grew older I
began to question my beliefs, and to my questions I could find no
satisfactory answer. I became dissatisfied and finally ceased attending
church. I could not accept the idea of God taught there, and at last my
friends looked sadly upon me as an atheist. There I stood until I
learned to know God as revealed in Science and Health, and then all my
questionings were answered. In my girlhood I had always prayed to the
God I held in mind, and when the shadows of sickness pain, and death
came to my family, I prayed as only those can who know that if He helps
not, there is none; but my prayers were unanswered. Then I closed my
Bible, saying, "There is a mistake somewhere, perhaps some time I may
know."

Only those who know the attitude of mind that I was in can understand
the joy that came to me as I began to learn of God in Christian Science,
and of my relation to Him.

Many proofs of the healing power of Truth and of His protecting care
throng my thoughts. Seven years ago, when we were in a far distant
country, where Christian Science was then unknown, my little daughter
came in one morning from her school, saying, "Mother, I have measles;
twenty of the girls are sick in bed and I am afraid they will put me
there also." Her face, hands, and chest were covered with a deep red
rash, throat sore, and eyes inflamed. We began immediately to do our
work in Science and at night, when I left her at the door of the
college, her face was clear, her eyes bright, and all fear destroyed.
That was the end of the disease. - F. M. P., Boston, Mass.

A JOYFUL EXPERIENCE

In love and gratitude to God, and to Mrs. Eddy, the interpreter of
Jesus' beautiful teachings, I wish to tell of some of the benefits which
I have received from Christian Science. It is a little over a year since
Science found me in a deplorable condition, physically as well as
mentally. I had ailments of many years' standing, - chronic stomach
trouble, severe eye trouble, made almost unbearable from the constant
fear of losing any sight (a fate which had befallen my mother), also a
painful rupture of twenty-five years' standing. These ailments, combined
with unhappy conditions in my home, made me very despondent. I had
entirely lost my belief in an all-merciful God, and I did not know where
to turn for help. At that time Christian Science was brought to my
notice, and I shall never forget the sublime moment when I perceived
that an all-loving Father is always with me. Forgotten was all sorrow
and worry, and after four weeks' reading in Science and Health all my
ailments had disappeared. I am today a healthy, contented woman.

All this has come to pass in one short year, and my earnest desire is to
be more and more worthy to be called a child of God. This is in loving
gratitude for an understanding of this glorious truth. - Mrs. R. J.,
Chicago, Ill.

AN EVER-PRESENT HELP

It is a year since I began to read Science and Health, and I will now
try to outline what a knowledge of its teachings has done for me.

My condition was then very trying; my eyes, which had caused me much
trouble since childhood, were very painful. For these I had been treated
by some of the best specialists in my native land, and after coming to
the United States I had been doctored much and had worn glasses for four
years. I also had catarrh, for which I had taken much medicine without
being relieved. In addition to this I was an excessive smoker, using
tobacco in some form almost constantly. I had contracted a smoker's
heart, and used liquors freely.

The one who brought to me that which I now prize so highly, was a book
agent. I told him that I should be forced to leave my trade on account
of my eyes. He then told me of having been healed of a cancer, through
Christian Science treatment. He showed me a copy of Science and Health,
which had the signs of much use, and after being assured that if I did
my part I would be healed of all my diseases, I sent for a copy of the
book.

My recovery was very rapid, for after reading the book only three weeks
I was completely healed of the tobacco habit. I will say, in regard to
this healing, that it did not require even as much as a resolution on my
part. I was smoking a cigar, while reading Science and Health, when all
the desire to continue smoking left me, and I have never had a desire to
use tobacco in any form since then. My eyes were the next to manifest
the influence of the new knowledge gained, and had soon so far recovered
that I could go about my work with ease, and I have had no more use for
glasses. To-day my heart is normal, the catarrh has totally disappeared,
and I am not addicted to the use of liquor.

Christian Science has proved to be an ever-present help, not only in
overcoming physical ailments, but in business and daily life. It has
also overcome a great sense of fear. The Bible, which I regarded with
suspicion, has become my guide, and Christianity has become a sweet
reality, because the Christian Science textbook has indeed been a "Key
to the Scriptures" and has breathed through the Gospel pages a sweet
sense of harmony. - A. F., Sioux City, Iowa.

SEVERE EYE TROUBLE OVERCOME

After hearing Christian Science lightly spoken of, from a Christian
pulpit, I decided to go to one of the services and hear for myself. From
infancy I had been devoted to my church, and as soon as I was old enough
I was ever active in the work. Feeling it to be my duty to attend every
service held in my own church, I took advantage of the Wednesday evening
meetings. My first visit was not my last, I am thankful to say, for I
saw immediately that these people not only preached Christianity, but
practised and lived it. At that time I was wearing glasses and had worn
them for sixteen years. At times I suffered the most intense pain, and
for this phase of the trouble, one specialist after another had been
consulted. All gave me very much the same advice; each one urged extreme
carefulness and gave me glasses that seemed to relieve for a time. None
of them held out any hope that my sight would ever be restored, saying
that the defect had existed since infancy, and that in time I should be
blind.

The thought of blindness was very distressing to me, but I tried to bear
it with Christian resignation, since I thought that God had seen fit to
afflict me; but since I have learned that He is a loving Father, who
gives only good, I regret that I ever charged Him with my affliction. I
had no treatment, but I read Science and Health, and my eyes were healed
and glasses laid aside. I can never find words to express my thanks to
our dear Leader, through whose teachings my sight has been regained. I
can truthfully say that "whereas I was blind, now I see" - through an
understanding of Truth I have found my sight perfect as God gave it. -
Miss B. S., Wilmington, N. C.

A TESTIMONY FROM IRELAND

It is with a heart full of love and gratitude to God, and to our dear
Leader, that I send this testimony to the Field. I had never been a
strong girl; had always been subject to colds and chills, and suffered
all my life from a delicate throat. Seven years ago I had a very severe
attack of rheumatic fever and subsequently two less severe ones. These
left all sorts of evils behind them, - debility, chronic constipation,
and several others, so that with these ills my life was often a burden
to me and I used to think I never should receive relief or health. I had
also lost all love for God and faith in Him. I could not accept a God
who, as I then believed, visited sickness and sorrow upon His children
as a means for drawing them to Him.

I was in this state of mind and body when Christian Science found me. A
dear friend, seeing my suffering, presented the truth to me, and though
at first I did not believe that there could be healing for me, the
Christian Scientists' God seemed to be the one I had been looking for
all my life. I began to read Science and Health, and shall never forget
my joy at finding that I could love and trust God. I took to studying
the Bible, and read nothing but Science and Health and other Christian
Science literature for a year. After studying the "little book" for
about six weeks, I one day realized that I was a well woman, that I had
taken no medicine for three weeks, and that my body was perfectly
harmonious. The reading of Science and Health had healed me. The
wonderful joy and spiritual uplifting which came to me then no words of
mine can describe. I had also suffered from astigmatism and had for
several years been obliged to use special glasses when reading or
working, and could never use my eyes for more than half an hour; but
from the first reading of Science and Health I found that I could read
in any light and for any length of time without the slightest
discomfort. I am not only grateful for the physical healing but for the
mental regeneration. I rejoice that I am now able to help others who are
sick and sorrowing. - E. E. L., Curragh Camp, County Kildare, Ireland.

THE TEXTBOOK MAKES OPERATION UNNECESSARY

In the early part of the year 1895 my physician said I must undergo a
surgical operation in order ever to be well.

While in great fear, and dreading the operation, a kind neighbor called,
and after telling me of Christian Science gave me a copy of Science and
Health. She said I must put aside all medicine, and by reading
faithfully she knew I could be healed. The book became my constant
companion, and in a short time I was healed. Besides the relief from an
operation, I was completely healed of severe headaches and stomach
trouble. Physicians could give me no help for either of these ailments.
For ten years I have not used medicine of any kind, and have not missed
a Christian Science service on account of sickness during this period. I
am perfectly well. To say that I am grateful to God for all this does
not express my feelings. The physical healing was wonderful, but the
understanding given me of God, and the ability to help others outweigh
all else. I also love our dear Leader. - Mrs. V. I. B., Concord, N. H.

KIDNEY DISEASE AND EYE TROUBLE HEALED

Early in 1904 I was teaching in a private boarding-school. I was a very
unhappy, discontented woman; I had kidney disease, besides sore eyes,
and my general health was very bad. The doctor said that the climate did
not suit me, and that I certainly should have a change. The best thing,
he said, was to go back to France (my own country); but I did not like
to leave the school, so I struggled on until July, when we went
travelling for a month, but I came home worse than ever. I had a lot of
worry, one disappointment after another, and I often thought that life
was not worth living. In September, 1904, we heard for the first time of
Christian Science through a girl who was attending our boarding-school,
and who was healed through Christian Science treatment. We bought the
textbook, "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures" by Mrs. Eddy,
and what a revelation it was and is to us; it is indeed the fountain of
Truth. I had read Science and Health but a very short time when I took
off my glasses, began to sleep well, and soon found myself well in mind
and body. Besides this, it has brought harmony into our school, where
there had been discord, and everything is changed for the better. I
cannot describe the happiness that has come to me through Christian
Science; I can only exclaim with the psalmist: "Bless the Lord, O my
soul;" and may God bless Mrs. Eddy.

My one aim now is to live Christian Science, not in words only, but in
deeds; loving God more and my neighbor as myself, and following meekly
and obediently all our Leader's teachings. Words cannot express my
gratitude to Mrs. Eddy for Christian Science. - S. A. K., Vancouver, B.
C.

DISEASE OF BOWELS HEALED

When I first heard of Christian Science I had been afflicted for nine
years with a very painful disease of the bowels, which four physicians
failed even to diagnose, all giving different causes for the dreadful
sufferings I endured. The last physician advised me to take no more
medicine for these attacks, as drugs would not reach the cause, or do
any good. About this time I heard of Christian Science, and had the
opportunity of reading "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures"
by Mrs. Eddy, a few minutes every day for about a week, and I
was thereby healed. In looking back I found I had not suffered in the
least from the time I began reading this book. It has been nearly
seventeen years since this wonderful healing, and I have had no return
of the disease. My gratitude is endless and can be best expressed by
striving mightily to walk in the path our Leader has so lovingly shown
us in Science and Health. - Mrs. J. W. C., Scranton, Pa.

HEALED BY READING THE TEXTBOOK

After doctoring about a year, I was obliged to give up school and was
under medical care for two years; but grew worse instead of better. I
was then taken to specialists, who pronounced my case incurable, saying
I was in the last stages of kidney disease and could live only a short
time. Shortly afterward my uncle gave me a copy of "Science and Health
with Key to the Scriptures," and asked me to study it. After studying a
short time I was able to walk a distance of several miles, which I had
not been able to do for three years. I also laid aside glasses which I
had worn seven years, having been told I would become blind if my eyes
did not receive proper care. It is over a year since I received God's
blessing, and I am now enjoying perfect health and happiness. I have
never had my glasses on since I first began reading Science and Health,
and I have not used any medicine. - L. R., Spring Valley, Minn.

A TESTIMONY FROM SCOTLAND

I came to Christian Science purely for physical healing. I was very ill
and unhappy; very cynical and disbelieving in regard to what I heard of
God and religion.

I tried to live my life in my own way and put religion aside. I was a
great believer in fate and in will-power, and thought to put them in the
place of God, with the consequence that I was led to do many rash and
foolish things. I am now thankful to say that my outlook on life is
entirely changed; I have proved God's wisdom and goodness so often that
I am willing and thankful to know my future is in His hands and that all
things must work out for the best. I have found a God whom I can love
and worship with my whole heart, and I now read my Bible with interest
and understanding.

I was healed of very bad rheumatism simply by reading Science and
Health. I had tried many medicines, also massage, with no result, and
the doctors told me that I would always suffer from this disease, as it
was inherited, and also because I had rheumatic fever when a child. I
suffered day and night, and nothing relieved me until Science proved to
me the falseness of this belief by removing it. I gave up all the
medicines I was taking and have never touched any since, and that is
more than two years ago. Before this I had often tried to do without a
medicine that I had taken every day for ten years, but was always ill
and had to return to it, until I found out that one Mind is the only
medicine, and then I was freed from the suffering.

I had also suffered constantly from bilious attacks, colds, and a weak
chest, and had been warned not to be out in wet weather, etc., but now,
I am glad to say, I am quite free from all those material laws and go
out in all sorts of weather. - R. D. F., Edinburgh, Scotland.

CURING BETTER THAN ENDURING

For eight years I was a great sufferer from weak lungs and after being
treated by ten different physicians, in the States of Illinois,
Missouri, and Colorado, I was told there was no hope of my recovery from
what they pronounced tuberculosis, which was hereditary, my father
having been afflicted with it. I was greatly emaciated and hardly able
to be about. My general condition was aggravated by what the doctors
said was paralysis of the bowels. Three physicians so diagnosed it at
different times, and assured my husband that I could never get more than
temporary relief. This indeed I found difficult to obtain, in spite of
my almost frantic efforts. At times I was nearly insane from suffering,
and after eight years of doctoring I found myself steadily growing
worse. For four years I did not have a normal action of the bowels, and
it was only by extreme effort and by resort to powerful drugs or
mechanical means, with resultant suffering, that any action whatever
could be brought about.

I had heard nothing of the curative power of Christian Science, and only
to oblige a friend I went one night, about three years ago, to one of
their mid-week testimonial meetings, in Boulder, Colorado. I was much
impressed by what I heard there, and determined at once to investigate
this strange religion, in the hope that it might have something good for
me. I bought the textbook, Science and Health, and from the first I
found myself growing stronger and better, both physically and mentally,
as I acquired a better understanding and endeavored to put into practice
what I learned. In one week I was able to get along better without drugs
than I had for years with them, and before three months had passed I was
better than I had been any time in my life, for I had always suffered
more or less from bowel trouble. Since that time I have taken no
medicine whatever, and rely wholly upon Christian Science. My lungs are
now sound, my bowels normally active, my general health excellent, and I
am able to endure without fatigue tasks that before would have
prostrated me. The study of our textbook was the sole means of my
healing. - L. M. St. C., Matachin, Canal Zone, Panama.

SEVERE ECZEMA DESTROYED

It is only two years since I came from darkness into the light of
Christian Science, and to me the spiritual uplifting has been wonderful,
to say nothing of the physical healing. Words cannot express my
gratitude for benefits I have received in that time. For five years I
suffered with that dreaded disease, eczema, all over my body. Five
doctors said there was no help for me. The suffering seemed as terrible
as the hell fire that I had been taught to believe in. When Christian
Science came to me two years ago through a dear friend, she gave me a
copy of Science and Health and asked me to read it. I told her that I
would, for I was like a drowning man grasping at a straw. I had been a
Bible student for twenty-eight years, but when I commenced reading
Science and Health with the Bible I was healed in less than a week. I
never had a treatment. A case of measles was also destroyed in
twenty-four hours after it appeared. - Mrs. M. B. G., Vermilion, Ohio.

SCIENCE AND HEALTH A PRICELESS BOON

I am a willing witness to the healing power of Christian Science, having
had a lifetime's battle with disease and medical experiments. Various
doctors finally admitted that they had exhausted their resources, and
could only offer me palliatives, saying that a cure was impossible. I
had paralysis of the bowels, frequent sick headaches with unutterable
agony, and my mortal career was nearly brought to an end by a malignant
type of yellow fever. Many were the attending evils of this physical
inharmony, but God confounds the wisdom of men, for while studying
Science and Health two years ago, the veil of ignorance was lifted and
perfect health was shown to me to be my real condition, and to such
there is no relapse. The constant use of glasses, which were apparently
a necessity to me for years, was proven needless, and they were laid
aside. Mrs. Eddy has made Scripture reading a never-failing well of
comfort to me. By her interpretation "the way of the Lord" is made
straight to me and mine. It aids us in our daily overcoming of the
tyranny of the flesh and its rebellion against the blessed leading of
Christ, Truth. The daily study of the Bible and our textbook is bringing
more and more into our consciousness the power of God unto salvation. -
J. C., Manatee, Fla.

A CRITIC CONVINCED

With gratitude to God I acknowledge my lifelong debt to Christian
Science. In 1895 I attended my first Christian Science meeting, and was
deeply impressed with the earnestness of the people and the love
reflected, but as for the spiritual healing of the physical body, I did
not believe such a thing to be possible. I bought Science and Health and
studied it to be able to dispute intelligently with the supposedly
deluded followers of Christian Science. I pursued the study carefully
and thoroughly, and I have had abundant reason since to be glad that I
did, for through this study, and the resultant understanding of my
relation to God, I was healed of a disease with which I had been
afflicted since childhood and for which there was no known remedy.
Surely my experience has been the fulfilling in part of the Scripture:
"He sent His Word and healed them, and delivered them from their
destructions." I believe that Science and Health reveals the Word
