
"The Ford comes from America," I told the lawyer. "It would be a
shame to deprive it of an opportunity to get acquainted with the
heart of Bengal!"

"May Ganesh {FN46-4} go with you!" Lambadar Babu said, laughing.
He added courteously, "If you ever get there, I am sure Giri Bala
will be glad to see you. She is approaching her seventies, but
continues in excellent health."

"Please tell me, sir, if it is absolutely true that she eats
nothing?" I looked directly into his eyes, those telltale windows
of the mind.

[Illustration: GIRI BALA, This great woman yogi has not taken food
or drink since 1880. I am pictured with her, in 1936, at her home
in the isolated Bengal village of Biur. Her non-eating state has
been rigorously investigated by the Maharaja of Burdwan. She employs
a certain yoga technique to recharge her body with cosmic energy
from the ether, sun, and air.--see giribala.jpg]

"It is true." His gaze was open and honorable. "In more than five
decades I have never seen her eat a morsel. If the world suddenly
came to an end, I could not be more astonished than by the sight
of my sister's taking food!"

We chuckled together over the improbability of these two cosmic
events.

"Giri Bala has never sought an inaccessible solitude for her yoga
practices," Lambadar Babu went on. "She has lived her entire life
surrounded by her family and friends. They are all well accustomed
now to her strange state. Not one of them who would not be stupefied
if Giri Bala suddenly decided to eat anything! Sister is naturally
retiring, as befits a Hindu widow, but our little circle in Purulia
and in Biur all know that she is literally an 'exceptional' woman."

The brother's sincerity was manifest. Our little party thanked him
warmly and set out toward Biur. We stopped at a street shop for
curry and LUCHIS, attracting a swarm of urchins who gathered round
to watch Mr. Wright eating with his fingers in the simple Hindu
manner. {FN46-5} Hearty appetites caused us to fortify ourselves
against an afternoon which, unknown at the moment, was to prove
fairly laborious.

Our way now led east through sun-baked rice fields into the Burdwan
section of Bengal. On through roads lined with dense vegetation;
the songs of the MAYNAS and the stripe-throated BULBULS streamed
out from trees with huge, umbrellalike branches. A bullock cart
now and then, the RINI, RINI, MANJU, MANJU squeak of its axle and
iron-shod wooden wheels contrasting sharply in mind with the SWISH,
SWISH of auto tires over the aristocratic asphalt of the cities.

"Dick, halt!" My sudden request brought a jolting protest from the
Ford. "That overburdened mango tree is fairly shouting an invitation!"

The five of us dashed like children to the mango-strewn earth; the
tree had benevolently shed its fruits as they had ripened.

"Full many a mango is born to lie unseen," I paraphrased, "and
waste its sweetness on the stony ground."

"Nothing like this in America, Swamiji, eh?" laughed Sailesh
Mazumdar, one of my Bengali students.

"No," I admitted, covered with mango juice and contentment. "How
I have missed this fruit in the West! A Hindu's heaven without
mangoes is inconceivable!"

I picked up a rock and downed a proud beauty hidden on the highest
limb.

"Dick," I asked between bites of ambrosia, warm with the tropical
sun, "are all the cameras in the car?"

"Yes, sir; in the baggage compartment."

"If Giri Bala proves to be a true saint, I want to write about her
in the West. A Hindu YOGINI with such inspiring powers should not
live and die unknown-like most of these mangoes."

Half an hour later I was still strolling in the sylvan peace.

"Sir," Mr. Wright remarked, "we should reach Giri Bala before the
sun sets, to have enough light for photographs." He added with a
grin, "The Westerners are a skeptical lot; we can't expect them to
believe in the lady without any pictures!"

This bit of wisdom was indisputable; I turned my back on temptation
and reentered the car.

"You are right, Dick," I sighed as we sped along, "I sacrifice the
mango paradise on the altar of Western realism. Photographs we must
have!"

The road became more and more sickly: wrinkles of ruts, boils of
hardened clay, the sad infirmities of old age! Our group dismounted
occasionally to allow Mr. Wright to more easily maneuver the Ford,
which the four of us pushed from behind.

"Lambadar Babu spoke truly," Sailesh acknowledged. "The car is not
carrying us; we are carrying the car!"

Our climb-in, climb-out auto tedium was beguiled ever and anon by
the appearance of a village, each one a scene of quaint simplicity.

"Our way twisted and turned through groves of palms among ancient,
unspoiled villages nestling in the forest shade," Mr. Wright has
recorded in his travel diary, under date of May 5, 1936. "Very
fascinating are these clusters of thatched mud huts, decorated with
one of the names of God on the door; many small, naked children
innocently playing about, pausing to stare or run wildly from
this big, black, bullockless carriage tearing madly through their
village.  The women merely peep from the shadows, while the men
lazily loll beneath the trees along the roadside, curious beneath
their nonchalance. In one place, all the villagers were gaily
bathing in the large tank (in their garments, changing by draping
dry cloths around their bodies, dropping the wet ones). Women
bearing water to their homes, in huge brass jars.

"The road led us a merry chase over mount and ridge; we bounced and
tossed, dipped into small streams, detoured around an unfinished
causeway, slithered across dry, sandy river beds and finally, about
5:00 P.M., we were close to our destination, Biur. This minute
village in the interior of Bankura District, hidden in the protection
of dense foliage, is unapproachable by travelers during the rainy
season, when the streams are raging torrents and the roads serpentlike
spit the mud-venom.

"Asking for a guide among a group of worshipers on their way home
from a temple prayer (out in the lonely field), we were besieged by
a dozen scantily clad lads who clambered on the sides of the car,
eager to conduct us to Giri Bala.

"The road led toward a grove of date palms sheltering a group of
mud huts, but before we had reached it, the Ford was momentarily
tipped at a dangerous angle, tossed up and dropped down. The narrow
trail led around trees and tank, over ridges, into holes and deep
ruts. The car became anchored on a clump of bushes, then grounded
on a hillock, requiring a lift of earth clods; on we proceeded,
slowly and carefully; suddenly the way was stopped by a mass of
brush in the middle of the cart track, necessitating a detour down
a precipitous ledge into a dry tank, rescue from which demanded some
scraping, adzing, and shoveling. Again and again the road seemed
impassable, but the pilgrimage must go on; obliging lads fetched
spades and demolished the obstacles (shades of Ganesh!) while
hundreds of children and parents stared.

"Soon we were threading our way along the two ruts of antiquity,
women gazing wide-eyed from their hut doors, men trailing alongside
and behind us, children scampering to swell the procession. Ours
was perhaps the first auto to traverse these roads; the 'bullock
cart union' must be omnipotent here! What a sensation we created-a
group piloted by an American and pioneering in a snorting car
right into their hamlet fastness, invading the ancient privacy and
sanctity!

"Halting by a narrow lane we found ourselves within a hundred feet
of Giri Bala's ancestral home. We felt the thrill of fulfillment
after the long road struggle crowned by a rough finish. We approached
a large, two-storied building of brick and plaster, dominating the
surrounding adobe huts; the house was under the process of repair,
for around it was the characteristically tropical framework of
bamboos.

"With feverish anticipation and suppressed rejoicing we stood
before the open doors of the one blessed by the Lord's 'hungerless'
touch.  Constantly agape were the villagers, young and old, bare
and dressed, women aloof somewhat but inquisitive too, men and
boys unabashedly at our heels as they gazed on this unprecedented
spectacle.

"Soon a short figure came into view in the doorway-Giri Bala! She
was swathed in a cloth of dull, goldish silk; in typically Indian
fashion, she drew forward modestly and hesitatingly, peering
slightly from beneath the upper fold of her SWADESHI cloth. Her
eyes glistened like smouldering embers in the shadow of her head
piece; we were enamored by a most benevolent and kindly face, a face
of realization and understanding, free from the taint of earthly
attachment.

"Meekly she approached and silently assented to our snapping a
number of pictures with our 'still' and 'movie' cameras. {FN46-6}
Patiently and shyly she endured our photo techniques of posture
adjustment and light arrangement. Finally we had recorded for
posterity many photographs of the only woman in the world who is
known to have lived without food or drink for over fifty years.
(Therese Neumann, of course, has fasted since 1923.) Most motherly
was Giri Bala's expression as she stood before us, completely
covered in the loose-flowing cloth, nothing of her body visible
but her face with its downcast eyes, her hands, and her tiny feet.
A face of rare peace and innocent poise-a wide, childlike, quivering
lip, a feminine nose, narrow, sparkling eyes, and a wistful smile."

Mr. Wright's impression of Giri Bala was shared by myself; spirituality
enfolded her like her gently shining veil. She PRONAMED before me
in the customary gesture of greeting from a householder to a monk.
Her simple charm and quiet smile gave us a welcome beyond that of
honeyed oratory; forgotten was our difficult, dusty trip.

The little saint seated herself cross-legged on the verandah. Though
bearing the scars of age, she was not emaciated; her olive-colored
skin had remained clear and healthy in tone.

"Mother," I said in Bengali, "for over twenty-five years I have
thought eagerly of this very pilgrimage! I heard about your sacred
life from Sthiti Lal Nundy Babu."

She nodded in acknowledgment. "Yes, my good neighbor in Nawabganj."

"During those years I have crossed the oceans, but I never forgot
my early plan to someday see you. The sublime drama that you are
here playing so inconspicuously should be blazoned before a world
that has long forgotten the inner food divine."

The saint lifted her eyes for a minute, smiling with serene interest.

"Baba (honored father) knows best," she answered meekly.

I was happy that she had taken no offense; one never knows how
great yogis or yoginis will react to the thought of publicity. They
shun it, as a rule, wishing to pursue in silence the profound soul
research. An inner sanction comes to them when the proper time
arrives to display their lives openly for the benefit of seeking
minds.

"Mother," I went on, "please forgive me, then, for burdening you
with many questions. Kindly answer only those that please you; I
shall understand your silence, also."

She spread her hands in a gracious gesture. "I am glad to reply,
insofar as an insignificant person like myself can give satisfactory
answers."

"Oh, no, not insignificant!" I protested sincerely. "You are a
great soul."

"I am the humble servant of all." She added quaintly, "I love to
cook and feed people."

A strange pastime, I thought, for a non-eating saint!

"Tell me, Mother, from your own lips-do you live without food?"

"That is true." She was silent for a few moments; her next remark
showed that she had been struggling with mental arithmetic. "From
the age of twelve years four months down to my present age of
sixty-eight--a period of over fifty-six years--I have not eaten
food or taken liquids."

"Are you never tempted to eat?"

"If I felt a craving for food, I would have to eat." Simply yet
regally she stated this axiomatic truth, one known too well by a
world revolving around three meals a day!

"But you do eat something!" My tone held a note of remonstrance.

"Of course!" She smiled in swift understanding.

"Your nourishment derives from the finer energies of the air and
sunlight, {FN46-7} and from the cosmic power which recharges your
body through the medulla oblongata."

"Baba knows." Again she acquiesced, her manner soothing and
unemphatic.

"Mother, please tell me about your early life. It holds a deep
interest for all of India, and even for our brothers and sisters
beyond the seas."

Giri Bala put aside her habitual reserve, relaxing into a conversational
mood.

"So be it." Her voice was low and firm. "I was born in these forest
regions. My childhood was unremarkable save that I was possessed
by an insatiable appetite. I had been betrothed in early years.

"'Child,' my mother often warned me, 'try to control your greed.
When the time comes for you to live among strangers in your husband's
family, what will they think of you if your days are spent in
nothing but eating?'

"The calamity she had foreseen came to pass. I was only twelve
when I joined my husband's people in Nawabganj. My mother-in-law
shamed me morning, noon, and night about my gluttonous habits.
Her scoldings were a blessing in disguise, however; they roused my
dormant spiritual tendencies. One morning her ridicule was merciless.

"'I shall soon prove to you,' I said, stung to the quick, 'that I
shall never touch food again as long as I live.'

"My mother-in-law laughed in derision. 'So!' she said, 'how can
you live without eating, when you cannot live without overeating?'

"This remark was unanswerable! Yet an iron resolution scaffolded
my spirit. In a secluded spot I sought my Heavenly Father.

"'Lord,' I prayed incessantly, 'please send me a guru, one who can
teach me to live by Thy light and not by food.'

"A divine ecstasy fell over me. Led by a beatific spell, I set out
for the Nawabganj GHAT on the Ganges. On the way I encountered the
priest of my husband's family.

"'Venerable sir,' I said trustingly, 'kindly tell me how to live
without eating.'

"He stared at me without reply. Finally he spoke in a consoling
manner. 'Child,' he said, 'come to the temple this evening; I will
conduct a special VEDIC ceremony for you.'

"This vague answer was not the one I was seeking; I continued toward
the GHAT. The morning sun pierced the waters; I purified myself in
the Ganges, as though for a sacred initiation. As I left the river
bank, my wet cloth around me, in the broad glare of day my master
materialized himself before me!

"'Dear little one,' he said in a voice of loving compassion, 'I
am the guru sent here by God to fulfill your urgent prayer. He was
deeply touched by its very unusual nature! From today you shall
live by the astral light, your bodily atoms fed from the infinite
current.'"

Giri Bala fell into silence. I took Mr. Wright's pencil and pad
and translated into English a few items for his information.

The saint resumed the tale, her gentle voice barely audible. "The
GHAT was deserted, but my guru cast round us an aura of guarding
light, that no stray bathers later disturb us. He initiated me
into a KRIA technique which frees the body from dependence on the
gross food of mortals. The technique includes the use of a certain
MANTRA {FN46-8} and a breathing exercise more difficult than the
average person could perform. No medicine or magic is involved;
nothing beyond the KRIA."

In the manner of the American newspaper reporter, who had unknowingly
taught me his procedure, I questioned Giri Bala on many matters
which I thought would be of interest to the world. She gave me,
bit by bit, the following information:

"I have never had any children; many years ago I became a widow.
I sleep very little, as sleep and waking are the same to me. I
meditate at night, attending to my domestic duties in the daytime. I
slightly feel the change in climate from season to season. I have
never been sick or experienced any disease. I feel only slight
pain when accidentally injured. I have no bodily excretions. I
can control my heart and breathing. I often see my guru as well as
other great souls, in vision."

"Mother," I asked, "why don't you teach others the method of living
without food?"

My ambitious hopes for the world's starving millions were nipped
in the bud.

"No." She shook her head. "I was strictly commanded by my guru
not to divulge the secret. It is not his wish to tamper with God's
drama of creation. The farmers would not thank me if I taught
many people to live without eating! The luscious fruits would lie
uselessly on the ground. It appears that misery, starvation, and
disease are whips of our karma which ultimately drive us to seek
the true meaning of life."

"Mother," I said slowly, "what is the use of your having been
singled out to live without eating?"

"To prove that man is Spirit." Her face lit with wisdom. "To
demonstrate that by divine advancement he can gradually learn to
live by the Eternal Light and not by food."

The saint sank into a deep meditative state. Her gaze was directed
inward; the gentle depths of her eyes became expressionless. She
gave a certain sigh, the prelude to the ecstatic breathless trance.
For a time she had fled to the questionless realm, the heaven of
inner joy.

The tropical darkness had fallen. The light of a small kerosene
lamp flickered fitfully over the faces of a score of villagers
squatting silently in the shadows. The darting glowworms and distant
oil lanterns of the huts wove bright eerie patterns into the velvet
night.  It was the painful hour of parting; a slow, tedious journey
lay before our little party.

"Giri Bala," I said as the saint opened her eyes, "please give me
a keepsake-a strip of one of your SARIS."

She soon returned with a piece of Benares silk, extending it in
her hand as she suddenly prostrated herself on the ground.

"Mother," I said reverently, "rather let me touch your own blessed
feet!"

{FN46-1} In northern Bengal.

{FN46-2} H. H. Sir Bijay Chand Mahtab, now dead. His family doubtless
possesses some record of the Maharaja's three investigations of
Giri Bala.

{FN46-3} Woman yogi.

{FN46-4} "Remover of Obstacles," the god of good fortune.

{FN46-5} Sri Yukteswar used to say: "The Lord has given us the fruits
of the good earth. We like to see our food, to smell it, to taste
it--the Hindu likes also to touch it!" One does not mind HEARING
it, either, if no one else is present at the meal!

{FN46-6} Mr. Wright also took moving pictures of Sri Yukteswar
during his last Winter Solstice Festival in Serampore.

{FN46-7} "What we eat is radiation; our food is so much quanta
of energy," Dr. George W. Crile of Cleveland told a gathering of
medical men on May 17, 1933 in Memphis. "This all-important radiation,
which releases electrical currents for the body's electrical circuit,
the nervous system, is given to food by the sun's rays. Atoms, Dr.
Crile says, are solar systems. Atoms are the vehicles that are
filled with solar radiance as so many coiled springs. These countless
atomfuls of energy are taken in as food. Once in the human body,
these tense vehicles, the atoms, are discharged in the body's
protoplasm, the radiance furnishing new chemical energy, new
electrical currents.  'Your body is made up of such atoms,' Dr.
Crile said. 'They are your muscles, brains, and sensory organs,
such as the eyes and ears.'"

Someday scientists will discover how man can live directly on solar
energy. "Chlorophyll is the only substance known in nature that
somehow possesses the power to act as a 'sunlight trap,'" William
L.  Laurence writes in the NEW YORK TIMES. "It 'catches' the energy
of sunlight and stores it in the plant. Without this no life could
exist.  We obtain the energy we need for living from the solar
energy stored in the plant-food we eat or in the flesh of the
animals that eat the plants. The energy we obtain from coal or oil
is solar energy trapped by the chlorophyll in plant life millions
of years ago. We live by the sun through the agency of chlorophyll."

{FN46-8} Potent vibratory chant. The literal translation of Sanskrit
MANTRA is "instrument of thought," signifying the ideal, inaudible
sounds which represent one aspect of creation; when vocalized as
syllables, a MANTRA constitutes a universal terminology. The infinite
powers of sound derive from AUM, the "Word" or creative hum of the
Cosmic Motor.



CHAPTER: 47

I RETURN TO THE WEST

"I have given many yoga lessons in India and America; but I must
confess that, as a Hindu, I am unusually happy to be conducting a
class for English students."

My London class members laughed appreciatively; no political turmoils
ever disturbed our yoga peace.

India was now a hallowed memory. It is September, 1936; I am
in England to fulfill a promise, given sixteen months earlier, to
lecture again in London.

England, too, is receptive to the timeless yoga message. Reporters
and newsreel cameramen swarmed over my quarters at Grosvenor House.
The British National Council of the World Fellowship of Faiths
organized a meeting on September 29th at Whitefield's Congregational
Church where I addressed the audience on the weighty subject of
"How Faith in Fellowship may Save Civilization." The eight o'clock
lectures at Caxton Hall attracted such crowds that on two nights
the overflow waited in Windsor House auditorium for my second talk
at nine-thirty.  Yoga classes during the following weeks grew so
large that Mr. Wright was obliged to arrange a transfer to another
hall.

The English tenacity has admirable expression in a spiritual
relationship. The London yoga students loyally organized themselves,
after my departure, into a Self-Realization Fellowship center,
holding their meditation meetings weekly throughout the bitter war
years.

Unforgettable weeks in England; days of sight-seeing in London,
then over the beautiful countryside. Mr. Wright and I summoned the
trusty Ford to visit the birthplaces and tombs of the great poets
and heroes of British history.

Our little party sailed from Southampton for America in late October
on the BREMEN. The majestic Statue of Liberty in New York harbor
brought a joyous emotional gulp not only to the throats of Miss
Bletch and Mr. Wright, but to my own.

The Ford, a bit battered from struggles with ancient soils, was
still puissant; it now took in its stride the transcontinental trip
to California. In late 1936, lo! Mount Washington.

The year-end holidays are celebrated annually at the Los Angeles
center with an eight-hour group meditation on December 24th
(Spiritual Christmas), followed the next day by a banquet (Social
Christmas). The festivities this year were augmented by the presence
of dear friends and students from distant cities who had arrived
to welcome home the three world travelers.

The Christmas Day feast included delicacies brought fifteen thousand
miles for this glad occasion: GUCCHI mushrooms from Kashmir, canned
RASAGULLA and mango pulp, PAPAR biscuits, and an oil of the Indian
KEORA flower which flavored our ice cream. The evening found us
grouped around a huge sparkling Christmas tree, the near-by fireplace
crackling with logs of aromatic cypress.

Gift-time! Presents from the earth's far corners-Palestine, Egypt,
India, England, France, Italy. How laboriously had Mr. Wright
counted the trunks at each foreign junction, that no pilfering hand
receive the treasures intended for loved ones in America! Plaques
of the sacred olive tree from the Holy Land, delicate laces and
embroideries from Belgium and Holland, Persian carpets, finely
woven Kashmiri shawls, everlastingly fragrant sandalwood trays from
Mysore, Shiva "bull's eye" stones from Central Provinces, old Indian
coins of dynasties long fled, bejeweled vases and cups, miniatures,
tapestries, temple incense and perfumes, SWADESHI cotton prints,
lacquer work, Mysore ivory carvings, Persian slippers with their
inquisitive long toe, quaint old illuminated manuscripts, velvets,
brocades, Gandhi caps, potteries, tiles, brasswork, prayer rugs-booty
of three continents!

One by one I distributed the gaily wrapped packages from the immense
pile under the tree.

"Sister Gyanamata!" I handed a long box to the saintly American
lady of sweet visage and deep realization who, during my absence,
had been in charge at Mt. Washington. From the paper tissues she
lifted a SARI of golden Benares silk.

"Thank you, sir; it brings the pageant of India before my eyes."

"Mr. Dickinson!" The next parcel contained a gift which I had
bought in a Calcutta bazaar. "Mr. Dickinson will like this," I had
thought at the time. A dearly beloved disciple, Mr. Dickinson had
been present at every Christmas festivity since the 1925 founding
of Mt. Washington.  At this eleventh annual celebration, he was
standing before me, untying the ribbons of his square little package.

"The silver cup!" Struggling with emotion, he stared at the present,
a tall drinking cup. He seated himself some distance away, apparently
in a daze. I smiled at him affectionately before resuming my role
as Santa Claus.

The ejaculatory evening closed with a prayer to the Giver of all
gifts; then a group singing of Christmas carols.

Mr. Dickinson and I were chatting together sometime later.

"Sir," he said, "please let me thank you now for the silver cup.
I could not find any words on Christmas night."

"I brought the gift especially for you."

"For forty-three years I have been waiting for that silver cup! It
is a long story, one I have kept hidden within me." Mr. Dickinson
looked at me shyly. "The beginning was dramatic: I was drowning.
My older brother had playfully pushed me into a fifteen-foot pool
in a small town in Nebraska. I was only five years old then. As I
was about to sink for the second time under the water, a dazzling
multicolored light appeared, filling all space. In the midst was
the figure of a man with tranquil eyes and a reassuring smile.
My body was sinking for the third time when one of my brother's
companions bent a tall slender willow tree in such a low dip that
I could grasp it with my desperate fingers. The boys lifted me to
the bank and successfully gave me first-aid treatment.

"Twelve years later, a youth of seventeen, I visited Chicago with
my mother. It was 1893; the great World Parliament of Religions
was in session. Mother and I were walking down a main street, when
again I saw the mighty flash of light. A few paces away, strolling
leisurely along, was the same man I had seen years before in vision.
He approached a large auditorium and vanished within the door.

[Illustration: Mr. E. E. Dickinson of Los Angeles; he sought a
silver cup--see dickinson.jpg]

[Illustration: Sri Yukteswar and myself in Calcutta, 1935. He is
carrying the gift umbrella-cane--see gurus.jpg]

[Illustration:  A group of Ranchi students and teachers pose with
the venerable Maharaja of Kasimbazar (at center, in white). In 1918
he gave his Kasimbazar Palace and twenty-five acres in Ranchi as
a permanent site for my yoga school for boys.--see teachers.jpg]


"'Mother,' I cried, 'that was the man who appeared at the time I
was drowning!'

"She and I hastened into the building; the man was seated on a
lecture platform. We soon learned that he was Swami Vivekananda of
India. {FN47-1} After he had given a soul-stirring talk, I went
forward to meet him. He smiled on me graciously, as though we
were old friends. I was so young that I did not know how to give
expression to my feelings, but in my heart I was hoping that he
would offer to be my teacher. He read my thought.

"'No, my son, I am not your guru.' Vivekananda gazed with his
beautiful, piercing eyes deep into my own. 'Your teacher will come
later. He will give you a silver cup.' After a little pause, he
added, smiling, 'He will pour out to you more blessings than you
are now able to hold.'

"I left Chicago in a few days," Mr. Dickinson went on, "and never
saw the great Vivekananda again. But every word he had uttered
was indelibly written on my inmost consciousness. Years passed; no
teacher appeared. One night in 1925 I prayed deeply that the Lord
would send me my guru. A few hours later, I was awakened from sleep
by soft strains of melody. A band of celestial beings, carrying
flutes and other instruments, came before my view. After filling
the air with glorious music, the angels slowly vanished.

"The next evening I attended, for the first time, one of your lectures
here in Los Angeles, and knew then that my prayer had been granted."

We smiled at each other in silence.

"For eleven years now I have been your KRIYA YOGA disciple," Mr.
Dickinson continued. "Sometimes I wondered about the silver cup;
I had almost persuaded myself that Vivekananda's words were only
metaphorical. But on Christmas night, as you handed me the square
box by the tree, I saw, for the third time in my life, the same
dazzling flash of light. In another minute I was gazing on my
guru's gift which Vivekananda had foreseen for me forty-three years
earlier-a silver cup!"

{FN47-1} The chief disciple of the Christlike master Sri Ramakrishna.



CHAPTER: 48

AT ENCINITAS IN CALIFORNIA

"A surprise, sir! During your absence abroad we have had this
Encinitas hermitage built; it is a 'welcome-home' gift!" Sister
Gyanamata smilingly led me through a gate and up a tree-shaded
walk.

I saw a building jutting out like a great white ocean liner toward
the blue brine. First speechlessly, then with "Oh's!" and "Ah's!",
finally with man's insufficient vocabulary of joy and gratitude,
I examined the ashram-sixteen unusually large rooms, each one
charmingly appointed.

The stately central hall, with immense ceiling-high windows, looks
out on a united altar of grass, ocean, sky-a symphony in emerald,
opal, sapphire. A mantle over the hall's huge fireplace holds the
framed likeness of Lahiri Mahasaya, smiling his blessing over this
far Pacific heaven.

Directly below the hall, built into the very bluff, two solitary
meditation caves confront the infinities of sky and sea. Verandahs,
sun-bathing nooks, acres of orchard, a eucalypti grove, flagstone
paths leading through roses and lilies to quiet arbors, a long
flight of stairs ending on an isolated beach and the vast waters!
Was dream ever more concrete?

"May the good and heroic and bountiful souls of the saints come
here," reads "A Prayer for a Dwelling," from the ZEND-AVESTA,
fastened on one of the hermitage doors, "and may they go hand in
hand with us, giving the healing virtues of their blessed gifts as
widespread as the earth, as far-flung as the rivers, as high-reaching
as the sun, for the furtherance of better men, for the increase of
abundance and glory.

"May obedience conquer disobedience within this house; may peace
triumph here over discord; free-hearted giving over avarice, truthful
