pressure of daily duty; and it is not altogether wholesome to think
much about it; but it is still more harmful to put it out of our
sight, as so many of us do, and to go on habitually as if there would
never come a time when we shall cease to be where we have been so
long, and when there will no more arise the daily calls to transitory
occupations. The thought of the certainty and nearness of that end has
often become a stimulus to wild, sensuous living, as the history of
the relaxation of morality in pestilences, and in times when war
stalked through the land, has abundantly shown. 'Let us eat and drink,
for tomorrow we die,' is plainly a way of reasoning that appeals to
the average man. But the entire forgetfulness that there is an end is
no less harmful, and is apt to lead to over-indulgence in sensuous
desires as the other extreme. Perhaps the young need more especially
to be recalled to the thought of the 'end' because they are more
especially likely to forget it, and because it is specially worth
their while to remember it. They have still the long stretch before
the 'end' before them, to make of it what they will. Whereas for us
who are further on in the course, there is less time and opportunity
to shape our path with a view to its close, and to those of us in old
age, there is but little need to preach remembrance of what has come
so close to us. It is to the young man that the Preacher proffers his
final advice, to 'rejoice in his health, and to walk in the ways of
his heart, and in the sight of his eyes,' but withal to know that 'for
these God will bring him into judgment.'

And in that counsel is involved the thought that 'the end which is
better than the beginning' is neither old age, with its limitations
and compulsory abstinences, nor death, which is, as the dreary creed
of the book in its central portions believes it to be, the close of
all things, but, beyond these, the state in which men will reap as
they have sown, and inherit what they have earned. It is that
condition which gives all its importance to death--the porter who
opens the door into a future life of recompence.

II. The end will, in many respects, not be better than the beginning.

Put side by side the infant and the old man. Think of the undeveloped
strength, the smooth cheek, the ruddy complexion, the rejoicing in
physical well-being, of the one, with the failing senses, the
tottering limbs, the lowered vitality, the many pains and aches, of
the other. In these respects the end is worse than the beginning. Or
go a step further onwards in life, and think of youth, with its unworn
energy, and the wearied longing for rest which comes at the end; of
youth, with its quick, open receptiveness for all impressions, and the
horny surface of callousness which has overgrown the mind of the old;
of youth, with its undeveloped powers and endless possibilities, which
in the old have become rigid and fixed; of youth, with the rich gift
before it of a continent of time, which in the old has been washed
away by the ocean, till there is but a crumbling bank still to stand
on; of youth, with its wealth of hopes, and of the hopes of the old,
which are solemn ventures, few and scanty--and then say if the end is
not worse than the beginning.

And if we go further, and think of death as the end, is it not in a
very real and terrible sense, loss, loss? It is loss to be taken out
of the world, to 'leave the warm precincts and the cheerful day,' to
lose friends and lovers, and to be banned into a dreary land. Yet,
further, the thought of the end as being a state of retribution
strikes upon all hearts as being solemn and terrible.

III. Yet the end may be better.

The sensuous indulgence which Ecclesiastes preaches in its earlier
portions will never lead to such an end. It breeds disgust of life, as
the examples of in all ages, and today, abundantly shows. Epicurean
selfishness leads to weariness of all effort and work. If we are
unwise enough to make either of these our guides in life, the only
desirable end will be the utter cessation of being and consciousness.

But there is a better sense in which this paradoxical saying is simple
truth, and that sense is one which it is possible for us all to
realise. What sort of end would that be, the brightness of which would
far outshine the joy when a man-child is born into the world? Would it
not be a birth into a better life than that which fills and often
disturbs the 'threescore years and ten' here? Would it not be an end
to a course in which all our nature would be fully developed and all
opportunities of growth and activity had been used to the full? which
had secured all that we could possess? which had happy memories and
calm hopes? Would it not be an end which brought with it communion
with the Highest--joys that could never fade, activities that could
never weary? Surely the Christian heaven is better than earth; and
that heaven may be ours.

That supreme and perfect end will be reached by us through faith in
Christ, and through union by faith with Him. If we are joined to the
Lord and are one with Him, our end in glory will be as much better
than this our beginning on earth as the full glory of a summer's day
transcends the fogs and frosts of dreary winter. 'The path of the just
is as the shining light, which shineth more and more unto the perfect
day.'

If the end is not better than the beginning, it will be infinitely
worse. Golden opportunities will be gone; wasted years will be
irrevocable. Bright lights will be burnt out; sin will be graven on
the memory; remorse will be bitter; evil habits which cannot be
gratified will torment; a wearied soul, a darkened understanding, a
rebellious heart, will make the end awfully, infinitely, always worse
than the beginning. From all these Jesus Christ can save us; and, full
as He fills the cup of life as we travel along the road, He keeps the
best wine till the last, and makes 'the end of a thing better than the
beginning.'



MISUSED RESPITE

'Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily,
therefore the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do
evil'--ECCLES. viii. 11.


When the Pharaoh of the Exodus saw there was respite, he hardened his
heart. Abject in his fear before Moses, he was ready to promise
anything; insolent in his pride, he swallows down his promises as soon
as fear is eased, his repentance and his retractation of it combined
to add new weights about his neck. He was but a conspicuous example of
a universal fault. Every nation, I suppose, has its proverb scoffing
at the contrast between the sick man's vow and the recovered man's
sins. The bitter moralist of the Old Testament was sure not to let
such an instance of man's inconceivable levity pass unnoticed. His
settled habit of dragging to light the seamy side of human nature was
sure to fall on this illustration of it as congenial food. He has
wrapped up here in these curt, bitter words a whole theory of man's
condition, of God's providence, of its abuse, and of the end to which
it all tends.

I. Note the delay in executing sentence.

Every 'evil work' is already sentenced. 'He that believeth not,' said
Christ, 'is condemned already'; and that is one case of a general
truth. The text writes the sentence as passed, though the execution is
for a time suspended. What is the underlying fact expressed by this
metaphor? God's thorough knowledge of, and displeasure at, every evil.
When one sees vile things done on earth, and no bolt coming out of the
clear sky, it is not easy to believe that all the foulness is known to
God; but His eye reaches further than He wills to stretch His arm. He
sits a silent Onlooker and beholds; the silence does not argue
indifference. The sentence is pronounced, but the execution is
delayed. It is not wholly delayed, for there are consequences which
immediately dog our evil deeds, and are, as it were, premonitions of a
yet more complete penalty. But in the present order of things the
connection between a man's evil-doing and suffering is, on the whole,
slight, obscure, and partial. Evil triumphs; goodness not seldom
suffers. If one thinks for a moment of the manifold evils of the
world, which swathe it, as it were, in an atmosphere of woe--the wars,
the slavery, the oppressions, the private sorrows--and then thinks
that there is a God who lets all these go on from generation to
generation, we seem to be in the presence of a mystery of mysteries.
The Psalmist of old exclaimed in adoring wonder, 'Thy judgments are a
great deep'; but the absence of His judgments seems to open a
profounder abyss into which even the great mountains of His
righteousness appear in danger of falling.

II. The reasons for this delay.

It is not only a mystery, but it is a 'mystery of love.' We can see
but a little way into it, but we can see so far as to be sure that the
apparent passivity of God, which looks like leaving evil to work its
unhindered will, is the silence of a God who 'doth not willingly
afflict,' and is 'slow to anger,' because He is perfect love.

The ground of necessity for the delay in executing the sentence lies,
partly, in the probationary character of this present life. If
evil-doing was always followed by swift retribution, obedience would
be only the obedience of fear, and God does not desire such obedience.
It would be impossible that testing could go on at all if at every
instant the whole of the consequences of our actions were being
realised. Such a condition of things is unthinkable, and would be as
confusing, in the moral sphere, as if harvest weather and spring
weather were going on together. Again, the great reason why sentence
against an evil work is not executed speedily lies in God's own heart,
and His desire to win us to Himself by benefits. He does not seek
enforced obedience; He neither desires our being wedded to evil, nor
our being weighed upon by the consequences of our sin, and so He holds
back His hand. It is to be remembered that He not merely does thus
restrain the forthcoming of His hand of judgment, but, instead of it,
puts forth a hand of blessing. He moves around us wooing us to
Himself, and, in patience possessing His spirit, marks all our sins,
but loves and blesses still. He gives us the vineyard, though we do
not give Him the fruit. Still He is not angry, but sends His
messengers, and we stone them. Still He waits: we go on heaping year
upon year of rebellious forgetfulness, and no lightning flashes from
His eye, no exclamation of wearied-out patience, comes from His lips,
no rush of the sudden arrow from His long-stretched bow. The endless
patience of God has no explanation but only this, that He loves us too
well to leave any means untried to bring us to Him, and that He
lingers round us to win our hearts. O rare and unspeakable love, the
patient love of the patient God!

III. The abuse of this delay.

We have the knack of turning God's pure gifts into poison, and
practise a devilish chemistry by which we distil venom from the
flowers of Eden and the roses of the garden of God. I don't suppose
that to many men the respite which marks God's dealing with them
actually tends to doubts of His righteousness, or of His power, or of
His being. We have evidence enough of these; and the apparently
counter evidence, arising from the impunity of evil-doers, is fairly
enough laid aside by our moral instincts and consciousness, and by the
consideration that the mighty sweep of God's providence is too great
for us to decide on the whole circle by the small portion of the
circumference which we have seen. But what most men do is simply that
they permit impunity to deaden their sense of right and wrong, and go
on in their course without any serious thought of God's blessings, to
jostle Him out of their mind; they _'despise the riches of His
long-suffering goodness,'_ and never suffer it to _'lead them to
repentance.'_ To the unthinking minds of most of us, the long
continuance of impunity lulls us into a dream of its perpetuity. Man's
godless ingratitude is as deep a mystery as is God's loving patience.
It is strange that, with such constant failure of His love to win, God
should still persevere in it. For more than seventy times seven He
persists in forgiving the rebellious child who sins against Him, and
for more than seventy times seven the child persists in the abuse of
the Father's love, which still remains-an abuse of sin above all sins.

IV. The end of the delay.

The sentence is passed. It is impossible that it should not be
executed. When God has done all, and sees that the point of
hopelessness is reached, or when the time has for other reasons come,
then He lets the sentence take effect. He kept back the destroying
angels from Sodom, but He sent them forth at last. There is a point in
the history of nations and of men when iniquity is 'full,' and when
God sees that it is best, on world-wide grounds or personal ones, to
end it. So there come for nations and for individuals crises; and the
law for the divine working is, 'A short work will the Lord make on the
earth.' For long years Noah was building the ark, and exposed to the
scoffs of a generation whose sentence had been pronounced and not yet
executed; but the day came when he entered into its covert, and 'the
flood came and destroyed them all.' For generations He would fain have
gathered the people of Jerusalem to His bosom 'as a hen gathereth her
chickens under her wings, and they would not'; but the day came when
the Roman soldiers cast their torches into the beautiful house where
their fathers had praised Him, and sinned against Him, and it was left
unto them desolate. Let us not be high-minded nor victims of our
levity and inconsiderateness, but fear.

Let us remember too that the intensity of the execution is aggravated
by all the sins committed during the delay. By them we 'treasure wrath
against the day of wrath.' He says to His angels at last 'Now,' and
the sword falls, and justice is done. 'The mills of God grind slowly,
but they grind exceeding small.' The sum of the whole matter is, every
evil of ours is sentenced already; the punishment is delayed for our
sins, and because Christ has died. God is wooing our hearts, and
trying to win us to love Him by the holding back of the sentence which
we are daily abusing. Shall we not accept His forbearance and take His
gifts as tokens of the patient tenderness of His heart? Or are we to
be like 'the brutes that perish,' knowing neither the hand that feeds
them, nor the hand that kills them. The delay in rendering 'the just
recompence of reward' only aggravates its weight when it falls. As in
some levers, the slower the motion, the greater the force of the lift.



FENCES AND SERPENTS

'... Whoso breaketh an hedge, a serpent shall bite him.'--ECCLES. x.
8.


What is meant here is, probably, not such a hedge as we are accustomed
to see, but a dry-stone wall, or, perhaps, an earthen embankment, in
the crevices of which might lurk a snake to sting the careless hand.
The connection and purpose of the text are somewhat obscure. It is one
of a string of proverb-like sayings which all seem to be illustrations
of the one thought that every kind of work has its own appropriate and
peculiar peril. So, says the Preacher, if a man is digging a pit, the
sides of it may cave in and he may go down. If he is pulling down a
wall he may get stung. If he is working in a quarry there may be a
fall of rock. If he is a woodman the tree he is felling may crush him.
What then? Is the inference to be, Sit still and do nothing, because
you may get hurt whatever you do? By no means. The writer of this book
hates idleness very nearly as much as he does what he calls 'folly,'
and his inference is stated in the next verse--'Wisdom is profitable
to direct.' That is to say, since all work has its own dangers, work
warily, and with your brains as well as your muscles, and do not put
your hand into the hollow in the wall, until you have looked to see
whether there are any snakes in it. Is that very wholesome maxim of
prudence all that is meant to be learned? I think not. The previous
clause, at all events, embodies a well-known metaphor of the Old
Testament. 'He that diggeth a pit shall fall into it,' often occurs as
expressing the retribution in kind that comes down on the cunning
plotter against other men's prosperity, and the conclusion that wisdom
suggests in that application of the sentence is, 'Dig judiciously,'
but 'Do not dig at all.' And so in my text the 'wall' may stand for
the limitations and boundary-lines of our lives, and the inference
that wisdom suggests in that application of the saying is not 'Pull
down judiciously,' but 'Keep the fence up, and be sure you keep on the
right side of it.' For any attempt to pull it down--which being
interpreted is, to transgress the laws of life which God has
enjoined--is sure to bring out the hissing snake with its poison.

Now it is in that aspect that I want to look at the words before us.

I. First of all, let us take that thought which underlies my
text--that all life is given us rigidly walled up.

The first thing that the child learns is, that it must not do what it
likes. The last lesson that the old man has to learn is, you must do
what you ought. And between these two extremes of life we are always
making attempts to treat the world as an open common, on which we may
wander at our will. And before we have gone many steps, some sort of
keeper or other meets us and says to us, 'Trespassers, back again to
the road!' Life is rigidly hedged in and limited. To live as you like
is the prerogative of a brute. To live as you ought, and to recognise
and command by obeying the laws and limitations stamped upon our very
nature and enjoined by our circumstances, is the freedom and the glory
of a man. There are limitations, I say--fences on all sides. Men put
up their fences; and they are often like the wretched wooden hoardings
that you sometimes see limiting the breadth of a road. But in regard
to these conventional limitations and regulations, which own no higher
authority or lawgiver than society and custom, you must make up your
mind even more certainly than in regard of loftier laws, that if you
meddle with them, there will be plenty of serpents coming out to hiss
and bite. No man that defies the narrow maxims and petty restrictions
of conventional ways, and sets at nought the opinions of the people
round about him, but must make up his mind for backbiting and slander
and opposition of all sorts. It is the price that we pay for obeying
at first hand the laws of God and caring nothing for the
conventionalities of men.

But apart from that altogether, let me just remind you, in half a
dozen sentences, of the various limitations or fences which hedge up
our lives on every side. There are the obligations which we owe, and
the relations in which we stand, to the outer world, the laws of
physical life, and all that touches the external and the material.
There are the relations in which we stand, and the obligations which
we owe, to ourselves. And God has so made us as that obviously large
tracts of every man's nature are given to him on purpose to be
restrained, curbed, coerced, and sometimes utterly crushed and
extirpated. God gives us our impulses under lock and key. All our
animal desires, all our natural tendencies, are held on condition that
we exercise control over them, and keep them well within the rigidly
marked limits which He has laid down, and which we can easily find
out. There are, further, the relations in which we stand, and the
obligations and limitations, therefore, under which we come, to the
people round about us. High above them all, and in some sense
including them all, but loftier than these, there is the
all-comprehending relation in which we stand to God, who is the
fountain of all obligations, the source and aim of all duty, who
encompasses us on every side, and whose will makes the boundary walls
within which alone it is safe for a man to live.

We sometimes foolishly feel that a life thus hedged up, limited by
these high boundaries on either side, must be uninteresting,
monotonous, or unfree. It is not so. The walls are blessings, like the
parapet on a mountain road, that keeps the travellers from toppling
over the face of the cliff. They are training-walls, as our
hydro-graphical engineers talk about, which, built in the bed of a
river, wholesomely confine its waters and make a good scour which
gives life, instead of letting them vaguely wander and stagnate across
great fields of mud. Freedom consists in keeping willingly within the
limits which God has traced, and anything else is not freedom but
licence and rebellion, and at bottom servitude of the most abject
type.

II. So, secondly, note that every attempt to break down the
limitations brings poison into the life.

We live in a great automatic system which, by its own operation,
largely avenges every breach of law. I need not remind you, except in
a word, of the way in which the transgression of the plain physical
laws stamped upon our constitutions avenges itself; but the certainty
with which disease dogs all breaches of the laws of health is but a
type in the lower and material universe of the far higher and more
solemn certainty with which 'the soul that sinneth, it shall die.'
Wherever a man sets himself against any of the laws of this material
universe, they make short work of him. We command them, as I said, by
obeying them; and the difference between the obedience and the breach
of them is the difference between the engineer standing on his engine
and the wretch that is caught by it as it rushes over the rails. But
that is but a parable of the higher thing which I want to speak to you
about.

The grosser forms of transgression of the plain laws of temperance,
abstinence, purity, bring with them, in like manner, a visible and
palpable punishment in the majority of cases. Whoso pulls down the
wall of temperance, a serpent will bite him. Trembling hands, broken
constitutions, ruined reputations, vanished ambitions, wasted lives,
poverty, shame, and enfeebled will, death--these are the serpents that
bite, in many cases, the transgressor. I have a man in my eye at this
moment that used to sit in one of these pews, who came into Manchester
a promising young man, a child of many prayers, with the ball at his
foot, in one of your great warehouses, the only hope of his house,
professedly a Christian. He began to tamper with the wall. First a
tiny little bit of stone taken out that did not show the daylight
through; then a little bigger, and a bigger. And the serpent struck
its fangs into him, and if you saw him now, he is a shambling wreck,
outside of society, and, as we sometimes tremblingly think, beyond
hope. Young men! 'whoso breaketh an hedge, a serpent shall bite him.'

In like manner there are other forms of 'sins of the flesh avenged in
kind,' which I dare not speak about more plainly here. I see many
young men in my congregation, many strangers in this great city,
living, I suppose, in lodgings, and therefore without many restraints.
If you were to take a pair of compasses and place one leg of them down
at the Free Trade Hall, and take a circle of half a mile round there,
you would get a cavern of rattlesnakes. You know what I mean. Low
theatres, low music-halls, casinos, haunts of yet viler sorts--there
the snakes are, hissing and writhing and ready to bite. Do not 'put
your hand on the hole of the asp.' Take care of books, pictures,
songs, companions that would lead you astray. Oh for a voice to stand
at some doors that I know in Manchester, and peal this text into the
ears of the fools, men and women, that go in there!

I heard only this week of one once in a good position in this city,
and in early days, I believe, a member of my own congregation, begging
in rags from door to door. And the reason was, simply, the wall had
been pulled down and the serpent had struck. It always does; not with
such fatal external effects always, but be ye sure of this, 'God is
not mocked; "whatsoever a man," or a woman either, "soweth, that shall
he also reap."' For remember that there are other ways of pulling down
walls than these gross and palpable transgressions with the body; and
there are other sorts of retributions which come with unerring
certainty besides those that can be taken notice of by others. I do
not want to dwell upon these at any length, but let me just remind you
of one or two of them.

Some serpents' bites inflame, some paralyse; and one or other of these
two things--either an inflamed conscience or a palsied conscience--is
the result of all wrongdoing. I do not know which is the worst. There
are men and women now in this chapel, sitting listening to me, perhaps
half interested, without the smallest suspicion that I am talking
about them. The serpent's bite has led to the torpor of their
consciences. Which is the worse--to loathe my sin and yet to find its
slimy coils round about me, so that I cannot break it, or to have got
to like it and to be perfectly comfortable in it, and to have no
remonstrance within when I do it? Be sure of this, that every
transgression and disobedience acts immediately upon the conscience of
the doer, sometimes to stir that conscience into agonies of gnawing
remorse, more often to lull it into a fatal slumber.

I do not speak of the retributions which we heap upon ourselves in
loading our memories with errors and faults, in polluting them often
with vile imaginations, or in laying up there a lifelong series of
actions, none of which have ever had a trace of reference to God in
them. I do not speak, except in a sentence, of the retribution which
comes from the habit of evil which weighs upon men, and makes it all
but impossible for them ever to shake off their sin. I do not speak,
except in a sentence, of the perverted relations to God, the
incapacity of knowing Him, the disregard, and even sometimes the
dislike, of the thought of Him which steal across the heart of the man
that lives in evil and sin; but I put all into two words--every sin
that I do tells upon myself, inasmuch as its virus passes into my
blood as _guilt_ and as _habit_. And then I remind you of
what you say you believe, that beyond this world there lies the solemn
judgment-seat of God, where you and I have to give account of our
deeds. O brother, be sure of this, 'whoso breaketh an hedge'--here and
now, and yonder also--'a serpent shall bite him'!

That is as far as my text carries me. It has nothing more to say. Am I
to shut the book and have done? There is only one system that has
anything more to say, and that is the gospel of Jesus Christ.

III. And so, passing from my text, I have to say, lastly, All the
poison may be got out of your veins if you like.

Our Lord used this very same metaphor under a different aspect, and
with a different historical application, when He said, 'As Moses
lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, so must the Son of Man be
lifted up, that whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have
eternal life.'

There is Christ's idea of the condition of this world of ours--a camp
of men lying bitten by serpents and drawing near to death. What I have
been speaking about, in perhaps too abstract terms, is the condition
of each one of us. It is hard to get people, when they are gathered by
the hundred to listen to a sermon flung out in generalities, to
realise it. If I could get you one by one, and 'buttonhole' you; and
instead of the plural 'you' use the singular 'thou,' perhaps I could
reach you. But let me ask you to try and realise each for himself that
this serpent bite, as the issue of pulling down the wall, is true
about each soul in this place, and that Christ endorsed the
representation. How are we to get this poison out of the blood? Reform
your ways? Yes; I say that too; but reforming the life will deliver
from the poison in the character, when you cure hydrophobia by washing
the patient's skin, and not till then. It is all very well to repaper
your dining-rooms, but it is very little good doing that if the
drainage is wrong. It _is_ the drainage that is wrong with us
all. A man cannot reform himself down to the bottom of his sinful
being. If he could, it does not touch the past. That remains the same.
If he could, it does not affect his relation to God. Repentance--if it
were possible apart from the softening influence of faith in Jesus
Christ--repentance alone would not solve the problem. So far as men
can see, and so far as all human systems have declared, 'What I have
written I have written.' There is no erasing it. The irrevocable past
stands stereotyped for ever. Then comes in this message of forgiveness
and cleansing, which is the very heart of all that we preachers have
to say, and has been spoken to most of you so often that it is almost
impossible to invest it with any kind of freshness or power. But once
more I have to preach to you that Christ has received into His own
inmost life and self the whole gathered consequences of a world's sin;
and by the mystery of His sympathy, and the reality of His mysterious
union with us men, He, the sinless Son of God, has been made sin for
us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in Him. The brazen
serpent lifted on the pole was in the likeness of the serpent whose
poison slew, but there was no poison in it. Christ has come, the
sinless Son of God, for you and me. He has died on the Cross, the
Sacrifice for every man's sin, that every man's wound might be healed,
and the poison cast out of his veins. He has bruised the malignant,
black head of the snake with His wounded heel; and because He has been
wounded, we are healed of our wounds. For sin and death launched their
last dart at Him, and, like some venomous insect that can sting once
and then must die, they left their sting in His wounded heart, and
have none for them that put their trust in Him.

So, dear brother, here is the simple condition--namely, faith. One
look of the languid eye of the poisoned man, howsoever bloodshot and
dim it might be, and howsoever nearly veiled with the film of death,
was enough to make him whole. The look of our consciously sinful souls
to that dear Christ that has died for us will take away the guilt, the
power, the habit, the love of evil; and, instead of blood saturated
with the venom of sin, there will be in our veins the Spirit of life
in Christ, which will 'make us free from the law of sin and death.'
'Look unto Him and be ye saved, all the ends of the earth!'



THE WAY TO THE CITY

'The labour of the foolish wearieth every one of them, because he
knoweth not how to go to the city.'--ECCLES. x. 15.


On the surface this seems to be merely a piece of homely, practical
sagacity, conjoined with one of the bitter things which Ecclesiastes
is fond of saying about those whom he calls 'fools.' It seems to
repeat, under another metaphor, the same idea which has been presented
in a previous verse, where we read: 'If the iron be blunt, and he do
not whet the edge, then must he put to more strength; but wisdom is
profitable to direct.' That is to say, skill is better than strength;
brain saves muscle; better sharpen your axe than put yourself into a
perspiration, hitting fierce blows with a blunt one. The prerogative
of wisdom is to guide brute force. And so in my text the same general
idea comes under another figure. Immense effort may end in nothing but
tired feet if the traveller does not know his road. A man lost in the
woods may run till he drops, and find himself at night in the place
from which he started in the morning. The path must be known, and the
aim clear, if any good is to come of effort.

That phrase, 'how to go to the city,' seems to be a kind of proverbial
comparison for anything that is very plain and conspicuous, just as
our forefathers used to say about any obvious truth, that it was 'as
plain as the road to London town.' The road to the capital is sure to
be a well-marked one, and he must be a fool indeed who cannot see
that. So our text, though on the surface, as I say, is simply a
sarcasm and a piece of homely, practical sagacity, yet, like almost
all the sayings in this Book of Ecclesiastes, it has a deeper meaning
than appears on the surface; and may be applied in higher and more
important directions. It carries with it large truths, and enshrines
in a vivid metaphor bitter experiences which, I suppose, we can all
confirm.

I. We consider, first, the toil that tires.

'The labour wearies every one of them.' The word translated 'labour'
seems to carry with it both the idea of effort and of trouble. Or to
recur to a familiar distinction in modern English, the word really
covers both the ground of work and of worry. And it is a sad and
solemn thought that a word with that double element in it should be
the one which is most truly applicable to the efforts of a large
majority of men. I suppose there never was a time in the world's
history when life went so fast as it does in these great centres of
civilisation and commerce in which you and I live. And it is awful to
have to think that the great mass of it all ends in nothing else but
tired limbs and exhaustion. That is a truth to be verified by
experience, and I am bold to believe that every man and woman in this
chapel now can say more or less distinctly 'Amen!' to the assertion
that every life, except a distinctly and supremely religious one, is
worry and work without adequate satisfying result, and with no lasting
issue but exhaustion.

Let us begin at the bottom. For instance, take a man who has avowedly
flung aside the restraints of right and wrong and conscience, and does
things habitually that he knows to be wrong. Every sin is a blunder as
well as a crime. No man who aims at an end through the smoke of hell
gets the end that he aims at. Or if he does, he gets something that
takes all the gilt off the gingerbread, and all the sweetness out of
the success. They put a very evil-tasting ingredient into spirits of
wine to prevent its being drunk. The cup that sin reaches to a man,
though the wine moveth itself aright and is very pleasant to look at
before being tasted, cheats with _methylated_ spirits. Men and
women take more pains and trouble to damn themselves than ever they do
to have their souls saved. The end of all work, which begins with
tossing conscience on one side, is simply this--'The labour of the
foolish wearieth every one of them.'

Take a step higher--a respectable, well-to-do Manchester man,
successful in business. He has made it his aim to build up a large
concern, and has succeeded. He has a fine house, carriages,
greenhouses; he has 'J.P.' to his name; he stands high in credit and
on Change. His name is one that gives respectability to anything that
it is connected with. Has he 'come to the city'? Has he got what he
thought he would get when he began his career? He has succeeded in his
immediate and smaller purpose; has that immediate and smaller purpose
succeeded in bringing him what he thought it would bring him? Or has
he fallen a victim to those--

  'juggling fiends ...
  That palter with us in a double sense;
  That keep the word of promise to the ear,
  And break it to the hope?'

They tell us that if you put down in one column the value of the ore
that has been extracted from all the Australian gold-mines, and in
another the amount that it has cost to get it, the latter sum will
exceed the former. There are plenty of people in Manchester who have
put more down into the pit from which they dig their wealth than ever
they will get out of it. And their labour, too, leaves a very dark and
empty aching centre in their lives, 'and wearieth every one of them.'
And so I might go the whole round. We students, so long as our pursuit
of knowledge has not in it as supreme, directing motive, and ultimate
aim and issue, the glory and the service of God, come under the lash
of the same condemnation as those grosser and lower forms of life of
which I have been speaking. But wherever we look, if there be not in
the heart and in the life a supreme regard to God and a communion with
Him, then this characteristic is common to all the courses, that,
whilst they may each meet some immediate and partial necessity of our
natures, none of them is adequate for the whole circumference of a
man's being, nor any of them able, during the whole duration of that
being, to be his satisfaction and his rest. Therefore, I say, all
toil, however successful to the view of a shorter range of vision, and
however noble--excluding the noblest of all--all toil that ends only
in securing that which perishes with the using, or that which we leave
behind us here when we pass hence, is condemned for folly and labour
that wearies the men who are fools enough to surrender themselves to
it.

I need not remind you of the wonderful variety of metaphor under which
that threadbare thought, which yet it is so hard for us to believe and
make operative in our lives, is represented to us in Scripture. Just
let me recall one or two of them in the briefest way. 'Why do ye spend
your money for that which is not bread, and your labour for that which
profiteth not?' 'They have hewn for themselves cisterns, broken
cisterns that can hold no water.' 'Their webs shall not become
garments.' That may want a word of explanation. The metaphor is this.
You are all like spiders spinning carefully and diligently your web.
There is not substance enough in it to make a coat out of. You will
never cover yourselves with the product of your own brains or your own
efforts. There is no clothing in the spider's webs of a godless life.

Ah! brother, all these earthly aims which some of my friends listening
to me now have for the _sole_ aims of their lives, are as foolish
and as inadequate to accomplish that which is sought for by them, as
it would be to seek to quench raging thirst by lifting to the lips a
golden cup that is empty. Some of us have a whole sideboard full of
such, and vary our pursuits according to inclination and task. Some of
us have only one such, but they are all empty, and the lip is parched
after the cup has been lifted to it as it was before.

II. And so, consider now, secondly, the foolish ignorance that makes
the toil tiresome.

The metaphor of my text says that the reason why the 'fool' is so
wearied after the day's march is that he does not in the morning
settle where he is going, and how he is to get there; and so, having
started to go nowhither, he has got where he started for. He 'does not
know how to go to the city'--which, being translated into plain and
unmetaphorical English, is just this, that many men wreck their lives
for want of a clear sight of their true aim, and of the way to secure
it.

There is nothing more tragical than the absence, in the great bulk of
men, of anything like deliberate, definite views as to their aim in
life, and the course to be taken to secure it. There are two things
obviously necessary for success in any enterprise. One is, that there
shall be the most definite and clear conception of what is aimed at;
and the other, that there shall be a wisely considered plan to get at
it. Unless there be these, if you go at random, running a little way
for a moment in this direction, and then heading about and going in
the other, you cannot expect to get to the goal.

Now, what I want to ask some of my friends here is, Did you ever give
ten deliberate minutes to try to face for yourselves, and put into
plain words, what you are living for, and how you mean to secure it?
Of course I know that you have given thought and planning in plenty to
the nearer aims, without which material life cannot be lived at all. I
do not suppose that anybody here is chargeable with not having thought
enough about how to get on in business, or in their chosen walk of
life. It is not that kind of aim which I mean at all; but it is a
point beyond it that I want to press upon you. You are like men who
would carefully victual a ship and take the best information for their
guide as to what course to lie, and had never thought what they were
going to do when they got to the port. So you say, 'I am going to be
such-and-such a thing.' Well, what then? 'Well, I am going to lay
myself out for success.' Be it commercial, be it intellectual, be it
social, be it in the sphere of the affections, or whatever it may be.
Well, what then? 'Well, then I am going to advance in material
prosperity, I hope, or in wisdom, or to be surrounded by loving faces
of children and those that are dear to me.' What then? 'Then I am
going to die.' What then?

It is not till you get to that last question, and have faced it and
answered it, that you can be said to have taken the whole sweep of the
circumstances into view, and regulated your course according to the
dictates of common sense and right reason. And a terribly large number
of us live with careful adaptation of means to ends in regard of all
the smaller and more immediately to be realised aims of life, but have
never faced the larger question which reduces all these smaller aims
to insignificance. The simple child's interrogation which in the
well-known ballad ripped the tinsel off the skeleton, and showed war
in its hideousness, strips many of your lives of all pretence to be
reasonable. 'What good came of it at the last?' Can you answer the
question that the infant lips asked, and say, 'This good will come of
it at last. That I shall have God for my own, and Jesus Christ in my
heart'?

Brother! if I could only get you to this point, that you would take
half an hour now to think over what you ought to be, and to ask
yourself whether your aims in life correspond to what your aims should
be, I should have done more than I am afraid I shall do with some of
you. The naturalist can tell when he picks up a skeleton something of
the habits and the element of the creature to which it belonged. If it
has a hollow _sternum_ he knows it is meant to fly. On your
nature is impressed unmistakably that your destiny is not to creep,
but to soar. Not in vain does the Westminster Catechism lay the
foundation of everything in this, the prime question for all men,
'What is the chief end of man?' Ask that, and do not rest till you
have answered it.

Then there is another idea connected with this ignorance of my
text--viz. that it is the result of folly. Now the words 'folly' and
'foolish' and 'foolishness,' and their opposites, 'wisdom' and 'wise,'
in this Book of Ecclesiastes, as in the Book of Proverbs, do not mean
merely dull stupidity intellectually, which is a thing for which a man
is to be pitied rather than to be blamed, but they always carry
besides the idea of intellectual defect, also the idea of moral
obliquity. 'The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom'; and,
conversely, the absence of that fear is the foundation of that which
this writer stigmatises as 'folly' He is not merely sneering at men
with small brains and little judgments. There may be plenty of us who
are so, and yet are wise unto salvation and possessed of a far higher
wisdom than that of this world. But he tells us that so strangely
intertwined are the intellectual and moral parts of our nature, that
wheresoever there is the obscuration of the latter there is sure to be
the perversion of the former, and the man knows not 'how to go to the
city' because he is 'foolish.'

That is to say, you go wrong in your judgment about your conduct
because you have gone wrong morally. And your blunders about life, and
your ignorance of its true end and aim, and your mistakes as to how to
secure happiness and blessedness, are your own faults, and are owing
to the aversion of your nature from that which is highest and noblest,
even God and His service. Therefore you are not only to be pitied
because you are out of the road, but to be blamed because you have
darkened the eyes of your mind by loving the darkness rather than the
light. And you 'do not know how to go to the city,' because you do not
want to go to the city, and would rather huddle here in the
wilderness, and live upon its poor supplies, than pass within the
golden gates. My brethren! the folly which blinds a man to his true
aim and mission in life is a folly which has in it the darker aspect
of sin, and is punishable as such.

III. Lastly, note the plain path which the foolish miss.

He 'does not know how to go to the city.' What on earth will he be
able to see if he cannot see that broad highway, beaten and white,
stretching straight before him, over hill and dale, and going right to
the gates? A man must be a fool who cannot find the way to London.

The principles of moral conduct are trite and obvious. It is plain
that it is better to be good than bad. It is better to be unselfish
than selfish. It is better not to live for things that perish, seeing
that we are going to last for ever. It is better not to make the flesh
our master here, seeing that the spirit will have to live without the
flesh some day. It is better to get into training for the world to
coma, seeing that we are all drifting thither. All these things are
plain and obvious.

Man's destiny for God is unmistakable. 'Whose image and superscription
hath it?' said Christ about the coin. 'Caesar's!' 'Then give it to
Caesar.' Whose image and superscription hath my heart, this restless
heart of mine, this spirit that wanders on through space and time,
homeless and comfortless, until it can grasp the Eternal? Who are you
meant for? God! And every fibre of your nature has a voice to say so
to you if you listen to it. So, then, a godless life such as some of
you, my hearers, are contentedly living, ignores facts that are most
patent to every man's experience. And while before you, huge 'as a
mountain, open, palpable,' are the commonplaces and undeniable
verities which declare that every man who is not a God-fearing man is
a fool, you admit them all, and, bowing your heads in reverence, let
them all go over you and produce no effect.

The road is clearer than ever since Jesus Christ came. He has shown us
the city, for He has brought life and immortality to light by the
Gospel. He has shown us the road, for His life is the pattern of all
that men ought to aim at and to be. The motto of the eternal Son of
God, if I may venture upon such a metaphor, is like the motto of the
heir-apparent of the English throne, 'I serve.' Lo! 'I come to do Thy
will'--and that is the only word which will make a human life peaceful
and strong and beautiful. In the presence of His radiant and solitary
perfection, men no longer need to wonder, What is the ideal to which
conduct and character should be conformed? And Jesus Christ has come
to make it possible to go to the city, by that cross on which He bore
the burden of all sin, and takes away the sin of the world, and by
that Spirit of life which He will impart to our weakness, and which
makes our sluggish feet run in the way of His commandments, and not be
weary, and walk and not faint.

Take that dear Lord for your revelation of duty, for your Pattern of
conduct, for the forgiveness of your sins, for the Inspirer with power
to do His will, and then you will see stretching before you, high up
above the surrounding desert, so that no lion nor ravenous beast shall
go up there, the highway on which the ransomed of the Lord shall walk,
'and the wayfaring man, though a fool, shall not err therein.'
'Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may enter in
through the gates into the City.'



A NEW YEARS SERMON TO THE YOUNG

'Rejoice, O young man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in
the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the
sight of thine eyes: but know thou, that for all these things God will
bring thee into judgment.... Remember now thy Creator in the days of
thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when
thou shalt say, I have no pleasure in them.'--ECCLES. xi. 9; xii. 1.


This strange, and in some places perplexing Book of Ecclesiastes, is
intended to be the picture of a man fighting his way through
perplexities and half-truths to a clear conviction in which he can
rest. What he says in his process of coming to that conviction is not
always to be taken as true. Much that is spoken in the earlier portion
of the Book is spoken in order to be confuted, and its insufficiency,
its exaggerations, its onesidedness, and its half-truths, to be
manifest in the light of the ultimate conclusion to which he comes.
Through all these perplexities he goes on 'sounding his dim and
perilous way,' with pitfalls on this side of him and bogs on that,
till he comes out at last upon the open way, with firm ground under
foot and a clear sky overhead. These phrases which I have taken are
the opening sentences and the final conclusion on which he rests. How
then are they meant to be understood? Is that saying, 'Rejoice, O
young man! in the days of thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in
the days of thy youth, and walk in the ways of thine heart and in the
