son of his would be capable of bearing like the Vindhya mountains the
weapons of the foe, he should be called Prativindhya. And because the
child that Draupadi bore to Bhimasena was born after Bhima had performed a
thousand Soma sacrifices, he came to be called Sutasoma. And because
Arjuna's son was born upon his return from exile during which he had
achieved many celebrated feats, that child came to be called Srutakarman.
While Nakula named his son Satanika after a royal sage of that name, in
the illustrious race of Kuru. Again the son that Draupadi bore to Sahadeva
was born under the constellation called Vahni-daivata (Krittika),
therefore was he called after the generalissimo of the celestial host,
Srutasena (Kartikeya). The sons of Draupadi were born, each at the
interval of one year, and all of them became renowned and much attached to
one another. And, O monarch, all their rites of infancy and childhood,
such as Chudakarana and Upanayana (first shave of the head and investiture
with the sacred threads) were performed by Dhaumya according to the
ordinance. All of them, of excellent behaviour and vows, after having
studied the Vedas, acquired from Arjuna a knowledge of all the weapons,
celestial and human. And, O tiger among kings, the Pandavas, having
obtained sons all of whom were equal unto the children of the celestials
and endued with broad chests, and all of whom became great warriors, were
filled with joy.'"


SECTION CCXXIV

(Khandava-daha Parva)

"Vaisampayana said, 'The Pandavas, after they had taken up their abode at
Indraprastha at the command of Dhritarashtra and Bhishma began to bring
other kings under their sway. All the subjects (of the kingdom) lived most
happily depending upon Yudhishthira the just, like a soul living happily
depending upon a body blest with auspicious marks and pious deeds. And, O
bull in Bharata's race, Yudhishthira paid homage unto virtue, pleasure,
and profit, in judicious proportion, as if each were a friend dear unto
him as his own self. It seemed as if the three pursuits--virtue, pleasure,
and profit--became personified on earth, and amongst them the king shone
as a fourth. The subjects having obtained Yudhishthira as their king,
obtained in their monarch one that was devoted to the study of the Vedas,
one that was performer of the great sacrifices, and one that was protector
of all good people. In consequence of Yudhishthira's influence, the good
fortune of all the monarchs of the earth became stationary, and their
hearts became devoted to the meditation of the Supreme Spirit, and virtue
itself began to grow every way all round. And in the midst of and assisted
by his four brothers, the king looked more resplendent (than he would have
done if he were alone), like a great sacrifice depending upon and assisted
by the four Vedas. Many learned Brahmanas with Dhananjaya at their head,
each like unto Vrihaspati, waited upon the monarch, like the celestials
waiting upon the Lord of the creation. From excess of affection, the eyes
and hearts of all the people equally took great delight in Yudhishthira
who was even as the full moon without a stain. The people took delight in
him not only because he was their king but also from sincere affection.
The king always did what was agreeable to them. The sweet-speeched
Yudhishthira of great intelligence never uttered anything that was
improper or untrue or unbearable or disagreeable. The best of monarchs of
the Bharata race, endued with great energy, passed his days happily for
the welfare of all as his own. His brothers also bringing by their energy
other kings under their sway, passed their days in happiness, without a
foe to disturb their peace.

"'After a few days, Vibhatsu, addressing Krishna, said, "The summer days
have set in, O Krishna! Therefore, let us go to the banks of the Yamuna. O
slayer of Madhu, sporting there in the company of friends, we will, O
Janardana, return in the evening." Thereupon Vasudeva said, "O son of
Kunti, this is also my wish. Let us, O Partha, sport in the waters as we
please, in the company of friends."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Then, O Bharata, having consulted thus with each
other, Partha and Govinda, with Yudhishthira's leave, set out, surrounded
by friends. Reaching a fine spot (on the banks of the Yamuna) suitable for
purposes of pleasure, overgrown with numerous tall trees and covered with
several high mansions that made the place look like the celestial city and
within which had been collected for Krishna and Partha numerous costly and
well-flavoured viands and drinks and other articles of enjoyment and
floral wreaths and various perfumes, the party entered without delay the
inner apartments adorned with many precious gems of pure rays. Entering
those apartments, everybody, O Bharata, began to sport, according to his
pleasure. The women of the party, all of full rotund hips and deep bosoms
and handsome eyes, and gait unsteady with wine began to sport there at the
command of Krishna and Partha. Some amongst the women sported as they
liked in the woods, some in the waters, and some within the mansions, as
directed by Partha and Govinda. Draupadi and Subhadra, exhilarated with
wine, began to give away unto the women so sporting, their costly robes
and ornaments. And some amongst those women began to dance in joy, and
some began to sing; and some amongst them began to laugh and jest, and
some to drink excellent wines. Some began to obstruct one another's
progress and some to fight with one another, and to discourse with one
another in private. Those mansions and the woods, filled with the charming
music of flutes and guitars and kettledrums, became the scene of
Prosperity personified.

"'When such was the state of things there, Arjuna and Vasudeva went to a
certain charming spot (in those woods) not far from the place where the
others were. O monarch, the high-souled Krishna, and that subjugator of
hostile cities, viz., Arjuna, going thither, sat down upon two very costly
seats. Vasudeva and Partha amused themselves there with discoursing upon
many past achievements of prowess and other topics. Unto Vasudeva and
Dhananjaya happily sitting there like the Aswins in heaven, a certain
Brahmana came. The Brahmana that came there looked like a tall Sala tree.
His complexion was like unto molten gold; his beard was bright yellow
tinged with green; and the height and the thickness of the body were in
just proportion. Of matted locks and dressed in rags, he resembled the
morning sun in splendour. Of eyes like lotus-petals and of a tawny hue, he
seemed to be blazing with effulgence. Beholding that foremost of Brahmanas
blazing with splendour approach towards them both Arjuna and Vasudeva,
hastily rising from their seats, stood, waiting (for his commands).'"


SECTION CCXXV

(Khandava-daha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Then that Brahmana addressed Arjuna and Vasudeva of
the Satwata race, saying, "Ye who are now staying so near unto Khandava
are the two foremost of heroes on earth. I am a voracious Brahmana that
always eateth much. O thou of the Vrishni race, and O Partha, I solicit
you to gratify me by giving me sufficient food." Thus addressed by the
Brahmana, Krishna and the son of Pandu answered him, saying, "O, tell us
what kind of food will gratify thee so that we may endeavour to give it
thee." The illustrious Brahmana, thus replied to, said unto those heroes
who were enquiring after the kind of food he sought, "I do not desire to
eat ordinary food. Know that I am Agni! Give me that food which suiteth me.
This forest of Khandava is always protected by Indra. And as it is
protected by the illustrious one, I always fail to consume it. In that
forest dwelleth, with his followers and family, a Naga, called Takshaka,
who is the friend of Indra. It is for him that the wielder of the
thunderbolt protecteth this forest. Many other creatures also are thus
protected here for the sake of Takshaka. Desiring to consume the forest I
succeed not in my attempts in consequence of Indra's prowess. Beholding me
blazing forth, he always poureth upon me water from the clouds. Therefore,
I succeed not in consuming the forest of Khandava, although I desire very
much to do so. I have now come to you--you who are both skilled in
weapons! If you help me I will surely consume this forest: for even this
is the food that is desired by me! As ye are conversant with excellent
weapons, I pray you to prevent those showers from descending and any of
the creatures from escaping, when I begin to consume this forest!"'

"Janamejaya said, 'Why did the illustrious Agni desire to consume the
forest of Khandava that was filled with various living creatures and
protected by the chief of the celestials? When Agni consumed in wrath the
forest of Khandava, it is evident there was a grave cause. I desire, O
Brahmana, to hear all this in detail from thee. Tell me, O sage, how the
Khandava forest was consumed in days of yore.'

"Vaisampayana said, 'O chief of men, I will narrate to you the story of
the conflagration of Khandava as told by Rishis in the Purana. It hath
been heard, O king, in the Purana that there was a celebrated king of the
name of Swetaki who was endued with strength and prowess and who was equal
unto Indra himself. No one on earth has equalled him in sacrifices,
charity, and intelligence. Swetaki performed the five great sacrifices and
many others, at all of which the presents unto Brahmanas were large. The
heart of that monarch, O king, was always set upon sacrifices, religious
rites, and gifts of all kinds. And king Swetaki of great intelligence,
assisted by his Ritwiks performed sacrifices for many long years, till
those sacrificial priests with eyes afflicted by the continued smoke and
becoming very weak, left that monarch, wishing never more to assist at his
sacrifices. The king, however, repeatedly asked those Ritwiks to come to
him. But they came not to his sacrifice in consequence of the painful
state of their eyes. The king, therefore, invited at the command of his
own Ritwiks, others like unto them, and completed the sacrifice that he
had begun. After some days had elapsed, king Swetaki desired to perform
another sacrifice which should extend for a hundred years. But the
illustrious monarch obtained not any priest to assist him in it. The
celebrated king then, with his friends and relatives, casting off all
sloth, repeatedly courted his priests with great persistence, by bowing
down unto them, by conciliatory speeches, and by gifts of wealth. All of
them, however, refused to accomplish the purpose which that king of
immeasurable energy had in view. Then that royal sage, getting angry,
addressed those Brahmanas sitting in their asylums, and said, "If, ye
Brahmanas, I were a fallen person, or, if, I were wanting in homage and
service to you, I should then deserve to be abandoned without scruple by
you and by other Brahmanas at the same time. But as I am neither degraded
nor wanting in homage to you, it behoveth you not to obstruct the
performance by me of my sacrifice or to abandon me thus, ye foremost of
Brahmanas, without adequate reason. I seek, ye Brahmanas, your protection!
It behoveth you to be propitious unto me. But, ye foremost of Brahmanas,
if you abandon me from enmity alone or any improper motive, I shall go
unto other priests for their assistance in this sacrifice of mine, and
conciliating them by sweet words and gifts, I shall represent unto them
the business I have on hand, so that they may accomplish it." Having said
this, the monarch became silent. And, O chastiser of foes, when those
priests well knew that they could not assist at the king's sacrifice, they
pretended to be angry, and addressing that best of monarchs said, "O best
of kings, thy sacrifices are incessant! By assisting thee always, we have
all been fatigued. And as we have been wearied in consequence of these
labours, it behoveth thee to give us leave. O sinless one, from loss of
judgment thou canst not wait (but urgest us repeatedly). Go unto Rudra! He
will assist at thy sacrifice!" Hearing those words of censure and wrath,
king Swetaki became angry. And the monarch wending to the mountains of
Kailasa, devoted himself to asceticism there. And, O king, the monarch
began to worship Mahadeva, with fixed attention, and by observing the most
rigid vows. And foregoing all food at times, he passed a long period. The
monarch ate only fruits and roots sometimes at the twelfth and sometimes
at the sixteenth hour of the whole day. King Swetaki stood for six months,
rapt in attention, with arms upraised and steadfast eyes, like the trunk
of a tree or a column rooted to the ground. And, O Bharata, Sankara at
last gratified with that tiger among kings, who was undergoing such hard
penances, showed himself unto him. And the god spake unto the monarch in a
calm and grave voice, saying, "O tiger among kings, O chastiser of foes, I
have been gratified with thee for thy asceticism! Blest be thou! Ask now
the boon that thou, O king, desirest." Hearing these words of Rudra of
immeasurable energy, the royal sage bowed unto that deity and replied,
saying, "O illustrious one, O thou that art worshipped by the three worlds,
if thou hast been gratified with me, then, O god of gods, assist me
thyself, O lord of the celestials, in my sacrifice!" Hearing these words
spoken by the monarch, the illustrious god was gratified, and smilingly
said, "We do not ourselves assist at sacrifices: but as thou, O king, hast
undergone severe penances, desirous of obtaining a boon, I will, O
chastiser of foes, assist at thy sacrifice, upon, O king, this condition."
And Rudra continued, "If, O king of kings, thou canst, for twelve years,
pour without intermission libations of clarified butter into the fire,
thyself leading all the while the life of a Brahmacharin with rapt
attention, then thou shalt obtain from me what thou askest." King Swetaki,
thus addressed by Rudra, did all that he was directed to do by the wielder
of the trident. And after twelve years had elapsed, he again came unto
Maheswara. And Sankara, the Creator of the worlds upon seeing Swetaki,
that excellent monarch, immediately said, in great gratification, "I have
been gratified by thee, O best of kings, with this thy own act! But, O
chastiser of foes, the duty of assisting at sacrifices properly belongeth
to Brahmanas. Therefore, O oppressor of foes, I will not myself assist at
thy sacrifice today. There is on earth an exalted Brahmana who is even a
portion of my own self. He is known by the name of Durvasa. Even that
Brahmana endued with great energy will assist you in thy sacrifice. Let,
therefore, every preparation be made." Hearing these words uttered by
Rudra, the king, returning to his own capital, began to collect all that
was necessary. After everything had been collected, the monarch again
presented himself before Rudra and said, "Every necessary article hath
been collected, and all my preparations are complete, through thy grace, O
god of gods! Let me, therefore, be installed at the sacrifice tomorrow."
Having heard these words of that illustrious king, Rudra summoned Durvasa
before him and said. "This, O Durvasa, is that best of monarchs called
Swetaki. At my command, O best of Brahmanas, assist even this king in his
sacrifice." And the Rishi Durvasa said unto Rudra, "So be it." Then the
sacrifice for which king Swetaki had made those preparations, took place.
And the illustrious monarch's sacrifice was performed according to the
ordinance and in proper season. And the gifts, on that occasion, unto the
Brahmanas were large. And after that monarch's sacrifice had come to an
end, all the other priests who had come to assist at it went away with
Durvasa's leave. All other Sadasyas also of immeasurable energy, who had
been installed at that sacrifice, then went away. That exalted monarch
then entered his own palace, worshipped by exalted Brahmanas conversant
with the Vedas, eulogised by chanters of panegyrical hymns and
congratulated by the citizens.

"'Such was the history of that best of monarchs, the royal sage Swetaki,
who, when the time came, ascended to heaven, having won great renown on
earth, and accompanied by the Ritwiks and the Sadasyas that had helped him
in life.'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'At that sacrifice of Swetaki, Agni had drunk
clarified butter for twelve years. Indeed, clarified butter had been
poured into Agni's mouth in a continuous stream for that period. Having
drunk so much butter, Agni, satiated, desired not to drink butter again
from the hand of anybody else at any other sacrifice. Agni became pale,
having lost his colour, and he could not shine as before. He felt a loss
of appetite from surfeit, and his energy itself decreased and sickness
afflicted him. Then when the drinker of sacrificial libations perceived
that his energy was gradually diminishing, he went to the sacred abode of
Brahman that is worshipped by all. Approaching the great Deity seated on
his seat, Agni said, "O exalted one, Swetaki hath (by his sacrifice)
gratified me to excess. Even now I am suffering from surfeit which I
cannot dispel. O Lord of the universe, I am being reduced both in
splendour and strength. I desire to regain, through thy grace, my own
permanent nature." Hearing these words from Hutavaha, the illustrious
Creator of all things smilingly replied unto him, saying, "O exalted one,
thou hast eaten, for twelve years, a continuous stream of sacrificial
butter poured into thy mouth! It is for this that illness hath seized thee.
But, O Agni, grieve not for it. Thou shalt soon regain thy own nature. I
shall dispel this surfeit of thine and the time for it is even come. The
dreadful forest Khandava, that abode of the enemies of the gods, which
thou hadst of old once consumed to ashes at the request of the gods, hath
now become the home of numerous creatures. When thou will have eaten the
fat of those creatures, thou shalt regain thy own nature. Proceed thither
in haste to consume that forest with its living population. Thou wilt then
be cured of thy malady." Hearing the words that fell from the lips of the
Supreme Deity, Hutasana proceeded with great speed and soon reached the
forest of Khandava in great vigour. Arrived there, he suddenly blazed
forth in anger, assisted by Vayu. Beholding Khandava on fire the dwellers
(in the forest) that were there, made great efforts to extinguish the
conflagration. Elephants by hundreds of thousands, speeding in anger,
brought water in their trunks and scattered it upon the fire. Thousands of
many-hooded snakes, mad with anger, hastily began to scatter upon fire
much water from those many hoods of theirs. And so, O bull of Bharata's
race, the other creatures dwelling in that forest, by various appliances
and efforts, soon extinguished the fire. In this way, Agni blazed forth in
Khandava repeatedly, even for seven times. And it was in this way that the
blazing fire was extinguished there as often by the denizens of that
forest.'"


SECTION CCXXVI

(Khandava-daha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Then Havyavahana (Agni) in anger and disappointment,
with his ailment uncured, went to the Grandsire. And he represented unto
Brahman all that had happened: The illustrious deity, reflecting for a
moment, said unto him, "O sinless one, I see a way by which thou mayest
consume the forest of Khandava today in the very sight of Indra. Those old
deities, Nara and Narayana, have become incarnate in the world of men to
accomplish the business of the celestials. They are called on earth Arjuna
and Vasudeva. They are even now staying in the forest of Khandava. Solicit
them for aiding thee in consuming that forest. Thou shalt then consume the
forest even if it be protected by the celestials. They will certainly
prevent the population of Khandava from escaping, and thwart Indra also
(in aiding any one in the escape). I have no doubt of this!" Hearing these
words, Agni came in haste unto Krishna and Partha. O king, I have already
told thee what he said, having approached the illustrious pair. O tiger
among kings, hearing those words of Agni who was desirous of consuming the
forest of Khandava against the will of Indra, Vibhatsu said unto him these
words well-suited to the occasion, "I have numberless excellent celestial
weapons with which I can fight even many wielders of the thunderbolt. But,
O exalted one, I have no bow suited to the strength of my arms, and
capable of bearing the might I may put forth in battle. In consequence of
the lightness of my hands also I require arrows that must never be
exhausted. My car also is scarcely able to bear the load of arrows that I
would desire to keep by me. I desire celestial steeds of pure white,
possessing the speed of the wind; and a car possessing the splendour of
the sun and the clatter of whose wheels should resemble the roar of the
clouds. Then, there is no weapon suited to Krishna's energy and with which
Madhava can slay Nagas and Pisachas. O exalted one, it behoveth thee to
give us the means by which success may be achieved and by which we may
thwart Indra in pouring his showers upon that extensive forest. O Pavaka,
we are ready to do all that manliness and prowess can do. But, O exalted
one, it behoveth thee to give us the adequate means."'"


SECTION CCXXVII

(Khandava-daha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Thus addressed by Arjuna, the smoke-bannered
Hutasana, desirous of an interview with Varuna, recollected that son of
Aditi,--that deity protecting one of the points of the heavens and having
his home in the water and ruling that element. Varuna, knowing that he was
thought of by Pavaka, immediately appeared before that deity. The smoke-
bannered celestial welcoming with reverence the ruler of the waters, that
fourth of the Lokapalas, said unto that eternal god of gods, "Give me
without loss of time that bow and quiver, and that ape-bannered car also,
which were obtained from king Soma. Partha will achieve a great task with
Gandiva, and Vasudeva also with the discus! Give both, therefore, unto me
today." Hearing these words, Varuna replied unto Pavaka, saying, "Well, I
am giving them." He then gave that wonderful jewel of a bow that was
endued with great energy. That bow was the enhancer of fame and
achievements, and was incapable of being injured by any weapon. It was the
chief of all weapons, and the grinder of them all. And it was the smiter
of hostile armies and was alone equal to a hundred thousand bows. It was
the multiplier of kingdoms, and was variegated with excellent colours. It
was well-adorned, and beautiful to behold, and without a mark of weakness
or injury anywhere. And it was always worshipped both by the celestials
and the Gandharvas. Varuna also gave two inexhaustible quivers, and he
also gave a car furnished with celestial weapons and whose banner bore a
large ape. Yoked unto that car were steeds white as silver of the fleecy
clouds, and born in the region of the Gandharvas, and decked with golden
harness, and resembling in fleetness the wind or the mind. And it was
equipped with implement of war, and was incapable of being vanquished by
the celestials or the Asuras. Its splendour was great and the sounds of
its wheels was tremendous. It delighted the heart of every creature that
looked at it. It had been made by Viswakarman, the architect of the
universe and one of the lords of creation, after severe ascetic meditation.
Its splendour, like that of the sun, was so great that no one could gaze
at it. It was the very car from which the lord Soma had vanquished the
Danavas. Resplendent with beauty, it looked like an evening cloud
reflecting the effulgence of the setting sun. It was furnished with an
excellent flag-staff of golden colour and great beauty. And there sat upon
that flag-staff a celestial ape of form fierce like that of a lion or a
tiger. Stationed on high, the ape seemed bent upon burning everything it
beheld. And upon the (other) flags were various creatures of large size,
whose roars and yells caused the enemy's soldiers to faint. Then Arjuna,
accoutred in mail and armed with the sword, and his fingers cased in
leathern gloves, walking round that excellent car adorned with numerous
flags and bowing unto the gods, ascended it like a virtuous man riding in
the celestial car that bears him to heaven. And taking up that celestial
and first of bows created by Brahman of old and called Gandiva, Arjuna was
filled with joy. And bowing unto Hutasana, Partha endued with great energy,
took up the bow and strung it forcibly. Those who heard the noise that was
made while the mighty Pandava strung that bow, quaked with fear. And
having obtained that car and that bow, and the two inexhaustible quivers,
the son of Kunti became glad and thought himself competent to assist at
the task. And Pavaka then gave unto Krishna a discus with an iron pole
attached to a hole in the centre. And it was a fiery weapon and became his
favourite. Having obtained that weapon, Krishna also became equal to the
task. Pavaka then, addressing Krishna, said, "With this, O slayer of Madhu,
thou shalt be able without doubt to vanquish in battle even foes that are
not human. With this weapon, without doubt, thou shalt be superior in
battle to men and gods, and Rakshasas and Pisachas, and Daityas and Nagas.
And thou shalt certainly be able with this to smite all. And, O Madhava,
hurled by thee in battle at thy foes, this weapon will irresistibly slay
the enemy and again come back into thy hands." And the lord Varuna, after
this, gave unto Krishna a mace, of name Kaumodaki, capable of slaying
every Daitya and producing, when hurled, a roar like that of the thunder.
Then Arjuna and Achyuta, filled with joy said unto Pavaka, "O exalted one,
furnished with weapons and knowing their use, possessed of cars with flags
and flagstaffs, we are now able to fight with even all the celestials and
the Asuras (together), let alone the wielder of the thunderbolt desirous
of fighting for the sake of the Naga (his friend Takshaka)." Arjuna also
said, "O Pavaka, while Hrishikesa, endued with abundant energy, moves on
the field of battle with this discus in hand, there is nothing in the
three worlds that he will not be able to consume by hurling this weapon.
Having obtained the bow Gandiva and this couple of inexhaustible quivers I
also am ready to conquer in battle the three worlds. Therefore, O lord,
blaze thou forth as thou likest, surrounding this large forest on every
side. We are quite able to help thee."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed both by Dasarha and Arjuna, the
illustrious god then put forth his most energetic form, and prepared to
consume the forest. Surrounding it on all sides with his seven flames, he
began to consume the forest of Khandava, exhibiting his all-consuming form
like that at the end of the Yuga (cycle). And, O bull of Bharata's race,
surrounding that forest and catching it from all sides with a roar like
that of the clouds, Agni made every creature within it tremble. And, O
Bharata, that burning forest then looked resplendent like the king of
mountains, Meru, blazing with the rays of the sun fallen thereupon.'"


SECTION CCXXVIII

(Khandava-daha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Then those foremost of car-warriors (Krishna and
Arjuna), riding in their cars and placing themselves on opposite sides of
that forest, began a great slaughter, on all sides, of the creatures
dwelling in Khandava. At whatever point any of the creatures residing in
Khandava could be seen attempting to escape, thither rushed those mighty
heroes (to prevent its flight). Indeed those two excellent cars seemed to
be but one, and the two warriors also therein but one individual. And
while the forest was burning, hundreds and thousands of living creatures,
uttering frightful yells, began to run about in all directions. Some had
particular limbs burnt, some were scorched with excessive heat, and some
came out, and some ran about from fear. And some clasping their children
and some their parents and brothers, died calmly without, from excess of
affection, being able to abandon those that were dear to them. And many
there were who biting their nether lips rose upwards and soon fell
whirling into the blazing element below. And some were seen to roll on the
ground with wings, eyes, and feet scorched and burnt. These creatures were
all seen to perish there almost soon enough. The tanks and ponds within
that forest, heated by the fire around, began to boil; the fishes and the
tortoises in them were all seen to perish. During that great slaughter of
living creatures in that forest, the burning bodies of various animals
looked as if fire itself had assumed many forms. The birds that took wings
to escape from that conflagration were pierced by Arjuna with his shafts,
and cut into pieces, they fell down into the burning element below.
Pierced all over with Arjuna's shafts, the birds dropped down into the
burning forest, uttering loud cries. The denizens of the forest, struck
with those shafts, began to roar and yell. The clamour they raised was
like unto the frightful uproar heard during the churning of the ocean (in
days of yore). The mighty flames of the blazing fire reaching the
firmament, caused great anxiety to the celestials themselves. Then all the
illustrious dwellers in heaven went in a body unto him of a hundred
sacrifices and thousand eyes, viz., their chief, that grinder of Asuras.
Approaching Indra, the celestials said, "Why, O lord of immortals, doth
Agni burn these creatures below? Hath the time come for the destruction of
the world?"'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of the gods, and himself
beholding what Agni was doing, the slayer of Vritra set out for the
protection of the forest of Khandava. And Vasava, the chief of the
celestials soon covering the sky with masses of clouds of every kind began
to shower upon the burning forest. Those masses of clouds by hundreds and
thousands, commanded by Indra began to pour rain upon Khandava in showers
thick as the flag-staffs of battle-cars. But the showers were all dried up
in the sky itself by the heat of the fire and could not, therefore, reach
the fire at all! Then the slayer of Namuchi, getting angry with Agni,
collected huge masses of clouds and caused them to yield a heavy downpour.
Then with the flames contending with those heavy showers, and with masses
of clouds overhead, that forest, filled with smoke and flashes of
lightning, became terrible to behold.'"


SECTION CCXXIX

(Khandava-daha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Then Vibhatsu, the son of Pandu, invoking his
excellent weapons, prevented that shower of rain by Indra, by means of a
shower of his own weapons. And Arjuna of immeasurable soul soon covered
the forest of Khandava with innumerable arrows like the moon covering the
atmosphere with a thick fog. When the sky above that forest was thus
covered with the arrows of Arjuna no living creature could then escape
from below. And it so happened that while that forest was burning,
Takshaka, the chief of the Nagas, was not there, having gone at that time
to the field of Kurukshetra. But Aswasena, the mighty son of Takshaka, was
there. He made great efforts to escape from that fire; but confined by
Arjuna's shafts he succeeded not in finding a way. It was then that his
mother, the daughter of a snake, determined to save him by swallowing him
first. His mother first swallowed his head and then was swallowing his
tail. And desirous of saving her son, the sea-snake rose (up from the
earth) while still employed in swallowing her son's tail. But Arjuna as
soon as he beheld her escaping, severed her head from her body by means of
a sharp and keen-edged arrow. Indra saw all this, and desiring to save his
friend's son, the wielder of the thunderbolt, by raising a violent wind,
deprived Arjuna of consciousness. During those few moments, Aswasena
succeeded in effecting his escape. Beholding that manifestation of the
power of illusion, and deceived by that snake, Arjuna was much enraged. He
forthwith cut every animal seeking to escape by the skies, into two, three,
or more pieces. And Vibhatsu in anger, and Agni, and Vasudeva also, cursed
the snake that had escaped so deceitfully, saying, "Never shalt thou be
famous!" And Jishnu remembering the deception practised upon him, became
angry, and covering the firmament with a cloud of arrows, sought to fight
with him of a thousand eyes. The chief of the celestials also, seeing
Arjuna in anger, sought to fight with him, and hurled his own fierce
weapons, covering the wide expanse of the firmament. Then the winds,
making a loud roar and agitating all the oceans, brought together masses
of clouds in the sky, charged with torrents of rain. Those masses of
clouds began to vomit thunder and terrible flashes of lightning charged
with the thunderclap. Then Arjuna possessing a knowledge of means, hurled
the excellent weapon called Vayavya with proper mantras to dispel those
clouds. With that weapon the energy and force of Indra's thunderbolt and
of those clouds were destroyed. And the torrents of rain with which those
clouds were charged were all dried up, and the lightning that played
amongst them was also destroyed. Within a moment the sky was cleared of
dust and darkness, and a delicious, cool breeze began to blow and the disc
of the sun resumed its normal state. Then the eater of clarified butter
(Agni), glad because none could baffle him, assumed various forms, and
sprinkled over with the fat exuded by the bodies of creatures, blazed
forth with all his flames, filling the universe with his roar. Then
numerous birds of the Garuda tribe bearing excellent feathers, beholding
that the forest was protected by Krishna and Arjuna, descended filled with
pride, from the upper skies, desirous of striking those heroes with their
thunderlike wings, beaks and claws. Innumerable Nagas also, with faces
emitting fire descending from high, approached Arjuna, vomiting the most
virulent poison all the while. Beholding them approach, Arjuna cut them
into pieces by means of arrows steeped in the fire of his own wrath. Then
those birds and snakes, deprived of life, fell into the burning element
below. And there came also, desirous of battle, innumerable Asuras with
Gandharvas and Yakshas and Rakshasas and Nagas sending forth terrific
yells. Armed with machines vomiting from their throats (mouths) iron
balls and bullets, and catapults for propelling huge stones, and rockets,
they approached to strike Krishna and Partha, their energy and strength
increased by wrath. But though they rained a perfect shower of weapons,
Vibhatsu, addressing them reproachfully, struck off their heads with his
own sharp arrows. That slayer of foes, Krishna, also, endued with great
energy, made a great slaughter of the Daitya and the Danava with his
discus. Many Asuras of immeasurable might, pierced with Krishna's arrows
and smitten with the force of his discus, became motionless like waifs and
strays stranded on the bank by the violence of the waves. Then Sakra the
lord of the celestials, riding on his white elephant, rushed at those
heroes, and taking up his thunderbolt which could never go in vain, hurled
it with great force. And the slayer of Asuras said unto the gods, "These
two are slain." Beholding the fierce thunderbolt about to be hurled
by their chief, the celestials all took up their respective weapons. Yama,
O king, took up the death-dealing mace, and Kuvera his spiked club, and
Varuna his noose and beautiful missile. And Skanda (Kartikeya) took up his
long lance and stood motionless like the mountain of Meru. The Aswins
stood there with resplendent plants in their hands. Dhatri stood, bow in
hand, and Jaya with a thick club. Tvashtri of great strength took up in
wrath, a huge mountain and Surya stood with a bright dart, and Mrityu with
a battle-axe. Aryaman stalked about with a terrible bludgeon furnished
with sharp spikes, and Mitra stood there with a discus sharp as a razor.
And, O monarch, Pusha and Bhaga and Savitri, in wrath, rushed at Krishna
and Partha with bows and scimitars in hand. And Rudras and the Vasus, the
mighty Maruts and the Viswedevas and the Sadhyas, all resplendent with
their own energy,--these and many other celestials, armed with various
weapons rushed against those exalted of men, Krishna and Partha, for
smiting them down. Then were seen in that great conflict wonderful
portents all around robbing every creature of his sense, and resembling
those that appeared at the time of the universal dissolution. But Arjuna
and Krishna, fearless and invincible in battle, beholding Sakra and the
other celestials prepared for fight, calmly waited, bows in hands. Skilled
in battle, those heroes in wrath assailed the advancing host of celestials
with their own thunderlike arrows. The celestials repeatedly routed by
Krishna and Arjuna, at last left the field of battle for fear and sought
the protection of Indra. The Munis who were witnessing the battle from the
skies, beholding the celestials defeated by Madhava and Arjuna, were
filled with wonder. Sakra also repeatedly witnessing their prowess in
battle, became exceedingly gratified, and once more rushed to the assault.
The chastiser of Paka then caused a heavy shower of stones, desiring to
ascertain the prowess of Arjuna who was able to draw the bow even with his
left hand. Arjuna, in great wrath, dispelled with his arrows that thick
shower. Then he of a hundred sacrifices beholding that shower baffled,
once more caused a thicker shower of stones. But the son of the chastiser
of Paka (viz., Arjuna) gratified his father by baffling that shower also
with his swift arrows. Then Sakra, desirous of smiting down the son of
Pandu, tore up with his hands a large peak from Mandara, with tall trees
on it, and hurled it against him. But Arjuna divided that mountain-peak
into a thousand pieces by his swift-going and fire-mouthed arrows. The
fragments of that mountain, in falling through the skies, looked as if the
sun and the moon and the planets, displaced from their positions fell down
on earth. That huge peak fell down upon that forest and by its fall killed
numerous living creatures that dwelt in Khandava.'"


SECTION CCXXX

(Khandava-daha Parva continued)

"Vaisampayana said, 'Then the inhabitants of the forest of Khandava, the
Danavas and Rakshasas and Nagas and wolves and bears and other wild
animals, and elephants with rent temples, and tigers, and lions with manes
and deer and buffaloes by hundreds, and birds, and various other creatures,
frightened at the falling stones and extremely anxious, began to fly in
all directions. They saw the forest (burning all around) and Krishna and
Arjuna also ready with their weapons. Frightened at the terrible sounds
that were audible there those creatures lost their power of movement.
Beholding the forest burning in innumerable places and Krishna also ready
to smite them down with his weapons, they all set up a frightful roar.
With that terrible clamour as also with the roar of fire, the whole welkin
resounded, as it were, with the voice of portentous clouds. Kesava of dark
hue and mighty arms, in order to compass their destruction, hurled at them
his large and fierce discus resplendent with its own energy. The forest-
dwellers including the Danavas and the Rakshasas, afflicted by that weapon,
were cut in hundreds of pieces and fell unto the mouth of Agni. Mangled by
Krishna's discus, the Asuras were besmeared with blood and fat and looked
like evening clouds. And, O Bharata, he of the Vrishni race moved about
like death itself, slaying Pisachas and birds and Nagas and other
creatures by thousands. The discus itself, repeatedly hurled from the
hands of Krishna, that slayer of all foes, came back to his hands after
slaughtering numberless creatures. The face and form of Krishna that soul
of every created thing became fierce to behold while he was thus employed
in the slaughter of the Pisachas, Nagas and Rakshasas. No one among the
celestials, who had mustered there could vanquish in battle Krishna and
Arjuna. When the celestials saw that they could not protect that forest
from the might of Krishna and Arjuna by extinguishing that conflagration,
they retired from the scene. Then, O monarch, he of a hundred sacrifices
(Indra), beholding the immortals retreat, became filled with joy and
applauded Krishna and Arjuna. And when the celestials gave up the fight,
an incorporeal voice, deep and loud, addressing him of a hundred
sacrifices, said, "Thy friend Takshaka, that chief of snakes, hath not
been slain! Before the conflagration commenced in Khandava he had
journeyed to Kurukshetra. Know from my words, O Vasava, that Vasudeva and
Arjuna are incapable of being vanquished in battle by any one! They are
Nara and Narayana--those gods of old heard of in heaven! Thou knowest what
their energy is and what their prowess. Invincible in battle, these best
of old Rishis are unconquerable by any one in all the worlds! They deserve
the most reverential worship of all the celestials and Asuras; of Yakshas
and Rakshasas and Gandharvas, of human beings and Kinnaras and Nagas.
Therefore, O Vasava, it behoveth thee to go hence with all the celestials.
The destruction of Khandava hath been ordained by Fate!" Then the chief of
the immortals, ascertaining those words to be true abandoned his wrath and
jealousy, and went back to heaven. The dwellers in heaven, O monarch,
beholding the illustrious Indra abandon the fight, followed him with all
their soldiers. Then those heroes, Vasudeva and Arjuna, when they saw the
chief of the celestials retreat accompanied by all the gods, set up a
leonine roar. And, O monarch, Kesava and Arjuna, after Indra had left the
scene, became exceedingly glad. Those heroes then fearlessly assisted at
the conflagration of the forest. Arjuna scattered the celestials like the
wind scattering the clouds, and slew with showers of his arrows,
numberless creatures that dwelt in Khandava. Cut off by Arjuna's arrows,
no one amongst the innumerable creatures could escape from the burning
forest. Far from fighting with him, none amongst even the strongest
creatures mustered there could look at Arjuna whose weapons were never
futile. Sometimes piercing hundred creatures with one shaft and sometimes
a single creature with hundred shafts, Arjuna moved about in his car. The
creatures themselves, deprived of life, began to fall into the mouth of
Agni (god of fire), struck down as it were by death itself. On the banks
of rivers or on uneven plains or on crematoriums, go where they did, the
creatures (dwelling in Khandava) found no ease, for wherever they sought
shelter there they were afflicted by the heat. And hosts of creatures
roared in pain, and elephants and deer and wolves set up cries of
affliction. At that sound the fishes of the Ganges and the sea, and the
various tribes of Vidyadharas dwelling in that forest all became
frightened. O thou of mighty arms, let alone battling with them, no one,
could even gaze at Arjuna and Janardana of dark hue. Hari slew with his
discus those Rakshasas and Danavas and Nagas that rushed at him in bands.
Of huge bodies, their heads and trunks were cut off by the swift motion of
the discus, and deprived of life they fell down into the blazing fire.
Gratified with large quantities of flesh, blood, and fat, the flames rose
up to a great height without a curling wreath of smoke. Hutasana (fire-
god) with blazing and coppery eyes, and flaming tongue and large mouth,
and the hair on the crown of his head all fiery, drinking, with the help
of Krishna and Arjuna, that nectar-like stream of animal fat, became
filled with joy. Gratified greatly, Agni derived much happiness.

"'And it so happened that the slayer of Madhu suddenly beheld an Asura of
the name of Maya escaping from the abode of Takshaka. Agni having Vayu for
his car-driver, assuming a body with matted locks on head, and roaring
like the clouds, pursued the Asura, desirous of consuming him. Beholding
the Asura, Vasudeva stood with his weapon upraised, ready to smite him
down, seeing the discus uplifted and Agni pursuing from behind to burn him,
Maya said "Run to me, O Arjuna, and protect me!" Hearing his affrighted
voice Arjuna said, "Fear not!" That voice of Arjuna, O Bharata, seemed to
give Maya his life. As the merciful son of Pritha said unto Maya that
there was nothing to fear, he of the Dasarha race no longer desired to
slay Maya who was the brother of Namuchi, and Agni also burned him not.'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Protected from Indra by Krishna and Partha, Agni
gifted with great intelligence, burned that forest for five and ten days.
And while the forest burned Agni spared only six of its dwellers, viz.,
Aswasena, Maya, and four birds called Sarngakas.'"


SECTION CCXXXI

(Khandava-daha Parva continued)

"Janamejaya said, 'O Brahmana, tell me why and when that forest burnt in
that way, Agni consumed not the birds called Sarngakas? Thou hast, O
Brahmana, recited (to us) the cause of Aswasena and the Danava Maya not
having been consumed. But thou hast not as yet said what the cause was of
the escape of the Sarngakas? The escape of those birds, O Brahmana,
appeareth to me to be wonderful. Tell us why they were not destroyed in
that dreadful conflagration.'

"Vaisampayana said, 'O slayer of all foes, I shall tell thee all as to why
Agni did not burn up those birds during the conflagration. There was, O
king, a great Rishi known by the name of Mandapala, conversant with all
the shastras, of rigid vows, devoted to asceticism, and the foremost of
all virtuous persons. Following in the wake of Rishis that had drawn up
their virile fluid, that ascetic, O monarch, with every sense under
complete control, devoted himself to study and virtue. Having reached the
opposite shores of asceticism, O Bharata, he left his human form and went
to the region of the Pitris. But going thither he failed to obtain the
(expected) fruit of his acts. He asked the celestials that sat around the
king of the dead as to the cause of his treatment, saying, "Why have these
regions become unattainable by me,--regions that I had thought had been
acquired by me by my ascetic devotions? Have I not performed those acts
whose fruits are these regions? Ye inhabitants of heaven, tell me why
these regions are shut against me! I will do that which will give me the
fruit of my ascetic penances."

"'The celestials answered, "Hear, O Brahmana, of those acts and things on
account of which men are born debtors. Without doubt, it is for religious
rites, studies according to the ordinance, and progeny, that men are born
debtors. These debts are all discharged by sacrifices, asceticism, and
offspring. Thou art an ascetic and hast also performed sacrifices; but
thou hast no offspring. These regions are shut against thee only for want
of children. Beget children, therefore! Thou shalt then enjoy multifarious
regions of felicity. The Vedas declared that the son rescueth the father
from a hell called Put. Then, O best of Brahmanas, strive to beget
offspring."'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Mandapala, having heard these words of the
dwellers in heaven, reflected how best he could obtain the largest number
of offspring within the shortest period of time. The Rishi, after
reflection, understood that of all creatures birds alone were blest with
fecundity. Assuming the form of a Sarngaka the Rishi had connection with a
female bird of the same species called by the name of Jarita. And he begat
upon her four sons who were all reciters of the Vedas. Leaving all those
sons of his with their mother in that forest, while they were still within
eggs, the ascetic went to (another wife called by the name of) Lapita. And,
O Bharata, when the exalted sage went away for the company of Lapita,
moved by affection for her offspring, Jarita became very thoughtful.
Though forsaken by their father in the forest of Khandava, Jarita, anxious
