whereby we may ever abide in the very Holy of Holies and be in the
secret place of the Most High, even while we are busy in the world, but
it also points to our duty of ministering; for the word 'stand' is
employed to designate the attendance of the priests in their office, and
is almost equivalent to 'serve.' 'To bless the Lord,' then, is the work
to which we are especially called. If we are made a 'royal priesthood,'
it is that we 'should show forth the praises of Him who has called us
out of darkness into His marvellous light.' The purpose of that full
horn of plenty, charged with blessings which God has emptied upon our
heads, is that our dumb lips may be touched into thankfulness, because
our selfish hearts have been wooed and charmed into love and life.

The Rabbis had a saying that there were two sorts of angels: the angels
that served, and the angels that praised; of which, according to their
teaching, the latter were the higher in degree. It was only a
half-truth, for true service is praise.

But whatever the form in which praise may come, whether it be in the
form of vocal thanksgiving, or whether it be the glad surrender of the
heart, manifested in the conscious discharge of the most trivial duties,
whether we 'lift up our hands in the Sanctuary, and bless the Lord' with
them, or whether we turn our hands to the tools of our daily occupation
and handle them for His sake, alike we maybe praising Him. And the thing
for us to remember is that the place where we, if we are Christians,
stand, and the character which we, if we are Christians, sustain, bind
us to live blessing and praising Him whilst we live. 'Behold!'--as if He
would point to all the crowded list of God's great mercies--'Bless ye
the Lord, all ye servants of the Lord that ... stand in the house of the
Lord.'

And then there is another point that comes out of this charge to the
watchers, viz. the necessity of strenuously trying to unite together
service of God and communion with God. These priests might have
said--'When we go our rounds through the empty and echoing corridors of
the dark Temple, we perform the charge which God gave us; and it needs
not that we pray. We are working for Him and doing the work which He
appointed us; and that is better than all external ritual.' But this
unknown speaker who charges them knew better than that. The priests'
service under the Old Covenant was very unspiritual service. Their work
was sometimes very repulsive and always purely external work, which
might be done without one trace of religion or devotion in it. And so
the speaker here warns them, as it were, against the temptation which
besets all men that are concerned in the outward service of the house of
God, to confound the mere outward service with inward devotion. The
charge bids us remember that the more sedulously our hands and thoughts
are employed about the externals of religious duties, the more must we
see to it that our inmost spirits are baptized into fellowship with God.

It is not enough to patrol the Temple courts unless we 'lift up our
hands to the sanctuary,' and with our hearts 'bless the Lord.' And all
we who in any degree and any department are officially or
semi-officially connected with the work of the Christian Church have
very earnestly and especially to lay this to heart. We ministers,
deacons, Sunday-school teachers, tract distributors, have much need to
take care that we do not confound watching in the courts of the Temple
with lifting up our own hands and hearts to our Father that is in
heaven; and remember that the more outward work we do, the more inward
life we ought to have. The higher the stem of the tree grows and the
broader its branches spread the deeper must strike and the wider must
extend its underground roots, if it is not to be blown over and become a
withered ruin.

And so all you Christian men and women! will you take the plain lesson
that is here? All ye that stand ready for service, and doing service,
all 'ye that stand in the house of the Lord, behold' your peril and your
duty--and 'bless ye the Lord,' and remember that the more work the more
prayer to keep it from rotting; the more effort the more communion; and
that at the end we shall discover with alarm, and with shame confess 'I
kept others' vineyards and my own vineyard have I not kept'; unless,
like our Master, we prepare for a day of work and toil in the Temple by
a night of quiet communion with our Father on the mountainside.

And then there is another lesson here which I only touch, and that is
that all times are times for blessing God. 'Ye who _by night_ stand in
the house of the Lord, bless the Lord': so though no sacrifice was
smoking on the altar, and no choral songs went up from the company of
praising priests in the ritual service; and although the nightfall had
silenced the worship and scattered the worshippers, yet some low murmur
of praise would be echoing through the empty halls all the night long,
and the voice of thanksgiving and of blessing would blend with the clank
of the priests' feet on the marble pavements as they went their
patrolling rounds; and their torches would send up a smoke not less
acceptable than the wreathing columns of the incense that had filled the
day. And so as in some convents you will find a monk kneeling on the
steps of the altar at each hour of the four-and-twenty, adoring the
Sacrament exposed upon it, so (but in inmost reality and not in a mere
vulgar outside form that means nothing) in the Christian heart there
should be a perpetual adoration and a continual praise--a prayer without
ceasing. What is it that comes first of all into your minds when you
wake in the middle of the night? Yesterday's business, to-morrow's
vanities, or God's present love and your dependence upon Him?

In the night of sorrow, too, do our songs go up, and do we hear and obey
the charge which commands not only perpetual adoration, but bids us fill
the night with music and with praise? Well for us if it be, anticipating
the time when 'they rest not day nor night saying, Holy! Holy! Holy!'

Now, that is the priests' charge. Look for a moment at the answering
blessing: 'The Lord that made heaven and earth bless thee out of Zion.'

'Thee?' Whom? Him who gave the solemn charge. Their obedience to it is
implied in the blessing which the priests invoke on the head of the
unnamed speaker. So they express their joyful consent to his charge, and
their desires for his welfare whose clear voice has summoned them to
their high duty and privilege. They obey, and their first prayer is a
prayer for him.

May we venture to draw from this interchange of counsel and benediction
a simple lesson as to the best form in which mutual goodwill and
friendship may express itself? It is by the interchange of stimulus to
God's service and praise, and of grateful prayer. He is my best friend
who stirs me up to make my whole life a strong sweet song of
thanksgiving to God for all His numberless mercies to me. Even if the
exhortation becomes rebuke, faithful are such wounds. It is but a
shallow affection which can be eloquent on other subjects of common
interests, but is dumb on this, the deepest of all; which can counsel
wisely and rebuke gently in regard to other matters, but has never a
word to say to its dearest concerning duty to the God of all mercies.

And the true response to any loving exhortation to bless God, or any
religious impulse which we receive from one another, is to invoke God's
blessing on faithful lips that have given us counsel.

This is the best recompense to Christian teachers. If any poor words of
ours have come to any of your hearts with power for conviction, or
instruction, or encouragement, let your response be, I beseech you, 'The
Lord that hath made heaven and earth bless _thee_.' We need your
prayers. We are weak, often sad, often discouraged. We are tempted ever
to handle God's truth professionally, instead of living on it for
ourselves. We are tempted to think that our work is in vain, and to lose
heart because we do not see the spiritual results which we would fain
reap. And in many an hour of languor and despondency, when the wheels of
life turn heavily and the sky seems very far away, and our message seems
to have lost its grandeur and certainty to ourselves, and our handling
of it looks as if it had been one long failure, then we need and may be
helped by the voice of cheer coming through the night from those whom we
have tried to counsel: 'The Lord that made heaven and earth bless thee.'

But observe, further, the two kinds of blessing which answer to one
another--God's blessing of man, and man's blessing of God. The one is
communicative, the other receptive and responsive. The one is the great
stream which pours itself over the precipice; the other is the basin
into which it falls and the showers of spray which rise from its
surface, rainbowed in the sunshine, as the cataract of divine mercies
comes down upon it. God blesses us when He gives. We bless God when we
thankfully take, and praise the Giver. God's blessing then, must ever
come first. 'We love Him because He first loved us.' Ours is but the
echo of His, but the acknowledgment of the divine act, which must
precede our recognition of it as the dawn must come in order that the
birds may wake to sing.

Our highest service is to take the gifts of God, and with glad hearts to
praise the Giver.

Our blessings are but words. God's blessings are realities. We wish good
to one another when we bless each other. But He does good to men when He
blesses them. Our wishes may be deep and warm, but, alas! how
ineffectual. They flutter round the heads of those whom we would bless,
but how seldom do they actually rest upon their brows. But God's
blessings are powers. They never miss their mark. Whom He blesses are
blessed indeed.

That experience of the ineffectual emptiness of blessings from the most
loving hearts gives point to the emphatic designation here of 'the Lord
which made heaven and earth,' a formula which is common in this
connection. It brings before the eye of faith the mighty Name, and the
mighty work of Him in whose blessing we shall be rich. He is the Lord,
the Eternal and the Covenant King. He has made heaven and earth. If He
who lives above all limitations of time, the Source of life, who has the
fulness of life in Himself, He who has revealed Himself to Israel and
bound Himself to fulfil His covenant with all who plead it, He whose
sovereign effortless power willed and spake into being the azure deeps
of heaven with all its stars, and the solid earth with its tribes--if
He, with such infinite resources to bestow on us as we need, if He
blesses us, it will be with no vain wishes nor with the invoking of the
goodwill of a higher power, but with the veritable communication of
good, and we shall be blessed indeed.

Observe, too, the channel through which God's blessings come--'out of
Zion.' For the Jew, the fulness of divine glory dwelt between the
Cherubim, and the richest of the divine blessings were bestowed on the
waiting worshippers there, and no doubt it is still true that God dwells
in Zion, and blesses men from thence. The New Testament analogue to the
Old Testament Temple is no outward building. That would be absurd
confusing of the very nature of type and antitype. A material type must
have a spiritual fulfilment. A rite cannot correspond to a rite, nor a
building to a building. But the correspondence in Christianity to the
Temple where God dwelt, and from which He scattered His blessings is
twofold--one proper and original, the other secondary and derived. In
the true sense, Jesus Christ is the Temple. In Him God dwelt; in Him,
man meets God; in Him was the place of revelation; in Him the place of
sacrifice. 'In this place is one greater than the Temple,' and the
abiding of Jehovah above the mercy-seat was but a material symbol,
shadowing and foretelling the true indwelling of all the fulness of the
Godhead bodily in that true Tabernacle which the Lord hath pitched and
not man. So the great fountain of all possible good and benediction
which was opened for the believing Jew in 'Zion,' is opened for us in
Jesus Christ who stood in the very court of the Temple, and called in
tones of clear, loud invitation: 'If any man thirst let him come unto Me
and drink.' We may each pass through the rent veil into the holiest of
all, and there, laying our hand on Jesus, touch God, and opening our
empty palm extended to Him, can receive from Him all the blessing that
we need.

There is another application of the Temple symbol in the New
Testament--a derivative and secondary one--to the Church, that is, to
the aggregate of believers. In it God dwells through Christ. Receiving
His Spirit, instinct with His life, it is His Body, and as in His
earthly life 'He spake of the Temple of His "literal" body,' so now that
Church becomes the Temple of God, being builded through the ages. In
that Zion all God's best blessings are possessed and stored, that the
Church may, by faithful service, impart them to the world. Whosoever
desires to possess these blessings must enter thither--not by any
ceremonial act, or outward profession, but by becoming one of those who
put their whole heart's confidence in Jesus Christ. Within that sacred
enclosure we receive whatever divine love and power can give. If we are
knit to Christ by our faith, we share in proportion to our faith in all
the wealth of blessing with which God has blessed Him. We possess Christ
and in Him all. The ancient benediction, which came from the lips of the
priestly watchers, and rang through the empty corridors of the darkened
Temple, asked for much: 'The Lord who made heaven and earth bless thee
out of Zion.' But the Apostolic assurance sounds a yet deeper and more
wonderful note of confidence when it proclaims that already, however to
ourselves we may seem sad and needy, and however little we may have
counted our treasures or made them our own, 'God hath blessed us with
all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ Jesus.'




GOD'S SCRUTINY LONGED FOR


    'Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts;
    24. And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way
    everlasting.'--PSALM cxxxix. 23, 24.

This psalm begins with perhaps the grandest contemplation of the divine
Omniscience that was ever put into words. It is easy to pour out
platitudes upon such a subject, but the Psalmist does not content
himself with generalities. He gathers all the rays, as it were, into one
burning point, and focusses them upon himself: 'Oh, Lord! Thou hast
searched _me_, and known _me_.' All the more remarkable, then, is it
that the psalm should end with asking God to do what it began with
declaring that He does. He knows us each, altogether; whether we like it
or not, whether we try to hinder it or not, whether we remember it or
not. Singular, therefore, is it to find this prayer as the very climax
of all the Psalmist's contemplation. It is more than the 'searching'
which was spoken of at the beginning, which is desired at the end. It is
a process which has for its issue the cleansing of all the evil that is
beheld. The prayer of the text is in fact the yearning of the devout
soul for purity. I simply wish to consider the series of petitions here,
in the hope that we may catch something of their spirit, and that some
faint echo of them may sound in our desires. My purpose, then, will be
best accomplished if I follow the words of the text, and look at these
petitions in the order in which they stand.

I. Note then, first, the longing for the searching of God's eye.

Now, the word which is here rendered 'search' is a very emphatic and
picturesque one. It means to dig deep. God is prayed, as it were, to
make a cutting into the man, and lay bare his inmost nature, as men do
in a railway cutting, layer after layer, going ever deeper down till the
bed-rock is reached. 'Search me'--dig into me, bring the deep-lying
parts to light--'and know my heart'; the centre of my personality, my
inmost self. That is the prayer, not of fancied fitness to stand
investigation, but of lowly acknowledgment. In other words, it is really
a form of confession. 'Search me. I know Thou wilt find evil, but
still--search me!' It seems to me that there are two main ideas in this
petition, on each of which I touch briefly.

One is, that it is a glad recognition of a fact which is very terrible
to many hearts. The conception of God as 'knowing me altogether,' down
to the very roots of my being, is either the most blessed or the most
unwelcome thought, according to my conception of what His heart to me
is. If I think of Him, as so many of us do, as simply the 'austere man'
who 'gathers where he did not straw,' and 'reaps where he did not sow';
if my thought of God is mainly that of an Investigator and a Judge, with
pure eyes and rigid judgment, then I shall be more ignorant of myself,
and more confident in myself, than the most of men are when they bethink
themselves, if I do not feel that I shrink up like a sensitive plant's
leaf when a finger touches it, and would fain curl myself together, and
hide from His eye something that I know lurks and poisons at the centre
of my being.

The gaoler's eye at the slit in the wall of the solitary prisoner's cell
is a constant terror to the man who knows that it may be upon him at
every moment, and does not know where the eyehole is, or when the
merciless eye may be at it, but if we love one another we do not shrink
from opening out our inward baseness to each other. We can venture to
tell those that are dear to us as our own hearts the things that lie in
our own hearts and make them black and ugly in all eyes but love's; or
if we cannot venture to do it wholly, at all events we do it more fully,
and more willingly, and with more of something that is almost pleasure
in the very act of confession, in proportion as we are bound by the
sacred ties of love to the recipient of the confession. There is a joy,
and a blessedness deeper than joy, in discovering ourselves, even our
unworthy selves, when we know that the eye that looks is a loving eye.

If, then, we have rightly conceived of our relation to Him, that
infinite Lover of all our hearts, who looks, 'with other eyes than ours,
and makes allowance for us all,' there will be a certain blessedness,
almost like joy, in turning ourselves inside out before Him; and in
feeling that every corner of our hearts lies naked and opened unto the
eyes of Him with whom we have to do. 'Search me, O God!' is the voice of
confident love, which is sure of the love that contemplates the sinner.

And for us Christian people, to whom all these attributes of Deity are
gathered together and brought very near our hearts and our experiences
in the person of our Brother Christ, the thought of such knowledge of us
becomes still more blessed. Just as the Apostle who was conscious of
many sins, could say to his Master, not in petulance, but in
deeply-moved confidence, 'Thou knowest all things! Why dost Thou ask me
questions? Thou knowest all things; Thou knowest, notwithstanding my
denials, that I love Thee,' so may we turn to Jesus Christ, who knows
what is in men, and who knows each man, and may be sure that the eye
which looks upon our unworthiness pities our sinfulness, and is ready to
bear it all away. There is a deeper gladness in pouring out our hearts
to our loving Lord than in locking them in sullen silence, with the vain
conceit that we thereby hide ourselves from Him. Make a clean breast of
your evil, and you will find that the act has in it a blessedness all
unique and poignant. 'Pour out your hearts before Him, O ye people! God
is a refuge for us.'

This prayer is also an expression of absolute willingness to submit to
the searching process. God is represented in my text as searching the
secrets of a man's heart, not that God may know, but that the man may
know. By His Spirit He will come into the innermost corners of our
nature, if this prayer is a real expression of our desire, and there the
illumination of His presence will flash light into all the dark places
of our experience and of our natures. We cannot afford to be in
ignorance of these. Pestilence breathes in the unventilated, unlighted,
uncleansed recesses of a neglected nature. It is only on condition of
the light of God's convincing Spirit being cast into every part of our
being that we shall be able to overcome and annihilate the creeping
swarms of microscopic sins that are there, minute but mighty in their
myriads to destroy a man's soul. 'Search me' is the expression of a
penitence that knows itself to be full of evil, that does not know all
the evil of which it is full, that needs enlightenment, that desires
deliverance, that is sure of the love that looks, and that so spreads
itself, as a bleacher spreads some piece of stained cloth in the
gracious sunshine and sprinkles it with the pure water of heaven that
all the stains may melt away.

It is useless to ask God to search us if we lock our hearts against His
searching. The mere natural exercise, if I may so say, of the divine
attribute of Omniscience we cannot hinder. He knows us thereby
altogether, whether we like it or not; but the 'searching' of my text is
one which He cannot put in force without our consent. We have to confess
our sins unto the Lord ere this kind of divine scrutiny can be brought
to bear. By His natural Omniscience, He knows them altogether, but the
seeing which is preparatory to destroying them depends on our
willingness to submit ourselves to the often painful process by which He
drags our sins to light. Do you want Him to come and search your hearts,
and tell you in your spirits what He has found there? Do you desire to
know your hidden evil? Then keep close to Him, and tell Him what the sin
is which you know to be sin; and ask Him to show you what the sins are
which, as yet, you have not grown up to the height of understanding and
acknowledging.

II. Next, there follows the longing for the divine testing of our
thoughts.

Now you will have observed, I suppose, that in the second clause of my
text, 'try me, and know my thoughts' the result of the investigation is
somewhat different from that of the previous clause. The 'searching'
issued in a divine knowledge of the heart; the 'trying,' or testing,
issues in a divine knowledge of the thoughts. The distinction between
these two, in the Biblical use of the expressions, is not precisely the
same as in our modern popular speech. We are accustomed to talk of the
heart as being the seat of emotions, affections, feelings, whereas we
relegate thoughts to the head. But Scripture does not quite take that
metaphorical view. In it the heart is the centre of personal being, and
out of it there come, not only emotions and loves, but 'thoughts and
intents.' The difference, then, between these two, 'heart' and
'thoughts' is this, the one is the workshop and the other is the
product. The heart is the place where the thoughts are elaborated. So
you see the process of the Psalmist's prayer is from the centre a little
outwards, first the inmost self, and then the 'thoughts,' meaning
thereby the whole web of activities, both intellectual and emotional, of
which the heart, in his sense of the word, is the seat and source. In
like manner as the field of investigation is somewhat shifted in the
second petition, so the manner of investigation is correspondingly
different. 'Search' is the divine scrutiny of the inner man by the eye;
'test' is the trial as metals are tried and proved by the fiery furnace.

So, then, the innermost man is searched by the divine knowledge, and the
thoughts which the innermost man produces are tested by the divine
providence. And our second petition is for a trial by facts, by external
agencies, of the true nature and character of the purposes, desires,
designs, intentions, as well as of the affections and loves and joys.
That is to say, this second prayer submits absolutely to any discipline,
fiery and fierce and bitter, by which the true character of a man's
activities may be made clear to himself. Oh! it is a prayer easily
offered; hard to stand by. It is a prayer often answered in ways that
drive us almost to despair. It means, 'Do anything with me, put me into
any seven-fold heated furnace of sorrow, do anything that will melt my
hardness, and run off my dross, which Thy great ladle will then skim
away, that the surface may be clear, and the substance without alloy.'

Do you pray that prayer, brother! knowing all that it means, and being
willing to take the answer, in forms that may rack your heart, and
sadden your whole lives? If you are wise, you will. Better to go
crippled into life than, 'having two hands or two feet, to be cast into
hell fire'! Better to be saved though maimed, than to be entire and
lost.

'Try me.' It is an awful prayer. Let us not offer it lightly, or
unadvisedly; but if we are wise let it be our inmost desire. And when
the answer comes, and sorrows fall, do not let us murmur, do not let us
kick, do not let us wonder, but let us say, 'Thou art a God that hearest
prayer,' and 'I will glorify God in the fires.' Then 'the trial of your
faith being much more precious than of gold that perisheth, though it be
tried with fire, shall be found unto praise and honour and glory.'

III. The next petition of my text is a longing for the casting out of
evil.

'See if there be any wicked way in me.' Now, that _if_ is not the 'if'
of doubt whether any such 'ways' are in the man, but it is the 'if' of
consciousness that there are such, though what they are he may not
clearly discern. And so, it is the 'if' of humility--knowing that he is
not justified because he knows nothing against himself--and not the 'if'
of presumption.

I have only time to observe here, in a word or two, what would well
deserve more expanded treatment, and that is, the very striking and
significant expression here employed for this evil way that the Psalmist
desires to be detected, that it may be cast out. The word rendered
'wicked'--or more properly, wickedness--is literally 'forced labour,'
which was, in old times, and still is in some countries, laid upon the
inhabitants at the command of authority; and then, because forced labour
is grievous labour, it comes to mean sorrow. So the 'way of wickedness'
that the Psalmist feels is in him is the way of compulsory service, and
the way that leads to sorrow. That is to say, all sin is slavery, and
all sin leads to a bitter and a bad end, and its fruit is death. And so,
because the man feels that his better self is in bondage, and
shudderingly apprehends that the courses which he pursues can only end
in bitterness and misery, he turns to God and asks Him that He would
enlighten him as to what these fatal courses are. 'See if there be any
way of wickedness in me,' because he is quite sure that the evil which
God sees, God will help him to overcome.

Ah, friends! we all have such ways deeply lodged within us, and we do
not always know that we have; but if we will turn ourselves to Him, He
will prevent our 'condemning ourselves in things that we allow' and
increasing the sensitiveness of our consciences, He will teach us that
many things that we did not know to be wrong are harmful.

As soon as we learn that they are, He will help us to cast them out. God
has nothing to do with our evil but to fight against it. Be sure of
this, that whatsoever evil in us He thus searches and shows us. He does
so in order to fling it from us. He goes down into the cellars of our
hearts, with the candle of His Spirit in His hand, in order that He may
lay hold of all the explosives there, and having drenched them so that
they shall not catch fire, may cast them clean out so that they may not
blow us to destruction.

IV. The last petition of my text is for guidance in 'the everlasting
way.'

The 'ways of wickedness' are in us; the 'way everlasting' we need to be
led into. That is to say, naturally we incline to evil; it must be the
divine hand and the divine Spirit that lead our feet in the paths of
righteousness. When we ask Him to 'guide us in the way everlasting,' we
ask that we may know what is duty, and that we may incline to do it. And
He answers it by the gift of His divine Spirit, by the quickening of our
consciences, by bringing nearer to our hearts the great Example who has
left us His footsteps as a legacy that we may tread in them.

Whosoever walks in Christ's footsteps is walking in 'the way
everlasting,' for that path is rightly so named which leads to eternal
blessedness. It is everlasting, too, inasmuch as nothing of human effort
or work abides except that which is in conformity with the will of God,
and inasmuch as it, and it alone, is not broken short off by death, but
runs, borne upon one mighty arch that spans the gorge, clean across the
black abyss, and continues straight on in the same course, only with a
swifter upward gradient, through all the ages of eternity. The man who
here has lived for God will live yonder as he has lived here, only more
completely and more joyously for ever. 'A highway shall be there, and a
way, and the ransomed of the Lord shall return and come to Zion with
songs, and everlasting joy upon their heads.'




THE INCENSE OF PRAYER


    'Let my prayer be set forth before Thee as incense, and the lifting
    up of my hands as the evening sacrifice.'--PSALM cxli. 2.

The place which this psalm occupies in the Psalter, very near its end,
makes it probable that it is considerably later in date than the prior
portions of the collection. But the Psalmist, who here penetrates to the
inmost meaning of the symbolic sacrificial worship of the Old Testament,
was not helped to his clear-sightedness by his date, but by his
devotion. For throughout the Old Testament you find side by side these
two trends of thought--a scrupulous carefulness for the observance of
all the requirements of ritual worship, and a clear-eyed recognition
that it was all external and symbolical and prophetic. Who was it that
said 'Obedience is better than sacrifice, and to hearken than the fat of
rams'? Samuel, away back in the times when many scholars tell us that
the loftier conceptions of worship had not yet emerged. Similar
utterances are scattered throughout the Old Testament, and the
prominence given to the more spiritual side depends not on the speaker's
date but on his disposition and devotion. So here this Psalmist, because
his soul was filled with true longings after God, passes clear through
the externals and says, 'Here am I with no incense, but I have brought
my prayer. I am empty-handed, but because my hands are empty, I lift
them up to Thee; and Thou dost accept them, as if they were--yea, rather
than if they were--filled with the most elaborate and costly
sacrifices.'

So here are two thoughts suggested, which sound mere commonplace, but if
we realised them, in our religious life, that life would be
revolutionised; first, the incense of prayer; second, the sacrifice of
the empty-handed. Let us look at these two points.

I. The Incense of Prayer. 'Let my prayer come before Thee as incense.'

Now, that symbol of incense is thus used in many places in Scripture. I
need only remind you of one or two instances. You remember how, when the
father of John the Baptist went into the Holy Place, as was his priestly
duty at the time of the offering of the evening oblation, the whole
multitude were in the Outer Court praying; he in the Inner Court,
presenting the symbolical worship, and they, without, offering the real.
Then, if we turn to the grand imagery of the Book of the Revelation,
where we find the heavenly temple opened up to our reverent gaze, we
read that the elders, the representatives of redeemed humanity, have
'golden bowls full of odours, which are the prayers of the saints.' So
there is no fancifulness in interpreting the incense of the ancient
ritual as meaning simply the prayers of devout hearts. Of course there
has been a great deal of nonsense talked about the symbolical
signification of these Old Testament rites, and there is need for sober
sense to put the rein upon a vivid imagination in interpreting these;
still clear utterances of Scripture as well as this verse itself remove
all need for hesitation to accept this meaning of the symbol.

Now, let me remind you of the place which the Altar of Incense occupied.
The Temple was divided into three courts, the Outer Court, the Holy
Place, and the Holiest of All. The Altar of Incense stood in the second
of these, the Holy Place; the Altar of Burnt Offering stood in the court
without. It was not until that Altar, with its expiatory sacrifice, had
been passed, that one could enter into the Holy Place, where the Altar
of Incense stood. There were three pieces of furniture in that Place,
the Altar of Incense, the Golden Candlestick, and the Table of the
Shewbread. Of these three, the Altar of Incense stood in the centre.
Twice a day the incense was kindled upon it by a priest, by means of
live coals brought from the Altar of Burnt Offering in the Outer Court,
and, thus kindled, the wreaths of fragrant smoke ascended on high. All
day long the incense smouldered upon the altar; twice a day it was
kindled into a bright flame.

Now, if we take these things with us, we can understand a little more of
the depth and beauty of this prayer, and see how much it tells us of
what we, as the priests of the most High God--which we are, if we are
Christian people at all--ought to have in our censers.

I need not dwell upon the careful and sedulous preparation from pure
spices which went to the making of the incense. So we have to prepare
ourselves by sedulous purity if there is to be any life or power in our
devotions. But I pass from that, and ask you to think of the lovely
picture of true devoutness given in that inflamed incense, wreathing in
coils of fragrance up to the heavens. Prayer is more than petition. It
is the going up of the whole soul towards God. Brother! do you know
anything of that instinctive and spontaneous rising up of desire and
aspiration and faith and love, up and up and up, until  they reach Him?
Do you realise that just in the measure in which we set our minds as
well as our affections, and our affections as well as our minds, on the
things which are above, just to that extent, and not one hairsbreadth
further, have we the right to call ourselves Christians at all? I fear
me that for the great mass of Christian professors the great bulk of
their lives creeps along the low levels like the mists in winter, that
hug the marshes instead of rising, swirling up like an incense cloud,
impelled by nothing but the fire in the censer up and up towards God.
Let us each ask the question for himself, Is my prayer '_directed_'--as
is the true meaning of the Hebrew word--'before Thee as incense'?

Remember, too, that the incense lay dead, unfragrant, and with no
capacity of soaring, till it was kindled; that is to say, unless there
is a flame in my heart there will be no rising of my aspirations to God.
Cold prayers do not go up more than a foot or two above the ground; they
have no power to soar. There must be the inflaming before there can be
the mounting of the aspiration. You cannot get a balloon to go up unless
the gas within it is warmer than the atmosphere round it. It is because
we are habitually such tepid Christians that we are so tongue-tied in
prayer.

Where was the incense kindled from? From coals brought from the Altar of
Burnt Offering in the outer court; that is to say, light the fire in
your heart with a coal brought from Christ's sacrifice, and then it will
flame; and only then will love well upwards and desires be set on the
things above. The beginning of Christian fervour lies in the habitual
realising as a fact of the great love which 'loved me and gave itself
for me.' There is no patent way of getting a vivid Christian  experience
except the old way of clinging close to Jesus Christ the Saviour; and in
order to do that, we have to think about Him, as well as to feel about
Him, a great deal more than I fear the most of us do.

Further, does not this lovely symbol of my text suggest to us a glorious
thought, the acceptableness even of our poor prayers, if they come from
hearts inflamed with love because of Christ's great redeeming love? The
Psalmist, thinking humbly of himself and of the worth of anything that
he can bring, says, 'Let my prayer come before Thee as incense,' an
'odour of a sweet smell, acceptable to God'; yes, even our prayers will
be sweet to Him if they are prayers of true aspiration and mounting
faith, leaping from a kindled heart, kindled at the great flame of
Christ's love.

Were you ever in a Roman Catholic cathedral? Did you ever see there the
little boys that carry the censers, swinging them backwards and forwards
every now and then, and by means of the silver chains lifting the
covers? What is that for? Because the incense would go out unless the
air was let into it. So a constant effort is needed in order to keep the
incense of our prayers alight. We have to swing the censer to get rid of
the things that make our hearts cold; we have to stir the fire, and only
so shall we keep up our devotion. Remember the incense burned all day
long on the altar; though perhaps but smouldering, like the banked-up
fires in the furnaces of a steamer that lies at anchor, still the glow
was there; and twice a day there came the priest with his pan full of
fresh glowing coals from the altar in the Outer Court, and kindled it up
into a flame once more. Which things are thus far an allegory that our
devotion is to be diffused throughout our lives in a lambent glow, and
if it is, it will have to be fed by special acts of worship day by day.

You hear people talk of not caring about times and seasons of prayer,
and of the beauty of making all life a prayer. Amen! I say so too. But
depend upon it that there will never be devotion diffused through life
unless there is devotion concentrated at points in the life. There must
be reservoirs as well as pipes in order to supply the water through the
whole city. So the incense is perpetually to be heaped on the Altar of
Incense, but also it is to be stirred to a fragrant blaze and fed,
morning and evening, by fresh coals from the altar.

II. Now let me say a word about the other thought here--the sacrifice of
the empty-handed.

'The lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice.' In accordance
with the genius of Hebrew poetry the same general idea is repeated in
the second member of the parallelism, but with modifications. What is
implied in likening the uplifted empty hands to the evening sacrifice?
First, it is a confession of impotent emptiness, a lifting up of
expectant hands to be filled with the gift from God. And, says this
Psalmist, 'Because I bring nothing in my hand, Thou dost accept me, as
if I came laden with offerings.' That is just a picturesque way of
putting a familiar, threadbare truth, which, threadbare as it is, needs
to be laid to heart a great deal more by us, that our true worship and
truest honour of God lies not in giving but in taking. 'He is not
worshipped with men's hands, as though He needed anything, seeing that
He giveth to all life, and breath, and all things.' That one truth, Paul
felt on Mars Hill, was sure enough to make all the temples and statues
by which he was surrounded  crumble into nothingness. But it does not
merely destroy idolatry. It cuts up by the root much of what we call
Christian worship. How many people worship because they think they
ought? How many people talk about Christian worship as being a
duty--'Our duty we have now performed'? How many have never had a
glimpse of this thought, that God wills us to draw near to Him, not
because it pleases Him but because it blesses us, and that we are to
worship, not in order that we may bring anything, either the sacrifices
of bulls and goats, or the more refined ones that we bring nowadays, but
in order that, bringing our emptiness into touch with His infinite
fulness, as much of that fulness as we need to make us full, and as much
of that blessedness as we need to make us blessed, may pass into our
lives. Oh! if we understand 'the giving God,' as James calls Him in his
letter; and if we had learned the old lesson of that fiftieth Psalm, 'If
I were hungry I would not tell thee.... Will I eat  the flesh of bulls
and drink the blood of goats? He that offereth praise glorifieth Me, and
to him that  ordereth his conversation aright will I show the salvation
of God'--if we had learned that, and laid it to heart, and applied it to
our own worship and our lives, mountains of misconception would be
lifted away from many hearts. In our service we do not need to bring any
merit of our own. This great principle destroys not only the gross
externalities of heathen sacrifice, and the notion that worship is a
duty, but it destroys the other notion of our having to bring anything
to deserve God's gifts. And so it is an encouragement to us when we feel
ourselves to be what we are, and what we should always feel ourselves to
be, empty-handed, coming to Him not only with hearts  that aspire like
incense, but with petitions that confess our need, and cast ourselves
upon His grace. See that you desire what God wishes to give; see that
you go to Him for what He does give. See that you give to Him the only
thing that He does wish, or that it lies in your power to give, and that
is yourself.

  Nothing in my hand I bring,
  Simply to Thy Cross I cling.

'Let the lifting of my hands be as the evening sacrifice';  as the
Psalmist has it in another place, 'What shall I render to the Lord for
all His benefits?'--it is not a question of rendering, but 'I will
_take_ the cup of salvation.' Taking is our truest worship, and the
lifting up of empty, expectant hands is, in God's sight, as the evening
sacrifice.




THE PRAYER OF PRAYERS


    'Teach me to do Thy will; for Thou art my God! Thy spirit is good;
    lead me into the land of uprightness.'--PSALM cxliii. 10.

These two clauses mean substantially the same thing. The Psalmist's
longings are expressed in the first of them in plain words, and in the
second in a figure. 'To do God's will' is to be in 'the land of
uprightness.' That phrase, in its literal application, means a stretch
of level country, and hence is naturally employed as an emblem of a
moral or religious condition. A life of obedience to the will of God is
likened to some far stretching plain, easy to traverse, broken by no
barren mountains or frowning cliffs, but basking, peaceful and fruitful,
beneath the smile of God. Into such a garden of the Lord the Psalmist
prays to be led.

In each case his prayer is based upon a motive or plea. 'Thou art my
God'; his faith apprehends a personal bond between him and God, and
feels that that bond obliges God to teach him His will. If we adopt the
reading in our Bibles of our second clause a still deeper and more
wonderful plea is presented there. 'Thy Spirit is good,' and therefore
the trusting spirit has a right to ask to be made good likewise. The
relation of the believing spirit to God not only obliges God to teach it
His will, but to make it partaker of His own image and conformed to His
own purity. So high on wings of faith and desire soared this man, who,
at the beginning of his psalm, was crushed to the dust by enemies and by
dangers. So high we may rise by like means.

I. Notice, then, first, the supreme desire of the devout soul.

We do not know who wrote this psalm. The superscription says that it was
David's, and although its place in the Psalter seems to suggest another
author, the peculiar fervour and closeness of intimacy with God which
breathes through it are like the Davidic psalms, and seem to confirm the
superscription. If so, it will naturally fall into its place with the
others which were pressed from his heart by the rebellion of Absalom.
But be that as it may, whosoever wrote the psalm, was a man in extremest
misery and peril, and as he says of himself, 'persecuted,'
'overwhelmed,' 'desolate.' The tempest blows him to the Throne of God,
and when he is there, what does he ask? Deliverance? Scarcely. In one
clause, and again at the end, as if by a kind of after-thought, he asks
for the removal of the calamities. But the main burden of his prayer is
for a closer knowledge of God, the sound of His lovingkindness in his
inward  ear, light to show him the way wherein he should walk, and the
sweet sunshine of God's face upon his heart. There is a better thing to
ask than exemption from sorrows, even grace to bear them rightly. The
supreme desire of the devout soul is practical conformity to the will of
God. For the prayer of our text is not 'Teach me to _know_ Thy will.'
The Psalmist, indeed, has asked _that_ in a previous clause--'Cause me
to know the way wherein I should walk.' But knowledge is not all that we
need, and the gulf between knowledge and practice is so deep that after
we have prayed that we may be caused to know the way, and have received
the answer, there still remains the need for God's help that knowledge
may become life, and that all which we understand we may do. To such
practical conformity to the will of God all other aspects of religion
are meant to be subservient.

Christianity is a revelation of truth, but to accept it as such is not
