
III. Well, then, still further connected with this first idea of the
lesson and significance of the distribution of the bread, I think we
may take another consideration, which is, in fact, only another
application of the one I have already been suggesting--Where Christ
is invited as a guest, He becomes the host.

They constrained Him to abide with them; they made Him welcome to
their rude hospitality. It was little--a hut where poor men lay, a
bit of barley-bread. But it was theirs, and they gave it Him; and He
entered in and supped with them, and then, in the middle of it, the
relations were inverted, and they that had been showing the
hospitality became the guests, and the table that had been theirs
became His. 'And He took the bread and gave it to them.' You have
the same inversion of relation in that first miracle that He wrought
at Cana of Galilee, where invited as a guest, at a point in the
entertainment He provides the supplies for the further conduct of
it. You remember the words which contain the spiritual application
of the same thought--'Behold, I stand at the door and knock. If any
man open the door, I will enter in and sup with him and he with Me.'
To put away the metaphor, it amounts to this--our Master never comes
empty-handed. Where He is invited, He comes to bestow; where He is
welcomed, He comes with His gifts; where we say, 'Do Thou take what
I offer,' He says, 'Do thou take Myself.' All His requirements are
veiled promises; all His commandments are assurances of His gifts.
He bestows that He may receive; He seems to take that He may enrich.
They that give to Christ receive back again more than all that they
gave, according to the profound words, 'There is no man that hath
left father or mother, or wife or children, or houses or lands, for
My sake and the Gospel's, but shall receive a hundredfold more in
this life, and in the world to come life everlasting.' The Christ
that is asked to come in order to receive, abides in order to
bestow.

And then there is a second point, going on with the flow of this
little narrative before us, about which a word or two may be said.
The consequence of this assumption of the position of master, host,
bestower is--'Their eyes were opened, and they knew Him.' The
discovery of His person follows on the distribution of His gifts.

Now, there is one point to be remarked before I deal with the
lessons which I think are capable of being gathered from this part
of our subject, and that is, that this narrative gives no sort of
support, as it seems to me, to the ordinary notion that, subsequent
to the Resurrection, there had passed upon our Lord's corporeal
frame any change whatsoever as the commencement of the glorification
of His earthly body. If you observe, the course of the narrative
takes pains to point out to us distinctly, that whatever may have
been the reason why they did not recognise Him at first, that reason
was entirely in them, and not at all in Him. It is not that He was
changed; it is that 'their eyes were holden'; and when they did
recognise Him, it is not that any change whatsoever is recorded as
having passed upon Him, but 'their eyes were opened, and they knew
Him.' And the same thing may be said, as I believe, about the whole
of the appearances, mysterious as they were, of our Lord, in the
interval between the Resurrection and the Ascension. I do not think,
for my part, (although I would by no means speak with confidence
about a matter that is so fragmentarily dealt with in Scripture),
but I do not think, for my part, that the narrative gives any
support whatsoever to the idea of any change analogous to that which
takes place upon us at our resurrection, having begun to take place
upon our Lord so long as He remained upon earth. The Ascension and
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, in His case, are parts of one
process. He was raised with the body with which He was crucified; He
ascended up on high, and there the glorification, as far as
Scripture teaches, is, I conceive, commenced. At all events, there
is nothing in our narrative to support the idea of an incipient
transformation having begun with the Resurrection.

But, passing by that, which has nothing to do with my main present
purpose, I may notice just one or two considerations in reference to
this discovery of our Lord. And the first and main one that I would
suggest is this--Where Christ is loved and desired, the veriest
trifles of common life may be the means of His discovery.  We know not
what was the special point which brought dormant remembrance to life
again, and quickened the associations of the two, so that they knew
Jesus; even as we do not know what was the hindrance, whether
supernatural or whether by reason of their own fault, which prevented
the earlier recognition; but this at least we see, that in all
probability something in the manner of taking the bread and breaking
it, the well-remembered action of the Master, brought back to mind
the whole of the former relation, and a rush of associations and
memories pulled away the veil and scaled off the mists from their
eyes. And so, dear brethren, if we have loving, and waiting, and
Christ-desiring spirits, everything in this world--the common meal,
the events of every day, the most veritable trifles of our earthly
relationships--they will all have hooks and barbs, as it were, which
will draw after them thoughts of Him. There is nothing so small but
that to it there may be attached some filament which will bring after
it the whole majesty and grace of Christ and His love. Whether ye eat
or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all in remembrance of Him, and do
all to His glory. Oh, if we had in our inmost spirits a closer
fellowship with Him, and a truer relation to Him, we should be more
quick of apprehension. And, as in regard to those that we love, when
they are away from us, the fold of a garment, some bit of cloth lying
about the room, something upon the table, some common incident of the
day that used to be done in company with them, may bring a flood of
memories that sometimes is too strong for a weak heart, so with the
Lord, if we loved Him--everything would be (as it is to those whose
ears are purged) vocal with His name, and everything would be flushed
with the light that falls from His face, and everything would suffice
to remind us of our love, our hope, our joy. Especially let us
remember that He has entrusted--with strange humility and with
wonderful knowledge of us, and with the truest sympathy and tenderness
for our weakness--He has entrusted a large portion of our most
spiritual remembrance and recognition of Him to material things. Did it
ever strike you what a depth of what I may call Christ's condescension
there lay in this? 'Take this bread and this wine, and if you will not
remember Me because I loved you so well, if you will not remember Me
because I died for you, if earthly things and material realities will
drive Me out of your thoughts, at least remember Me because and when
earthly things and material realities become My agents and My
memorials. If you forget the Cross, perhaps a bit of bread will remind
you of Me; and I am not too proud to spurn the remembrance that roots
itself even in the material things of earth and by such means as that.'
'He took the bread and brake it.' They had listened to all His words
upon the road, and it never occurred to them who He was; they had walked
beside Him all day long, and even their burning hearts did not make them
suspect that it was the Master. It must needs be so--they whom wisdom
and truth and His spiritual Presence cannot teach to recognise, may be
led to recognise Him by the movement of His hands with the barley loaf,
and some intonation of His voice in blessing it. 'This do in remembrance
of Me' is the word of that deep pity that knows our frame and remembers
that we are dust, and is a word of the most marvellous condescension
that ever was uttered in human ears.

IV. And then there is the final consideration here upon which I
touch but for a moment. The distribution and the discovery are
followed by the disappearance of the Lord, 'They knew Him, and'--and
what? And He let their hearts run over in thankful words? No. 'They
knew Him,' and so they all went back to Jerusalem happy together?
No. 'They knew Him, and--He vanished out of their sight.' Yes, for
two reasons. First, because when Christ's Presence is recognised
sense may be put aside. 'It is expedient for you that I go away.'
You and I, dear brethren, need no visible manifestation; we have
lost nothing though we have lost the bodily Presence of our Master.
It is more than made up to us, as He Himself assures us, and as we
shall see ourselves if we think for a moment, by the clearer
knowledge of His spiritual verity and stature, by the deeper
experience of the profounder aspects of His mission and message, by
the indwelling Spirit, and by the knowledge of Him working evermore
for us all. His going is a step in advance. 'If I go not away the
Comforter will not come to you; but if I depart, I will send Him
unto you.' The earthly manifestation was only the basis and the
platform for that which is purer and deeper in kind, and more
precious and powerful; and when the platform has been laid, then
there is no need for the continuance thereof. And so, when He was
manifested to the heart He disappeared from the eyes; and we, who
have not beheld Him, stand upon no lower level than they who did,
for the voice of our experience is, 'Whom having not seen we love;
in whom, though now we see Him not, yet believing, we rejoice with
joy that is unspeakable and full of glory.'

And for another reason.--When Christ is discerned there is work to
be done. 'Their eyes were opened, and they knew Him, and He vanished
out of their sight; and ... they rose up that same hour; and
returned to Jerusalem' and said, He was known to us in breaking of
bread, and He talked with us by the way. Yes, the vision of Christ
binds us to work, and while the more close and intimate and silent
communion has its rights and its place in life, it is never to be
made a substitute for the active exercise of our Christian vocation
to bear witness of Him, and to tell His name to those who need the
consolation of His Resurrection, and the joyful news that He lives
to bless. So then that meal by the wayside may stand as type and
symbol of the way in which we, like the two pedestrians on the road
and at the table, may have heart intercourse with Jesus, and may be
impelled thereby to labour for Him.

There was another time, after the Resurrection, when in like manner
we read that our Lord took bread, and blessed and brake and gave it
to them; and that was in that mysterious meal upon the shores of the
Galilean Lake, which has always been recognised as having a
symbolical meaning--though the exposition and detail have often been
exaggerated and made absurd. In the one case it was two travellers
who met their Lord; it was in an inn that the recognition took
place; it was a brief moment of vision, followed by disappearance,
and the disappearance led on to work; but in the other story it was
when the morning broke that the Lord was manifest; it was after the
night of toil that His form appeared; His words to them were, 'Bring
of the fruits of your labours and lay them upon the beach at My
feet.' And in the light of the eternal morning, after the weary
night of toil, they who on earth in their journey and pilgrimage
have had Him walking with them as third in their sweet society, and
sitting with them in the tents and changeful residences of earth,
may expect to find Him waiting for them upon the shore; and, as one
says, 'It is the Lord!' and another dashes through the water to
reach Christ, the invitation to all of them will be, 'Come and sit
with Me at My table in My kingdom; I provide the meal, and you add
to it by that which you have caught.' 'They rest from their labours
and their works do follow them.' And so 'they go no more out, but
are ever with the Lord.'




PETER ALONE WITH JESUS


    'The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon.'
    --LUKE xxiv. 34.

The other appearances of the risen Lord to individuals on the day of
Resurrection are narrated with much particularity, and at
considerable length. John gives us the lovely account of our Lord's
conversation with Mary Magdalene, Luke gives us in full detail the
story of the interview with the two travellers on the road to
Emmaus. Here is another appearance, known to 'the eleven, and them
that were with them' on the Resurrection evening, and enumerated by
Paul in his list of the appearances of the Lord, the account of
which was the common gospel of himself and all the others, and yet
deep silence is preserved in regard to it. No word escaped Peter's
lips as to what passed in the conversation between the denier and
his Lord. That is very significant.

The other appearances of the risen Lord to individuals on the day of
Resurrection suggest their own reasons. He appeared first to Mary
Magdalene because she loved much. The love that made a timid woman
brave, and the sorrow that filled her heart, to the exclusion of
everything else, drew Jesus to her. The two on the road to Emmaus
were puzzled, honest, painful seekers after truth. It was worth
Christ's while to spend hours of that day of Resurrection in
clearing, questioning, and confirming sincere minds. Does not this
other appearance explain itself? The brief spasm of cowardice and
denial had changed into penitence when the Lord looked, and the
bitter tears that fell were not only because of the denial, but
because of the wound of that sharp arrow, the poisoned barb of which
we are happy if we have not felt the thought--'He will never know
how ashamed and miserable I am; and His last look was reproach, and
I shall never see His face any more.' To respond to, and to satisfy,
love, to clear and to steady thought, to soothe the agony of a
penitent, were worthy works for the risen Lord. I venture to think
that such a record of the use of such a day bears historical truth
on its very face, because it is so absolutely unlike what myth-making
or hallucination, or the excited imagination of enthusiasts would
have produced, if these had been the sources of the story of the
Resurrection. But apart from that, I wish in this sermon to try to
gather the suggestions that come to us from this interview, and from
the silence which is observed concerning them.

With regard to--

I. The fact of the appearance itself.

We can only come into the position rightly to understand its
precious significance, if we try to represent to ourselves the state
of mind of the man to whom it was granted. I have already touched
upon that; let me, in the briefest possible way, recapitulate. As I
have said, the momentary impulse to the cowardly crime passed, and
left a melted heart, true penitence, and profound sorrow. One sad
day slowly wore away. Early on the next came the message which
produced an effect on Peter so great, that the gospel, which in some
sense is his gospel (I mean that 'according to Mark') alone contains
the record of it--the message from the open grave: 'Tell my
disciples _and Peter_ that I go before you into Galilee.' There
followed the sudden rush to the grave, when the feet made heavy by a
heavy conscience were distanced by the light step of happy love, and
'the other disciple did outrun Peter.' The more impulsive of the two
dashed into the sepulchre, just as he afterwards threw himself over
the side of the boat, and floundered through the water to get to his
Lord's feet, whilst John was content with looking, just as he
afterwards was content to sit in the boat and say, 'It is the Lord.'
But John's faith, too, outran Peter's, and he departed 'believing,'
whilst Peter only attained to go away 'wondering.' And so another
day wore away, and at some unknown hour in it, Jesus stood before
Peter alone.

What did that appearance say to the penitent man? Of course, it said
to him what it said to all the rest, that death was conquered. It
lifted his thoughts of his Master. It changed his whole atmosphere
from gloom to sunshine, but it had a special message for him. It
said that no fault, no denial, bars or diverts Christ's love. Peter,
no doubt, as soon as the hope of the Resurrection began to dawn upon
him, felt fear contending with his hope, and asked himself, 'If He
is risen, will He ever speak to me again?' And now here He is with a
quiet look on His face that says, 'Notwithstanding thy denial, see,
I have come to thee.'

Ah, brethren! the impulsive fault of a moment, so soon repented of,
so largely excusable, is far more venial than many of our denials.
For a continuous life in contradiction to our profession is a
blacker crime than a momentary fall, and they who, year in and year
out, call themselves Christians, and deny their profession by the
whole tenor of their lives, are more deeply guilty than was the
Apostle, But Jesus Christ comes to us, and no sin of ours, no denial
of ours, can bar out His lingering, His reproachful, and yet His
restoring, love and grace. All sin is inconsistent with the
Christian profession. Blessed be God; we can venture to say that no
sin is incompatible with it, and none bars off wholly the love that
pours upon us all. True; we may shut it out. True; so long as the
smallest or the greatest transgression is unacknowledged and
unrepented, it forms a non-conducting medium around us, and isolates
us from the electric touch of that gracious love. But also true; it
is there hovering around us, seeking an entrance. If the door be
shut, still the knocking finger is upon it, and the great heart of
the Knocker is waiting to enter. Though Peter had been a denier,
because he was a penitent the Master came to him. No fault, no sin,
cuts us off from the love of our Lord.

And then the other great lesson, closely connected with this, but
yet capable of being treated separately for a moment, which we
gather from the fact of the interview, is that Jesus Christ is
always near the sorrowing heart that confesses its evil. He knew of
Peter's penitence, if I might so say, in the grave; and, therefore,
risen, His feet hasted to comfort and to soothe him. As surely as
the shepherd hears the bleat of the lost sheep in the snowdrift, as
surely as the mother hears the cry of her child, so surely is a
penitent heart a magnet which draws Christ, in all His potent
fullness and tenderness, to itself. He that heard and knew the tears
of the denier, and his repentance, when in the dim regions of the
dead, no less hears and knows the first faint beginnings of sorrow
for sin, and bends down from His seat on the right hand of God,
saying, 'I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also that is
of a humble and contrite spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble,
and to revive the heart of the contrite ones.' No fault bars
Christ's love. Christ is ever near the penitent spirit; and whilst
he is yet a great way off, He has compassion, and runs and falls on
his neck and kisses him.

Now let us look at--

II. The interview of which we know nothing.

We know nothing of what did pass; we know what must have passed.
There is only one way by which a burdened soul can get rid of its
burden. There is only one thing that a conscience-stricken denier
can say to his Saviour. And--blessed be God!--there is only one
thing that a Saviour can say to a conscience-stricken denier. There
must have been penitence with tears; there must have been full
absolution and remission. And so we are not indulging in baseless
fancies when we say that we know what passed in that conversation,
of which no word ever escaped the lips of either party concerned. So
then, with that knowledge, just let me dwell upon one or two
considerations suggested.

One is that the consciousness of Christ's love, uninterrupted by our
transgression, is the mightiest power to deepen penitence and the
consciousness of unworthiness. Do you not think that when the
Apostle saw in Christ's face, and heard from His lips, the full
assurance of forgiveness, he was far more ashamed of himself than he
had ever been in the hours of bitterest remorse? So long as there
blends with the sense of my unworthiness any doubt about the free,
full, unbroken flow of the divine love to me, my sense of my own
unworthiness is disturbed. So long as with the consciousness of
demerit there blends that thought--which often is used to produce
the consciousness, viz., the dread of consequences, the fear of
punishment--my consciousness of sin is disturbed. But sweep away
fear of penalty, sweep away hesitation as to the divine love, then I
am left face to face with the unmingled vision of my own evil, and
ten thousand times more than ever before do I recognise how black my
transgression has been; as the prophet puts it with profound truth,
'Thou shalt be ashamed and confounded, and never open thy mouth any
more, because of thy sins, when I am pacified towards thee for all
that thou hast done.' If you would bring a man to know how bad he
is, do not brandish a whip before his face, or talk to him about an
angry God. You may bray a fool in a mortar, and his foolishness will
not depart from him. You may break a man down with these violent
pestles, and you will do little more. But get him, if I may continue
the metaphor, not into the mortar, but set him in the sunshine of
the divine love, and that will do more than break, it will melt the
hardest heart that no pestle would do anything but triturate. The
great evangelical doctrine of full and free forgiveness through
Jesus Christ produces a far more vital, vigorous, transforming
recoil from transgression than anything besides. 'Do we make void
the law through faith? God forbid! Yea, we establish the law.'

Then, further, another consideration may be suggested, and that is
that the acknowledgment of sin is followed by immediate forgiveness.
Do you think that when Peter turned to his Lord, who had come from
the grave to soothe him, and said, 'I have sinned,' there was any
pause before He said, 'and thou art forgiven'? The only thing that
keeps the divine love from flowing into a man's heart is the barrier
of unforgiven, because unrepented, sin. So soon as the acknowledgment
of sin takes away the barrier--of course, by a force as natural as
gravitation--the river of God's love flows into the heart. The
consciousness of forgiveness may be gradual; the fact of forgiveness
is instantaneous. And the consciousness may be as instantaneous as
the fact, though it often is not. 'I believe in the forgiveness of
sins'; and I believe that a man, that you, may at one moment be held
and bound by the chains of sin, and that at the next moment, as when
the angel touched the limbs of this very Apostle in prison, the
chains may drop from off ankles and wrists, and the prisoner may be
free to follow the angel into light and liberty. Sometimes the change
is instantaneous, and there is no reason why it should not be an
instantaneous change, experienced at this moment, by any man or woman
among us. Sometimes it is gradual. The Arctic spring comes with a
leap, and one day there is thick-ribbed ice, and a few days after
there are grass and flowers. A like swift transformation is within
the limits of possibility for any of us, and--blessed be God! within
the experience of a good many of us. There is no reason why it should
not be that of each of us, as well as of this Apostle.

Then there is one other thought that I would suggest, viz., that the
man who is led through consciousness of sin and experience of
uninterrupted love which is forgiveness, is thereby led into a
higher and a nobler life. Peter's bitter fall, Peter's gracious
restoration, were no small part of the equipment which made him what
we see him in the days after Pentecost--when the coward that had
been ashamed to acknowledge his Master, and all whose impulsive and
self-reliant devotion passed away before a flippant servant-girl's
tongue, stood before the rulers of Israel, and said: 'Whether it be
right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more than unto God,
judge ye!' The sense of sin, the assurance of pardon, shatter a
man's unwholesome self-confidence, and develop his self-reliance
based upon his trust in Jesus Christ. The consciousness of sin, and
the experience of pardon, deepen and make more operative in life the
power of the divine love. Thus, the publicans and the harlots do go
into the Kingdom of God many a time before the Pharisees. So let us
all be sure that even our sins and faults may be converted into
stepping stones to higher things.

III. Lastly, notice the deep silence in which this interview is
shrouded.

I have already pointed to the occupations of that Resurrection day
as bearing on their face the marks of veracity. It seems to me that
if the story of the Resurrection is not history, the talk between
the denier and the Master would have been a great deal too tempting
a subject for romancers of any kind to have kept their hands off. If
you read the apocryphal gospels you will see how eager they are to
lay hold of any point in the true gospels, and spin a whole farrago
of rubbish round about it. And do you think they could ever have let
this incident alone without spoiling it by expanding it, and putting
all manner of vulgarities into their story about it? But the men who
told the story were telling simple facts, and when they did not know
anything they said nothing.

But why did not Peter say anything about it? Because nobody had
anything to do with it but himself  and his Master. It was his
business, and no one else's. The other scene by the lake reinstated
him in his office, and it was public because it concerned others
also; but what passed when he was restored to his faith was of no
concern to any one but the Restorer and the restored. And so, dear
friends, a religion which has a great deal to say about its
individual experiences is in very slippery places. The less you
think about your emotions, and eminently the less you talk about
them, the sounder, the truer, and the purer they will be. Goods in a
shop-window get fly-blown very quickly, and lose their lustre. All
the deep secrets of a man's life, his love for his Lord, the way by
which he came to Him, his penitence for his sin, like his love for
his wife, had better speak in deeds than in words to others. Of
course while that is true on one side, we are not to forget the
other side. Reticence as to the secret things of my own personal
experience is never to be extended so as to include silence as to
the fact of my Christian profession. Sometimes it is needful, wise,
and Christlike for a man to lift the corner of the bridal curtain,
and let in the day to some extent, and to say, 'Of whom I am chief,
but I obtained mercy.' Sometimes there is no such mighty power to
draw others to the faith which we would fain impart, as to say,
'Whether this Man be a sinner or no, I know not; but one thing I
know, that whereas I was blind now I see.' Sometimes--always--a man
must use his own personal experience, cast into general forms, to
emphasise his profession, and to enforce his appeals. So very
touchingly, if you will turn to Peter's sermons in the Acts, you
will find that he describes himself there (though he does not hint
that it is himself) when he appeals to his countrymen, and says, 'Ye
denied the Holy One and the Just.' The personal allusion would make
his voice vibrate as he spoke, and give force to the charge.
Similarly, in the letter which goes by his name--the second of the
two Epistles of Peter--there is one little morsel of evidence that
makes one inclined to think that it is his, notwithstanding the
difficulties in the way, viz., that he sums up all the sins of the
false teachers whom he is denouncing in this: 'Denying the Lord that
bought them.' But with these limitations, and remembering that the
statement is not one to be unconditionally and absolutely put, let
the silence with regard to this interview teach us to guard the
depths of our own Christian lives.

Now, dear brethren, have you ever gone apart with Jesus Christ, as
if He and you were alone in the world? Have you ever spread out all
your denials and faults before Him? Have you ever felt the swift
assurance of His forgiving love, covering over the whole heap, which
dwindles as His hand lies upon it? Have you ever felt the increased
loathing of yourselves which comes with the certainty that He has
passed by all your sins? If you have not, you know very little about
Christ, or about Christianity (if I may use the abstract word) or
about yourselves; and your religion, or what you call your religion,
is a very shallow and superficial and inoperative thing. Do not
shrink from being alone with Jesus Christ. There is no better place
for a guilty man, just as there is no better place for an erring
child than its mother's bosom. When Peter had caught a dim glimpse
of what Jesus Christ was, he cried: 'Depart from me, for I am a
sinful man, O Lord!' When he knew his Saviour and himself better, he
clung to Him because he was so sinful. Do the same, and He will say
to you: 'Son, thy sins be forgiven thee; Daughter, thy faith hath
made thee whole. Go in peace, and be whole of thy plague.'




THE TRIUMPHANT END


    'And as they thus spake, Jesus Himself stood in the
    midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace be unto you.
    37. But they were terrified and affrighted, and
    supposed that they had seen a spirit. 38. And He said
    unto them, Why are ye troubled? and why do thoughts
    arise in your hearts? 39. Behold My hands and My feet,
    that it is I Myself: handle Me, and see; for a spirit
    hath not flesh and bones, as ye see Me have. 40. And
    when He had thus spoken, He shewed them His hands and
    His feet. 41. And while they yet believed not for joy,
    and wondered, He said unto them, Have ye here any
    meat? 42. And they gave Him a piece of a broiled fish,
    and of an honeycomb. 43. And He took it, and did eat
    before them. 44. And He said unto them, These are the
    words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with
    you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were
    written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and
    in the psalms, concerning Me. 45. Then opened He their
    understanding, that they might understand the
    scriptures, 46. And said unto them, Thus it is written,
    and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from
    the dead the third day: 47. And that repentance and
    remission of sins should be preached in His name among
    all nations, beginning at Jerusalem. 48. And ye are
    witnesses of these things. 49. And, behold, I send the
    promise of My Father upon you: but tarry ye in the
    city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from
    on high. 50. And He led them out as far as to Bethany;
    and He lifted up His hands, and blessed them. 51. And
    it came to pass, while He blessed them, He was parted
    from them, and carried up into heaven. 52. And they
    worshipped Him, and returned to Jerusalem with great
    joy: 53. And were continually in the temple, praising
    and blessing God.'--LUKE xxiv. 36-53.

There are no marks of time in this passage, and, for anything that
appears, the narrative is continuous, and the Ascension might have
occurred on the evening of the Resurrection. But neither is there
anything to forbid interpreting this close of Luke's Gospel by the
fuller details contained in the beginning of his other treatise, the
Acts, where the space of forty days interposes between the
Resurrection and the Ascension. It is but reasonable to suppose that
an author's two books agree, when he gives no hint of change of
opinion, and it is reasonable to regard the narrative in this
passage as a summary of the whole period of forty days. If so, it
contains three things,--the first appearance of the risen Lord to
the assembled disciples (vs. 36-43), a condensed summary of the
teachings of the risen Lord (vs. 44-49), and an equally compressed
record of the Ascension (vs. 50-53).

I. The proofs of the Resurrection graciously granted to incredulous
love (vs. 36-43). The disciples were probably assembled in the upper
room, where the Lord's Supper had been instituted, and which became
their ordinary meeting-place (Acts i.) up till Pentecost. What
sights that room saw! There, when night had come, they were
discussing the strange reports of the Resurrection, when, all
suddenly, they saw Jesus, not coming or moving, but standing in the
midst. Had He come in unnoticed by them in their eager talk? The
doors were shut. How had this calm Presence become visible all at
once?

So little were they the enthusiastic, credulous people whom modern
theories which explain away the Resurrection assume them to have
been, that even His familiar voice in His familiar salutation,
tenfold more significant now than ever before, did not wake belief
that it was verily He. They fled to the ready refuge of supposing
that they saw 'a spirit.' Our Lord has no rebukes for their
incredulity, but patiently resumes His old task of instruction, and
condescends to let them have the evidence of two senses, not
shrinking from their investigating touch. When even these proofs
were seen by Him to be insufficient, He added the yet more cogent
one of 'eating before them.' Then they were convinced.

Now their incredulity is important, and the acknowledgment shows the
simple historical good faith of the narrator. A witness who at first
disbelieved is all the more trustworthy. These hopeless mourners who
had forgotten all Christ's prophecies of His Resurrection, and were
so fixed in their despair that the two from Emmaus could not so far
kindle a gleam of hope as to make them believe that their Lord stood
before them, were not the kind of people in whom hallucination would
operate, as modern deniers of the Resurrection make them out to have
been. What changed their mood? A fancy? Surely nothing less than a
solid fact. Hallucination may lay hold on a solitary, morbid mind,
but it does not attack a company, and it scarcely reaches to
fancying touch and the sight of eating.

Note Luke's explanation of the persistent incredulity, as being 'for
joy.' It is like his notice that the three in Gethsemane 'slept for
sorrow.' Great emotion sometimes produces effects opposite to what
might have been expected. Who can wonder that the mighty fact which
turned the black smoke of despair into bright flame should have
seemed too good to be true? The little notice brings the disciples
near to our experience and sympathy. Christ's loving forbearance and
condescending affording of more than sufficient evidence show how
little changed He was by Death and Resurrection. He is as little
changed by sitting at the right hand of God. Still He is patient
with our slow hearts. Still He meets our hesitating faith with
lavish assurances. Still He lets us touch Him, if not with the hand
of sense, with the truer contact of spirit, and we may have as firm
personal experience of the reality of His life and Presence as had
that wondering company in the upper room.

II. Verses 44-49 are best taken as a summary of the forty days'
teaching. They fall into stages which are distinctly separated.
First we have (ver. 44) the reiteration of Christ's earlier
teaching, which had been dark when delivered, and now flashed up
into light when explained by the event. 'These are my words which I
spake,' and which you did not understand or note. Jesus asserts that
He is the theme of all the ancient revelation. If we suppose that
the present arrangement of the Old Testament existed then, its
present three divisions are named; namely, Law, Prophets, and
Hagiographa, as represented by its chief member. But, in any case,
He lays His hand on the whole book, and declares that He, and His
Death as sacrifice, are inwrought into its substance. 'The testimony
of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.' Whatever views we hold as to
the date and manner of origin of the Old Testament books, we miss
the most pregnant fact about them if we fail to recognise that they
all point onwards to Him.

Another stage is marked by that remarkable expression, 'He opened
their mind.' His teaching was not, like ours, from without only. He
gave not merely instruction, but inspiration. It was not enough to
spread truth before the disciples. He did more; He made them able to
receive it. He gives no lesser gifts from the throne than He gave in
the upper room, and we may receive, if our minds are kept expectant
and in touch with Him, the same inward eye to see wondrous things
out of the Word.

Verse 46, by its repetition of 'and He said,' seems to point to
another stage, in which the teaching as to the meaning of the Old
Testament passes into instructions for the future. Already Jesus had
hinted at the cessation of the old close intercourse in that
pathetic 'while I was yet with you,' and now He goes on to outline
the functions and equipment of the disciples in the future period of
His absence. As to the past sufferings, He indicates a double
necessity for them,--one based on their having been predicted;
another, deeper, based on the fitness of things. These sufferings
made the preaching of repentance and forgiveness possible, and
imposed on His followers the obligation of preaching His name to all
the world. Without the Cross His servants would have no gospel.
Having the Cross, His servants are bound to publish it everywhere.

The universal reach of His atonement is implied in the commission.
The sacrifice for the world's sin is the sole ground of remission of
sin, and is to be proclaimed to every creature. Mark that here the
same word is employed in connection with proclaiming Christ's Death
as in John's version of this saying (John xx. 23), which is misused
as a fortress of the priestly power of absolution. The plain
inference is that the servant's power of remission is exercised by
preaching the Master's death of expiation.

The ultimate reach of the message is to be to all nations; the
beginning of the universal gospel is to be at Jerusalem. The whole
history of the world and the Church lies between these two. By that
command to begin at Jerusalem, the connection of the Old with the
New is preserved, the Jewish prerogative honoured, the path made
easier for the disciples, the development of the Church brought into
unison with their natural sentiments and capacities.

The spirit of the commandment remains still imperative. 'The eyes of
a fool are in the ends of the earth.' A wise and Christlike
beneficence will not gaze far afield, and neglect things close at
our doors. The scoff at the supporters of foreign missions, as if
they quixotically went abroad when they should work at home, has
no point even as regards Christian practice, for it is the people
who work for the distant heathen who also toil for home ones; but it
has still less ground in regard to Christian conceptions of duty,
for the Lord of the harvest has bidden the reapers begin with the
fields nearest them.

The equipment for work is investiture with divine power. A partial
bestowment of the Spirit, which is the Father's promise, took place
while Jesus spoke. 'I send' refers to something done at the moment;
but the fuller clothing with that garment of power was to be waited
for in expectancy and desire. No man can do the Christian work of
witnessing for and of Christ without that clothing with power. It
was granted as an abiding gift on Pentecost. It needs perpetual
renewal. We may all have it. Without it, eloquence, learning, and
all else, are but as sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal.

III. Verses 50-53 give us the transcendent miracle which closes the
earthly life of Jesus. We cannot here enter on the large questions
which it raises, but must content ourselves with simply pointing to
the salient features of Luke's condensed account. The mention of the
place as 'over against Bethany' recalls the many memories of that
village where Jesus had found His nearest approach to a home, where
He had exercised His stupendous life-giving power, whence He had set
out to the upper room and the near Cross. His last act was to bless
His followers. He is the High-priest for ever, and these uplifted
hands meant a sacreder thing than the affectionate good wishes of a
departing friend. He gives the blessings which He invokes. His wish
is a conveyance of good.

The hands remained in the attitude of benediction while He ascended,
and the last sight of Him, as the cloud wrapped Him round, showed
Him shedding blessing from them. He continues that attitude and act
till He comes again. Two separate motions are described in verse 51.
He was parted from them,--that is, withdrew some little distance on
the mountain, that all might see, and none might hinder, His
departure; and 'was carried up into heaven' by a slow upward
movement, as the word implies. Contrast this with Elijah's rapture.
There was no need of fiery chariot or whirlwind to lift Jesus to the
heavens. He went up where He was before, returning to the glory
which He had with the Father before the world was. The end matches
the beginning. The supernatural birth corresponds with the
supernatural departure.

We have to think of that Ascension as the entrance of corporeal
humanity into the divine glory, as the beginning of His heavenly
activity for the world, as the token of His work being triumphantly
completed, as the prophecy and pledge of immortal life like His own
for all who love Him. Therefore we may share the joy which flooded
the lately sorrowful disciples' hearts, and, like them, should make
all life sacred, and be continually in the Temple, blessing God, and
have the deep roots of our lives hid with Christ in the glory.




CHRIST'S WITNESSES


    'Ye are witnesses of these things. 49. And, behold, I
    send the promise of My Father upon you: but tarry ye
    in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with
    power from on high.'--LUKE xxiv. 48, 49.

Luke's account of the Resurrection and subsequent forty days is so
constructed as to culminate in this appointment of the disciples to
their high functions and equipment for it, by the gift of the Holy
Spirit. The Evangelist has evidently in view his second 'treatise,'
and is here preparing the link of connection between it and the
Gospel. Hence this very condensed summary of many conversations lays
stress upon these points--the fulfilment of prophecy in Christ's
life and death; the world-wide destination of the blessings to be
proclaimed in His name; and the appointment and equipment of the
disciples.

The same notes are again struck in the beginning of the Acts of the
Apostles. The same charge to the disciples, when viewed in
connection with Christ's life on earth, may be considered as its end
and aim; and when viewed in connection with the history of the
Church, as its foundation and beginning. So that we are following in
the line plainly marked out for us by the Evangelist himself, when
we take these words as containing a charge and a gift as really
belonging to all Christians in this day as to the little group on
the road to Bethany, to whom they were first addressed on the
Ascension morning. There are, then, but two points to be looked at
in the words before us; the one the function of the Church, and the
other its equipment for it.

I. The task of the Church.

Now, of course, I need not remind you that there is a special sense
in which the office of witness-bearing belonged only to those who
had seen Christ in the flesh, and could testify to the fact of His
Resurrection. I need not dwell upon that further than to remark that
the fact that the designation of the first preachers of the Gospels
was 'witnesses' is significant of a great deal. For witness implies
fact, and the nature of their message, as being the simple
attestation to the occurrence of things that truly happened in the
earth, is wrapped up in that name. They were not speculators,
philosophers, moralists, legislators. They had neither to argue nor
to dissertate, nor to lay down rules for conduct, nor to ventilate
their own fancies. They were witnesses, and their business was to
tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. All
doctrine and all morality will come second. The first form of the
Gospel is, 'How that Jesus Christ died for our sins according to the
Scriptures, and that He was raised again the third day, according to
the Scriptures.' First, a history; then a religion; then a morality;
and morality and religion because it is a history of redemption.

These early Christians were witnesses in another sense. The very
existence of the Church at all was a testimony to that supernatural
fact without which it could not have been. We are often told in
recent years that the belief in the Resurrection grew slowly up
amongst the early Christians. What became of the Church whilst it
was growing? What held it together? How comes it that the fate of
Christ's followers was not the fate of the followers of Theudas and
other people that rose up, 'boasting themselves to be somebody,'
whose followers as a matter of course, 'came to nought' when the
leader was slain? There is only one answer. 'He rose again from the
dead.' Else there is no possibility of accounting for the fact that
the Church as a distinct organisation survived Calvary. The
Resurrection was no gradually evolved hardening of desire and fancy
into fact, but it was the foundation upon which the Church was
built. 'Ye'--by your words and by your existence as a community--'are
the witnesses of these things.'

But that is somewhat apart from the main purpose of my remarks now.
I desire rather to emphasise the thought that, with modifications in
form, the substance of the functions of these early believers
remains still the office and dignity of all Christian men. 'Ye are
the witnesses of these things.'

And what is the manner of testimony that devolves upon you and me,
Christian friends? Witness by your lives. Most men take their
notions of what Christianity is from the average of the Christians
round about them. And, if we profess to be Christ's followers, we
shall be taken as tests and specimen cases of the worth of the
religion that we profess. 'Ye are the Epistles of Christ,' and if
the writing be blurred and blotted and often half unintelligible,
the blame will be laid largely at His door. And men will say, and
say rightly, 'If that is all that Christianity can do, we are just
as well without it.' It is our task to 'adorn the doctrine of
Christ,' marvellous as it may seem that anything in our poor lives
can commend that fairest of all beautiful things--and to commend it
to some hearts. Just as some poor black-and-white engraving of a
masterpiece  of the painter's brush may, to an eye untrained in the
harmony of colour, be a better interpretation of the artist's
meaning than his own proper work, so our feeble copies of the
transcendent splendour and beauty may suit some purblind and
untrained eyes better than the serener and loftier perfection which
we humbly copy. 'We are the witnesses of these things.' And depend
upon it, mightier than all direct effort, and more unusual than all
utterances of lip, is the witness of the life of all professing
Christians to the reality of the facts upon which they say they base
their faith.

But beyond that, there is yet another department of testimony which
belongs to each of us, and that is the attestation of personal
experience. That is a form of Christian service which any and every
Christian can put forth. You cannot all be preachers, in the
technical sense. You cannot all be thinkers and strong champions,
argumentative or otherwise, for God's truth. But I will tell you
what you all can be. You can all say, 'Come and hear all ye; and I
will declare what He hath done for my soul.' It does not take
eloquence, gifts, learning, intellectual grasp of the doctrinal side
of Christian truth for a man to say, as the first preacher of Christ
upon earth said, 'Brother! we have found the Messias.' That was all,
and that was enough. That you can say, if you _have_ found Him,
and after all, the witness of personal experience of what faith in
Jesus Christ can make of a man, and do for a man, is the strongest
and most universal weapon placed in the hands of Christian men and
women. There is nothing that goes so far as that, if it be backed up
by a life corresponding, which, like a sounding-board behind a man,
flings his words out into the world'; 'Whether this man be a sinner
or no I know not'; 'I leave all that talk about heights and depths
of argument and controversy to other people, but this one thing I
know'--not I _think,_ not I _believe,_ not I am disposed to come to
the conclusion that--but 'this one thing I _know_, that whereas I
was blind now I see.' There is no getting over that! 'Ye are the
witnesses of these things.' And do not be ashamed of your function,
