


THE ANCIENT COSMOGONY.

Speculating relative to the order in which chaos had been organized,
the ancient Astrologers constructed a Cosmogony, which divided the
labors of God the Son, or second person in the Trinity, into six
periods of a thousand years each; and which, answering to the six
divisions of the 12,000 year cycle corresponding to the reproductive
months of Spring and Summer, taught that in the first period he made
the earth; in the second, the firmament; in the third, vegetation; in
the fourth, the Sun and Moon and "the stars also;" in the fifth, the
animals, fishes, birds, etc., and in the sixth, Man.

That vegetation was made before the Sun was not an inconsistent idea to
the originators of the ancient Cosmogony. They imagined that the heat
and light, emanating from the elementary fire, were sufficient to
stimulate its growth, after which God the Son gathered it together and
made the Celestial luminaries. In the solar fables this imaginary
element is called the fire-ether, or sacred fire of the stars.



FALL AND REDEMPTION OF MAN.

Religion having been based upon the worship of personified nature, it
is evident that its founders fabricated its dogmatic element from their
conceptions of her destructive and reproductive processes as manifested
in the rotation and diversity of the seasons. The apparent retreat of
the sun from the earth, in winter, and his return in the spring,
suggesting the idea of a figurative death and resurrection of the
genius of that luminary, they applied these phenomena of the year to
man, and composed the allegories relative to his fall and redemption,
as inculcated in the Exoteric Creed. In the allegory relating to the
fall, it was taught that, after making the first human pair, the Lord
of Good or the Lord God placed them in a beautiful garden--corresponding
to the seasons of fruits and flowers or months of Spring and Summer,
with the injunction, under a penalty, not to eat of the fruit of a
certain tree. When the Lord of Evil, or Devil, symbolized by the serpent
and represented by the constellation "Serpens" placed in conjunction
with the Autumnal Equinox, meeting them on the confines of his dominion,
and tempting the woman, and she the man, they ate of the forbidden
fruit; thus, falling from their first estate, and committing the
original sin, they involved the whole human race in the consequences
of their disobedience. Then the Lord God, pronouncing a curse against
the serpent, clothed the man and woman with skins to protect them
against the inclemency of his, dominion as Lord of Evil, and drove them
from the garden; after which they were necessitated to earn their bread
by tilling the ground.

In, reference to the plan of redemption, the ancient Astrologers
divided the 6,000 years appropriated to man, as the duration of his
race on earth, into ten equal cycles, and taught that at the conclusion
of each God Sol, as Lord of Good, would manifest himself in the flesh,
to destroy his works as Lord of Evil, and through suffering and death
make an atonement for sin. Thus having originated the doctrines of
original sin, incarnation and vicarious atonement, as parts of the plan
of redemption, and making its finale correspond, in point of time, to
the conclusion of the 12,000 year cycle, their successors in the
priestly office ultimately inculcated the additional dogmas of the
general judgment and future rewards and punishments, as we have shown
in our introduction.

Having based the fables of the fall and redemption of man upon the idea
that he was impelled, without his volition, to pass from the dominion
of God to that of the Devil, or in other words, upon his subjection to
the inexorable necessity which makes the inclement seasons of Autumn
and Winter succeed the beneficent ones of Spring and Summer, its
authors composed the original of the text which, found in Romans viii.,
20, reads that "The creature was made subject to vanity (Evil), not
willingly, but by reason of him who hath subjected the same in hope."

But for the popular teaching in favor of its being literal history, no
one could read the account of the fall of man, as recorded in the third
chapter of Genesis, without recognizing it as simply an allegory; or
fail to realize, the force of the argument of no fall, no redemption,
and if no redemption, no God to reward or Devil to punish; no hell to
suffer, or heaven to enjoy. The fact is that these are but antithetical
ideas which came in together, and must survive or perish together. They
cannot be separated without destroying the whole theological fabric.



INCARNATIONS OF GOD SOL.

Believing that God Sol was necessitated to remain at his post to direct
the course of the sun, the ancient astrologers conceived the idea of
teaching that, attended by a retinue of subordinate genii, he descended
to earth through the medium of incarnations at the end of 600 year
cycles, to perform the work of man's redemption and, having made Virgo
of the Zodiac the mother of the Solar divinity, they taught in their
allegorical Astronomy, or scriptures, that his incarnations were born
of a Virgin. Hence we find that God Sol, usually designated by the
title of the Word, "was made flesh, and dwelt among us." John i., 14.

In a discourse upon this text delivered by Tillotson, Archbishop of
Canterbury, in the year 1680, published in the fourth volume of
Woodhouse's edition of his Grace's sermons, in the year 1744,
concerning the Incarnation of our blessed Saviour, he explains the
necessity of incarnation by saying that "There was likewise a great
inclination in mankind to the worship of a visible Deity, so God was
pleased to appear in our nature, that they, who were so fond of a
visible Deity, might have one, even a true and natural image of God the
Father, the express image of his person." It only requires a little
reflection to appreciate the Prelate's covert irony and want of faith.

Having ascribed to the imaginary incarnations of God Sol the
characteristics of heaven-descending, virgin-born, earth-walking,
wonder-working, dying, resuscitated and ascending sons of God, the
ancient Astrologers attached to them the several titles of Saviour,
Redeemer, Avatar, Divine-Helper, Shiloh, Messiah, Christ; and, in
reference to their foster-father, that of Son of Man. Teaching that
they continued to make intercession for sin, after their ascension to
the right hand of the Father, they were also called Intercessors,
Mediators or Advocates with the Father. From teaching their appearance
every 600 years originated the Egyptian legend of the Phoenix, a bird
said to descend from the sun at these intervals, and, after being
consumed upon the altar in the temple of On, or city of the sun--called
Heliopolis by the Greeks--would rise from its ashes and ascend to its
source. According to the civil laws of Egypt, manhood was not attained
until the age of thirty years. Hence the earthly mission of incarnate
Saviours was made to begin at that age; and for the reason that,
relating to the apparent transit of the sun through the twelve signs of
the Zodiac, it was completed during the period of one year.

To impress the ignorant masses with the belief that the scriptures were
literal histories, and the incarnate Saviours real personages, the
ancient Astrologers caused tombs to be erected in which it was claimed
they were buried. Such sepulchres were erected to Hercules at Cadiz, to
Apollo at Delphi, and to other Saviours at many other places, to which
their respective votaries were induced to perform pilgrimages. In Egypt
the pyramids were built, partly for astronomical purposes, and partly
as tombs for Saviours, claimed to have been kings, who had once ruled
over the country; and why should we not recognize that magnificent
structure known as the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, at Jerusalem, as
but another of those tombs of Saviours in which no Saviour was ever
entombed?

Thus we have shown that it was God Sol, the only begotten of the
Father, or second person in the sacred Triad, to whom supreme adoration
was inculcated in all forms of the ancient Astrolatry; and that its
cultured votaries, understanding that the doctrines pertaining to the
fall and redemption of man were evolved from the figurative death and
resurrection of the solar divinity, recognized the doctrine of
incarnation as a priestly invention intended only for the ignorant
masses.



FABLE OF THE TWELVE LABORS.

The authors of the original solar fables, having lived in that remote
age in which physical prowess was recognized as the highest attribute
of humanity, conceived the idea that God Sol, while passing through his
apparent orbit, had to fight his way with the animals of the Zodiac,
and with others in conjunction with them. Hence, designating him as the
Mighty Hunter, and calling his exploits the twelve labors, they made
the incarnate Saviours the heroes of similar ones on earth, which they
taught were performed for the good of mankind; and that, after
fulfilling their earthly mission, they were exhaled to heaven through
the agency of fire. When these fables were composed the Summer Solstice
was in the sign of Leo, and making the twelve labors begin in it, the
first consisted in the killing of a lion, and the second, in rescuing a
virgin (Virgo) by the destruction of a Hydra, the constellation in
conjunction with her. Upon one of the Assyrian marbles on exhibition in
the British Museum these two labors are represented as having been
performed by a saviour by the name of Nimroud. In the constellations of
Taurus, the bull of the Zodiac, and of Orion, originally known as
Horns, in conjunction therewith, we have groupings of stars
representing the latter as one of the mighty hunters of the ancient
Astrolatry, supporting on his left arm the shield of the lion's skin,
the trophy of the first labor, and holding a club in his uplifted right
hand, is engaged in performing the tenth labor by a conflict with the
former.

[See plate4.gif]

The fable of the twelve labors constituted the sacred records or
scriptures of the older forms of Astrolatry, one version of which,
written with the cuneiform character upon twelve tablets of burnt clay,
exhumed from the ruins of an Assyrian city, and now on exhibition in
the British Museum, is ascribed to Nimroud, the prototype of the
Grecian Hercules, and of Nimrod, the Mighty Hunter of the Old
Testament.



ANNIVERSARIES OF SOLAR WORSHIP.

The Nativity.

Applying the anniversaries inculcated in the worship of God Sol to his
imaginary incarnations, the founders of the ancient Astrolatry made
them refer to the several stages of human existence from infancy to
mature age. Hence, comparing the first day of infantile life to the
shortest day of the year, it would naturally be expected that they
would have placed the anniversary of the Nativity exactly at the Winter
solstice; but, having conceived the idea that the sun stood still for
the space of three days at each of the cardinal points, and making it
represent the figurative death of the genius of that luminary, they
fixed the date for its observance three days later, or on the 25th of
December. The Gnostic adherents to the ancient solar worship, or those
who were conversant with the teachings of the Esoteric philosophy,
knowing that the dramatis personae of the fable of incarnation were
pictured with stars upon the azure vault, recognized the woman "clothed
with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of
twelve stars," referred to in Revelations xii. 1, as the Virgo of the
Zodiac; they also knew that she was the true queen of heaven and mother
of God; and that the infant, anciently represented in her arms, and
with whom, in their day, she arose on the Eastern horizon at midnight
on the 24th of December, was the same of whom the people were taught to
sing at Christmas "Unto us a child is born this day."

With the knowledge of these facts we can readily see that this is the
Virgin and child which constituted the originals of those exquisite
paintings, by the old masters, known as the Madonna and Child.


Epiphany or Twelfth Day.

In reference to the twelve signs through which the sun makes his
apparent annual revolution, the twelfth day after Christmas, answering
to the 6th of January, was observed by the votaries of the ancient
Astrolatry as the anniversary of the Epiphany or Twelfth Day. In the
solar fables, it was taught that a star appeared in the heavens on that
day to manifest the birthplace of the infant Saviour to the Magi or
Wise Men of the East, who came to pay him homage, and to present him
with the gifts of gold, frankincense and myrrh, as related in Matthew
ii. 11.

The reason for presenting these gifts is explained by the facts that of
the seven metals dedicated to the genii of the planets, gold was the
one consecrated to God Sol; and frankincense and myrrh were the gums
burned in censers in his worship.

In reading the account of the Magi's visit to the infant Saviour, we
have but to exercise our thinking faculties to realize that it is
allegory instead of literal history.


Lent or Lenten Season.

In the ancient solar fables it was taught that the persecutions to
which the incarnate Saviours were subjected while passing through the
dominion of God Sol as Lord of Evil, raged with greatest fury during
the forty days preceding the festival of Easter, which period,
beginning when the days were perceptibly lengthening, was called Lent,
or the Lenten season. It was during this season that the votaries of
the ancient religion were taught to manifest their sympathy for the
Saviour in his imaginary conflict with the Devil by abstaining from all
festivities, and by fasting and prayer; and, as that was the season in
which the flocks and herds were poor in flesh, while the seas and
rivers abounded with fish in good condition, the ancient priests,
making a virtue of necessity, enjoined a diet principally of fish, and
for that reason placed the constellation Pisces at the point in the
Zodiac in which the Lenten season anciently began; which, without
regard to the day of the week, was always observed on the 15th day of
February, the name of that month having been derived from the Februa,
or feast of purification and expiation of the old Roman calendar.

At the council of Nice the Lenten season was made to begin on the
fourth day of the week, and in reference to the ancient custom of the
more devout sprinkling ashes upon their heads at the feast of the
Februa, it is called Ash Wednesday.

Hence we see that all years in which Ash Wednesday does not come on the
15th of February, the Lenten season must necessarily contain a greater
or lesser number than the original assignment of forty days.


Passion Week.

The last seven days of Lent is called Passion Week, in reference to the
apparent passage of the sun across the Celestial equator at the Vernal
Equinox or 21st of March; the ancient astrologers having conceived the
idea that the sun stood still for the space of three days at each of
the cardinal points, and making it represent the figurative death of
the genius of that luminary, it was observed as the anniversary of the
Vernal crucifixion or passion of the incarnate Saviours; and in
commemoration of their imaginary sufferings and death it was the custom
to expose in the temples during the last three days of Passion Week
figures representing their dead bodies, over which the votaries of
solar worship, especially the women, made great lamentation. It was in
reference to one of these images, laid out in the temple at Jerusalem,
to which the jealous Jehovah, considering it a great abomination in his
own house, is made to direct the attention of Ezekiel, the prophet,
who, looking, beheld "Women weeping for Tammuz" as recorded in the
eighth chapter. This divinity was the Phoenician prototype of the
Grecian Adonis, to whom the women of Judea preferred to pay homage.

