awe of the divine power, hoping to please God, and fearing to offend 
Him, by their behaviour respectively.

That justice should be administered between men, it is necessary 
that testimonies of fact be alleged; and that witnesses should 
apprehend themselves greatly obliged to discover the truth, 
according to their conscience, in dark and doubtful cases.

That men should uprightly discharge offices serviceable to public 
good, it doth behove that they be firmly engaged to perform the 
trusts reposed in them.

That in affairs of very considerable importance men should deal with 
one another with satisfaction of mind, and mutual confidence, they 
must receive competent assurances concerning the integrity, 
fidelity, and constancy each of other.

That the safety of governors may be preserved, and the obedience due 
to them maintained secure from attempts to which they are liable (by 
the treachery, levity, perverseness, timorousness, ambition, all 
such lusts and ill humours of men), it is expedient that men should 
be tied with the strictest bands of allegiance.

That controversies emergent about the interests of men should be 
determined, and an end put to strife by peremptory and satisfactory 
means, is plainly necessary for common quiet.

Wherefore for the public interest and benefit of human society it is 
requisite that the highest obligations possible should be laid upon 
the consciences of men.

And such are those of oaths, engaging them to fidelity and constancy 
in all such cases, out of regard to Almighty God, as the infallible 
patron of truth and right, the unavoidable chastiser of 
perfidiousness and improbity.

To such purposes, therefore, oaths have ever been applied, as the 
most effectual instruments of working them; not only among the 
followers of true and perfect religion, but even among all those who 
had any glimmering notions concerning a Divine Power and Providence; 
who have deemed an oath the fastest tie of conscience, and held the 
violation of it for the most detestable impiety and iniquity.  So 
that what Cicero saith of the Romans, that "their ancestors had no 
band to constrain faith more strait than an oath," is true of all 
other nations, common reason not being able to devise any engagement 
more obliging than it is; it being in the nature of things [Greek], 
and [Greek], the utmost assurance, the last resort of human faith, 
the surest pledge that any man can yield of his trustiness.  Hence 
ever in transactions of highest moment this hath been used to bind 
the faith of men.

Hereby nations have been wont to ratify leagues of peace and amity 
between each other (which therefore the Greeks call [Greek]).

Hereby princes have obliged their subjects to loyalty:  and it hath 
ever been the strongest argument to press that duty, which the 
Preacher useth, "I counsel thee to keep the king's commandment, and 
that in regard of the oath of God."

Hereby generals have engaged their soldiers to stick close to them 
in bearing hardships and encountering dangers.

Hereby the nuptial league hath been confirmed; the solemnisation 
whereof in temples before God is in effect a most sacred oath.

Hereon the decision of the greatest causes concerning the lives, 
estates, and reputations of men have depended; so that, as the 
Apostle saith, "an oath for confirmation is to them an end of all 
strife."

Indeed, such hath the need hereof been ever apprehended, that we may 
observe, in cases of great importance, no other obligation hath been 
admitted for sufficient to bind the fidelity and constancy of the 
most credible persons; so that even the best men hardly could trust 
the best men without it.  For instance,

When Abimelech would assure to himself the friendship of Abraham, 
although he knew him to be a very pious and righteous person, whose 
word might be as well taken as any man's, yet, for entire 
satisfaction, he thus spake to him:  "God is with thee in all that 
thou doest:  Now therefore swear unto me here by God, that thou wilt 
not deal falsely with me."

Abraham, though he did much confide in the honesty of his servant 
Eliezer, having entrusted him with all his estate, yet in the affair 
concerning the marriage of his son he could not but thus oblige him:  
"Put," saith he, "I pray thee, thy hand under my thigh, and I will 
make thee swear by the Lord, the God of heaven and the God of the 
earth, that thou wilt not take a wife unto my son of the daughters 
of the Canaanites."

Laban had good experience of Jacob's fidelity; yet that would not 
satisfy, but, "The Lord," said he, "watch between me and thee, when 
we are absent one from another. If thou shalt afflict my daughters, 
or if thou shalt take other wives beside my daughters, no man is 
with us; see, God is witness between thee and me.  The God of 
Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their father, judge 
betwixt us."

So did Jacob make Joseph swear that he would bury him in Canaan:  
and Joseph caused the children of Israel to swear that they would 
translate his bones.  So did Jonathan cause his beloved friend David 
to swear that he would show kindness to him and to his house for 
ever.  The prudence of which course the event showeth, the total 
excision of Jonathan's family being thereby prevented; for "the 
king," 'tis said, "spared Mephibosheth the son of Jonathan, because 
of the Lord's oath that was between them."

These instances declare that there is no security which men can 
yield comparable to that of an oath; the obligation whereof no man 
wilfully can infringe without renouncing the fear of God and any 
pretence to His favour.

Wherefore human society will be extremely wronged and damnified by 
the dissolving or slackening these most sacred bands of conscience; 
and consequently by their common and careless use, which soon will 
breed a contempt of them, and render them insignificant, either to 
bind the swearers, or to ground a trust on their oaths.

As by the rare and reverent use of oaths their dignity is upheld and 
their obligation kept fast, so by the frequent and negligent 
application of them, by the prostituting them to every mean and 
toyish purpose, their respect will be quite lost, their strength 
will be loosed, they will prove unserviceable to public use.

If oaths generally become cheap and vile, what will that of 
allegiance signify?  If men are wont to play with swearing anywhere, 
can we expect they should be serious and strict therein at the bar 
or in the church.  Will they regard God's testimony, or dread His 
judgment, in one place, or at one time, when everywhere upon any, 
upon no occasion they dare to confront and contemn them?  Who then 
will be the more trusted for swearing?  What satisfaction will any 
man have from it?  The rifeness of this practice, as it is the sign, 
so it will be the cause of a general diffidence among man.

Incredible therefore is the mischief which this vain practice will 
bring in to the public; depriving princes of their best security, 
exposing the estates of private men to uncertainty, shaking all the 
confidence men can have in the faith of one another.

For which detriments accruing from this abuse to the public every 
vain swearer is responsible; and he would do well to consider that 
he will never be able to make reparation for them.  And the public 
is much concerned that this enormity be retrenched.


IV.  Let us consider, that rash and vain swearing is very apt often 
to bring the practiser of it into that most horrible sin of perjury.  
For "false swearing," as the Hebrew wise man saith, "naturally 
springeth out of much swearing:" and, "he," saith St. Chrysostom, 
"that sweareth continually, both willingly and unwillingly, both 
ignorantly and knowingly, both in earnest and in sport, being often 
transported by anger and many other things, will frequently 
forswear.  It is confessed and manifest, that it is necessary for 
him that sweareth much to be perjurious."  [Greek], "For," saith he 
again, "it is impossible, it is impossible for a mouth addicted to 
swearing not frequently to forswear."  He that sweareth at random, 
as blind passion moveth, or wanton fancy prompteth, or the temper 
suggesteth, often will hit upon asserting that which is false, or 
promising that which is impossible:  that want of conscience and of 
consideration which do suffer him to violate God's law in swearing 
will betray him to the venting of lies, which backed with oaths 
become perjuries.  If sometime what he sweareth doth happen to be 
true and performable, it doth not free him of guilt; it being his 
fortune, rather than his care or conscience, which keepeth him from 
perjury.


V.  Such swearing commonly will induce a man to bind himself by oath 
to unlawful practices; and consequently will entangle him in a 
woeful necessity either of breaking his oath, or of doing worse, and 
committing wickedness:  so that "swearing," as St. Chrysostom saith, 
"hath this misery attending it, that, both trangressed and observed, 
it plagueth those who are guilty of it."

Of this perplexity the Holy Scripture affordeth two notable 
instances:  the one of Saul, forced to break his rash oaths; the 
other of Herod, being engaged thereby to commit a most horrid 
murder.

Had Saul observed his oaths, what injury had he done, what mischief 
had he produced, in slaughtering his most worthy and most innocent 
son, the prop and glory of his family, the bulwark of his country, 
and the grand instrument of salvation to it; in forcing the people 
to violate their cross oath, and for prevention of one, causing many 
perjuries?  He was therefore fain to desist, and lie under the guilt 
of breaking his oaths.

And for Herod, the excellent father thus presseth the consideration 
of his case:  "Take," saith he, "I beseech you, the chopped off head 
of St. John, and his warm blood yet trickling down; each of you bear 
it home with you, and conceive that before your eyes you hear it 
uttering speech, and saying, Embrace the murderer of me, an oath.  
That which reproof did not, this an oath did do; that which the 
tyrant's wrath could not, this the necessity of keeping an oath did 
effect.  For when the tyrant was reprehended publicly in the 
audience of all men, he bravely did bear the rebuke; but when he had 
cast himself into the necessity of oaths, then did he cut off that 
blessed head."


VI.  Likewise the use of rash swearing will often engage a man in 
undertakings very inconvenient and detrimental to himself.  A man is 
bound to perform his vows to the Lord, whatever they be, whatever 
damage or trouble thence may accrue to him, if they be not unlawful.  
It is the law, that which is gone out of thy lips, thou shalt keep 
and perform.  It is the property of a good man, that he sweareth to 
his own hurt, and changeth not.  Wherefore 'tis the part of a sober 
man to be well advised what he doth swear or vow religiously, that 
he do not put himself into the inextricable strait of committing 
great sin, or undergoing great inconvenience; that he do not rush 
into that snare of which the wise man speaketh, "It is a snare to a 
man to devour that which is holy (or, to swallow a sacred 
obligation), and after vows to make inquiry," seeking how he may 
disengage himself the doing which is a folly offensive to God, as 
the Preacher telleth us.  "When," saith he, "thou vowest a vow unto 
God, defer not to pay it; for He hath no pleasure in fools:  pay 
that which thou hast vowed."  God will not admit our folly in vowing 
as a plea for non-performance; He will exact it from us both as a 
due debt, and as a proper punishment of our impious folly.

For instance, into what loss and mischief, what sorrow, what regret 
and repentance, did the unadvised vow of Jephthah throw him; the 
performance whereof, as St. Chrysostom remarketh, God did permit, 
and order to be commemorated with solemn lamentation, that all 
posterity might be admonished thereby, and deterred from such 
precipitant swearing.


VII.  Let us consider that swearing is a sin of all others 
peculiarly clamorous, and provocative of Divine judgment.  God is 
hardly so much concerned, or in a manner constrained, to punish any 
other sin as this.  He is bound in honour and interest to vindicate 
His name from the abuse, His authority from the contempt, His holy 
ordinance from the profanation, which it doth infer.  He is 
concerned to take care that His providence be not questioned, that 
the dread of His majesty be not voided, that all religion be not 
overthrown by the outrageous commission thereof with impunity.

It immediately toucheth His name, it expressly calleth upon Him to 
mind it, to judge it, to show himself in avenging it.  He may seem 
deaf, or unconcerned, if, being so called and provoked, He doth not 
declare Himself.

There is understood to be a kind of formal compact between Him and 
mankind, obliging Him to interpose, to take the matter into His 
cognisance, being specially addressed to Him.

The bold swearer doth importune Him to hear, doth rouse Him to mark, 
doth brave Him to judge and punish his wickedness.

Hence no wonder that "the flying roll," a quick and inevitable 
curse, doth surprise the swearer, and cut him off, as it is in the 
prophet.  No wonder that so many remarkable instances do occur in 
history of signal vengeance inflicted on persons notably guilty of 
this crime.  No wonder that a common practice thereof doth fetch 
down public judgments; and that, as the prophets of old did 
proclaim, "because of swearing the land mourneth."


VIII.  Further (passing over the special laws against it, the 
mischievous consequences of it, the sore punishments appointed to 
it), we may consider, that to common sense vain swearing is a very 
unreasonable and ill-favoured practice, greatly misbecoming any 
sober, worthy, or honest person; but especially most absurd and 
incongruous to a Christian.

For in ordinary conversation what needful or reasonable occasion can 
intervene of violating this command?  If there come under discourse 
a matter of reason, which is evidently true and certain, then what 
need can there be of an oath to affirm it, it sufficing to expose it 
to light, or to propose the evidences for it?  If an obscure or 
doubtful point come to be debated, it will not bear an oath; it will 
be a strange madness to dare, a great folly to hope the persuading 
it thereby.  What were more ridiculous than to swear the truth of a 
demonstrable theorem?  What more vain than so to assert a disputable 
problem:  oaths (like wagers) are in such cases no arguments, except 
silliness in the users of them.

If a matter of history be started, then if a man be taken for 
honest, his word will pass for attestation without further 
assurance; but if his veracity or probity be doubted, his oath will 
not be relied on, especially when he doth obtrude it.  For it was no 
less truly than acutely said by the old poet, [Greek], "The man doth 
not get credit from an oath, but an oath from the man."  And a 
greater author, "An oath," saith St. Chrysostom, "doth not make a 
man credible; but the testimony of his life, and the exactness of 
his conversation, and a good repute.  Many often have burst with 
swearing, and persuaded no man; others only nodding have deserved 
more belief than those who swore so mightily."  Wherefore oaths, as 
they are frivolous coming from a person of little worth or 
conscience, so they are superfluous in the mouth of an honest and 
worthy person; yea, as they do not increase the credit of the 
former, so they may impair that of the latter.

"A good man," as Socrates did say, "should apparently so demean 
himself, that his word may be deemed more credible than an oath;" 
the constant tenour of his practice vouching for it, and giving it 
such weight, that no asseveration can further corroborate it.

He should [Greek], "swear by his good deeds," and exhibit [Greek], 
"a life deserving belief," as Clemens Alex. saith:  so that no man 
should desire more from him than his bare assertion; but willingly 
should yield him the privilege which the Athenians granted to 
Xenocrates, that he should testify without swearing.

He should be like the Essenes, of whom Josephus saith, that 
everything spoken by them was more valid than an oath; whence they 
declined swearing.

He should so much confide in his own veracity and fidelity, and so 
much stand upon them, that he should not deign to offer any pledge 
for them, implying them to want confirmation.

"He should," as St. Jerome saith, "so love truth, that he should 
suppose himself to have sworn whatsoever he hath said;" and 
therefore should not be apt to heap another oath on his words.

Upon such accounts common reason directed even pagan wise men wholly 
to interdict swearing in ordinary conversation, or about petty 
matters, as an irrational and immoral practice, unworthy of sober 
and discreet persons.  "Forbear swearing about any matter," said 
Plato, cited by Clem. Alex.  "Avoid swearing, if you can, wholly," 
said Epictetus.  "For money swear by no god, though you swear 
truly," said Socrates.  And divers the like precepts occur in other 
heathens; the mention whereof may well serve to strike shame into 
many loose and vain people bearing the name of Christians.

Indeed, for a true and real Christian, this practice doth especially 
in a far higher degree misbecome him, upon considerations peculiar 
to his high calling and holy profession.

Plutarch telleth us that among the Romans the flamen of Jupiter was 
not permitted to swear, of which law among other reasons he assigned 
this:  "Because it is not handsome that he to whom divine and 
greatest things are entrusted should be distrusted about small 
matters."  The which reason may well be applied to excuse every 
Christian from it, who is a priest to the most High God, and hath 
the most celestial and important matters concredited to him; in 
comparison to which all other matters are very mean and 
inconsiderable.  The dignity of his rank should render his word 
verbum honoris, passable without any further engagement.  He hath 
opinions of things, he hath undertaken practices inconsistent with 
swearing.  For he that firmly doth believe that God is ever present 
with him, and auditor and witness of all his discourse; he that is 
persuaded that a severe judgment shall pass on him, wherein he must 
give an account for every idle word which slippeth from him, and 
wherein, among other offenders, assuredly liars will be condemned to 
the burning lake; he that in a great Sacrament (once most solemnly 
taken, and frequently renewed) hath engaged and sworn, together with 
all other divine commandments, to observe those which most expressly 
do charge him to be exactly just, faithful, and veracious in all his 
words and deeds; who therefore should be ready to say with David, "I 
have sworn, and am steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous 
judgments," to him every word hath the force of an oath; every lie, 
every breach of promise, every violation of faith doth involve 
perjury:  for him to swear is false heraldry, an impertinent 
accumulation of one oath upon another; he of all men should disdain 
to allow that his words are not perfectly credible, that his promise 
is not secure, without being assured by an oath.


IX.  Indeed, the practice of swearing greatly disparageth him that 
useth it, and derogateth from his credit upon divers accounts.

It signifieth (if it signifieth anything) that he doth not confide 
in his own reputation, and judgeth his own bare word not to deserve 
credit:  for why, if he taketh his word to be good, doth he back it 
with asseverations? why, if he deemeth his own honesty to bear 
proof, doth he cite Heaven to warrant it?

"It is," saith St. Basil, "a very foul and silly thing for a man to 
accuse himself as unworthy of belief, and to proffer an oath for 
security."

By so doing a man doth authorise others to distrust him; for it can 
be no wrong to distrust him who doth not pretend to be a credible 
person, or that his saying alone may safely be taken:  who, by 
suspecting that others are not satisfied with his simple assertion, 
implieth a reason known to himself for it.

It rendereth whatever he saith to be in reason suspicious, as 
discovering him void of conscience and discretion; for he that 
flatly against the rules of duty and reason will swear vainly, what 
can engage him to speak truly?  He that is so loose in so clear and 
so considerable a point of obedience to God, how can he be supposed 
staunch in regard to any other?  "It being," as Aristotle hath it, 
"the part of the same men to do ill things, and not to regard 
forswearing."  It will at least constrain any man to suspect all his 
discourse of vanity and unadvisedness, seeing he plainly hath no 
care to bridle his tongue from so gross an offence.

It is strange, therefore, that any man of honour or honesty should 
not scorn, by such a practice, to shake his own credit, or to 
detract from the validity of his word; which should stand firm on 
itself, and not want any attestation to support it.  It is a 
privilege of honourable persons that they are excused from swearing, 
and that their verbum honoris passeth in lieu of an oath:  is it not 
then strange, that when others dispense with them, they should not 
dispense with themselves, but voluntarily degrade themselves, and 
with sin forfeit so noble a privilege?


X.  To excuse these faults, the swearer will be forced to confess 
that his oaths are no more than waste and insignificant words, 
deprecating being taken for serious, or to be understood that he 
meaneth anything by them, but only that he useth them as expletive 
phrases, [Greek], to plump his speech, and fill up sentences.  But 
such pleas do no more than suggest other faults of swearing, and 
good arguments against it; its impertinence, its abuse of speech, 
its disgracing the practiser of it in point of judgment and 
capacity.  For so it is, oaths as they commonly pass are mere 
excrescences of speech, which do nothing but encumber and deform it; 
they so embellish discourse, as a wen or a scab do beautify a face, 
as a patch or a spot do adorn a garment.

To what purpose, I pray, is God's name hooked and haled into our 
idle talk? why should we so often mention Him, when we do not mean 
anything about Him? would it not, into every sentence to foist a dog 
or a horse, to intrude Turkish, or any barbarous gibberish, be 
altogether as proper and pertinent?

What do these superfluities signify, but that the venter of them 
doth little skill the use of speech, or the rule of conversation, 
but meaneth to sputter and prate anything without judgment or wit; 
that his invention is very barren, his fancy beggarly, craving the 
aid of any stuff to relieve it?  One would think a man of sense 
should grudge to lend his ear, or incline his attention to such 
motley ragged discourse; that without nauseating he scarce should 
endure to observe men lavishing time, and squandering their breath 
