Moses and Aaron, therefore, went into Egypt, where they called together
the chief men among their own people, the Hebrews, or Israelites, and
told them what God had commanded. Moses also did the miracles which God
had given him power to do, and the people believed that God had sent
him.

After this Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh, and told him that it was the
Lord's command that he should let the Israelites go. Pharaoh knew
nothing about God, and became very angry, saying that Moses and Aaron
kept the people from their work by telling them such things; and he
treated the poor Israelites worse than before.

But Moses had faith in God; so he was able to perform before the king
the wonderful things that he had done before his own people; still,
Pharaoh would not let the children of Israel go.

Then Moses turned the waters of the rivers into blood; and after that he
caused large numbers of frogs to run over the land and through the
houses, doing great harm. He also brought locusts and other insects to
be a pest to the people, and caused many of the useful animals which
belonged to the Egyptians to grow sick and die, doing all these wonders
with the rod which God had given him. But Pharaoh would not listen to
him.

Then God commanded Moses again, and he brought other plagues upon the
Egyptians; but Pharaoh would not give up.

At last, however, God sent a still more terrible trouble; for the
first-born of every Egyptian family, and even the first-born among their
flocks, died; although the Israelites, who were constantly praying to
the Lord and making sacrifices, were spared, as they had been all the
time.

Then Pharaoh was frightened into obeying God, and he let the Israelites
go; so they started at once for the land of Canaan, and the Lord guided
them by a cloud, which at night looked like a pillar of fire.

When the Israelites had reached the Red Sea, they found that Pharaoh
was pursuing them with a large army. But God commanded Moses to stretch
forth his rod over the sea; he did so, and the waters parted, making a
high wall upon either side, so that the children of Israel passed
through and reached the other side in safety. Pharaoh and his hosts
followed and were all drowned.

When the children of Israel saw that they were safe, they sang a
beautiful song of praise to God, and then they went on their way again.

After they had traveled for some time, they were in need of bread and
meat, and they complained about Moses because he had brought them to a
land where they had not enough to eat. But God sent them plenty of
quails and also a substance which they could use for bread. Later, when
they wanted water, the Lord commanded Moses, and he struck a rock with
his rod, and pure water poured out of it, so that the thirsty people and
their animals had all that they wanted.

In this way God took care of them as they journeyed through the new and
strange country toward the promised land, and Moses became the law-giver
of the Israelites, receiving his commandments from God.




JACOB AND ESAU.


Jacob and Esau were twin brothers, sons of Isaac and Rebekah. Esau was
the dearer to his father; but Rebekah loved Jacob more, and she wished
her favorite son to have the birthright, or larger portion of the
property, which really belonged to Esau because he was a little the
older.

One day Esau came in from hunting, very tired and hungry, and sold his
birthright to Jacob for a kind of stew called pottage.

Afterward, when Isaac had grown very old, he sent Esau one day to get
some of his favorite meat, saying that when he returned he should have
his father's blessing.

But Rebekah heard this and determined that Jacob should have the
blessing instead. So she prepared meat, then dressed Jacob in some of
his brother's clothing, covering his hands and neck with the skin of the
kids, and sent him to his father; and Isaac blessed him, for his sight
was dim, and he thought it was Esau.

When the elder brother returned, he was very angry with Jacob, and Isaac
was deeply grieved to think he had been deceived; but he blessed Esau as
well, who became prosperous and had large possessions and great power.

After this Jacob went to his mother's people, where he met Rachel, whom
he loved very dearly. He told Laban, her father, that he would serve him
faithfully seven years if Rachel might be his wife, and Laban consented
to this; at the end of the seven years, however, he told Jacob that he
must first marry Leah, as she was the older, but if he would serve
another seven years he might have Rachel also. So Jacob served another
seven years for Rachel, and then they were married.

Later Esau and Jacob met and were very glad to see each other, for Jacob
had repented of his sin, and God had forgiven him; while Esau forgave
him also.

[Illustration: ISAAC BLESSING JACOB.]




THE APOSTLE PAUL.


Before his conversion to the faith of Christ, Paul was called Saul, and
he persecuted the Christians, believing that they were doing wickedly
and that he ought to punish them for it.

But while he was in the midst of these persecutions, and as he was
journeying toward Damascus one day, he saw suddenly at noon-time, a
light shining in the heavens which was greater than the light of the
sun, and he and all that were with him fell to the earth in wonder and
awe. Then Saul heard a voice speaking to him and saying, "Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou Me?" And Saul said, "Who art Thou, Lord?" And the
voice answered, "I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest."

Then Saul was instructed as to what he was to do, and was told that he
