methods of treating their diseases. No animal in my hands becometh weak
or ill. Not to speak of horses, even mares in my hands will never be
found to be vicious. People called me Granthika by name and so did
Yudhishthira, the son of Pandu.'

"Virata said, 'Whatever horses I have, I consign to thy care even from
today. And all the keepers of my horses and all my charioteers will from
today be subordinate to thee. If this suits thee, say what remuneration
is desired by thee. But, O thou that resemblest a celestial, the office
of equerry is not worthy of thee. For thou lookest like a king and I
esteem thee much. The appearance here hath pleased me as much as if
Yudhishthira himself were here. Oh, how does that blameless son of Pandu
dwell and divert himself in the forest, now destitute of servants as he
is.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "That youth, like unto a chief of the
_Gandharvas_, was treated thus respectfully by the delighted king
Virata. And he conducted himself there in such a manner as to make
himself dear and agreeable to all in the palace. And no one recognised
him while living under Virata's protection. And it was in this manner
then the sons of Pandu, the very sight of whom had never been fruitless,
continued to live in the country of the Matsyas. And true to their
pledge those lords of the earth bounded by her belt of seas passed their
days of _incognito_ with great composure notwithstanding their poignant
sufferings."


SECTION XIII

(_Samayapalana Parva_)

Janamejaya said, "While living thus disguised in the city of the
Matsyas, what did those descendants of the Kuru race endued with great
prowess, do, O regenerate one!"

Vaisampayana said, "Hear, O king, what those descendants of Kuru did
while they dwelt thus in disguise in the city of the Matsyas,
worshipping the king thereof. By the grace of the sage Trinavindu and of
the high-souled lord of justice, the Pandavas continued to live
unrecognised by others in the city of Virata. O lord of men,
Yudhishthira, as courtier made himself agreeable to Virata and his sons
as also to all the Matsyas. An adept in the mysteries of dice, the son
of Pandu caused them to play at dice according to his pleasure and made
them sit together in the dice-hall like a row of birds bound in a
string. And that tiger among men, king Yudhishthira the Just, unknown to
the monarch, distributed among his brothers, in due proportion, the
wealth he won from Virata. And Bhimasena on his part, sold to
Yudhishthira for price, meat and viands of various kinds which he
obtained from the king. And Arjuna distributed among all his brothers
the proceeds of worn-out cloths which he earned in the inner apartments
of the palace. And Sahadeva, too, who was disguised as a cowherd gave
milk, curds and clarified butter to his brothers. And Nakula also shared
with his brothers the wealth the king gave him, satisfied with his
management of the horses. And Draupadi, herself in a pitiable condition,
looked after all those brothers and behaved in such a way as to remain
unrecognized. And thus ministering unto one another's wants, those
mighty warriors lived in the capital of Virata as hidden from view, as
if they were once more in their mother's womb. And those lords of men,
the sons of Pandu, apprehensive of danger from the son of Dhritarashtra,
continued to dwell there in concealment, watching over their wife
Draupadi. And after three months had passed away, in the fourth, the
grand festival in honour of the divine Brahma which was celebrated with
pomp in the country of the Matsyas, came off. And there came athletes
from all quarters by thousands, like hosts of celestials to the abode of
Brahma or of Siva to witness that festival. And they were endued with
huge bodies and great prowess, like the demons called _Kalakhanjas_. And
elated with their prowess and proud of their strength, they were highly
honoured by the king. And their shoulders and waists and necks were like
those of lions, and their bodies were very clean, and their hearts were
quite at ease. And they had many a time won success in the lists in the
presence of kings. And amongst them there was one who towered above the
rest and challenged them all to a combat. And there was none that dared
to approach him as he proudly stalked in the arena. And when all the
athletes stood sad and dispirited, the king of the Matsyas made him
fight with his cook. And urged by the king, Bhima made up his mind
reluctantly, for he could not openly disobey the royal behest. And that
tiger among men then having worshipped the king, entered the spacious
arena, pacing with the careless steps of a tiger. And the son of Kunti
then girded up his loins to the great delight of the spectators. And
Bhima then summoned to the combat that athlete known by the name of
Jimuta who was like unto the Asura Vritra whose prowess was widely
known. And both of them were possessed of great courage, and both were
endued with terrible prowess. And they were like a couple of infuriate
and huge-bodied elephants, each sixty years old. And those brave tigers
among men then cheerfully engaged in a wrestling combat, desirous of
vanquishing each other. And terrible was the encounter that took place
between them, like the clash of the thunderbolt against the stony
mountain-breast. And both of them were exceedingly powerful and
extremely delighted at each other's strength. And desirous of
vanquishing each other, each stood eager to take advantage of his
adversary's lapse. And both were greatly delighted and both looked like
infuriate elephants of prodigious size. And various were the modes of
attack and defence that they exhibited with their clenched fists.[12]
And each dashed against the other and flung his adversary to a distance.
And each cast the other down and pressed him close to the ground. And
each got up again and squeezed the other in his arms. And each threw the
other violently off his place by boxing him on the breast. And each
caught the other by the legs and whirling him round threw him down on
the ground. And they slapped each other with their palms that struck as
hard as the thunderbolt. And they also struck each other with their
outstretched fingers, and stretching them out like spears thrust the
nails into each other's body. And they gave each other violent kicks.
And they struck knee and head against head, producing the crash of one
stone against another. And in this manner that furious combat between
those warriors raged on without weapons, sustained mainly by the power
of their arms and their physical and mental energy, to the infinite
delight of the concourse of spectators. And all people, O king, took
deep interest in that encounter of those powerful wrestlers who fought
like Indra and the Asura Vritra. And they cheered both of them with loud
acclamations of applause. And the broad-chested and long-armed experts
in wrestling then pulled and pressed and whirled and hurled down each
other and struck each other with their knees, expressing all the while
their scorn for each other in loud voices. And they began to fight with
their bare arms in this way, which were like spiked maces of iron. And
at last the powerful and mighty-armed Bhima, the slayer of his foes,
shouting aloud seized the vociferous athlete by the arms even as the
lion seizes the elephant, and taking him up from the ground and holding
him aloft, began to whirl him round, to the great astonishment of the
assembled athletes and the people of Matsya. And having whirled him
round and round a hundred times till he was insensible, the strong-armed
Vrikodara dashed him to death on the ground. And when the brave and
renowned Jimuta was thus killed, Virata and his friends were filled with
great delight. And in the exuberance of his joy, the noble-minded king
rewarded Vallava then and there with the liberality of Kuvera. And
killing numerous athletes and many other men possessed of great bodily
strength, he pleased the king very much. And when no one could be found
there to encounter him in the lists, the king made him fight with tigers
and lions and elephants. And the king also made him battle with furious
and powerful lions in the harem for the pleasure of the ladies. And
Arjuna, too, pleased the king and all the ladies of the inner apartments
by singing and dancing. And Nakula pleased Virata, that best of kings,
by showing him fleet and well-trained steeds that followed him wherever
he went. And the king, gratified with him, rewarded him with ample
presents. And beholding around Sahadeva a herd of well-trained bullocks,
Virata that bull among men, bestowed upon him also wealth of diverse
kinds. And, O king, Draupadi distressed to see all those warriors suffer
pain, sighed incessantly. And it was in this way that those eminent
persons lived there in disguise, rendering services unto king Virata."

    [12] _Krita_--attack; _Pratikrita_--warding it off;
    _Sankata_--clenched. _Some_ texts read _Sankatakais_. The
    meaning then would be 'cased in gauntlets.'


SECTION XIV

(_Kichaka-badha Parva_)

Vaisampayana said, "Living in such disguise, those mighty warriors, the
sons of Pritha, passed ten months in Matsya's city. And, O monarch,
although herself deserving to be waited upon by others, the daughter of
Yajnasena, O Janamejaya, passed her days in extreme misery, waiting upon
Sudeshna. And residing thus in Sudeshna's apartments, the princess of
Panchala pleased that lady as also the other females of the inner
apartments. And it came to pass that as the year was about to expire,
the redoubtable Kichaka, the Commander of Virata's forces, chanced to
behold the daughter of Drupada. And beholding that lady endued with the
splendour of a daughter of the celestials, treading the earth like a
goddess, Kichaka, afflicted with the shafts of Kama, desired to possess
her. And burning with desire's flame, Virata's general came to Sudeshna
(his sister) and smilingly addressed her in these words, 'This beauteous
lady had never before been seen by me in king Virata's abode. This
damsel maddens me with her beauty, even as a new wine maddens one with
its fragrance. Tell me, who is this graceful and captivating lady
possessed of the beauty of a goddess, and whose she is, and whence she
hath come. Surely, grinding my heart she hath reduced me to subjection.
It seems to me that (save her) there is no other medicine for my
illness. O, this fair hand-maid of thine seemeth to me to be possessed
of the beauty of a goddess. Surely, one like her is ill suited to serve
thee. Let her rule over me and whatever is mine. O, let her grace my
spacious and beautiful palace, decked with various ornaments of gold,
full of viands and drinks in profusion, with excellent plates, and
containing every kind of plenty, besides elephants and horses and cars
in myriads.' And having consulted with Sudeshna thus, Kichaka went to
princess Draupadi, and like a jackal in the forest accosting a lioness,
spoke unto Krishna these words in a winning voice, 'Who and whose art
thou, O beautiful one? And O thou of beautiful face, whence hast thou
come to the city of Virata? Tell me all this, O fair lady. Thy beauty
and gracefulness are of the very first order and the comeliness of thy
features is unparalleled. With its loveliness thy face shineth ever like
the resplendent moon. O thou of fair eye-brows, thy eyes are beautiful
and large like lotus-petals. Thy speech also, O thou of beautiful limbs,
resembles the notes of the _cuckoo_. O thou of fair hips, never before
in this world have I beheld a woman possessed of beauty like thine, O
thou of faultless features. Art thou Lakshmi herself having her abode in
the midst of lotuses or, art thou, O slender-waisted one, she who is
called _Bhuti_[13]. Or, which amongst these--_Hri, Sri, Kirti_ and
_Kanti_,--art thou, O thou of beautiful face? Or possessed of beauty
like Rati's, art thou, she who sporteth in the embraces of the God of
love? O thou that possessest the fairest of eye-brows, thou shinest
beautifully even like the lovely light of the moon. Who is there in the
whole world that will not succumb to the influence of desire beholding
thy face? Endued with unrivalled beauty and celestial grace of the most
attractive kind, that face of thine is even like the full moon, its
celestial effulgence resembling his radiant face, its smile resembling
his soft-light, and its eye-lashes looking like the spokes on his disc.
Both thy bosoms, so beautiful and well-developed and endued with
unrivalled gracefulness and deep and well-rounded and without any space
between them, are certainly worthy of being decked with garlands of
gold. Resembling in shape the beautiful buds of the lotus, these thy
breasts, O thou of fair eye-brows, are even as the whips of Kama that
are urging me forward, O thou of sweet smiles. O damsel of slender
waist, beholding that waist of thine marked with four wrinkles and
measuring but a span, and slightly stooping forward because of the
weight of thy breasts, and also looking on those graceful hips of thine
broad as the banks of a river, the incurable fever of desire, O
beauteous lady, afflicteth me sore. The flaming fire of desire, fierce
as a forest conflagration, and fanned by the hope my heart cherisheth of
a union with thee is consuming me intensely. O thou of exceeding beauty
quench thou that flaming fire kindled by Manmatha. Union with thee is a
rain-charged cloud, and the surrender of thy person is the shower that
the cloud may drop. O thou of face resembling the moon, the fierce and
maddening shafts of Manmatha whetted and sharpened by the desire of a
union with thee, piercing this heart of mine in their impetuous course,
have penetrated into its core. O black-eyed lady, those impetuous and
cruel shafts are maddening me beyond endurance. It behoveth thee to
relieve me from this plight by surrendering thyself to me and favouring
me with thy embraces. Decked in beautiful garlands and robes and adorned
with every ornament, sport thou, O sweet damsel, with me to thy fill. O
thou of the gait of an elephant in rut, deserving as thou art of
happiness though deprived of it now, it behoveth thee not to dwell here
in misery. Let unrivalled weal be thine. Drinking various kinds of
charming and delicious and ambrosial wines, and sporting at thy pleasure
in the enjoyment of diverse objects of delight, do thou, O blessed lady,
attain auspicious prosperity. This beauty of thine and this prime of thy
youth, O sweet lady, are now without their use. For, O beauteous and
chaste damsel, endued with such loveliness, thou dost not shine, like a
graceful garland lying unused and unworn. I will forsake all my old
wives. Let them, O thou of sweet smiles, become thy slaves. And I also,
O fair damsel, will stay by thee as thy slave, ever obedient to thee, O
thou of the most handsome face.' Hearing these words of his, Draupadi
replied, 'In desiring me, a female servant of low extraction, employed
in the despicable office of dressing hair, O _Suta's_ son, thou desirest
one that deserves not that honour. Then, again, I am the wife of others.
Therefore, good betide thee, this conduct of thine is not proper. Do
thou remember the precept of morality, viz., that persons should take
delight only in their wedded wives. Thou shouldst not, therefore, by any
means bend thy heart to adultery. Surely abstaining from improper acts
is ever the study of those that are good. Overcome by ignorance sinful
men under the influence of desire come by either extreme infamy or
dreadful calamity.'"

    [13] _Bhuti, Hri, Sri, Kirti_ and _Kanti_ are respectively the
    feminine embodiments of Prosperity, Modesty, Beauty, Fame and
    Loveliness.

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus addressed by the _Sairindhri_, the wicked
Kichaka losing control over his senses and overcome by lust, although
aware of the numerous evils of fornication, evils condemned by everybody
and sometimes leading to the destruction of life itself,--then spoke
unto Draupadi, 'It behoveth thee not, O beauteous lady, O thou of
graceful features, thus to disregard me who am, O thou of sweet smiles,
under the power of Manmatha on thy account. If now, O timid one, thou
disregardest me who am under thy influence and who speak to thee so
fair, thou wilt, O black-eyed damsel, have to repent for it afterwards.
O thou of graceful eye-brows, the real lord of this entire kingdom, O
slender-waisted lady, is myself. It is me depending upon whom the people
of this realm live. In energy and prowess I am unrivalled on earth.
There is no other man on earth who rivals me in beauty of person, in
youth, in prosperity, and in the possession of excellent objects of
enjoyment. Why it is, O auspicious lady, that having it in thy power to
enjoy here every object of desire and every luxury and comfort without
its equal, thou preferest servitude. Becoming the mistress of this
kingdom which I shall confer on thee, O thou of fair face, accept me,
and enjoy, O beauteous one, all excellent objects of desire.' Addressed
in these accursed words by Kichaka, that chaste daughter of Drupada
answered him thus reprovingly, 'Do not, O son of a _Suta_, act so
foolishly and do not throw away thy life. Know that I am protected by my
five husbands. Thou canst not have me. I have Gandharvas for my
husbands. Enraged they will slay thee. Therefore, do thou not bring
destruction on thyself. Thou intendest to tread along a path that is
incapable of being trod by men. Thou, O wicked one, art even like a
foolish child that standing on one shore of the ocean intends to cross
over to the other. Even if thou enterest into the interior of the earth,
or soarest into the sky, or rushest to the other shore of the ocean,
still thou wilt have no escape from the hands of those sky-ranging
offspring of gods, capable of grinding all foes. Why dost thou today, O
Kichaka, solicit me so persistently even as a sick person wisheth for
the night that will put a stop to his existence? Why dost thou desire
me, even like an infant lying on its mother's lap wishing to catch the
moon? For thee that thus solicitest their beloved wife, there is no
refuge either on earth or in sky. O Kichaka, hast thou no sense which
leads thee to seek thy good and by which thy life may be saved?'"


SECTION XV

Vaisampayana said, "Rejected thus by the princess, Kichaka, afflicted
with maddening lust and forgetting all sense of propriety, addressed
Sudeshna saying, 'Do thou, Kekaya's daughter, so act that thy
_Sairindhri_ may come into my arms. Do thou, O Sudeshna, adopt the means
by which the damsel of the gait of an elephant may accept me; I am dying
of absorbing desire.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Hearing his profuse lamentations, that gentle
lady, the intelligent queen of Virata, was touched with pity. And having
taken counsel with her own self and reflected on Kichaka's purpose and
on the anxiety of Krishna, Sudeshna addressed the _Suta's_ son in these
words, 'Do thou, on the occasion of some festival, procure viands and
wines for me. I shall then send my _Sairindhri_ to thee on the pretence
of bringing wine. And when she will repair thither do thou in solitude,
free from interruption, humour her as thou likest. Thus soothed, she may
incline her mind to thee.'"

Vaisampayana continued, "Thus addressed, he went out of his sister's
apartments. And he soon procured wines well-filtered and worthy of a
king. And employing skilled cooks, he prepared many and various kinds of
choice viands and delicious drinks and many and various kinds of meat of
different degrees of excellence. And when all this had been done, that
gentle lady Sudeshna, as previously counselled by Kichaka, desired her
_Sairindhri_ to repair to Kichaka's abode, saying, 'Get up, O
_Sairindhri_ and repair to Kichaka's abode to bring wine, for, O
beauteous lady, I am afflicted with thirst.' Thereupon the _Sairindhri_
replied, 'O princess, I shall not be able to repair to Kichaka's
apartments. Thou thyself knowest, O queen, how shameless he is. O thou
of faultless limbs, O beauteous lady, in thy palace I shall not be able
to lead a lustful life, becoming faithless to my husbands. Thou
rememberest, O gentle lady, O beautiful one, the conditions I had set
