Dhaumya, they with joined hands paid homage unto all the Brahmanas. Then
Dhaumya taking Yudhishthira's right hand, said these words, looking at
the east, 'O mighty monarch, this king of mountains, Mandara lieth vast,
covering the earth up to the ocean. O Pandava, Indra and Vaisravana
preside over this point graced with woods and forests and mountains.
And, O child, the intelligent sages versed in every duty, say, that this
(region) is the abode of Indra and king Vaisravana. And the twice-born
ones, and the sages versed in the duties, and the _Sidhas_, and the
_Sadhyas_, and the celestials pay their adorations unto the Sun as he
riseth from this point. And that lord of all living beings, king _Yama_,
conversant with duty, presideth over yonder southern region whither come
the spirits of the departed. And this is _Sanyamana_, the abode of the
lord of departed spirits, sacred, and wonderful to behold, and crowned
with prime prosperity. And the intelligent ones call that monarch of
mountains (by the name of) Asta. Having, O king, arrived at this, the
Sun ever abideth by the truth. And king _Varuna_ protects all creatures,
abiding in this king of mountains, and also in the vast deep. And, O
highly fortunate one, there illumining the northern regions, lieth the
puissant Mahameru, auspicious and the refuge of those knowing _Brahma_,
where is the court of _Brahma_, and remaining where that soul of all
creatures, _Prajapati_, hath created all that is mobile and immobile.
And the _Mahameru_ is the auspicious and healthy abode even of the seven
mind-born sons of _Brahma_, of whom _Daksha_ was the seventh. And, O
child, here it is that the seven celestial _rishis_ with Vasishtha at
their head rise and set. Behold that excellent and bright summit of the
Meru, where sitteth the great sire (_Brahma_) with the celestials happy
in self-knowledge. And next to the abode of _Brahma_ is visible the
region of him who is said to be the really primal Cause or the origin of
all creatures, even that prime lord, god Narayana, having neither
beginning nor end. And, O king, that auspicious place composed of all
energies even the celestials, cannot behold. And the region of the
high-souled _Vishnu_, by its native splendour, exceeding in effulgence
the sun or fire, cannot be beheld by the gods, or the Danavas. And the
region of Narayana lieth resplendent to the east of the _Meru_, where, O
child, that lord of all creatures, the self-create primal Cause of the
universe, having manifested all beings, looketh splendid of his
excellent grace. O child, not to speak of the _Maharshis_-even
_Brahmarshis_ have no access to that place. And, O best of the Kurus, it
is the _Yatis_ only who have access to it. And, O Pandu's son, (at that
place) luminaries cannot shine by him; there that lord of inconceivable
soul alone shineth transcendental. There by reverence, and severe
austerities, Yatis inspired by virtue of pious practices, attain
Narayana Hari. And, O Bharata, repairing thither, and attaining that
universal Soul--the self-create and eternal God of gods, high-souled
ones, of _Yoga_ success, and free from ignorance and pride have not to
return to this world. O highly fortunate Yudhishthira, this region is
without beginning, or deterioration, or end for it is the very essence
of that God. And, O son of the Kurus, the Sun and the Moon every day go
round this Meru, coursing in an opposite direction. And, O sinless one,
O mighty monarch, the other luminaries also go round this king of
mountains in the self-same way. Thus the worshipful Sun who dispelleth
darkness, goeth round this (mountain) obscuring other luminaries. Then
having set, and passed the evening, that Maker of day, the Sun, taketh a
northerly course. Then again nearing the _Meru_, the divine Sun (ever)
intent on the good of all beings, again courseth, facing the east. And
in this way, the divine Moon also together with the stars goeth round
this mountain, dividing the month unto several sections, by his arrival
at the Parvas. Having thus unerringly coursed round the mighty _Meru_,
and, nourished all creatures, the Moon again repaireth unto the
_Mandar_. In the same way, that destroyer of darkness--the divine
Sun--also moveth on this unobstructed path, animating the universe.
When, desirous of causing dew, he repaireth to the south, then there
ensueth winter to all creatures. Then the Sun, turning back from the
south, by his rays draweth up the energy from all creatures both mobile
and immobile. Thereupon, men become subject to perspiration, fatigue,
drowsiness and lassitude; and living beings always feel disposed to
slumber. Thence, returning through unknown regions, that divine
effulgent one causeth shower, and thereby reviveth beings. And having,
by the comfort caused by the shower, wind, and warmth, cherished the
mobile and the immobile, the powerful Sun resumeth his former course. O
Partha, ranging thus, the Sun unerringly turneth on the wheel of Time,
influencing created things. His course is unceasing; he never resteth, O
Pandava. Withdrawing the energy of all beings, he again rendereth it
back. O Bharata, dividing time into day and night, and Kala, and
Kashiba, that lord, the Sun, dealeth life and motion to all created
things.'"


SECTION CLXIII

Vaisampayana continued, "Dwelling in that best of mountains those
high-souled ones observing excellent vows, felt themselves attracted (to
that place), and diverted themselves, eager to behold Arjuna. And
multitudes of _Gandharvas_ and _Maharshis_ gladly visited those
energetic ones, possessing prowess, of chaste desires and being the
foremost of those endued with truth and fortitude. And having arrived at
that excellent mountain furnished with trees bearing blossoms, those
mighty charioteers were exceedingly delighted, even as the _Marutas_, on
arriving at the celestial regions. And experiencing great exhilaration,
they lived (there), seeing the slopes and summits of that mighty
mountain, filled with flowers, and resonant with the cries of peacocks
and cranes. And on that beautiful mountain they beheld lakes filled with
lotuses, and having their shores covered with trees, and frequented by
darkness, and _karandavas_ and swans. And the flourishing
sporting-regions, graceful on account of the various flowers, and
abounding in gems, was capable of captivating that king, the dispenser
of wealth (_Kuvera_). And always ranging (there), those foremost of
ascetics (the Pandavas) were incapable of conceiving (the significance
of) that Summit, furnished with mighty trees, and masses of
wide-spreading clouds. And, O great hero, owing to its native splendour,
and also on account of the brilliance of the annual plants, there was no
difference there between night and day. And staying in the mountain,
remaining in which the Sun of unrivalled energy cherisheth the mobile
and immobile things, those heroes and foremost of men beheld the rising
and the setting of the Sun. And having seen the rising and the setting
points of the Sun and the rising and the setting mountain, and all the
cardinal points, as well as the intervening spaces ever blazing with the
rays of the Dispeller of darkness, those heroes, in expectation of the
arrival of that mighty charioteer firm in truth, became engaged in
reciting the _Vedas_, practising the daily rituals, chiefly discharging
the religious duties, exercising sacred vows, and abiding by the truth.
And saying, 'Let us even here experience delight by joining without
delay Arjuna accomplished in arms,' those highly blessed Parthas became
engaged in the practice of _Yoga_. And beholding romantic woods on that
mountain, as they always thought of _Kiriti_, every day and night
appeared unto them even as a year. From that very moment joy had taken
leave of them when, with Dhaumya's permission, the high-souled _Jishnu_,
matting his hair, departed (for the woods). So, how could they, absorbed
in his contemplation, experience happiness there? They had become
overwhelmed with grief ever since the moment when at the command of his
brother, Yudhishthira, _Jishnu_ of the tread of a mad elephant had
departed from the _Kamyaka_ forest. O Bharata, in this way, on that
mountain those descendants of Bharata passed a month with difficulty,
thinking of him of the white steeds, who had gone to _Vasava's_ abode
for learning arms. And Arjuna, having dwelt for five years in the abode
of him of a thousand eyes, and having from that lord of celestials
obtained all the celestial weapons,--such as those of _Agni_, of
_Varuna_, of _Soma_, of _Vayu_, of _Vishnu_, of _Indra_, of _Pasupati_,
of _Brahma_, of _Parameshthi_, of _Prajapati_, of _Yama_, of _Dhata_, of
_Savita_, of _Tvashta_, and of _Vaisravana_; and having bowed down to
and gone round him of a hundred sacrifices, and taken his (Indra's)
permission, cheerfully came to the Gandhamadana."


SECTION CLXIV

Vaisampayana continued, "And it came to pass that one day as those
mighty charioteers were thinking of Arjuna, seeing Mahendra's car, yoked
with horses of the effulgence of lightning, arrive all on a sudden, they
were delighted. And driven by Matali, that blazing car, suddenly
illuminating the sky, looked like smokeless flaming tongues of fire, or
a mighty meteor embosomed in clouds. And seated in that car appeared
_Kiriti_ wearing garlands and new-made ornaments. Then Dhananjaya
possessing the prowess of the wielder of the thunder-bolt, alighted on
that mountain, blazing in beauty. And that intelligent one decked in a
diadem and garlands, having alighted on the mountain, first bowed down
at the feet of _Dhaumya_, and then at those of _Ajatasatru_. And he also
paid homage unto Vrikodara's feet; and the twins also bowed down unto
him. Then going to Krishna, and having cheered her, he stood before his
(elder) brother in humble guise. And on meeting with that matchless one,
they were exceedingly delighted. And he also meeting with them rejoiced
exceedingly, and began to eulogise the king. And seeing before them that
car driving in which the slayer of Namuchi had annihilated seven
phalanxes of _Diti's_ offspring, the magnanimous Parthas went round it.
And being highly pleased, they offered excellent worship unto Matali, as
unto the lord of the celestials himself. And then the son of the Kuru
king duly enquired of him after the health of all the gods. And Matali
also greeted them. And having instructed the Parthas even as a father
doth his sons, he ascended that incomparable car, and returned to the
lord of the celestials.

"And when Matali had gone away, that foremost of the royal race, Sakra's
son, the high-souled destroyer of all foes made over unto his love, the
mother of _Sutasoma_, beautiful precious gems and ornaments having the
splendour of the sun, which had been presented to him by Sakra. Then,
sitting in the midst of those foremost of the Kurus, and those best of
the _Brahmanas_, effulgent like unto fire or the sun, he began to relate
all as it had happened, saying, 'In this way, I have learnt weapons from
_Sakra_, _Vayu_, and the manifest _Siva_; and all the celestials with
Indra also have been pleased with me, on account of my good behaviour,
and concentration.'

"After having briefly narrated unto them his sojourn in heaven, _Kiriti_
of spotless deeds agreeably slept that night with the two sons of
Madri."


SECTION CLXV

Vaisampayana said, "Then when the night had been spent, Dhananjaya,
together with his brothers, paid homage unto Yudhishthira the just. And,
O Bharata, at this moment, proceeding from the celestials there arose
mighty and tremendous sounds of a musical instrument, and the rattling
of car-wheels, and the tolling of bells. And there at all the beasts and
beasts of prey and birds emitted separate cries. And from all sides in
cars resplendent as the sun, hosts of _Gandharvas_ and _Apsaras_ began
to follow that represser of foes, the lord of the celestials. And
ascending a car yoked with steeds, decorated with burnished gold, and
roaring like clouds, that king of the celestials, _Purandara_ blazing in
beauty came unto the Parthas. And having arrived (at that place), he of
a thousand eyes descended from his car. And as soon as Yudhishthira the
just saw that high-souled one, he together with his brothers, approached
that graceful king of the immortals. And in accordance with the
ordinance that generous one duly worshipped him of immeasurable soul, in
consequence with his dignity. And then Dhananjaya possessed of prowess,
having bowed down unto _Purandara_, stood before the lord of the
celestials in humble guise, like unto a servant. And seeing the sinless
Dhananjaya having ascetic merit, bearing clotted hair, stand in humility
before the lord of celestials, Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, of great
energy, smelt (the crown) of his head. And beholding _Phalguna_ (in that
attitude), he was exceedingly glad; and by worshipping the king of the
celestials, he experienced the highest bliss. Then unto that
strongminded monarch, swimming in felicity, the intelligent lord of the
celestials, Purandara, spake, saying, 'Thou shalt rule the earth, O
Pandava. Blessed be thou! Do thou, O Kunti's son, again repair unto
Kamyaka.'

"That learned man who for a year leading the _Brahmacharya_ mode of
life, subduing his senses and observing vows, peruseth with rapt
attention this meeting of _Sakra_ with the Pandavas, liveth a hundred
years free from disturbances, and enjoying happiness."


SECTION CLXVI

Vaisampayana continued, "When _Sakra_ had gone to his proper place,
_Vibhatsu_ together with his brothers and Krishna, paid homage unto the
son of Dharma. Then smelling the crown of the head of that Pandava, who
was thus paying homage, (Yudhishthira) in accents faltering on account
of joy, addressed Arjuna, saying, 'O Arjuna, how didst thou pass this
period in heaven? And how has thou obtained the weapons, and how also
hast thou gratified the lord of the celestials? And, O Pandava, has thou
adequately secured the weapons? Have the lord of the celestials and
_Rudra_ gladly granted thee the weapons? And how hast thou beheld the
divine _Sakra_, and the wielder of _Pinaka_? And how has thou obtained
the weapons? And in what manner didst thou worship (them)? And what
service hadst thou done unto that repressor of foes, the worshipful one
of a hundred sacrifices, that he said unto thee, "By thee have I been
gratified?" All this, O highly effulgent one, I wish to hear in detail.
And, O sinless one, the manner in which thou didst please Mahadeva and
the king of the celestials and, O repressor of foes, the service thou
hadst done to the wielder of the thunder-bolt,--do thou, O Dhananjaya,
relate all this in detail.'

"Arjuna said, 'O mighty monarch, listen how I duly beheld him of a
hundred sacrifice and the divine _Sankara_ also. O grinder of foes, O
king, having acquired that science which thou hadst directed me (to
learn), I at thy command went to the forest, for practising penances.
From _Kamyaka_ repairing to the _Bhrigutunga_, I spent there one night,
being engaged in austerities. And it came to pass that on the next I saw
a certain _Brahmana_. And he asked me, saying, "O son of Kunti, whither
wilt thou go?" Thereupon, O descendant of the Kurus, I truly related
unto him everything. And, O best of kings, having heard the true
account, the _Brahmana_ became well-pleased with me, and, O king,
praised me. Then the _Brahmana_, pleased with me, said, "O Bharata, be
thou engaged in austerities. By performing penances, thou wilt in a
short time behold the lord of the celestials." And according to his
advice I ascended the _Himavan_, and, O mighty king, began to practise
penances, (the first) month subsisting on fruit and roots. I spent the
second month, subsisting on water. And, O Pandava, in the third month I
totally abstained from food. And in the fourth month I remained with
upraised arms. And a wonder it is that I did not lose any strength. And
it came to pass that when the first day of the fifth month had been
spent, there appeared before me a being wearing the form of a boar,
turning up the earth with his mouth, stamping the ground with his feet,
rubbing the earth with his breast, and momentarily going about in a
frightful manner. And him followed a great being in the guise of a
hunter furnished with the bow, arrows, and the sword, and surrounded by
females. Thereupon, taking my bow and the two inexhaustible quivers, I
pierced with shafts that terrible and frightful creature. And
simultaneously (with me) that hunter also drawing a strong bow, more
severely struck at (the animal), as if shaking my mind. And, O king, he
also said unto me, "Why hast thou, transgressing the rules of hunting,
hit the animal first hit at by me? With these sharpened shafts will I
destroy thy pride. Stay!" Then that mighty-bodied one holding the bow
rushed at me. And with volleys of mighty shafts, he covered me entirely,
even as a cloud covereth a mountain with showers. Then, on my part, I
covered him with a mighty discharge of arrows. Thereupon, with steady
arrows having their points aflame, and inspired with _mantras_, I
pierced him even as (Indra) riveth a mountain with a thunderbolt. Then
his person began to be multiplied a hundredfold and a thousandfold. At
this, I pierced all his bodies with shafts. Then again all those forms
became one, O Bharata. Thereat I struck at it. Next, he now assumed a
small body with a huge head, and now a huge body with a small head. And,
O king, he then assumed his former person and approached me for fight.
And, O foremost of the Bharata race, when in the encounter I failed to
overwhelm him with arrows, I fixed the mighty weapon of the Wind-god.
But I failed to discharge it at him, and this was a wonder. And when
that weapon thus failed of effect, I was struck with amazement. However,
O king, exerting myself more vigorously, I again covered that being with
a mighty multitude of shafts. Then taking _Sthuna-karna_, and _Varuna_
and _Salava_, and _Asmavarsha_ weapons, I assailed him, profusely
showering shafts. But, O king, he instantly swallowed up even all these
weapons of mine. And when all those (weapons) had been swallowed up, I
discharged the weapon presided over by Brahma. And when the blazing
arrows issuing from that weapon were heaped upon him all around, and
being thus heaped over by that mighty weapon discharged by me, he
increased (in bulk). Then all the world became oppressed with the energy
begotten of the weapon hurled by me, and the firmament and all the
points of the sky became illumined. But that one of mighty energy
instantly baffled even that weapon. And, O monarch, when that weapon
presided over by _Brahma_ had been baffled I was possessed with terrible
fear. Thereupon immediately holding even my bow and the two
inexhaustible quivers, I shot at that being, but he swallowed up all
those weapons. And when all the weapons had been baffled and swallowed
up, there ensued a wrestling between him and myself. And we encountered
each other first with blows and then with slaps. But incapable of
overcoming that being, I fell down stupefied on the ground. Thereupon, O
mighty king, with a laugh, that wonderful being at my sight vanished at
that spot together with the women. Having accomplished this, O
illustrious monarch, that divine one assumed another and unearthly form
(clad in) wonderful raiment. And renouncing the form of a hunter, that
divine lord of the gods, resumed his own unearthly appearance and that
mighty god stood (there). Then appeared before me with _Uma_ that
manifest divine one, having the bull for his mark, wielding the
_Pinaka_, bearing serpents and capable of assuming many forms. And, O
repressor of foes, advancing towards me, standing even then in the field
ready for conflict, that wielder of the trident addressed me saying, "I
am well-pleased with thee." Then that divine one held up my bows and the
couple of quivers furnished with inexhaustible shafts and returned them
unto me saying, "Do thou ask some boon, O Kunti's son. I am well-pleased
with thee. Tell me, what I shall do for thee. And, O hero, express the
desire that dwelleth in thy heart. I will grant it. Except immortality
alone, tell me as to the desire that is in thy heart." Thereat with my
mind intent on the acquisition of arms, I only bowed down unto Siva and
said, "O divine one, if thou beest favourably disposed towards me, then
I wish to have this boon,--I wish to learn all the weapons that are with
thy god-head." Then the god _Tryamvaka_ said unto me, "I will give. O
Pandava, my own weapon _Raudra_ shall attend upon thee." Thereupon
_Mahadeva_, well-pleased, granted to me the mighty weapon, _Pasupata_.
And, having granted that eternal weapon, he also said unto me, "This
must never be hurled at mortals. If discharged at any person of small
energy, it would consume the universe. Shouldst thou (at any time) be
hard pressed, thou mayst discharge it. And when all thy weapons have
been completely baffled, thou mayst hurl it." Then when he having the
bull for his mark, had been thus gratified, there stood manifest by my
side that celestial weapon, of resistless force capable of baffling all
weapons and destructive of foes and the hewer of hostile forces and
unrivalled and difficult to be borne even by the celestials, the demons
and the _Rakshasas_. Then at the command of that god, I sat me down
there. And in my very sight the god vanished from the spot.'"


SECTION CLXVII

"Arjuna said, 'O Bharata, by the grace of that god of gods the Supreme
Soul, _Tryamvaka_, I passed the night at that place. And having passed
the night, when I had finished the morning rituals, I saw that foremost
of the _Brahmanas_ whom I had seen before. And unto him I told all as it
had happened, O Bharata, namely, that I had met the divine _Mahadeva_.
Thereupon, O king of kings, well-pleased, he said unto me, "Since thou
hast beheld the great god, incapable of being beheld by any one else,
soon wilt thou mix with _Vaivaswata_ and the other _Lokapalas_ and the
lord of the celestials; and Indra too will grant thee weapons." O king,
having said this unto me and having embraced me again and again, that
_Brahmana_ resembling the Sun, went away whither he listed. And, O
slayer of foes, it came to pass that on the evening of that day
refreshing the whole world, there began to blow a pure breeze. And in my
vicinity on the base of the _Himalaya_ mountain fresh, fragrant and fair
flowers began to bloom. And on all sides there were heard charming
symphony and captivating hymns relating to Indra. And before the lord of
the celestial hosts of _Apsaras_ and _Gandharvas_ chanted various songs.
And ascending celestial cars, there approached the _Marutas_ and the
followers of _Mahendra_ and the dwellers of heaven. And afterwards,
Marutvan together with _Sachi_ and all the celestials appeared on the
scene in cars yoked with horses elegantly adorned. And at this very
moment, O king, he that goeth about on the shoulders of men manifested
himself unto me in excellent grace. And I saw _Yama_ seated on the south
and _Varuna_ and the lord of the celestials at their respective regions.
And, O foremost of men, O mighty monarch, they after having cheered me
said, "O Savyasachin, behold us--the Lokapalas--seated. For the
performance of the task of the gods thou hast obtained the sight of
_Sankara_. Do thou now receive weapons from us seated around."
Thereupon, O lord, having bowed down unto those foremost of the
celestials with regard, I duly accepted those mighty weapons. And then
they recognised me as one of their own. Afterwards the gods repaired to
the quarter from whence they had come. And that lord of the celestials,
the divine Maghavan too having ascended his glorious chariot, said, "O
_Phalguna_, thou shalt have to repair unto the celestial region. O
Dhananjaya, even before this thy arrival I knew that thou wouldst come
hither. Then I have, O best of the Bharatas, manifested myself unto
thee. As formerly thou hadst performed thy ablution in the various
_tirthas_ and now hast performed severe austerities, so thou wilt be
able to repair unto the celestial regions, O Pandava. Thou wilt,
however, again have to practise extreme penance, for thou shouldst at
any rate journey to heaven. And at my command, Matali shall take thee to
the celestial regions. Thou hast already been recognised by the
celestials and the celestial sages of high soul." Thereupon I said unto
Sakra, "O divine one, be thou favourable unto me. With the view of
learning arms do I beseech thee that thou mayst be my preceptor." At
this Indra said, "O child, having learnt weapons thou wouldst perform
terrible deeds and with this object thou desirest to obtain the weapons.
However, obtain thou the arms, as thou desirest." Then I said, "O slayer
of foes, I never would discharge these celestial weapons at mortals
except when all my other arms should have been baffled. Do thou, O lord
of the celestials, grant me the celestial weapons (so that) I may
hereafter obtain the regions attainable by warriors." Indra said, "O
Dhananjaya it is to try thee that I have said such words unto thee.
Having been begotten of me this speech of thine well becometh thee. Do
thou, O Bharata, repairing unto my abode learn all the weapons of
_Vayu_, of _Agni_, of the _Vasus_, of _Varuna_, of the _Marutas_, of the
_Siddhas_, of Brahma, of the Gandharvas, of the Uragas, of the
Rakshasas, of Vishnu and of the _Nairitas_; and also all the weapons
that are with me, O perpetuator of the Kuru race." Having said this unto
me _Sakra_ vanished at the very spot. Then, O king, I saw the wonderful
and sacred celestial car yoked with steeds arrive conducted by Matali.
And when the Lokapalas went away Matali said unto me, "O thou of mighty
splendour, the lord of the celestials is desirous of seeing thee. And O
mighty-armed one, do thou acquire competence and then perform thy task.
Come and behold the regions, attainable by merit and come unto heaven
even in this frame. O Bharata, the thousand-eyed lord of the celestials
wisheth to see thee." Thus addressed by Matali, I, taking leave of the
mountain Himalaya and having gone round it ascended that excellent car.
And then the exceedingly generous Matali, versed in equine lore, drove
the steeds, gifted with the speed of thought or the wind. And when the
chariot began to move that charioteer looking at my face as I was seated
steadily, wondered and said these words, "Today this appeareth unto me
strange and unprecedented that being seated in this celestial car, thou
hast not been jerked ever so little. O foremost of Bharata race, I have
ever remarked that at the first pull by the steeds even the lord of the
celestials himself getteth jerked. But all the while that the car had
moved, thou hast been sitting unshaken. This appeareth unto me as
transcending even the power of _Sakra_."

"'Having said this, O Bharata, Matali soared in the sky and showed me
the abodes of the celestials and their palaces. Then the chariot yoked
with steeds coursed upwards. And the celestials and the sages began to
worship (that car), O prince of men. And I saw the regions, moving
anywhere at will, and the splendour also of the highly energetic
_Gandharvas, Apsaras_, and the celestial sages. And _Sakra's_
charioteer, Matali, at once showed me _Nandana_ and other gardens and
groves belonging to the celestials. Next I beheld Indra's abode,
_Amaravati_, adorned with jewels and trees yielding any sort of fruit
that is desired. There the Sun doth not shed heat; nor doth heat or cold
or fatigue there affect (one), O king. And, O great monarch, the
celestials feel neither sorrow nor poverty of spirit, nor weakness, nor
lassitude, O grinder of foes. And, O ruler of men, the celestials and
the others have neither anger nor covetousness. And, O king, in the
abodes of the celestials, the beings are ever contented. And there the
trees ever bear verdant foliage, and fruits, and flowers; and the
various lakes are embalmed with the fragrance of lotuses. And there the
breeze is cool, and delicious, and fragrant, and pure, and inspiring.
And the ground is variegated with all kinds of gems, and adorned with
blossoms. And there were seen innumerable beautiful beasts and in the
air innumerable rangers of the sky. Then I saw the _Vasus_, and the
_Rudras_, and the _Sadhyas_ with the _Marutas_, and the _Adityas_, and
the two _Aswins_ and worshipped them. And they conferred their benison
on me, granting me strength and prowess, and energy, and celebrity, and
(skill in) arms, and victory in battle. Then, entering that romantic
city adored by the _Gandharvas_ and the celestials, with joined hands, I
stood before the thousand-eyed lord of the celestials. Thereupon, that
best of bestowers gladly offered unto me half of his seat; and _Vasava_
also with regard touched my person. And, O Bharata, with the view of
acquiring arms and learning weapons, I began to dwell in heaven,
together with the gods and the _Gandharvas_ of generous souls. And
_Viswavana's_ son, _Chitrasena_ became my friend. And he, O king,
imparted unto me the entire _Gandharva_ (science). And, O monarch, I
happily lived in _Sakra's_ abode, well cared for having all my desires
gratified, learning weapons, listening to the notes of songs, and the
clear sounds of musical instruments, and beholding the foremost of
_Apsaras_ dance. And without neglecting to study the arts, which I
learnt properly, my attention was specially fixed on the acquisition of
arms. And that lord of a thousand eyes was pleased with that purpose of
mine. Living thus in heaven, O king, I passed this period.

"'And when I had acquired proficiency in weapons, and gained his
confidence that one having for his vehicle the horse (_Uchchaisrava_),
(Indra), patting me on the head with his hand, said these words, "Now
even the celestials themselves cannot conquer thee,--what shall I say of
imperfect mortals residing on earth? Thou hast become invulnerable in
strength, irrepressible, and incomparable in fight." Then with the hair
of his body standing on end, he again accosted me saying, "O hero, in
fighting with weapons none is equal unto thee. And, O perpetuator of the
Kuru race, thou art even watchful, and dexterous, and truthful, and of
subdued senses, and the protector of the _Brahmanas_ and adept in
weapons, and warlike. And, O Partha, together with (a knowledge of) the
five modes, using (them), thou hast obtained five and ten weapons and,
therefore, there existeth none, who is thy peer. And thou hast perfectly
learnt the discharge (of those weapons) and (their) withdrawal, and
(their) re-discharge and re-withdrawal, and the _Prayaschitta_ connected
(with them), and also their revival, in case of their being baffled.
Now, O represser of foes, the time hath arrived for thy paying the
preceptor's fee. Do thou promise to pay the fee; then I shall unfold
unto thee what thou wilt have to perform." Thereat, O king, I said unto
the ruler of the celestials, "If it be in my power to do the work, do
thou consider it as already accomplished by me." O king, when I had said
these words, Indra with a smile said unto me "Nothing is there in the
three worlds that is not in thy power (to achieve). My enemies, those
_Danavas_, named _Nivata-Kavachas_, dwell in the womb of the ocean. And
they number thirty million and are notorious, and all of equal forms and
strength and splendour. Do thou slay them there, O Kunti's son; and that
will be thy preceptor's fee."

"'Saying this he gave unto me the highly resplendent celestial car,
conducted by Matali, furnished with hair resembling the down of
peacocks. And on my head he set this excellent diadem. And he gave me
ornaments for my body, like unto his own. And he granted unto me the
impenetrable mail--the best of its kind, and easy to the touch; and
fastened unto the _Gandiva_ this durable string. Then I set out,
ascending that splendid chariot riding on which in days of yore, the
lord of the celestials and vanquished _Vali_--that son of _Virochana_.
And, O ruler of men, startled by the rattling of the car, all the
celestials, approached (there), taking me to be the king of the
celestials. And seeing me, they asked, "O Phalguna, what art thou going
to do?" And I told them as it had fallen out,--and said, "I shall even
do this in battle. Ye that are highly fortunate, know that I have set
out desirous of slaying the _Nivata-Kavachas_. O sinless ones, do ye
bless me." Thereupon, they began to eulogise me even as they (eulogise)
the god, _Purandara_. And they said, "Riding on this car, _Maghavan_
conquered in battle _Samvara_, and _Namuchi_, and _Vala_, and _Vritra_,
and _Prahrada_, and _Naraka_. And mounted on this car also Maghavan, had
conquered in battle many thousands and millions and hundreds of millions
of _Daityas_. And, O _Kaunteya_, thou also, riding on this car, by thy
prowess shalt conquer the _Nivata-Kavachas_ in conflict, even as did the
self-possessed Maghavan in days of yore. And here is the best of shells;
by this also thou shalt defeat the _Danavas_. And by this it is that the
high souled _Sakra_ conquered the words." Saying this, the gods offered
(unto me) this shell, _Devadatta_, sprung in the deep; and I accepted it
for the sake of victory. And at this moment, the gods fell extolling me.
And in order to be engaged in action, I proceeded to the dreadful abode
of the _Danavas_, furnished with the shell, the mail, and arrows, and
taking my bow.'"


SECTION CLXVIII

"Arjuna continued, 'Then at places eulogised by the _Maharshis_, I
(proceeded, and at length) beheld the ocean--that inexhaustible lord of
waters. And like unto flowing cliffs were seen on it heaving billows,
now meeting together and now rolling away. And there (were seen) all
around barks by thousands filled with gems. And there were seen
_timingilas_ and tortoises and _makaras_ like unto rock submerged in
water. And on all sides round thousands of shells sunk in water appeared
like stars in the night covered by light clouds. And thousands upon
thousands of gems were floating in heaps and a violent wind was blowing
about in whirls--and this was wonderful to behold. And having beheld
that excellent lord of all waters with powerful tides, I saw at a short
distance the city of the demons filled with the _Danavas_. And even
there, entering underneath the earth, Matali skilled in guiding the car,
sitting fast on the chariot drove it with force; and he dashed on,
frightening that city with the rattling of his chariot. And hearing that
rattling of the chariot like unto the rumbling of the clouds in the sky,
the _Danavas_, thinking me to be the lord of the celestials, became
agitated. And thereupon they all, frightened at heart, stood holding in
their hands bows and arrows and swords and javelins and axes and maces
and clubs. Then having made arrangements for the defence of the city,
the _Danavas_, with minds alarmed, shut the gates, so that nothing could
be discovered. Thereupon taking my shell, _Devadatta_, of tremendous
roars, I again and again winded it with exceeding cheerfulness. And
filling all the firmament, those sounds produced echoes. Thereat mighty
beings were terrified and they hid (themselves). And then, O Bharata,
all of them adorned with ornaments, those offsprings of _Diti_--the
