should therefore have the dominion over Sion?

2 Esdr 3:29
For when I came thither, and had seen impieties without number,
then my soul saw many evildoers in this thirtieth year, so that
my heart failed me.

2 Esdr 3:30
For I have seen how thou sufferest them sinning, and hast spared
wicked doers: and hast destroyed thy people, and hast preserved
thine enemies, and hast not signified it.

2 Esdr 3:31
I do not remember how this way may be left: Are they then of
Babylon better than they of Sion?

2 Esdr 3:32
Or is there any other people that knoweth thee beside Israel?
or what generation hath so believed thy covenants as Jacob?

2 Esdr 3:33
And yet their reward appeareth not, and their labour hath no
fruit: for I have gone here and there through the heathen, and I
see that they flow in wealth, and think not upon thy
commandments.

2 Esdr 3:34
Weigh thou therefore our wickedness now in the balance, and
their's also that dwell the world; and so shall thy name no
where be found but in Israel.

2 Esdr 3:35
Or when was it that they which dwell upon the earth have not
sinned in thy sight? or what people have so kept thy
commandments?

2 Esdr 3:36
Thou shalt find that Israel by name hath kept thy precepts;
but not the heathen.

2 Esdr 4:1
And the angel that was sent unto me, whose name was Uriel, gave
me an answer,

2 Esdr 4:2
And said, Thy heart hath gone to far in this world, and thinkest
thou to comprehend the way of the most High?

2 Esdr 4:3
Then said I, Yea, my lord. And he answered me, and said, I am
sent to shew thee three ways, and to set forth three similitudes
before thee:

2 Esdr 4:4
Whereof if thou canst declare me one, I will shew thee also
the way that thou desirest to see, and I shall shew thee from
whence the wicked heart cometh.

2 Esdr 4:5
And I said, Tell on, my lord. Then said he unto me, Go thy
way, weigh me the weight of the fire, or measure me the blast of
the wind, or call me again the day that is past.

2 Esdr 4:6
Then answered I and said, What man is able to do that, that
thou shouldest ask such things of me?

2 Esdr 4:7
And he said unto me, If I should ask thee how great dwellings
are in the midst of the sea, or how many springs are in the
beginning of the deep, or how many springs are above the
firmament, or which are the outgoings of paradise:

2 Esdr 4:8
Peradventure thou wouldest say unto me, I never went down
into the deep, nor as yet into hell, neither did I ever climb up
into heaven.

2 Esdr 4:9
Nevertheless now have I asked thee but only of the fire and
wind, and of the day wherethrough thou hast passed, and of
things from which thou canst not be separated, and yet canst
thou give me no answer of them.

2 Esdr 4:10
He said moreover unto me, Thine own things, and such as are
grown up with thee, canst thou not know;

2 Esdr 4:11
How should thy vessel then be able to comprehend the way of
the Highest, and, the world being now outwardly corrupted to
understand the corruption that is evident in my sight?

2 Esdr 4:12
Then said I unto him, It were better that we were not at all,
than that we should live still in wickedness, and to suffer, and
not to know wherefore.

2 Esdr 4:13
He answered me, and said, I went into a forest into a plain,
and the trees took counsel,

2 Esdr 4:14
And said, Come, let us go and make war against the sea that
it may depart away before us, and that we may make us more
woods.

2 Esdr 4:15
The floods of the sea also in like manner took counsel, and
said, Come, let us go up and subdue the woods of the plain, that
there also we may make us another country.

2 Esdr 4:16
The thought of the wood was in vain, for the fire came and
consumed it.

2 Esdr 4:17
The thought of the floods of the sea came likewise to nought,
for the sand stood up and stopped them.

2 Esdr 4:18
If thou wert judge now betwixt these two, whom wouldest thou
begin to justify? or whom wouldest thou condemn?

2 Esdr 4:19
I answered and said, Verily it is a foolish thought that they
both have devised, for the ground is given unto the wood, and
the sea also hath his place to bear his floods.

2 Esdr 4:20
Then answered he me, and said, Thou hast given a right judgment,
but why judgest thou not thyself also?

2 Esdr 4:21
For like as the ground is given unto the wood, and the sea to
his floods: even so they that dwell upon the earth may
understand nothing but that which is upon the earth: and he that
dwelleth above the heavens may only understand the things that
are above the height of the heavens.

2 Esdr 4:22
Then answered I and said, I beseech thee, O Lord, let me have
understanding:

2 Esdr 4:23
For it was not my mind to be curious of the high things, but
of such as pass by us daily, namely, wherefore Israel is given
up as a reproach to the heathen, and for what cause the people
whom thou hast loved is given over unto ungodly nations, and why
the law of our forefathers is brought to nought, and the written
covenants come to none effect,

2 Esdr 4:24
And we pass away out of the world as grasshoppers, and our
life is astonishment and fear, and we are not worthy to obtain
mercy.

2 Esdr 4:25
What will he then do unto his name whereby we are called? of
these things have I asked.

2 Esdr 4:26
Then answered he me, and said, The more thou searchest, the
more thou shalt marvel; for the world hasteth fast to pass away,

2 Esdr 4:27
And cannot comprehend the things that are promised to the righteous
in time to come: for this world is full of unrighteousness and
infirmities.

2 Esdr 4:28
But as concerning the things whereof thou askest me, I will
tell thee; for the evil is sown, but the destruction thereof is
not yet come.

2 Esdr 4:29
If therefore that which is sown be not turned upside down,
and if the place where the evil is sown pass not away, then
cannot it come that is sown with good.

2 Esdr 4:30
For the grain of evil seed hath been sown in the heart of
Adam from the beginning, and how much ungodliness hath it
brought up unto this time? and how much shall it yet bring forth
until the time of threshing come?

2 Esdr 4:31
Ponder now by thyself, how great fruit of wickedness the
grain of evil seed hath brought forth.

2 Esdr 4:32
And when the ears shall be cut down, which are without number,
how great a floor shall they fill?

2 Esdr 4:33
Then I answered and said, How, and when shall these things
come to pass? wherefore are our years few and evil?

2 Esdr 4:34
And he answered me, saying, Do not thou hasten above the most
Highest: for thy haste is in vain to be above him, for thou hast
much exceeded.

2 Esdr 4:35
Did not the souls also of the righteous ask question of these
things in their chambers, saying, How long shall I hope on this
fashion? when cometh the fruit of the floor of our reward?

2 Esdr 4:36
And unto these things Uriel the archangel gave them answer,
and said, Even when the number of seeds is filled in you: for he
hath weighed the world in the balance.

2 Esdr 4:37
By measure hath he measured the times; and by number hath he
numbered the times; and he doth not move nor stir them, until
the said measure be fulfilled.

2 Esdr 4:38
Then answered I and said, O Lord that bearest rule, even we
all are full of impiety.

2 Esdr 4:39
And for our sakes peradventure it is that the floors of the
righteous are not filled, because of the sins of them that dwell
upon the earth.

2 Esdr 4:40
So he answered me, and said, Go thy way to a woman with
child, and ask of her when she hath fulfilled her nine months,
if her womb may keep the birth any longer within her.

2 Esdr 4:41
Then said I, No, Lord, that can she not. And he said unto me,
In the grave the chambers of souls are like the womb of a woman:

2 Esdr 4:42
For like as a woman that travaileth maketh haste to escape
the necessity of the travail: even so do these places haste to
deliver those things that are committed unto them.

2 Esdr 4:43
From the beginning, look, what thou desirest to see, it shall
be shewed thee.

2 Esdr 4:44
Then answered I and said, If I have found favour in thy sight,
and if it be possible, and if I be meet therefore,

2 Esdr 4:45
Shew me then whether there be more to come than is past, or
more past than is to come.

2 Esdr 4:46
What is past I know, but what is for to come I know not.

2 Esdr 4:47
And he said unto me, Stand up upon the right side, and I shall
expound the similitude unto thee.

2 Esdr 4:48
So I stood, and saw, and, behold, an hot burning oven passed
by before me: and it happened that when the flame was gone by I
looked, and, behold, the smoke remained still.

2 Esdr 4:49
After this there passed by before me a watery cloud, and sent
down much rain with a storm; and when the stormy rain was past,
the drops remained still.

2 Esdr 4:50
Then said he unto me, Consider with thyself; as the rain is
more than the drops, and as the fire is greater than the smoke;
but the drops and the smoke remain behind: so the quantity which
is past did more exceed.

2 Esdr 4:51
Then I prayed, and said, May I live, thinkest thou, until
that time? or what shall happen in those days?

2 Esdr 4:52
He answered me, and said, As for the tokens whereof thou
askest me, I may tell thee of them in part: but as touching thy
life, I am not sent to shew thee; for I do not know it.

2 Esdr 5:1
Nevertheless as coming the tokens, behold, the days shall
come, that they which dwell upon earth shall be taken in a great
number, and the way of truth shall be hidden, and the land shall
be barren of faith.

2 Esdr 5:2
But iniquity shall be increased above that which now thou
seest, or that thou hast heard long ago.

2 Esdr 5:3
And the land, that thou seest now to have root, shalt thou
see wasted suddenly.

2 Esdr 5:4
But if the most High grant thee to live, thou shalt see after
the third trumpet that the sun shall suddenly shine again in the
night, and the moon thrice in the day:

2 Esdr 5:5
And blood shall drop out of wood, and the stone shall give
his voice, and the people shall be troubled:

2 Esdr 5:6
And even he shall rule, whom they look not for that dwell
upon the earth, and the fowls shall take their flight away
together:

2 Esdr 5:7
And the Sodomitish sea shall cast out fish, and make a noise
in the night, which many have not known: but they shall all hear
the voice thereof.

2 Esdr 5:8
There shall be a confusion also in many places, and the fire
shall be oft sent out again, and the wild beasts shall change
their places, and menstruous women shall bring forth monsters:

2 Esdr 5:9
And salt waters shall be found in the sweet, and all friends
shall destroy one another; then shall wit hide itself, and
understanding withdraw itself into his secret chamber,

2 Esdr 5:10
And shall be sought of many, and yet not be found: then shall
unrighteousness and incontinency be multiplied upon earth.

2 Esdr 5:11
One land also shall ask another, and say, Is righteousness
that maketh a man righteous gone through thee? And it shall say,
No.

2 Esdr 5:12
At the same time shall men hope, but nothing obtain: they
shall labour, but their ways shall not prosper.

2 Esdr 5:13
To shew thee such tokens I have leave; and if thou wilt pray
again, and weep as now, and fast even days, thou shalt hear yet
greater things.

2 Esdr 5:14
Then I awaked, and an extreme fearfulness went through all my
body, and my mind was troubled, so that it fainted.

2 Esdr 5:15
So the angel that was come to talk with me held me, comforted
me, and set me up upon my feet.

2 Esdr 5:16
And in the second night it came to pass, that Salathiel the
captain of the people came unto me, saying, Where hast thou
been? and why is thy countenance so heavy?

2 Esdr 5:17
Knowest thou not that Israel is committed unto thee in the
land of their captivity?

2 Esdr 5:18
Up then, and eat bread, and forsake us not, as the shepherd
that leaveth his flock in the hands of cruel wolves.

2 Esdr 5:19
Then said I unto him, Go thy ways from me, and come not nigh
me. And he heard what I said, and went from me.

2 Esdr 5:20
And so I fasted seven days, mourning and weeping, like as
Uriel the angel commanded me.

2 Esdr 5:21
And after seven days so it was, that the thoughts of my heart
were very grievous unto me again,

2 Esdr 5:22
And my soul recovered the spirit of understanding, and I
began to talk with the most High again,

2 Esdr 5:23
And said, O Lord that bearest rule, of every wood of the
earth, and of all the trees thereof, thou hast chosen thee one
only vine:

2 Esdr 5:24
And of all lands of the whole world thou hast chosen thee one
pit: and of all the flowers thereof one lily:

2 Esdr 5:25
And of all the depths of the sea thou hast filled thee one
river: and of all builded cities thou hast hallowed Sion unto
thyself:

2 Esdr 5:26
And of all the fowls that are created thou hast named thee
one dove: and of all the cattle that are made thou hast provided
thee one sheep:

2 Esdr 5:27
And among all the multitudes of people thou hast gotten thee
one people: and unto this people, whom thou lovedst, thou gavest
a law that is approved of all.

2 Esdr 5:28
And now, O Lord, why hast thou given this one people over
unto many? and upon the one root hast thou prepared others, and
why hast thou scattered thy only one people among many?

2 Esdr 5:29
And they which did gainsay thy promises, and believed not thy
covenants, have trodden them down.

2 Esdr 5:30
If thou didst so much hate thy people, yet shouldest thou
punish them with thine own hands.

2 Esdr 5:31
Now when I had spoken these words, the angel that came to me
the night afore was sent unto me,

2 Esdr 5:32
And said unto me, Hear me, and I will instruct thee; hearken
to the thing that I say, and I shall tell thee more.

2 Esdr 5:33
And I said, Speak on, my Lord. Then said he unto me, Thou art
sore troubled in mind for Israel's sake: lovest thou that people
better than he that made them?

2 Esdr 5:34
And I said, No, Lord: but of very grief have I spoken: for my
reins pain me every hour, while I labour to comprehend the way
of the most High, and to seek out part of his judgment.

2 Esdr 5:35
And he said unto me, Thou canst not. And I said, Wherefore,
Lord? whereunto was I born then? or why was not my mother's womb
then my grave, that I might not have seen the travail of Jacob,
and the wearisome toil of the stock of Israel?

2 Esdr 5:36
And he said unto me, Number me the things that are not yet
come, gather me together the dross that are scattered abroad,
make me the flowers green again that are withered,

2 Esdr 5:37
Open me the places that are closed, and bring me forth the
winds that in them are shut up, shew me the image of a voice:
and then I will declare to thee the thing that thou labourest to
know.

2 Esdr 5:38
And I said, O Lord that bearest rule, who may know these
things, but he that hath not his dwelling with men?

2 Esdr 5:39
As for me, I am unwise: how may I then speak of these things
whereof thou askest me?

2 Esdr 5:40
Then said he unto me, Like as thou canst do none of these
things that I have spoken of, even so canst thou not find out my
judgment, or in the end the love that I have promised unto my
people.

2 Esdr 5:41
And I said, Behold, O Lord, yet art thou nigh unto them that
be reserved till the end: and what shall they do that have been
before me, or we that be now, or they that shall come after us?

2 Esdr 5:42
And he said unto me, I will liken my judgment unto a ring:
like as there is no slackness of the last, even so there is no
swiftness of the first.

2 Esdr 5:43
So I answered and said, Couldest thou not make those that
have been made, and be now, and that are for to come, at once;
that thou mightest shew thy judgment the sooner?

2 Esdr 5:44
Then answered he me, and said, The creature may not haste
above the maker; neither may the world hold them at once that
shall be created therein.

2 Esdr 5:45
And I said, As thou hast said unto thy servant, that thou,
which givest life to all, hast given life at once to the
creature that thou hast created, and the creature bare it: even
so it might now also bear them that now be present at once.

2 Esdr 5:46
And he said unto me, Ask the womb of a woman, and say unto
her, If thou bringest forth children, why dost thou it not
together, but one after another? pray her therefore to bring
forth ten children at once.

2 Esdr 5:47
And I said, She cannot: but must do it by distance of time.

2 Esdr 5:48
Then said he unto me, Even so have I given the womb of the
earth to those that be sown in it in their times.

2 Esdr 5:49
For like as a young child may not bring forth the things that
belong to the aged, even so have I disposed the world which I
created.

2 Esdr 5:50
And I asked, and said, Seeing thou hast now given me the way,
I will proceed to speak before thee: for our mother, of whom
thou hast told me that she is young, draweth now nigh unto age.

2 Esdr 5:51
He answered me, and said, Ask a woman that beareth children,
and she shall tell thee.

2 Esdr 5:52
Say unto her, Wherefore are unto they whom thou hast now
brought forth like those that were before, but less of stature?

2 Esdr 5:53
And she shall answer thee, They that be born in the the
strength of youth are of one fashion, and they that are born in
the time of age, when the womb faileth, are otherwise.

2 Esdr 5:54
Consider thou therefore also, how that ye are less of stature
than those that were before you.

2 Esdr 5:55
And so are they that come after you less than ye, as the
creatures which now begin to be old, and have passed over the
strength of youth.

2 Esdr 5:56
Then said I, Lord, I beseech thee, if I have found favour in
thy sight, shew thy servant by whom thou visitest thy creature.

2 Esdr 6:1
And he said unto me, In the beginning, when the earth was
made, before the borders of the world stood, or ever the winds
blew,

2 Esdr 6:2
Before it thundered and lightened, or ever the foundations of
paradise were laid,

2 Esdr 6:3
Before the fair flowers were seen, or ever the moveable
powers were established, before the innumerable multitude of
angels were gathered together,

2 Esdr 6:4
Or ever the heights of the air were lifted up, before the
measures of the firmament were named, or ever the chimneys in
Sion were hot,

2 Esdr 6:5
And ere the present years were sought out, and or ever the
inventions of them that now sin were turned, before they were
sealed that have gathered faith for a treasure:

2 Esdr 6:6
Then did I consider these things, and they all were made
through me alone, and through none other: by me also they shall
be ended, and by none other.

2 Esdr 6:7
Then answered I and said, What shall be the parting asunder
of the times? or when shall be the end of the first, and the
beginning of it that followeth?

2 Esdr 6:8
And he said unto me, From Abraham unto Isaac, when Jacob and
Esau were born of him, Jacob's hand held first the heel of Esau.

2 Esdr 6:9
For Esau is the end of the world, and Jacob is the beginning
of it that followeth.

2 Esdr 6:10
The hand of man is betwixt the heel and the hand: other
question, Esdras, ask thou not.

2 Esdr 6:11
I answered then and said, O Lord that bearest rule, if I have
found favour in thy sight,

2 Esdr 6:12
I beseech thee, shew thy servant the end of thy tokens,
whereof thou shewedst me part the last night.

2 Esdr 6:13
So he answered and said unto me, Stand up upon thy feet, and
hear a mighty sounding voice.

2 Esdr 6:14
And it shall be as it were a great motion; but the place
where thou standest shall not be moved.

2 Esdr 6:15
And therefore when it speaketh be not afraid: for the word is
of the end, and the foundation of the earth is understood.

2 Esdr 6:16
And why? because the speech of these things trembleth and is
moved: for it knoweth that the end of these things must be
changed.

2 Esdr 6:17
And it happened, that when I had heard it I stood up upon my
feet, and hearkened, and, behold, there was a voice that spake,
and the sound of it was like the sound of many waters.

2 Esdr 6:18
And it said, Behold, the days come, that I will begin to draw
nigh, and to visit them that dwell upon the earth,

2 Esdr 6:19
And will begin to make inquisition of them, what they be that
have hurt unjustly with their unrighteousness, and when the
affliction of Sion shall be fulfilled;

2 Esdr 6:20
And when the world, that shall begin to vanish away, shall be
finished, then will I shew these tokens: the books shall be
opened before the firmament, and they shall see all together:

2 Esdr 6:21
And the children of a year old shall speak with their voices,
the women with child shall bring forth untimely children of
three or four months old, and they shall live, and be raised up.

2 Esdr 6:22
And suddenly shall the sown places appear unsown, the full
storehouses shall suddenly be found empty:

2 Esdr 6:23
And tha trumpet shall give a sound, which when every man
heareth, they shall be suddenly afraid.

2 Esdr 6:24
At that time shall friends fight one against another like
enemies, and the earth shall stand in fear with those that dwell
therein, the springs of the fountains shall stand still, and in
three hours they shall not run.

2 Esdr 6:25
Whosoever remaineth from all these that I have told thee
shall escape, and see my salvation, and the end of your world.

2 Esdr 6:26
And the men that are received shall see it, who have not
tasted death from their birth: and the heart of the inhabitants
shall be changed, and turned into another meaning.

2 Esdr 6:27
For evil shall be put out, and deceit shall be quenched.

2 Esdr 6:28
As for faith, it shall flourish, corruption shall be
overcome, and the truth, which hath been so long without fruit,
shall be declared.

2 Esdr 6:29
And when he talked with me, behold, I looked by little and
little upon him before whom I stood.

2 Esdr 6:30
And these words said he unto me; I am come to shew thee the
time of the night to come.

2 Esdr 6:31
If thou wilt pray yet more, and fast seven days again, I
shall tell thee greater things by day than I have heard.

2 Esdr 6:32
For thy voice is heard before the most High: for the Mighty
hath seen thy righteous dealing, he hath seen also thy chastity,
which thou hast had ever since thy youth.

2 Esdr 6:33
And therefore hath he sent me to shew thee all these things,
and to say unto thee, Be of good comfort and fear not

2 Esdr 6:34
And hasten not with the times that are past, to think vain
things, that thou mayest not hasten from the latter times.

2 Esdr 6:35
And it came to pass after this, that I wept again, and fasted
seven days in like manner, that I might fulfil the three weeks
which he told me.

2 Esdr 6:36
And in the eighth night was my heart vexed within me again,
and I began to speak before the most High.

2 Esdr 6:37
For my spirit was greatly set on fire, and my soul was in
distress.

2 Esdr 6:38
And I said, O Lord, thou spakest from the beginning of the
creation, even the first day, and saidst thus; Let heaven and
earth be made; and thy word was a perfect work.

2 Esdr 6:39
And then was the spirit, and darkness and silence were on
every side; the sound of man's voice was not yet formed.

2 Esdr 6:40
Then commandedst thou a fair light to come forth of thy
treasures, that thy work might appear.

2 Esdr 6:41
Upon the second day thou madest the spirit of the firmament,
and commandedst it to part asunder, and to make a division
betwixt the waters, that the one part might go up, and the other
remain beneath.

2 Esdr 6:42
Upon the third day thou didst command that the waters should
be gathered in the seventh part of the earth: six pats hast thou
dried up, and kept them, to the intent that of these some being
planted of God and tilled might serve thee.

2 Esdr 6:43
For as soon as thy word went forth the work was made.

2 Esdr 6:44
For immediately there was great and innumerable fruit, and
many and divers pleasures for the taste, and flowers of
unchangeable colour, and odours of wonderful smell: and this was
done the third day.

2 Esdr 6:45
Upon the fourth day thou commandedst that the sun should
shine, and the moon give her light, and the stars should be in
order:

2 Esdr 6:46
And gavest them a charge to do service unto man, that was to
be made.

2 Esdr 6:47
Upon the fifth day thou saidst unto the seventh part, where
the waters were gathered that it should bring forth living
creatures, fowls and fishes: and so it came to pass.

2 Esdr 6:48
For the dumb water and without life brought forth living
things at the commandment of God, that all people might praise
thy wondrous works.

2 Esdr 6:49
Then didst thou ordain two living creatures, the one thou
calledst Enoch, and the other Leviathan;

2 Esdr 6:50
And didst separate the one from the other: for the seventh
part, namely, where the water was gathered together, might not
hold them both.

2 Esdr 6:51
Unto Enoch thou gavest one part, which was dried up the third
day, that he should dwell in the same part, wherein are a
thousand hills:

2 Esdr 6:52
But unto Leviathan thou gavest the seventh part, namely, the
moist; and hast kept him to be devoured of whom thou wilt, and
when.

2 Esdr 6:53
Upon the sixth day thou gavest commandment unto the earth,
that before thee it should bring forth beasts, cattle, and
creeping things:

2 Esdr 6:54
And after these, Adam also, whom thou madest lord of all thy
creatures: of him come we all, and the people also whom thou
hast chosen.

2 Esdr 6:55
All this have I spoken before thee, O Lord, because thou
madest the world for our sakes

2 Esdr 6:56
As for the other people, which also come of Adam, thou hast
said that they are nothing, but be like unto spittle: and hast
likened the abundance of them unto a drop that falleth from a
vessel.

2 Esdr 6:57
And now, O Lord, behold, these heathen, which have ever been
reputed as nothing, have begun to be lords over us, and to
devour us.

2 Esdr 6:58
But we thy people, whom thou hast called thy firstborn, thy
only begotten, and thy fervent lover, are given into their
hands.

2 Esdr 6:59
If the world now be made for our sakes, why do we not possess
an inheritance with the world? how long shall this endure?

2 Esdr 7:1
And when I had made an end of speaking these words, there was
sent unto me the angel which had been sent unto me the nights
afore:

2 Esdr 7:2
And he said unto me, Up, Esdras, and hear the words that I am
come to tell thee.

2 Esdr 7:3
And I said, Speak on, my God. Then said he unto me, The sea
is set in a wide place, that it might be deep and great.

2 Esdr 7:4
But put the case the entrance were narrow, and like a river;

2 Esdr 7:5
Who then could go into the sea to look upon it, and to rule
it? if he went not through the narrow, how could he come into
the broad?

2 Esdr 7:6
There is also another thing; A city is builded, and set upon
a broad field, and is full of all good things:

2 Esdr 7:7
The entrance thereof is narrow, and is set in a dangerous
place to fall, like as if there were a fire on the right hand,
and on the left a deep water:

2 Esdr 7:8
And one only path between them both, even between the fire
and the water, so small that there could but one man go there at
once.

2 Esdr 7:9
If this city now were given unto a man for an inheritance, if
he never shall pass the danger set before it, how shall he
receive this inheritance?

2 Esdr 7:10
And I said, It is so, Lord. Then said he unto me, Even so
also is Israel's portion.

2 Esdr 7:11
Because for their sakes I made the world: and when Adam
transgressed my statutes, then was decreed that now is done.

2 Esdr 7:12
Then were the entrances of this world made narrow, full of
sorrow and travail: they are but few and evil, full of perils,:
and very painful.

2 Esdr 7:13
For the entrances of the elder world were wide and sure, and
brought immortal fruit.

2 Esdr 7:14
If then they that live labour not to enter these strait and
vain things, they can never receive those that are laid up for
them.

2 Esdr 7:15
Now therefore why disquietest thou thyself, seeing thou art
but a corruptible man? and why art thou moved, whereas thou art
but mortal?

2 Esdr 7:16
Why hast thou not considered in thy mind this thing that is
to come, rather than that which is present?

2 Esdr 7:17
Then answered I and said, O Lord that bearest rule, thou hast
ordained in thy law, that the righteous should inherit these
things, but that the ungodly should perish.

2 Esdr 7:18
Nevertheless the righteous shall suffer strait things, and
hope for wide: for they that have done wickedly have suffered
the strait things, and yet shall not see the wide.

2 Esdr 7:19
And he said unto me. There is no judge above God, and none
that hath understanding above the Highest.

