Francisco de Lasuen and Gregorio Amurrio, with six soldiers, to begin
work at San Juan Capistrano. This occurred in August, 1775. On the
thirtieth of the following October, work was begun, and everything
seemed auspicious, when suddenly, as if God had ceased to smile upon
them, terrible news came from San Diego. There, apparently, things had
been going well. Sixty converts were baptized on October 3, and the
priests rejoiced at the success of their efforts. But the Indians back
in the mountains were alarmed and hostile. Who were these white-faced
strangers causing their brother aborigines to kneel before a strange
God? What was the meaning of that mystic ceremony of sprinkling with
water? The demon of priestly jealousy was awakened in the breasts of
the _tingaivashes_--the medicine-men--of the tribes about San Diego, who
arranged a fierce midnight attack which should rid them forever of these
foreign conjurers, the men of the "bad medicine."

Exactly a month and a day after the baptism of the sixty converts, at
the dead of night, the Mission buildings were fired and the eleven
persons of Spanish blood were awakened by flames and the yells of a
horde of excited savages. A fierce conflict ensued. Arrows were fired on
the one side, gun-shots on the other, while the flames roared in
accompaniment and lighted the scene. Both Indians and Spaniards fell.
The following morning, when hostilities had ceased and the enemy had
withdrawn, the body of Padre Jayme was discovered in the dry bed of a
neighboring creek, bruised from head to foot with blows from stones and
clubs, naked, and bearing eighteen arrow-wounds.

The sad news was sent to Serra, and his words, at hearing it, show the
invincible missionary spirit of the man: "God be thanked! Now the soil
is watered; now will the reduction of the Dieguinos be complete!"

At San Juan Capistrano, however, the news caused serious alarm. Work
ceased, the bells were buried, and the priests returned.

In the meantime events were shaping elsewhere for the founding of the
Mission of San Francisco. Away yonder, in what is now Arizona, but was
then a part of New Mexico, were several Missions, some forty miles
south of the city of Tucson, and it was decided to connect these, by
means of a good road, with the Missions of California. Captain Juan
Bautista de Anza was sent to find this road. He did so, and made the
trip successfully, going with Padre Serra from San Gabriel as far north
as Monterey.

On his return, the Viceroy, Bucareli, gave orders that he should recruit
soldiers and settlers for the establishment and protection of the new
Mission on San Francisco Bay. We have a full roster, in the handwriting
of Padre Font, the Franciscan who accompanied the expedition, of those
who composed it. Successfully they crossed the sandy wastes of Arizona
and the barren desolation of the Colorado Desert (in Southern
California).

On their arrival at San Gabriel, January 4, 1776 (memorable year on the
other side of the continent), they found that Rivera, who had been
appointed governor in Portola's stead, had arrived the day before, on
his way south to quell the Indian disturbances at San Diego, and Anza,
on hearing the news, deemed the matter of sufficient importance to
justify his turning aside from his direct purpose and going south with
Rivera. Taking seventeen of his soldiers along, he left the others to
recruit their energies at San Gabriel, but the inactivity of Rivera did
not please him, and, as things were not going well at San Gabriel, he
soon returned and started northward. It was a weary journey, the rains
having made some parts of the road well-nigh impassable, and even the
women had to walk. Yet on the tenth of March they all arrived safely and
happily at Monterey, where Serra himself came to congratulate them.

After an illness which confined him to his bed, Anza, against the advice
of his physician, started to investigate the San Francisco region, as
upon his decision rested the selection of the site. The bay was pretty
well explored, and the site chosen, near a spring and creek, which was
named from the day,--the last Friday in Lent,--_Arroyo de los Dolores_.
Hence the name so often applied to the Mission itself: it being commonly
known even to-day as "Mission Dolores."

His duty performed, Anza returned south, and Rivera appointed Lieutenant
Moraga to take charge of the San Francisco colonists, and on July 26,
1776, a camp was pitched on the allotted site. The next day a building
of tules was begun and on the twenty-eighth of the same month mass was
said by Padre Palou. In the meantime, the vessel "San Carlos" was
expected from Monterey with all needful supplies for both the _presidio_
and the new Mission, but, buffeted by adverse winds, it was forced down
the coast as far as San Diego, and did not arrive outside of what is now
the bay of San Francisco until August 17.

The two carpenters from the "San Carlos," with a squad of sailors, were
set to work on the new buildings, and on September 17 the foundation
ceremonies of the _presidio_ took place. On that same day, Lord Howe, of
the British army, with his Hessian mercenaries, was rejoicing in the
city of New York in anticipation of an easy conquest of the army of the
revolutionists.

It was the establishment of that _presidio_, followed by that of the
Mission on October 9, which predestined the name of the future great
American city, born of adventure and romance.

Padres Palou and Cambon had been hard at work since the end of July.
Aided by Lieutenant Moraga, they built a church fifty-four feet long,
and a house thirty by fifteen feet, both structures being of wood,
plastered with clay, and roofed with tules. On October 3, the day
preceding the festival of St. Francis, bunting and flags from the ships
were brought to decorate the new buildings; but, owing to the absence of
Moraga, the formal dedication did not take place until October 9. Happy
was Serra's friend and brother, Palou, to celebrate high mass at this
dedication of the church named after the great founder of his Order, and
none the less so were his assistants, Fathers Cambon, Nocedal, and Pena.

Just before the founding of the Mission of San Francisco, the Spanish
Fathers witnessed an Indian battle. Natives advanced from the region of
San Mateo and vigorously attacked the San Francisco Indians, burning
their houses and compelling them to flee on their tule rafts to the
islands and the opposite shores of the bay. Months elapsed before these
defeated Indians returned, to afford the Fathers at San Francisco an
opportunity to work for the salvation of their souls.

In October of the following year, Serra paid his first visit to San
Francisco, and said mass on the titular saint's day. Then, standing near
the Golden Gate, he exclaimed: "Thanks be to God that now our father,
St. Francis, with the holy professional cross of Missions, has reached
the last limit of the Californian continent. To go farther he must
have boats."

The same month in which Palou dedicated the northern Mission, found
Serra, with Padre Gregorio Amurrio and ten soldiers, wending their way
from San Diego to San Juan Capistrano, the foundation of which had been
delayed the year previous by the San Diego massacre. They disinterred
the bells and other buried materials and without delay founded the
Mission. With his customary zeal, Serra caused the bells to be hung and
sounded, and said the dedicatory mass on November 1, 1776. The original
location of this Mission, named by the Indians _Sajirit_, was
approximately the site of the present church, whose pathetic ruins speak
eloquently of the frightful earthquake which later destroyed it.

Aroused by a letter from Viceroy Bucareli, Rivera hastened the
establishment of the eighth Mission. A place was found near the
Guadalupe River, where the Indians named _Tares_ had four _rancherias_,
and which they called _Thamien_. Here Padre Tomas de la Pena planted the
cross, erected an _enramada_, or brush shelter, and on January 12, 1777,
said mass, dedicating the new Mission to the Virgin, Santa Clara, one of
the early converts of Francis of Assisi.

On February 3, 1777, the new governor of Alta California, Felipe de
Neve, arrived at Monterey and superseded Rivera. He quickly established
the pueblo of San Jose, and, a year or two later, Los Angeles, the
latter under the long title of the pueblo of "Nuestra Senora, Reina de
los Angeles,"--Our Lady, Queen of the Angels.

In the meantime, contrary to the advice and experience of the padres,
the new Viceroy, Croix, determined to establish two Missions on the
Colorado River, near the site of the present city of Yuma, and conduct
them not as Missions with the Fathers exercising control over the
Indians, but as towns in which the Indians would be under no temporal
restraint. The attempt was unfortunate. The Indians fell upon the
Spaniards and priests, settlers, soldiers, and Governor Rivera himself
perished in the terrific attack. Forty-six men met an awful fate, and
the women were left to a slavery more frightful than death. This was the
last attempt made by the Spaniards to missionize the Yumas.

With these sad events in mind the Fathers founded San Buenaventura on
March 31, 1782. Serra himself preached the dedicatory sermon. The
Indians came from their picturesque conical huts of tule and straw, to
watch the raising of the cross, and the gathering at this dedication was
larger than at any previous ceremony in California; more than seventy
Spaniards with their families, together with large numbers of Indians,
being there assembled.

The next month, the _presidio_ of Santa Barbara was established.

In the end of 1783, Serra visited all the southern Missions to
administer confirmation to the neophytes, and in January, 1784, he
returned to San Carlos at Monterey.

For some time his health had been failing, asthma and a running sore on
his breast both causing him much trouble. Everywhere uneasiness was felt
at his physical condition, but though he undoubtedly suffered keenly, he
refused to take medicine. The padres were prepared at any time to hear
of his death. But Serra calmly went on with his work. He confirmed the
neophytes at San Luis Obispo and San Antonio, and went to help dedicate
the new church recently built at Santa Clara, and also to San Francisco.
Called back to Santa Clara by the sickness of Padre Murguia, he was
saddened by the death of that noble and good man, and felt he ought to
prepare himself for death. But he found strength to return to San Carlos
at Monterey, and there, on Saturday, August 28, 1784, he passed to his
eternal reward, at the ripe age of seventy years, nine months and four
days. His last act was to walk to the door, in order that he might look
out upon the beautiful face of Nature. The ocean, the sky, the trees,
the valley with its wealth of verdure, the birds, the flowers--all gave
joy to his weary eyes. Returning to his bed, he "fell asleep," and his
work on earth ended. He was buried by his friend Palou at his beloved
Mission in the Carmelo Valley, and there his dust now rests.[1]

[1] In 1787 Padre Palou published, in the City of Mexico, his "Life and
Apostolic Labors of the Venerable Padre Junipero Serra." This has never
yet been translated, until this year, 1913, the bi-centenary of his
birth, when I have had the work done by a competent scholar, revised by
the eminent Franciscan historian, Father Zephyrin Englehardt, with
annotations. It is a work of over three hundred pages, and is an
important contribution to the historic literature of California.



CHAPTER IV

THE MISSIONS FOUNDED BY PADRE FERMIN FRANCISCO LASUEN

AT Padre Serra's death Fermin Francisco Lasuen was chosen to be his
successor as padre-presidente. At the time of his appointment he was the
priest in charge at San Diego. He was elected by the directorate of the
Franciscan College of San Fernando, in the City of Mexico, February 6,
1785, and on March 13, 1787, the Sacred Congregation at Rome confirmed
his appointment, according to him the same right of confirmation which
Serra had exercised. In five years this Father confirmed no less than
ten thousand, one hundred thirty-nine persons.

Santa Barbara was the next Mission to be founded. For awhile it seemed
that it would be located at Montecito, now the beautiful and picturesque
suburb of its larger sister; but President Lasuen doubtless chose the
site the Mission now occupies. Well up on the foothills of the Sierra
Santa Ines, it has a commanding view of valley, ocean and islands
beyond. Indeed, for outlook, it is doubtful if any other Mission equals
it. It was formally dedicated on December 4, 1786.

Various obstacles to the establishment of Santa Barbara had been placed
in the way of the priests. Governor Fages wished to curtail their
authority, and sought to make innovations which the padres regarded as
detrimental in the highest degree to the Indians, as well as annoying
and humiliating to themselves. This was the reason of the long delay in
founding Santa Barbara. It was the same with the following Mission. It
had long been decided upon. Its site was selected. The natives called it
_Algsacupi_. It was to be dedicated "to the most pure and sacred mystery
of the Immaculate Conception of the most Holy Virgin Mary, Mother of
God, Queen of Heaven, Queen of Angels, and Our Lady," a name usually,
however, shortened in Spanish parlance to "La Purisima Concepcion." On
December 8, 1787, Lasuen blessed the site, raised the cross, said mass
and preached a sermon; but it was not until March, 1788, that work on
the buildings was begun. An adobe structure, roofed with tiles, was
completed in 1802, and, ten years later, destroyed by earthquake.

The next Mission founded by Lasuen was that of Santa Cruz. On crossing
the coast range from Santa Clara, he thus wrote: "I found in the site
the most excellent fitness which had been reported to me. I found,
beside, a stream of water, very near, copious, and important. On August
28, the day of Saint Augustine, I said mass, and raised a cross on the
spot where the establishment is to be. Many gentiles came, old and
young, of both sexes, and showed that they would gladly enlist under the
Sacred Standard. Thanks be to God!"

On Sunday, September 25, Sugert, an Indian chief of the neighborhood,
assured by the priests and soldiers that no harm should come to him or
his people by the noise of exploding gunpowder, came to the formal
founding. Mass was said, a _Te Deum_ chanted, and Don Hermenegildo Sol,
Commandant of San Francisco, took possession of the place, thus
completing the foundation. To-day nothing but a memory remains of the
Mission of the Holy Cross, it having fallen into ruins and totally
disappeared.

Lasuen's fourth Mission was founded in this same year, 1791. He had
chosen a site, called by the Indians _Chuttusgelis_, and always known to
the Spaniards as Soledad, since their first occupation of the country.
Here, on October 9, Lasuen, accompanied by Padres Sitjar and Garcia, in
the presence of Lieutenant Jose Argueello, the guard, and a few natives,
raised the cross, blessed the site, said mass, and formally established
the Mission of "Nuestra Senyora de la Soledad."

One interesting entry in the Mission books is worthy of mention. In
September, 1787, two vessels belonging to the newly founded United
States sailed from Boston. The smaller of these was the "Lady
Washington," under command of Captain Gray. In the Soledad Mission
register of baptisms, it is written that on May 19, 1793, there was
baptized a Nootka Indian, twenty years of age, "Inquina, son of a
gentile father, named Taguasmiki, who in the year 1789 was killed by the
American Gert [undoubtedly Gray], Captain of the vessel called
'Washington,' belonging to the Congress of Boston."

For six years no new Missions were founded: then, in 1797, four were
established, and one in 1798. These, long contemplated, were delayed for
a variety of reasons. It was the purpose of the Fathers to have the new
Missions farther inland than those already established, that they might
reach more of the natives: those who lived in the valleys and on the
slopes of the foothills. Besides this, it had always been the intent of
the Spanish government that further explorations of the interior country
should take place, so that, as the Missions became strong enough to
support themselves, the Indians there might be brought under the
influence of the Church. Governor Neve's regulations say:

"It is made imperative to increase the number of Reductions (stations
for converting the Indians) in proportion to the vastness of the country
occupied, and although this must be carried out in the succession and
order aforesaid, as fast as the older establishments shall be fully
secure, etc.," and earlier, "while the breadth of the country is unknown
(it) is presumed to be as great as the length, or greater (200 leagues),
since its greatest breadth is counted by thousands of leagues."

Various investigations were made by the nearest priests in order to
select the best locations for the proposed Missions, and, in 1796,
Lasuen reported the results to the new governor, Borica, who in turn
communicated them to the Viceroy in Mexico. Approval was given and
orders issued for the establishment of the five new Missions.

On June 9, 1797, Lasuen left San Francisco for the founding of the
Mission San Jose, then called the Alameda. The following day, a brush
church was erected, and, on the morrow, the usual foundation ceremonies
occurred. The natives named the site _Oroysom_. Beautifully situated on
the foothills, with a prominent peak near by, it offers an extensive
view over the southern portion of the San Francisco Bay region. At
first, a wooden structure with a grass roof served as a church; but
later a brick structure was erected, which Von Langsdorff visited
in 1806.

It seems singular to us at this date that although the easiest means of
communication between the Missions of Santa Clara, San Jose and San
Francisco was by water on the Bay of San Francisco, the padre and
soldiers at San Francisco had no boat or vessel of any kind. Langsdorff
says of this: "Perhaps the missionaries are afraid lest if there were
boats, they might facilitate the escape of the Indians, who never wholly
lose their love of freedom and their attachment to their native habits;
they therefore consider it better to confine their communication with
one another to the means afforded by the land. The Spaniards, as well as
their nurslings, the Indians, are very seldom under the necessity of
trusting themselves to the waves, and if such a necessity occur, they
make a kind of boat for the occasion, of straw, reeds, and rushes, bound
together so closely as to be water-tight. In this way they contrive to
go very easily from one shore to the other. Boats of this kind are
called _walza_ by the Spanish. The oars consist of a thin, long pole
somewhat broader at each end, with which the occupants row sometimes on
one side, sometimes on the other."

For the next Mission two sites were suggested; but, as early as June 17,
Corporal Ballesteros erected a church, missionary-house, granary, and
guard-house at the point called by the natives _Popeloutchom_, and by
the Spaniards, San Benito. Eight days later, Lasuen, aided by Padres
Catala and Martiarena, founded the Mission dedicated to the saint of
that day, San Juan Bautista.

Next in order, between the two Missions of San Antonio de Padua and San
Luis Obispo, was that of "the most glorious prince of the heavenly
militia," San Miguel. Lasuen, aided by Sitjar, in the presence of a
large number of Indians, performed the ceremony in the usual form, on
July 25, 1797. This Mission eventually grew to large proportions and its
interior remains to-day almost exactly as decorated by the hands of the
original priests.

San Fernando Rey was next established, on September 8, by Lasuen, aided
by Padre Dumetz.

After extended correspondence between Lasuen and Governor Borica, a
site, called by the natives _Tacayme_, was finally chosen for locating
the next Mission, which was to bear the name of San Luis, Rey de
Francia. Thus it became necessary to distinguish between the two saints
of the same name: San Luis, Bishop (Obispo), and San Luis, King; but
modern American parlance has eliminated the comma, and they are
respectively San Luis Obispo and San Luis Rey. Lasuen, with the honored
Padre Peyri and Padre Santiago, conducted the ceremonies on June 13, and
the hearts of all concerned were made glad by the subsequent baptism of
fifty-four children.

It was as an adjunct to this Mission that Padre Peyri, in 1816, founded
the chapel of San Antonio de Pala, twenty miles east from San Luis Rey:
to which place were removed the Palatingwas, or Agua Calientes, evicted
a few years ago from Warner's Ranch. This chapel has the picturesque
_campanile_, or small detached belfry, the pictures of which are known
throughout the world.

With the founding of San Luis Rey this branch of the work of President
Lasuen terminated. Bancroft regards him as a greater man than Serra, and
one whose life and work entitle him to the highest praise. He died at
San Carlos on June 26, 1803, and was buried by the side of Serra.



CHAPTER V

THE FOUNDING OF SANTA INES, SAN RAFAEL AND SAN FRANCISCO SOLANO

Estevan Tapis now became president of the Missions, and under his
direction was founded the nineteenth Mission, that of Santa Ines, virgin
and martyr. Tapis himself conducted the ceremonies, preaching a sermon
to a large congregation, including Commandant Carrillo, on September
17, 1804.

With Lasuen, the Mission work of California reached its maximum power.
Under his immediate successors it began to decline. Doubtless the fact
that the original chain was completed was an influence in the decrease
of activity. For thirteen years there was no extension. A few minor
attempts were made to explore the interior country, and many of the
names now used for rivers and locations in the San Joaquin Valley were
given at this time. Nothing further, however, was done, until in 1817,
when such a wide-spread mortality affected the Indians at the San
Francisco Mission, that Governor Sola suggested that the afflicted
neophytes be removed to a new and healthful location on the north shore
of the San Francisco Bay. A few were taken to what is now San Rafael,
