in the Chinese district. There they had ministered to the natives in
their own language, but had rather neglected their Chinese-speaking
parishioners. Consequently after the arrival of the Dominicans the
Audiencia passed an ordinance requiring that the Bishop appoint
ministers of one order to administer to the Chinese in their own
language within thirty days. To meet the deadline the Augustinians
began to study Chinese at breakneck speed, but when the Bishop came
to Tondo to hear one of the friars, who was supposed to know the
language, preach in it, there was some trouble as a result of which
the Augustinian would not, or indeed could not, preach. Naturally,
when it was decided to award the territory to the Dominicans, the
Augustinians accused the Bishop of favoritism towards his own order.

The whole situation is best described in the report on the Chinese
made by Salazar to the King on June 24, 1590:


    "When I arrived in this land, I found that in a village called
    Tondo--which is not far from this city, there being a river
    between--lived many Sangleys, of whom some were Christians,
    but the larger part infidels. In this city were also some
    shops kept by Sangleys, who lived here in order to sell the
    goods which they kept here year by year. These Sangleys were
    scattered among the Spaniards, with no specific place assigned
    to them, until Don Gonzalo Ronquillo allotted them a place
    to live in, and to be used as a silk-market (which is here
    called _Parian_), of four large buildings. Here, many shops
    were opened, commerce increased, and more Sangleys came to this
    city.... When I came, all the Sangleys were almost forgotten,
    and relegated to a corner. No thought was taken for their
    conversion, because no one knew their language or undertook
    to learn it on account of its great difficulty; and because
    the religious who lived here were too busy with the natives of
    these islands. Although the Augustinian religious had charge
    of the Sangleys of Tondo, they did not minister to or instruct
    them in their own language, but in that of the natives or this
    land; thus the Sangley Christians living here, were Christians
    only in name, knowing no more of Christianity than if they
    had never accepted it.... Then I appealed to all religious
    orders to appoint some one of their religious to learn the
    language and take charge of the Sangleys. Although all of them
    showed a desire to do so, and some even began to learn it,
    yet no one succeeded; and the Sangleys found themselves with
    no one to instruct them and take up their conversion with the
    necessary earnestness, until, in the year eighty-seven, God
    brought to these islands the religious of St. Dominic." [106]


So we find, as the Dominicans undertook their mission, a large
settlement of Chinese, including both a settled and a floating
population, concentrated in the Parian, across the Pasig river from
the main city of Manila.

The dominating figure of the Chinese mission from the time of his
arrival in the Philippines was Juan Cobo. In a letter, written by him
from the Parian of Manila, July 13, 1589, probably to ecclesiastical
authorities in Mexico, he gives an account of the early days of
the mission:


    "The Order took a site next to this Parian, since there was
    not a single house between Santo Domingo and the Parian. And
    because of this opportunity the Order presently charged
    itself with the Chinese, both Christians and infidels. And
    upon P. Fr. Miguel de Benavides and P. Fr. Juan Maldonado was
    imposed the responsibility for the care of the Chinese and for
    learning their language. P. Fr. Miguel was less occupied with
    other matters than Fr. Juan Maldonado, so that he progressed
    in the language enough to begin to catechize in it. This was
    the first year the Order was in Manila.

    "Presently in the second year when I came, the Order moved
    P. Fr. Miguel and myself into another separate house at the
    other edge of the Parian. So that there stood between Santo
    Domingo and San Gabriel, which is the name of this church
    of the Chinese, the whole of the Parian of the Sangleys. And
    there a poor little church was built under the protection of
    San Gabriel, to whom it fell by lot, and a poor house where
    we two lived. We entered into it at the beginning of September
    1588. This was the first church for the Chinese built, and we
    believe that there is today not another parish church [for
    the Chinese] but that.... And P. Fr. Miguel catechized them
    and preached to them in their Chinese language, and taught
    the doctrine in it. I myself did not yet know the language,
    but the Lord has been served, so that in a short time I
    progressed in it." [107]


The account of Aduarte is not so accurate in some details, but
it supplies others not mentioned by Cobo. The first mission which
Benavides and Maldonado (or de San Pedro Martyr as he was later known)
built was near the village of Tondo, in a new settlement specially
founded for Christian Chinese, called Baybay, and it was named for Our
Lady of the Purification. The second mission which was established
by Benavides and Cobo was at first a palm-leaf hut. The name of San
Gabriel was decided upon by making lots with the names of various
saints on them and then drawing. San Gabriel came out three times in
a row, and "all were persuaded that the Lord was pleased to have the
patronage belong to this holy archangel." Soon, because of the good
works of the fathers who established a hospital there for the care
of the sick and poor, the demands upon the hut became so great that
a larger building was planned. At first it was to have been erected
on the site of the hut, but the inhabitants protested that a stone
building so near native houses might do them great damage in the
event of an earthquake, so the friars went to the other side of the
river, and there built a temporary building of wood which was later
completed in stone. It was here then that the Doctrina was printed,
in the Church of San Gabriel, near the Parian of Manila, at the edge
of the Chinese settlement.

Under the care of Benavides and Cobo the mission flourished,
and the two fathers became increasingly proficient in the Chinese
language. When the provincial Juan de Castro began making preparations
for an inspection tour of his Chinese vicariate in 1590, he chose as
his companion Miguel de Benavides. The account of the events leading
up to this expedition is given in the already quoted letter of Salazar
on the Chinese:


    "Of the Dominican religious who came to these islands, four
    are engaged in ministering to the Sangleys. Two of these
    four officiate in the Church of San Gabriel, which, together
    with the house where the religious live, stands close to the
    Parian. Another church with its house is on the promontory
    of Baybay, near Tondo--which a river divides, separating it
    from Manila. Two of the four have learned the language of
    the Sangleys so well, and one of these two how to write also
    (which is the most difficult part of the language), that the
    Sangleys wonder at their knowledge.... After due consideration
    of the matter, the Dominican fathers and myself decided that
    it was necessary to go to China.... Thus we decided upon the
    departure, sending at present no more than two religious: Fray
    Miguel de Benavides, who was the first to learn the language
    of the Sangleys; and Father Juan de Castro, who came as vicar
    of the religious and who was made provincial here. We preferred
    these two, as one is well acquainted with the language, and the
    other is much loved and esteemed by the Sangleys on account of
    his venerable gray locks and blessed old age; and we know that
    in that land old people are much respected and revered." [108]


They sailed on May 22, 1590, but Juan de Castro before he left
appointed Cobo acting superior of the province with full authority
during his absence, and in the latter's place as head of the Chinese
mission sent Juan de San Pedro Martyr.

There is no doubt but that at this time Benavides and Cobo were
the two outstanding Chinese linguists among the Spaniards in
the Philippines. To Benavides has been attributed [109] a Chinese
dictionary, and Schilling [110] uses the already quoted letter of Cobo
to prove that he also wrote a Doctrina in Chinese, but, granting that
such works were written by him, there is no evidence that they were
written in Chinese characters, and not in Chinese transliterated into
roman letters. The available evidence points to the fact that Cobo
was the only one who could then write in Chinese characters. Salazar
in his above quoted letter had said that "one of these two [have
learned] how to write also," and in the same letter he continued,
"Fray Juan Cobo, the Dominican religious--who, as I have said before,
knows the language of the Sangleys and their writing, and who is most
esteemed by them--is sending to Your Majesty a book, one of a number
brought to him from China." [111] Further witness to Cobo's amazing
knowledge of Chinese writing is given by Aduarte:


    "He knew three thousand Chinese characters, each different
    from all the rest, for the Chinese have no definite number
    of letters nor alphabet.... He translated a number [of
    Chinese books]; for like those of Seneca, though they are
    the work of heathens, they contain many profound sayings
    like ours. He taught astrology to some of them whom he found
    capable of learning; and to bring them by all means to their
    salvation also taught them some trades that are necessary
    among Spaniards, but which, not being used by the Chinese,
    they did not know--such as painting images, binding books,
    cutting and sewing clothes, and such things--doing all to
    win men to God." [112]


Finally, as a more definite proof that Cobo could have been the
author of the Chinese Doctrina of 1593, we have the record [113] of a
_Catecismo de la Doctrina Cristiana en Lengua China_ written by him,
as well as many other works in Chinese.

In May 1590, then, the most accomplished Sinologist yet to work in
the Philippines was in charge of the Dominican province. "His first
act," wrote Aduarte, "was to strengthen the ministry to the Chinese by
appointing to it Father Domingo de Nieva, a priest of great virtue and
very able--which was tremendously important there--and one who best
mastered that language, as well as that of the Indians in which he
had had experience; and he worked in both of them, and wrote much
to the great advantage of those who came after him." [114] It is
surprising that no previous writer has emphasized the presence of
Domingo de Nieva, whose proficiency in Tagalog we have already noted,
at San Gabriel during the years when the printing of the Doctrinas
must have been planned and executed. His works are cited by Fernandez,
[115] and after giving a summary of his career, Aduarte added:


    "He wrote much in the language of the Indians and other things
    in the language of the Chinese for whom he had printed in
    their language and characters a memorial upon the Christian
    life, with other brief tracts of prayer and meditation, in
    preparation for the holy sacraments, of confession and the
    sacred communion. He was an enemy of sloth, and so worked
    much in Chinese, in which he wrote a practically new grammar
    of the Chinese language, a vocabulary, a manual of confession
    and many sermons, in order that those who had to learn this
    language might find it less difficult." [116]


Medina [117] records these various works as Manila imprints of unknown
date, and to this indefinite information about them we can add nothing
positive. However, it is apparent that some time before 1606, when
Nieva died on his way to Mexico, he had had books printed, and since
they were in Chinese they must have been printed from wood-blocks,
for at that early date it would have been impossible to have cast the
number of characters necessary to print in Chinese with movable type.

With Nieva was Maldonado, or San Pedro Martyr. He had been one of the
first associates of Benavides in the first Chinese mission at Baybay,
but after the arrival of Cobo he had been sent by order of the first
chapter to Pangasinan. When Cobo was appointed acting provincial
San Pedro Martyr was again assigned to the Chinese ministry. He had
learned Tagalog, and after his return to the Parian "he learned more
words of the Chinese language than any other member of the order,
though he was not successful with the pronunciation." [118]

On May 31, 1592, the Governor received a letter from the Emperor of
Japan demanding that an ambassador be sent to offer him the fealty
of the Philippines. Juan Cobo, as the best speaker of Chinese, was
chosen to represent the Spaniards, and he left Manila on July 29,
1592. After successfully convincing the Japanese Emperor of the amity
of the Spaniards, he left to come back to Manila, but his ship was
wrecked in November on the coast of Formosa, and there Cobo was killed
by hostile natives. Meanwhile Benavides had gone back to Spain with
Bishop Salazar in 1591, and did not return to the Philippines until
after his appointment as Bishop of Nueva Segovia in 1595.

That left as the only two remaining experts in the Chinese language,
Domingo de Nieva and Juan de San Pedro Martyr, both of whom were at
San Gabriel in 1592. _Moreover, both of them knew Chinese and Tagalog._
A text in Tagalog was available, based on the Talavera-Plasencia-Oliver
model, which had circulated freely, and this, we believe, was further
edited--hence the "corrected by the religious of the orders"--by these
two Dominicans. In their editorial work they may have been helped
by Juan de la Cruz, who, we have noted, was sent to Bataan in 1588,
there learned Tagalog, and "succeeded so perfectly with it that Father
Fr. Francisco San Joseph, who was afterwards the best linguist there,
profited by the papers and labors of P. Fr. Juan de la Cruz." [119]
Juan de Oliver, the pioneer Franciscan Tagalist was still living and
available for consultation, and the polylingual Jesuit, Francisco
Almerique, also was in Manila at the time. A Chinese text had been
written by Juan Cobo, and both Nieva and San Pedro Martyr were capable
of preparing this for publication, again possibly aided by Almerique,
and also Diego Munoz, if as an Augustinian he had been willing to
cooperate with the Dominicans. Nothing remained to be done but have
the blocks cut and the impressions pulled.



THE PRINTING OF THE BOOKS


The stage was set for the production of the Doctrinas. That there
were Chinese xylographic models upon which the books could be based
is evidenced by the account of Mendoza of the considerable number of
Chinese books brought to Manila by Martin de Rada as early as 1575. A
more likely model was a bilingual text in Spanish and Chinese which
Cobo describes in his letter of July 13, 1589, where speaking of the
Jesuits in China he says:


    "Moreover the Father of the Company who was in China wrote and
    printed in Chinese letters a whole book of the unity of God,
    the creation of the world, and the commandments explained;
    and in this book has gotten as far as the incarnation of
    the Son of God. Concerning this I am not speaking of things
    heard, for I have it, and am thus certain of it, as of all
    the things that happened. How far I have progressed with the
    Chinese letters I shall say later. This book was printed in
    China in 1584. It circulates freely in China whence we have
    our copy, and because of the writing, contrary to what others
    have misleadingly said about the Chinese, they have done him
    no ill: from which it may be inferred that the lion is not
    so wild as they paint him." [120]


There is no direct evidence to support our belief that it was during
the brief period after Castro returned, probably late in 1590, and
relieved Cobo of his executive responsibilities, and June 1592 when he
left for Japan, that Cobo began intensive plans for the production of
bilingual texts. His recorded interest in such books, his influence
with the Chinese, his energy and his own linguistic aptitude would
naturally have stimulated him to undertake the task. Whether he
actually began work on the blocks from which the books were printed,
or merely suggested the feasibility of the idea, we do not know,
but we feel sure that Juan Cobo was the father of the production of
books in the Philippines.

There is no need here to go into the history of printing in China;
the method used there and its antiquity have been fully described
by others. [121] That there were Chinese in Manila who understood
this age-old process would seem obvious from the reports of skilled
craftsmen whose presence was noted by all the writers of the period. We
have already quoted a reference to Juan Cobo's teaching them European
trades, and Salazar in his already cited letter speaks of them further:


    "They are so skillful and clever, that, as soon as they see
    any object made by a Spanish workman, they reproduce it with
    exactness. What arouses my wonder most is, that when I arrived
    no Sangley knew how to paint anything; but now they have
    so perfected themselves in this art that they have produced
    marvelous works with both the brush and the chisel.... What has
    pleased all of us here has been the arrival of a bookbinder
    from Mexico. He brought books with him, set up a bindery,
    and hired a Sangley who had offered his services to him. The
    Sangley secretly, and without his master noticing it, watched
    how the latter bound books, and lo, in less than [lacuna in
    MS.] he left the house, saying that he wished to serve him
    no longer, and set up a similar shop." [122]


To turn over a manuscript copy of a book to a Chinaman who had already
some familiarity with the production of books in China, or who with a
given text could carve the blocks according to tradition, was then not
a matter of great difficulty. There were Chinese books which showed
what the result would be; there were Spanish books, definitely some
from Mexico, which provided samples of European characters and format.

Who cut the blocks--that is exactly what Chinaman--we do not know,
nor do we know who handled the presswork, but it is logical to assume
that the whole process took place under the supervision of the fathers
of San Gabriel, Juan Cobo if work had begun before 1592, and certainly
Nieva and San Pedro Martyr. One further aide may have been the lay
brother, Pedro Rodriguez, who had been sent to San Gabriel with Nieva,
and who was a handyman or skilled mechanic, for Aduarte credits him
with rebuilding and restoring the hospital.

In speaking of the book printed for Blancas de San Jose, Aduarte said
that the printing had been done by "a Chinaman, a good Christian,"
[123] but in this particular account he does not give the Chinaman's
name. Yet, where he describes the founding of a second church of San
Gabriel in Binondo, sometime after March 28, 1594 [124] and before
June 15, 1596 when it was admitted to the chapter, he tells in some
detail of printing done by Juan de Vera. [125]


    "There have been in this town [Binondo, then called Minondoc]
    many Chinese of very exemplary lives. Juan de Vera was
    not only a very devout man, and one much given to prayer,
    but a man who caused all his household to be the same. He
    always heard mass, and was very regular in his attendance at
    church. He adorned the church most handsomely with hangings
    and paintings, because he understood this art. He also,
    thinking only of the great results to be attained by means
    of holy and devout books, gave himself to the great labor
    necessary to establish printing in this country, where there
    was no journeyman who could show him the way, or give him an
    account of the manner of printing in Europe, which is very
    different from the manner of printing followed in his own
    country of China. The Lord aided his pious intentions, and
    he gave to this undertaking not only continued and excessive
    labor, but all the forces of his mind, which were great. In
    spite of the difficulties, he attained that which he desired,
    and was the first printer in these islands; and this not from
    avarice--for he gained much more in his business as a merchant,
    and readily gave up his profit--but merely to do service to
    the Lord and this good to the souls of the natives." [126]


It is interesting to note that this narrative, which is in substance
similar to that about the books of Blancas de San Jose, nowhere
mentions the name of the priest in connection with Vera. It is probable
that Juan de Vera was, as Retana believed, the first typographer, and
it may be that he also printed the Doctrinas of 1593. It is impossible
to say with certainty, but it is not too fanciful to suppose that
Juan de Vera tried xylographic printing under the supervision of
Nieva and San Pedro Martyr, and after some experimenting achieved
typography in the time of Blancas de San Jose.

Since we have here dealt with a volume printed entirely from
wood-blocks it does not seem necessary to discuss in detail the
subsequent typographical books. However, just as this goes to press,
a copy of the _Ordinationes Generales prouintiae Sanctissimi Rosarij
Philippinarum_, [127] printed at Binondo by Juan de Vera in 1604,
has been discovered, and also presented by Mr. Rosenwald to the
Library of Congress. This is the volume described by Remesal [128]
as being printed "in as fine characters and as correctly as if in
Rome or Lyon." No copy of the book had been described since his day,
although Medina [129] and Retana [130] both listed it from references
which probably derived from Remesal. Its discovery--almost unbelievable
coming so close on the heels of that of the Doctrina--helps to close
the gap between the latter and the two Bataan imprints [131] of 1610,
the _Arte y Reglas de la Lengva Tagala_ and the _Librong Pagaaralan
nang manga Tagalog nang uicang Castilla_.

The full story of the early typographical products of the Philippines
must wait upon another occasion, for the questions posed by the scanty
records and the handful of surviving books are extremely knotty. Where
did the type come from? Medina suggested it was imported from Macao;
Retana believed it to have been cut in the Philippines. Fernandez
said that the first works of Blancas de San Jose were printed at
Bataan and the two 1610 books have that place of printing, yet in
1604 the _Ordinationes_ issued from Binondo. Remesal wrote that this
