
The life of a Christian ought to be adorned with all virtues,
that he may be inwardly what he outwardly appeareth unto men.
And verily it should be yet better within than without, for God
is a discerner of our heart, Whom we must reverence with all our
hearts wheresoever we are, and walk pure in His presence as do
the angels.  We ought daily to renew our vows, and to kindle our
hearts to zeal, as if each day were the first day of our
conversion, and to say, "Help me, O God, in my good resolutions,
and in Thy holy service, and grant that this day I may make a
good beginning, for hitherto I have done nothing!"

2. According to our resolution so is the rate of our progress,
and much diligence is needful for him who would make good
progress.  For if he who resolveth bravely oftentimes falleth
short, how shall it be with him who resolveth rarely or feebly?
But manifold causes bring about abandonment of our resolution,
yet a trivial omission of holy exercises can hardly be made
without some loss to us.  The resolution of the righteous
dependeth more upon the grace of God than upon their own wisdom;
for in Him they always put their trust, whatsoever they take in
hand.  For man proposeth, but God disposeth; and the way of a
man is not in himself.(1)

3. If a holy exercise be sometimes omitted for the sake of some
act of piety, or of some brotherly kindness, it can easily be
taken up afterwards; but if it be neglected through distaste or
slothfulness, then is it sinful, and the mischief will be felt.
Strive as earnestly as we may, we shall still fall short in many
things.  Always should some distinct resolution be made by us;
and, most of all, we must strive against those sins which most
easily beset us.  Both our outer and inner life should be
straitly examined and ruled by us, because both have to do with
our progress.

4. If thou canst not be always examining thyself, thou canst at
certain seasons, and at least twice in the day, at evening and at
morning.  In the morning make thy resolves, and in the evening
inquire into thy life, how thou hast sped to-day in word, deed,
and thought; for in these ways thou hast often perchance offended
God and thy neighbour.  Gird up thy lions like a man against the
assaults of the devil; bridle thine appetite, and thou wilt soon
be able to bridle every inclination of the flesh.  Be thou never
without something to do; be reading, or writing, or praying, or
meditating, or doing something that is useful to the community.
Bodily exercises, however, must be undertaken with discretion,
nor are they to be used by all alike.

5. The duties which are not common to all must not be done
openly, but are safest carried on in secret.  But take heed that
thou be not careless in the common duties, and more devout in the
secret; but faithfully and honestly discharge the duties and
commands which lie upon thee, then afterwards, if thou hast still
leisure, give thyself to thyself as thy devotion leadeth thee.
All cannot have one exercise, but one suiteth better to this man
and another to that.  Even for the diversity of season different
exercises are needed, some suit better for feasts, some for
fasts.  We need one kind in time of temptations and others in
time of peace and quietness. Some are suitable to our times of
sadness, and others when we are joyful in the Lord.

6. When we draw near the time of the great feasts, good exercises
should be renewed, and the prayers of holy men more fervently
besought.  We ought to make our resolutions from one Feast to
another, as if each were the period of our departure from this
world, and of entering into the eternal feast.  So ought we to
prepare ourselves earnestly at solemn seasons, and the more
solemnly to live, and to keep straightest watch upon each holy
observance, as though we were soon to receive the reward of our
labours at the hand of God.

7. And if this be deferred, let us believe ourselves to be as yet
ill-prepared, and unworthy as yet of the glory which shall be
revealed in us at the appointed season; and let us study to
prepare ourselves the better for our end.  Blessed is that
servant, as the Evangelist Luke hath it, whom, when the Lord
cometh He shall find watching.  Verily I say unto you He will
make him ruler over all that He hath.(2)

(1) Jeremiah x. 23.   (2) Luke xii. 43, 44.


CHAPTER XX

Of the love of solitude and silence

Seek a suitable time for thy meditation, and think frequently of
the mercies of God to thee.  Leave curious questions.  Study such
matters as bring thee sorrow for sin rather than amusement.  If
thou withdraw thyself from trifling conversation and idle goings
about, as well as from novelties and gossip, thou shalt find thy
time sufficient and apt for good meditation.  The greatest saints
used to avoid as far as they could the company of men, and chose
to live in secret with God.

2. One hath said, "As oft as I have gone among men, so oft have I
returned less a man."  This is what we often experience when we
have been long time in conversation.  For it is easier to be
altogether silent than it is not to exceed in word.  It is easier
to remain hidden at home than to keep sufficient guard upon
thyself out of doors.  He, therefore, that seeketh to reach that
which is hidden and spiritual, must go with Jesus "apart from the
multitude."  No man safely goeth abroad who loveth not to rest at
home.  No man safely talketh but he who loveth to hold his peace.
No man safely ruleth but he who loveth to be subject.  No man
safely commandeth but he who loveth to obey.

3. No man safely rejoiceth but he who hath the testimony of a
good conscience within himself.  The boldness of the Saints was
always full of the fear of God.  Nor were they the less earnest
and humble in themselves, because they shone forth with great
virtues and grace.  But the boldness of wicked men springeth from
pride and presumption, and at the last turneth to their own
confusion.  Never promise thyself security in this life,
howsoever good a monk or devout a solitary thou seemest.

4. Often those who stand highest in the esteem of men, fall the
more grievously because of their over great confidence.
Wherefore it is very profitable unto many that they should not be
without inward temptation, but should be frequently assaulted,
lest they be over confident, lest they be indeed lifted up into
pride, or else lean too freely upon the consolations of the
world.  O how good a conscience should that man keep, who never
sought a joy that passeth away, who never became entangled with
the world!  O how great peace and quiet should he possess, who
would cast off all vain care, and think only of healthful and
divine things, and build his whole hope upon God!

5. No man is worthy of heavenly consolation but he who hath
diligently exercised himself in holy compunction.  If thou wilt
feel compunction within thy heart, enter into thy chamber and
shut out the tumults of the world, as it is written, Commune with
your own heart in your own chamber and be still.(1)  In
retirement thou shalt find what often thou wilt lose abroad.
Retirement, if thou continue therein, groweth sweet, but if thou
keep not in it, begetteth weariness.  If in the beginning of thy
conversation thou dwell in it and keep it well, it shall
afterwards be to thee a dear friend, and a most pleasant solace.

6. In silence and quiet the devout soul goeth forward and
learneth the hidden things of the Scriptures.  Therein findeth
she a fountain of tears, wherein to wash and cleanse herself each
night, that she may grow the more dear to her Maker as she
dwelleth the further from all worldly distraction.  To him who
withdraweth himself from his acquaintance and friends God with
his holy angels will draw nigh.  It is better to be unknown and
take heed to oneself than to neglect oneself and work wonders.
It is praiseworthy for a religious man to go seldom abroad, to
fly from being seen, to have no desire to see men.

7. Why wouldest thou see what thou mayest not have?  The world
passeth away and the lust thereof.  The desires of sensuality
draw thee abroad, but when an hour is past, what dost thou bring
home, but a weight upon thy conscience and distraction of heart?
A merry going forth bringeth often a sorrowful return, and a
merry evening maketh a sad morning?  So doth all carnal joy
begin pleasantly, but in the end it gnaweth away and destroyeth.
What canst thou see abroad which thou seest not at home?  Behold
the heaven and the earth and the elements, for out of these are
all things made.

8. What canst thou see anywhere which can continue long under the
sun?  Thou believest perchance that thou shalt be satisfied, but
thou wilt never be able to attain unto this.  If thou shouldest
see all things before thee at once, what would it be but a vain
vision?  Lift up thine eyes to God on high, and pray that thy
sins and negligences may be forgiven.  Leave vain things to vain
men, and mind thou the things which God hath commanded thee.
Shut thy door upon thee, and call unto thyself Jesus thy beloved.
Remain with Him in thy chamber, for thou shalt not elsewhere find
so great peace.  If thou hadst not gone forth nor listened to
vain talk, thou hadst better kept thyself in good peace.  But
because it sometimes delighteth thee to hear new things, thou
must therefore suffer trouble of heart.

(1) Psalm iv. 4.


CHAPTER XXI

Of compunction of heart

If thou wilt make any progress keep thyself in the fear of God,
and long not to be too free, but restrain all thy senses under
discipline and give not thyself up to senseless mirth.  Give
thyself to compunction of heart and thou shalt find devotion.
Compunction openeth the way for many good things, which
dissoluteness is wont quickly to lose.  It is wonderful that any
man can ever rejoice heartily in this life who considereth and
weigheth his banishment, and the manifold dangers which beset his
soul.

2. Through lightness of heart and neglect of our shortcomings we
feel not the sorrows of our soul, but often vainly laugh when we
have good cause to weep.  There is no true liberty nor real joy,
save in the fear of God with a good conscience.  Happy is he who
can cast away every cause of distraction and bring himself to the
one purpose of holy compunction.  Happy is he who putteth away
from him whatsoever may stain or burden his conscience.  Strive
manfully; custom is overcome by custom.  If thou knowest how to
let men alone, they will gladly let thee alone to do thine own
works.

3. Busy not thyself with the affairs of others, nor entangle
thyself with the business of great men.  Keep always thine eye
upon thyself first of all, and give advice to thyself specially
before all thy dearest friends.  If thou hast not the favour of
men, be not thereby cast down, but let thy concern be that thou
holdest not thyself so well and circumspectly, as becometh a
servant of God and a devout monk.  It is often better and safer
for a man not to have many comforts in this life, especially
those which concern the flesh.  But that we lack divine comforts
or feel them rarely is to our own blame, because we seek not
compunction of heart, nor utterly cast away those comforts which
are vain and worldly.

4. Know thyself to be unworthy of divine consolation, and worthy
rather of much tribulation.  When a man hath perfect compunction,
then all the world is burdensome and bitter to him.  A good man
will find sufficient cause for mourning and weeping; for whether
he considereth himself, or pondereth concerning his neighbour, he
knoweth that no man liveth here without tribulation, and the more
thoroughly he considereth himself, the more thoroughly he grieveth.
Grounds for just grief and inward compunction there are in our
sins and vices, wherein we lie so entangled that we are but
seldom able to contemplate heavenly things.

5. If thou thoughtest upon thy death more often than how long thy
life should be, thou wouldest doubtless strive more earnestly to
improve.  And if thou didst seriously consider the future pains
of hell, I believe thou wouldest willingly endure toil or pain
and fear not discipline.  But because these things reach not the
heart, and we still love pleasant things, therefore we remain
cold and miserably indifferent.

6. Oftentimes it is from poverty of spirit that the wretched body
is so easily led to complain.  Pray therefore humbly unto the
Lord that He will give thee the spirit of compunction and say in
the language of the prophet, Feed me, O Lord, with bread of
tears, and give me plenteousness of tears to drink.(1)

(1) Psalm lxxv. 5.


CHAPTER XXII

On the contemplation of human misery

Thou art miserable wheresoever thou art, and whithersoever thou
turnest, unless thou turn thee to God.  Why art thou disquieted
because it happeneth not to thee according to thy wishes and
desires?  Who is he that hath everything according to his will?
Neither I, nor thou, nor any man upon the earth.  There is no man
in the world free from trouble or anguish, though he were King or
Pope.  Who is he who hath the happiest lot?  Even he who is
strong to suffer somewhat for God.

2. There are many foolish and unstable men who say, "See what a
prosperous life that man hath, how rich and how great he is, how
powerful, how exalted."  But lift up thine eyes to the good
things of heaven, and thou shalt see that all these worldly
things are nothing, they are utterly uncertain, yea, they are
wearisome, because they are never possessed without care and
fear.  The happiness of man lieth not in the abundance of
temporal things but a moderate portion sufficeth him.  Our life
upon the earth is verily wretchedness.  The more a man desireth
to be spiritual, the more bitter doth the present life become to
him; because he the better understandeth and seeth the defects of
human corruption.  For to eat, to drink, to watch, to sleep, to
rest, to labour, and to be subject to the other necessities of
nature, is truly a great wretchedness and affliction to a devout
man, who would fain be released and free from all sin.

3. For the inner man is heavily burdened with the necessities of
the body in this world.  Wherefore the prophet devoutly prayeth
to be freed from them, saying, Deliver me from my necessities, O
Lord.(1)  But woe to those who know not their own misery, and yet
greater woe to those who love this miserable and corruptible
life.  For to such a degree do some cling to it (even though by
labouring or begging they scarce procure what is necessary for
subsistence) that if they might live here always, they would care
nothing for the Kingdom of God.

4. Oh foolish and faithless of heart, who lie buried so deep in
worldly things, that they relish nothing save the things of the
flesh!  Miserable ones!  they will too sadly find out at the
last, how vile and worthless was that which they loved.  The
saints of God and all loyal friends of Christ held as nothing the
things which pleased the flesh, or those which flourished in
this life, but their whole hope and affection aspired to the
things which are above.  Their whole desire was borne upwards to
everlasting and invisible things, lest they should be drawn
downwards by the love of things visible.

5. Lose not, brother, thy loyal desire of progress to things
spiritual.  There is yet time, the hour is not past.  Why wilt
thou put off thy resolution?  Arise, begin this very moment, and
say, "Now is the time to do: now is the time to fight, now is the
proper time for amendment."  When thou art ill at ease and
troubled, then is the time when thou art nearest unto blessing.
Thou must go through fire and water that God may bring thee into
a wealthy place.  Unless thou put force upon thyself, thou wilt
not conquer thy faults.  So long as we carry about with us this
frail body, we cannot be without sin, we cannot live without
weariness and trouble.  Gladly would we have rest from all
misery; but because through sin we have lost innocence, we have
lost also the true happiness.  Therefore must we be patient, and
wait for the mercy of God, until this tyranny be overpast,
and this mortality be swallowed up of life.

6. O how great is the frailty of man, which is ever prone to
evil!  To-day thou confessest thy sins, and to-morrow thou
committest again the sins thou didst confess.  Now dost thou
resolve to avoid a fault, and within an hour thou behavest
thyself as if thou hadst never resolved at all.  Good cause have
we therefore to humble ourselves, and never to think highly of
ourselves, seeing that we are so frail and unstable.  And quickly
may that be lost by our negligence, which by much labour was
hardly attained through grace.

7. What shall become of us at the end, if at the beginning we are
lukewarm and idle?  Woe unto us, if we choose to rest, as though
it were a time of peace and security, while as yet no sign
appeareth in our life of true holiness.  Rather had we need that
we might begin yet afresh, like good novices, to be instructed
unto good living, if haply there might be hope of some future
amendment and greater spiritual increase.

(1) Psalm xxv. 17.


CHAPTER XXIII

Of meditation upon death

Very quickly will there be an end of thee here; take heed
therefore how it will be with thee in another world.  To-day man
is, and to-morrow he will be seen no more.  And being removed out
of sight, quickly also he is out of mind.  O the dulness and
hardness of man's heart, which thinketh only of the present, and
looketh not forward to the future.  Thou oughtest in every deed
and thought so to order thyself, as if thou wert to die this day.
If thou hadst a good conscience thou wouldst not greatly fear
death.  It were better for thee to watch against sin, than to fly
from death.  If to-day thou art not ready, how shalt thou be
ready to-morrow?  To-morrow is an uncertain day; and how knowest
thou that thou shalt have a to-morrow?

2. What doth it profit to live long, when we amend so little?
Ah!  long life doth not always amend, but often the more
increaseth guilt.  Oh that we might spend a single day in this
world as it ought to be spent!  Many there are who reckon the
years since they were converted, and yet oftentimes how little is
the fruit thereof.  If it is a fearful thing to die, it may be
perchance a yet more fearful thing to live long.  Happy is the
man who hath the hour of his death always before his eyes, and
