Article XIII--REGULAR AND SPECIAL MEETINGS

Annual Meetings. SECTION 1. The regular meetings of The Mother Church
shall be held annually, on Monday following the first Sunday in June.
No other than its of officers are required to be present. These
assemblies shall be for listening to the reports of Treasurer, Clerk,
and Committees, and general reports from the Field.

Meetings of Board of Directors. SECTION 2. The annual meeting of the
Christian Science Board of Directors, for electing officers and other
business, shall be held on Monday preceding the annual meeting of the
Church. Regular meetings for electing candidates to membership with
The Mother Church, and for the transaction of such other business as
may properly come before these meetings, shall be held on the Friday
preceding the first Sunday in June, and on the first Friday in
November of each year. Special meetings may be held at any time upon
the call of the Clerk.

Called only by the Clerk. SECTION 3. Before calling a meeting of the
members of this Church (excepting its regular sessions) it shall be
the duty of the Clerk to inform the Board of Directors and the Pastor
Emeritus of his intention, and to state definitely the purpose for
which the members are to convene. The Clerk must have the consent of
this Board and the Pastor Emeritus, before he can call said meeting.




CHURCH SERVICES


Article XIV--THE CHRISTIAN SCIENCE PASTOR

Ordination. SECTION 1. I, Mary Baker Eddy, ordain the BIBLE, and
SCIENCE AND HEALTH WITH KEY TO THE SCRIPTURES, Pastor over The
Mother Church,--The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston,
Mass.,--and they will continue to preach for this Church and the
world.

The Lesson-Sermon. SECTION 2. The subject of the Lesson-Sermon in the
morning service of The Mother Church, and of the branch Churches of
Christ, Scientist, shall be repeated at the other services on Sunday.
The correlative Biblical texts in the Lesson-Sermon shall extend from
Genesis to Revelation.


Article XV--READING IN PUBLIC

Announcing Author's Name. SECTION 1. To pour into the ears
of listeners the sacred revelations of Christian Science
indiscriminately, or without characterizing their origin and thus
distinguishing them from the writings of authors who think at random
on this subject, is to lose some weight in the scale of right
thinking. Therefore it is the duty of every member of this Church,
when publicly reading or quoting from the books or poems of our
Pastor Emeritus, first to announce the name of the author. Members
shall also instruct their pupils to adopt the aforenamed method for
the benefit of our Cause.


Article XVI--WELCOMING STRANGERS

The Leader's Welcome. SECTION 1. Mrs. Eddy welcomes to her seats in
the church, persons of all sects and denominations who come to listen
to the Sunday sermon and are not otherwise provided with seats.

The Local Members' Welcome. SECTION 2. It shall be the duty and
privilege of the local members of The Mother Church to give their
seats, if necessary, to strangers who may come to attend the morning
services.


Article XVII--SERVICES UNINTERRUPTED

Continued Throughout the Year. SECTION 1. The services of The Mother
Church shall be continued twelve months each year. One meeting on
Sunday during the months of July and August is sufficient. A
Christian Scientist is not fatigued by prayer, by reading the
Scriptures or the Christian Science textbook. Amusement or idleness
is weariness. Truth and Love rest the weary and heavy laden.

Easter Observances. SECTION 2. In the United States there shall be no
special observances, festivities, nor gifts at the Easter season by
members of The Mother Church. Gratitude and love should abide in
every heart each day of all the years. Those sacred words of our
beloved Master, "Let the dead bury their dead," and "Follow thou me,"
appeal to daily Christian endeavors for the living whereby to
exemplify our risen Lord.

Laying a Corner Stone. SECTION 3. No large gathering of people nor
display shall be allowed when laying the Corner Stone of a Church of
Christ, Scientist. Let the ceremony be devout. No special trowel
should be used. (See SCIENCE AND HEALTH, page 140.)

Overflow Meetings. SECTION 4. A Church of Christ, Scientist, shall
not hold two or more Sunday services at the same hour.


Article XVIII--COMMUNION

No more Communion. SECTION 1. The Mother Church of Christ, Scientist,
shall observe no more Communion seasons.

Communion of Branch Churches. SECTION 2. The Communion shall be
observed in the branch churches on the second Sunday in January and
July of each year, and at this service the Tenets of The Mother
Church are to be read.


Article XIX--MUSIC IN THE CHURCH

Soloist and Organist. SECTION 1. The music in The Mother Church shall
not be operatic, but of an appropriate religious character and of a
recognized standard of musical excellence; it shall be played in a
dignified and suitable manner. Music from the organ alone should
continue about eight or nine minutes for the voluntary and six or
seven minutes for the postlude, the offertory conforming to the time
required to take the collection. The solo singer shall not neglect
to sing any special hymn selected by the Board of Directors.


Article XX--SUNDAY SCHOOL

The Sunday School. SECTION 1. Pupils may be received in the Sunday
School classes of any Church of Christ, Scientist, up to the age of
twenty years, and by transfer from another Church of Christ,
Scientist, up to that age, but no pupil shall remain in the Sunday
School of any Church of Christ, Scientist, after reaching the age of
twenty. None except the officers, teachers, and pupils should attend
the Sunday School exercises.

Teaching the Children. SECTION 2. The Sabbath School children shall
be taught the Scriptures, and they shall be instructed according to
their understanding or ability to grasp the simpler meanings of the
divine Principle that they are taught.

Subject for Lessons. SECTION 3. The first lessons of the children
should be the Ten Commandments (Exodus 20: 3-17), the Lord's Prayer
(Matt. 6: 9-13), and its Spiritual Interpretation by Mary Baker Eddy,
Sermon on the Mount (Matt. 5: 3-12). The next lessons consist of such
questions and answers as are adapted to a juvenile class, and may be
found in the Christian Science Quarterly Lessons, read in Church
services. The instruction given by the children's teachers must not
deviate from the absolute Christian Science contained in their
textbook.




READING ROOMS


Article XXI

Establishment. SECTION 1. Each church of the Christian Science
denomination shall have a Reading Room, though two or more churches
may unite in having Reading Rooms, provided these rooms are well
located.

Librarian. SECTION 2. The individuals who take charge of the Reading
Rooms of The Mother Church shall be elected by the Christian Science
Board of Directors, subject to the approval of Mary Baker Eddy. He or
she shall have no bad habits, shall have had experience in the Field,
shall be well educated, and a devout Christian Scientist.[3]

Literature in Reading Rooms. SECTION 3. The literature sold or
exhibited in the reading rooms of Christian Science Churches shall
consist only of _Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures_,
by Mary Baker Eddy, and other writings by this author; also the
literature published or sold by The Christian Science Publishing
Society.

[3] See also Article XXV, Sect. 7.




RELATION AND DUTIES OF MEMBERS TO PASTOR EMERITUS


Article XXII

The Title of Mother Changed. SECTION 1. In the year eighteen hundred
and ninety-five, loyal Christian Scientists had given to the author
of their textbook, the Founder of Christian Science, the individual,
endearing term of Mother. At first Mrs. Eddy objected to being called
thus, but afterward consented on the ground that this appellative in
the Church meant nothing more than a tender term such as sister or
brother. In the year nineteen hundred and three and after, owing to
the public misunderstanding of this name, it is the duty of Christian
Scientists to drop the word _mother_ and to substitute Leader,
already used in our periodicals.

A Member not a Leader. SECTION 2. A member of The First Church of
Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Mass., shall not be called Leader by
members of this Church, when this term is used in connection with
Christian Science.

Obedience Required. SECTION 3. It shall be the duty of the officers
of this Church, of the editors of the _Christian Science Journal_,
_Sentinel_, and _Der Herold_, of the members of the Committees on
Publication, of the Trustees of The Christian Science Publishing
Society, and of the Board of Education promptly to comply with any
written order, signed by Mary Baker Eddy, which applies to their
official functions. Disobedience to this By-Law shall be sufficient
cause for the removal of the offending member from office.

The vacancy shall be supplied by a majority vote of the Christian
Science Board of Directors, and the candidate shall be subject to
the approval of Mary Baker Eddy.

Understanding Communications. SECTION 4. If the Clerk of this Church
shall receive a communication from the Pastor Emeritus which he does
not fully understand, he shall inform her of this fact before
presenting it to the Church and obtain a clear understanding of the
matter,--then act in accordance therewith.

Interpreting Communications. SECTION 5. If at a meeting of this
Church a doubt or disagreement shall arise among the members as to
the signification of the communications of the Pastor Emeritus to
them, before action is taken it shall be the duty of the Clerk to
report to her the vexed question and to await her explanation thereof.

Reading and Attesting Letters. SECTION 6. When a letter or a message
from the Pastor Emeritus is brought before a meeting of this Church,
or she is referred to as authority for business, it shall be the duty
of the Church to inquire if all of the letter has been read, and to
require all of it to be read; also to have any authority supposed to
come from her satisfactorily attested.

Unauthorized Reports. SECTION 7. Members of this Church shall not
report on authority an order from Mrs. Eddy that she has not sent,
either to the Boards or to the executive bodies of this Church. The
Pastor Emeritus is not to be consulted on cases of discipline, on the
cases of candidates for admission to this Church, or on the cases of
those on trial for dismissal from the Church.

Private Communications. SECTION 8. A strictly private communication
from the Pastor Emeritus to a member of her Church shall not be made
public without her written consent.

Unauthorized Legal Action. SECTION 9. A member of this Church shall
not employ an attorney, nor take legal action on a case not provided
for in its By-Laws--if said case relates to the person or to the
property of Mary Baker Eddy--without having personally conferred with
her on said subject.

Duty to God. SECTION 10. Members of this Church who turn their
attention from the divine Principle of being to personality, sending
gifts, congratulatory despatches or letters to the Pastor Emeritus on
Thanksgiving, Christmas, New Year, or Easter, break a rule of this
Church and are amenable therefor.

Opportunity for Serving the Leader. SECTION 11. At the written
request of the Pastor Emeritus, Mrs. Eddy, the Board of Directors
shall immediately notify a person who has been a member of this
Church at least three years to go in ten days to her, and it shall be
the duty of the member thus notified to remain with Mrs. Eddy three
years consecutively. A member who leaves her in less time without the
Directors' consent or who declines to obey this call to duty, upon
Mrs. Eddy's complaint thereof shall be excommunicated from The Mother
Church. Members thus serving the Leader shall be paid semi-annually
at the rate of one thousand dollars yearly in addition to rent and
board. Those members whom she teaches the course in Divinity, and who
remain with her three consecutive years, receive the degree of the
Massachusetts Metaphysical College.

Location. SECTION 12. Rev. Mary Baker Eddy calls to her home or
allows to visit or to locate therein only those individuals whom
she engages through the Christian Science Board of Directors of
the Mother Church. This By-Law takes effect on Dec. 15, 1908.

Agreement Required. SECTION 13. When the Christian Science Board of
Directors calls a student in accordance with Article XXII, Sect. 11,
of our Church Manual to the home of their Leader, Mrs. Eddy, said
student shall come under a signed agreement to remain with Mrs. Eddy
if she so desires, during the time specified in the Church Manual.

Incomplete Term of Service. SECTION 14. If a student who has been
called to serve our Leader in accordance with Article XXII, Sect. 11,
of the Church Manual leaves her before the expiration of the time
therein mentioned such student shall pay to Mrs. Eddy whatsoever she
may charge for what she has taught him or her during the time of such
service.

Help. SECTION 15. If the author of the Christian Science textbook
call on this Board for household help or a handmaid, the Board shall
immediately appoint a proper member of this Church therefor, and the
appointee shall go immediately in obedience to the call. "He that
loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me." (Matt.
10:37.)

Students with Mrs. Eddy. SECTION 16. Students employed by Mrs. Eddy
at her home shall not take care of their churches or attend to other
affairs outside of her house.
