except with our profession and subscription we join such a life and
conversation as beseemeth Christians who have renewed their covenant
with God; we therefore faithfully promise for ourselves, our followers,
and all others under us, both in public, and in our particular families,
and personal carriage, to endeavour to keep ourselves within the bounds
of Christian liberty, and to be good examples to others of all
godliness, soberness, and righteousness, and of every duty we owe to
God and man.

And, that this our union and conjunction may be observed without
violation, we call the LIVING GOD, THE SEARCHER OF OUR HEARTS, to
witness, who knoweth this to be our sincere desire and unfeigned
resolution, as we shall answer to JESUS CHRIST in the great day, and
under the pain of God's everlasting wrath, and of infamy and loss of all
honour and respect in this world: most humbly beseeching the LORD to
strengthen us by His HOLY SPIRIT for this end, and to bless our desires
and proceedings with a happy success; that religion and righteousness
may flourish in the land, to the glory of GOD, the honour of our King,
and peace and comfort of us all. In witness whereof, we have subscribed
with our hands all the premises.

The article of this Covenant within written and within subscribed, which
was at the first subscription referred to the determination of the
General Assembly, being now determined, on the fifth of December, 1638,
and hereby the five articles of Perth, the government of the Kirk by
bishops, being declared to be abjured and removed, and the civil places
and power of kirkmen declared unlawful, we subscribe according to the
determination of the said lawful and free General Assembly, holden at
Glasgow.




THE NATIONAL COVENANT:

EXHORTATION TO THE LORDS OF COUNCIL.[1]


_May it please your Lordship_,

We, the ministers of the Gospel, conveened at this so necessary a time
do find ourselves bound to represent, as unto all, so in special unto
your lordship what comfortable experience we have of the wonderful
favour of God, upon the renewing of the Confession of Faith and
Covenant; what peace and comfort hath filled the hearts of all God's
people; what resolutions and beginnings of reformation of manners are
sensibly perceived in all parts of the kingdom, above any measure that
ever we did find, or could have expected; how great glory the Lord hath
received hereby, and what confidence we have (if this sunshine be not
eclipsed by some sinful division or defection) that God shall make this
a blessed kingdom, to the contentment of the king's majesty, and joy of
all his good subjects, according as God hath promised in His good Word,
and performed to His people in former times: and therefore we are
forced, from our hearts, both to wish and entreat your lordship to be
partaker and promover of this joy and happiness by your subscription,
when your lordship shall think it convenient; and in the mean time, that
your lordship would not be sparing to give a free testimony to the
truth, as a timely and necessary expression of your tender affection to
the cause of Christ, now calling for help at your hands. Your lordship's
profession of the true religion, as it was reformed in this land; the
national oath of this kingdom, sundry times sworn and subscribed,
obliging us who live at this time; the duty of a good patriot, the
office and trust of a privy councillor, the present employment, to have
place amongst those that are first acquainted with his majesty's
pleasure; the consideration that this is the time of trial of your
lordship's affection to religion, the respect which your lordship hath
unto your fame, both now and hereafter, when things shall be recorded to
posterity; and the remembrance, that not only the eyes of men and angels
are upon your lordship's carriage, but also that the Lord Jesus is a
secret witness now to observe, and shall be an open judge hereafter, to
reward and confess every man before His Father, that confesseth Him
before men: all of these, and each of them, beside your lordship's
personal and particular obligations to God, do call for no less at your
lordship's hands, in the case of so great and singular necessity: and we
also do expect so much at this time, according as your lordship at the
hour of death would be free of the terror of God, and be refreshed with
the comfortable remembrance of a word spoken in season for Christ Jesus,
King of kings, and Lord of lords.




THE NATIONAL COVENANT.

SERMON AT ST. ANDREWS.

_BY ALEXANDER HENDERSON._[2]

"Thy people shall be willing in the day of Thy power, in the
beauties of holiness from the womb of the morning; Thou hast the
dew of thy youth."--_Psalm_ cx. 3.


It is, beloved in the Lord, very expedient, and sometimes most necessar,
that we turn away our eyes from kings and their greatness, from kirkmen
and men of state, and that we turn them towards another object, and look
only to Jesus Christ, who is the great king, priest, and prophet of His
kirk. The godly in former times, who were kings, priests, and prophets
themselves, used to do this, and that before Christ; and mickle more is
it required of us now in thir days, seeing we live in troublesome times;
for there is a comfort that comes to the children of God that way. The
first part of this psalm expresses to us the threefold office of Christ,
and the second part of it expresses the valiant acts our Lord Jesus does
by these His three offices, but especially by His Princely office; whilk
indeed is His worst studied office by many men in the world. We would,
many of us, willingly take Him for our prophet to teach us, and for our
priest to intercede for us, and be a sacrifice for our sins, but when
it comes to His Princely office, to direct us what we should do, then we
would be at that whilk seems best in our own eyes.

His Princely office is described unto us here three ways. 1. In relation
to God Himself; "The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at My right hand."
2. In respect of His enemies; "The Lord sall send the rod of thy
strength out of Zion: rule thou in the midst of thy enemies." Were His
enemies never so many, and never so despiteful against Him, yet He sall
rule in the midst of them. And indeed this is a very admirable part of
His kingly office, that even in the midst of His enemies He sall have a
kingdom for Himself, in despite of them, and all that they can do or say
against it. 3. The third, wherein the glory of His kingly office
consists, is in thir words that I have read to you: and that is in
relation to, and in respect of the subjects of the kingdom of Christ.
And they are described here to be a people belonging to Jesus Christ; to
be a people on whom God manifests His power; and they are a most willing
people, a people who count holiness to be their chiefest beauty. And
they are so marvellously multiplied, that it is a wonder to consider of
it: there is no more drops of dew will fall, nor they will not fall any
faster in a morning than the Lord will multiply them, when He is pleased
to do so. And although the Lord sometimes multiply them in a secret
manner, yet still the multitude stands to be true.

That the purposes may be the better tane up by you who will take heed to
them, consider of these parts in the words. 1. The persons of whom the
Psalmist speaks here. "Thy people." 2. The properties of these people in
this day: They sall be a willing people; a holy people; a people who
sall be miraculously multiplied. And so their properties is willingness,
holiness, and multiplication.

Many proofs has been of the truth of this prophecy since the
beginning--that the Lord's people sall be willing in the day of His
power, in the beauties of holiness; from the womb of the morning thou
hast the dew of thy youth. There were many evident proofs of the truth
of this since the beginning of the plantation of the gospel into the
world. And surely we know not a more evident and notable proof of it
than this same that is presently into this land, nor think I that there
be any who can show the parallel of it. The Lord has made them willingly
to offer up themselves, and all that they have, for Him. And they are a
people of holiness; albeit it is true, indeed, many has been brought to
it from this quarter and that quarter of the land, since the beginning,
to be more holy than they used to be. And if the multiplication of them
be not wonderful, I cannot tell what ye will tell me of that is more
wonderful; so that indeed it is a miracle to all who hear of it. In the
time while Christ was upon the earth there were two sorts of miracles to
be seen;--first, Christ made the dumb to speak, the blind to see, the
lame to walk, &c.: this indeed was a great miracle. The second sort of
miracles was of him who did see these things wrought by Christ, and yet
for all that, did not believe in Him who did work them. Even so there
are two sorts of wonders in this same time wherein we live;--first, how
the Lord has multiplied His people, and made them to be so many,
whereas, at the first, we thought them to be but very few; secondly, we
cannot but wonder at these who observes not God's hand into it: and
indeed we cannot but wonder that any can be so blind that they observe
not the very hand and finger of God in the work. Ay, we who have been
witnesses to it, for the most part, we cannot but wonder at the work of
God in it. It has not been man's wit has done the work, and multiply so,
but only God has done it; and we cannot tell how; but only we see that
there are numbers continually multiplied.

I. "Thy people." Here is a note of property, and a note of distinction.
First, it is a note of property. They are God's people--God has absolute
right over a people, and there is none who has any right over them but
He alone. It's true all people are under Him, but He calls not all His
people after this manner. All things are for God, and subordinate to
Him; the absolute power to rule and to command these people is in God's
hand, and He will not give that power to any other over them: and He has
good reason so to do. 1. Because He was thinking upon His people from
all eternity; and there was none who did that but only He. 2. He made us
and fashioned us in time; and neither any authority or magistrate did
that. 3. Who is it that provides means for their sustenance daily, and
makes these means effectual, but only the Lord? A man cannot make one
pyle (blade) of grass, or one ear of corn, to grow for thy
entertainment, but only the Lord: and when thou hast gotten these
things, it is the blessing of God that makes them effectual. For when ye
say the grace to your meat, say ye it to man? No, ye say it only to God.
So that every way ye are God's people. And then, whilk is more, and
therefore we are bound to be His people, no man can redeem the life of
his brother, nor give a price sufficient for his life, let be (let
alone) for his soul, and yet the Lord, He has redeemed us from hell, and
from the grave; and therefore we belong to Him. Then is it not the Lord
who enters in covenant with thee, and says, I will remember thy sins no
more? Then albeit all the world should remember thy ill deeds, yet if
the Lord remember them not, then thou art blessed. It is He who says, I
will write My laws in your hearts, to lead you here: it is He who puts
us in the estate of grace while we are here, and so puts us in hope of
glory after this life. It is He who sall be our judge at that great day.
And so ye are the Lord's people, by way of property.

And this was it that made the apostles so bold, when it was alleged
that they had done that whilk was not right: they made the enemies
themselves judges, and says, "Whether it be right in your sight to obey
God rather than man, judge ye." As if they had said, It's true indeed we
are mickle obliged to man, but we are more obliged to God than to all
men; for what is it that man can do to us, either good or ill, but God
can do that als (also) and more? And upon this ground, in the next
chapter, they draw this conclusion,--It behoveth us rather to obey God
than man. And so, first, they reason with the adversars themselves upon
it; and seeing that they could not deny it, upon that they draw up their
conclusion. I mark this for this end, that whenever ye are enjoined to
do anything by any man, that then ye would not forget this dignity and
power that God has over you, and that ye are the people of Jesus Christ;
and therefore no man ought to enjoin anything to be done by you, but
that for the whilk he has a warrant from God. There is a great
controversy now about disobedience to superiors, and the contempt of
those who are in authority; but there is not a word of that, whether God
be obeyed or not, or if He be disobeyed by any. Fy, that people should
sell themselves over to the slavery of man, when the Lord has only
sovereign power over them! I would not have you to think that a whole
country of people are appointed only to uphold the grandeur of five or
six men. No, they are ordained to be magistrates for your good. And sall
we think that a ministry shines into a land for the upholding of the
grandeur of some few persons. No, all these things are ordained for the
good of God's people; and, seeing that it is so, sall ye then make
yourselves like to asses and slaves, to be subject to all that men
pleases to impose upon you? No, no; try anything that they impose upon
you, before ye obey it, if it is warranted by God or not; because God is
the only superior over you.

2. Secondly. "Thy people." This also is a note of distinction; for every
people are God's people, but there is a distinction among them. All
people, it's true, are God's people by right of creation: why therefore
says he, _Thy_ people, and not _all_ people? Because all people belong
not to Christ. God has authority over all indeed, but in a special
manner He enters into covenant with some. All people who are subject to
Him in His providence are not His peculiar people, His royal nation, His
holy priesthood, His chosen generation, but only those of them who
belong to Christ; those are properly termed to be His people. And we
should remember of this, that those who are the people of God, they have
notable privileges; they have all things that any people should have,
and, whatever we should be, they have that. Where any are the people of
God, there there is blessedness indeed, for they have His truth for
their security, they have His love for their comfort, His power for
their defence. The Lord God, He takes His people into His bosom, and
with every soul He does so, and says, "I the Lord thy God enters in
covenant with thee, and renews the covenant that before I made with
thee." And then He lays a necessity upon thee, by His providence, that
thou must enter into covenant with Him; and then He says to thee, "I
will not remember thy sins any more; I know they are heinous, great, and
many, but because thou desires that they should not be remembered,
therefore I will not remember them. And because when ye have renewed
your covenant with Me, ye will be aye in a fear to break it again,
therefore I will write My law in your hearts. And so whatever I promise
to you, I will perform it freely when ye are in covenant with Me; and
whatever ye promise to Me, being in covenant with Me, I sall perform it
for you also, at least I sall give you strength to perform it." And
therefore to the end that ye may be perfectly blessed, enter into a
covenant with God; and without ye be in covenant with Him, ye sall be
in nothing but perpetual misery. I would have all of you to think this
to be your only health, wealth, and peace, and your only glory in the
world, to be in covenant with God; and so that ye are the people of God,
I would not have you to count men to be rich and glorious men by their
estates in the world--that he can spend so many chalders of victual
yearly, or so many thousand merks. O, a silly, beggarly glory is this!
Naked thou came into the world, and naked thou must go out of it again.
But see how mickle thou has of the knowledge of Jesus Christ, how far
thou art forward in the work of repentance, faith, &c., and such good
actions. Learn to set your affections on things that are above, and
testify it by your actions.

II. "In the day of Thy power." This is the time when the people of God
sall be willing, even in the day of His power; that is, in the day of
the power of Jesus Christ. The day of His own resurrection from the dead
was one day of His power: He says, "I have power to lay down My life,
and I have power to take it again;" "Destroy this temple, and I will
build it up again in three days;" He meant of the temple of His body:
and indeed there was none who could raise His dead body out of the
grave, but only Himself. A second day of His power sall be the day of
the resurrection of our bodies out of the dust. But there is another day
that is meant of here than any of these, and that is the day of our
first resurrection out of the grave of sin, by the preaching of the
gospel. And there is good reason for it, why this should be called a day
of His power. First, because it is the power of Jesus Christ that brings
the purity of the gospel into a land; and we may indeed say that it was
only His power that brought the gospel into this land. It had not
authority then to countenance it, for all those that were in authority
were against it; and counsel and policy, and all the clergy, and the
multitude, all of them, were against it; and yet, for all that, the
Lord brought in the purity of the gospel into this land, and established
it here against all these. Secondly, when the purity of the gospel is
into a land, it is only the power of God that makes it effectual for
turning of souls unto Himself, and raising them out of the grave of sin,
wherein they are so fast buried. So when the Lord first sends the
gospel, we are lying into the grave of sin; and the devil, and the
world, and all these enemies they are watching the grave, to see that we
rise not out of it; and when we are beginning to rise they are busy to
hold us down. And think not that we can rise, and lift up ourselves from
so base to so high ane estate, without the power of God. No, no. Third.
When the gospel is into a land, it is only the power of Jesus Christ
that makes it to continue, for if the Lord make not the gospel to
continue into a land, it will not stay there. And there is no less power
required either to bring the gospel into a land, or to make it
effectual, or to make it to continue, than was required to raise the
dead body of Christ out of the grave, or will be required to raise ours.

I would have you consider here, that all times are not alike, but there
is a time of the Lord's power; that all days are not alike, but there is
a day of the Lord's power; a time when the saints of God sall be weak, a
time when they sall be strong; a time when some sall rise up to
persecute the saints, a time when others sall rise up to help them; a
time when the Lord withholds His power, and a time when He kythes (shews
it); a time when the people draws back from the Lord, and a time when
they turn to Him again. There has been a day of defection in this land
this time past, and now there is a time of the Lord's power in bringing
back this defection again: and indeed this very instant time that now is
is ane hour of that day of the Lord's power, and I will shew you two or
three reasons for it. 1. The Lord did arise and manifested His power
when the enemies were become insolent, and when they had determined that
they would set up such a mode of worship as they thought meet, and
noways according to the pattern shown upon the mount. And indeed the
Lord, He uses ordinarily to do this, that even when the enemies of His
people are become insolent, and they have determined that they will do
such a thing instantly, then He takes them in their own snare. 2. To
show that it is the Lord's power only that works a work, He uses to
begin at very small beginnings; and so the Lord did in this same
work;--He began at first with some few, and these not honourable, and
yet now He has made it to cover the whole land through all the quarters
thereof. 3. This is also a note of the power of God, that He has touched
the hearts of people, that there was never such a howling and a weeping
heard amongst them this long time as there is now; and yet it is not a
weeping for sorrow, but a weeping for joy. How oft has there been
preachings in the most part of the congregations of this land this long
time past, and yet people have never found the power of it in working
upon their hearts; and yet within this short space, when the Lord has
renewed His covenant with them, and they with Him, He has displayed His
banner, and made His power known in working upon the hearts of people.
4. In this the power of God is manifestly to be seen in this work, that
the Lord has made all the devices and plots of the adversars, that they
have devised to further their own ends, to work contrair to these ends,
and to work for the good of His own work. And, indeed, we may say that
it has not been so mickle the courage and wisdom of these, that has been
for this cause, that has brought it so far on, but the very plots and
devices of the adversars that they have devised for their own good. This
also is ane evident token of the Lord's power.

And now since the Lord did arise when the enemies were become insolent,
since He began at so small beginnings and has brought it so far, since
the Lord has wrought so on the hearts of people now, and since He has
made all the plots of the enemies to work against themselves, and for
His people, let us give this glory to God, and reverence Him, and say
that it is only by His power that the work is done, and that He has been
pleased to manifest Himself into the work. Beloved, we may comfort
ourselves in this, if all this has been done by the power of God, then
we need not to fear the power of men; men can do nothing against God.
The Lord may indeed put His kirk to a trial, but He will not suffer her
to be overthrown by any. And indeed, any who hears and knows what the
enemies are doing here may see that they are not fighting against men,
but against God, and that they are kicking against the pricks.

III. Now, for the properties of thir people. The first of them is
_willing_. The Lord's people are a people of willingness in the day of
His power: and indeed thir three go very well together, the people of
God, the power of God, and a willing people. When the power of God works
upon His people then He makes them to be a willing people. And indeed,
it is no small matter to see a people willing in a good cause, for by
nature we are unwilling, and naturally we are not set to affect anything
that is right, except it be through hypocrisy. Our hearts they are
contrary to God; they are proud, disobedient, rebellious, and he who
sees and knows his own heart sees all this to be in it; and he knows
that it is the Lord who cries upon him, in the day of His own power, and
frames his heart in a new mould, and makes it to be so nimble and
cheerful in any good work,--that albeit they had been before running
with all their speed to the devil, yet He makes them to stand still in
the way and look about them, and consider what they have been doing, and
then to turn about again. Albeit thou were like to Paul, persecuting the
Church, yet He can then make a preacher of thee, and so affright thee
that thou sall not know where thou art, but say, "Here am I, Lord:" and
albeit thou were as unwilling to go as the prophet Moses, yet He will
make thee to say, "Here am I, Lord, send me," and be as Elisha, when
Elias cuist (cast) his mantle about him, then he could not stay any
longer. And when Christ comes to Peter, and calls upon them, they cannot
stay any longer, but incontinent they leave all and follows Him. I will
not now begin to make any large discourse of the invincible power of
God; I say no more of it now but only this for your use. If ye kent this
power of God, it would make you ready and willing to give a confession
to Him this day, and even to confess Him before men, and to forsake all
and follow Him. Ye who are ignorant of the power of God, take heed to
this,--it is the Lord who commanded light to come out of darkness, who
must make you to see Christ; He who takes His rod in His hand to beat
down the hard and humble the haughty heart, He must do this also. O if
ye felt this power of God, ye would think nothing to forsake all and to
follow Him. He has suffered more for us nor we can suffer for Him; and
if we suffered anything for Him, He would not suffer any of us yet to be
a loser at His hand: but we cannot put Him to a trial.

Now for this unwillingness of these people, it is well expressed here.
They are called a people of willingness. And yet He thinks not this
satisfactory, to call them a willing people, but He calls them a people
of willingness, a noble, generous, high-minded people. And all this is
to shew that when the people of God is wakened up in the day of His
power, there is none who is able to express their willingness. They are
so willing that if they had a thousand minds they would employ them all
for Him, and if they had a thousand faces, they would not let one of
them look down, but they would hold them all up for the Lord; if every
hair in their head were a man, they would employ them all in His
service. Their willingness, indeed, it cannot be expressed. They cry to
the Lord, because they think they cannot run fast enough, "Draw me and I
sail run after Thee:" they are flying together, as the dowes does to the
holes of the rocks before a tempest come. In the Canticles, Christ says,
"My soul made Me as the chariots of My noble people;" and, indeed, to
see a people running through the land, to meet together to keep
communion with the Lord, this is the best chariot that can be. And this
willingness has been so great at some times in the children of God that
they have fallen in a paroxysm, or like the fit of a fever, with it: as
it is Acts xvii. Paul's spirit was stirred in him, when he saw the City
of Athens given to so much base idolatry as to worship the UNKNOWN GOD.
And Lot, also, he had such a fit as this; he vexed his righteous soul
with the iniquities of Sodom, that is, he tortured his soul with their
sins, he never saw them committing sin but it was a grief to him. And,
indeed, the children of God this while past have been grieved and vexed
to behold the sins that has been committed into this same land. I insist
upon this the rather because I would wish from my heart that ye would be
thus willing, and that ye would be as forward for the glory and honour
of God as ever any was. And then, indeed, it should do good to others
also, when they should hear tell that the people of St. Andrews were
such a willing people. And, indeed, ye have just reason to be willing
now.

1. Because it is God's cause ye have in hand, and it is no new cause to
us. It is almost sixty years old; it is no less since this same
Confession of Faith was first subscribed and sworn to. And it has been
still in use yearly to be subscribed and sworn to in some parts, among
some in this land, to this day. And I think it would have been so in all
the parts of the land if men had dreamed of what was coming upon us.
Whatever is added to it at this time, it is nothing but ane
interpretation of the former part; and if men will be willing to see the
right, they may see that there is nothing in the latter part but that
whilk may be deduced from the first. And in the making of a Covenant we
are not bound to keep only these same words that were before, but we
must renew it; and in the renewing thereof we must apply it to the
present time when it is renewed, as we have done, renewed it against the
present ills. For it is not necessar for us to abjure Turkism or
Paganism, because we are not in fear to be troubled with that; but the
thing that we are in danger of is Papistry, and therefore we must abjure
that.

2. A second reason to make you willing is, because this matter concerns
you in all things,--in your bodies, in your estates, in your lives, your
liberties, in your souls. I may say, if in the Lord's providence this
course had not been taken, ye would have found the thraldom whereinto
that course, wherein ye were anes (once) going, would have brought you
to or (ere) now, even ye who are most averse from it.

3. A third reason to make you willing is, ye have the precedency and
testimony of the nobility in the land to it, and of all sorts of
persons, noblemen, barons, gentlemen, burgesses, ministers, and commons;
and wherefore, then, should not ye be willing to follow their example?
