    All his body steeped in poison--till he free thee from thy woe,
    Shall he dwell within thee prison'd--in the ecstacy of pain.
    So from him, by whom, thou blameless!--sufferest such unworthy wrong,
    By the curse I lay upon him--my deliverance shall be wrought.
    Fear not thou the tusked wild boar--foeman fear not thou, O king,
    Neither Brahmin fear, nor Sages[104]--safe through my prevailing power.
    King, this salutary poison--gives to thee nor grief nor pain;
    In the battle, chief of Rajas--victory is ever thine.
    Go thou forth, thyself thus naming--Vahuca, the charioteer,
    To the royal Rituparna--in the dice all-skilful he;
    To Ayodhya's pleasant city--sovereign of Nishadha! go;
    He his skill in dice will give thee--for thy skill in taming steeds:
    Of Ikshwaku's noble lineage--he will be thy best of friends.
    Thou the skill in dice possessing--soon wilt rise again to bliss;
    With thy consort reunited--yield not up thy soul to grief.
    Thou thy kingdom, thou thy children--wilt regain, the truth I speak.
    When again thou would'st behold thee--in thy proper form, O king,
    Summon me to thy remembrance--and this garment put thou on:
    In this garment clad resum'st thou--instantly thy proper form."
    Saying thus, of vests celestial--gave he to the king a pair.[105]
    And king Nala, thus instructed--gifted with these magic robes,
    Instantly the king of serpents--vanished from his sight away.




BOOK XV.


    Vanished thus the King of Serpents--set Nishadha's raja forth,
    Rituparna's royal city--on the tenth day entered he.
    Straight before the royal presence--"Vahuca am I," he said,
    "In the skill of taming horses--on the earth is not my peer;
    Use me, where the difficult counsel--where thou want'st the dexterous hand;
    In the art of dressing viands[106]--I am skilful above all.
    Whatsoe'er the art, whatever--be most difficult to do,
    I will strive to execute it--take me to thy service, king."

    RITUPARNA _spake_.

    "Vahuca, I bid thee welcome--all this service shalt thou do,
    On my horses' rapid motion--deeply is my mind engaged.
    Take thou then on thee the office--that my steeds be fleet of foot,
    Of my horse be thou the master--hundred hundreds is thy pay:[107]
    Ever shalt thou have for comrades--Varshneya and Jivala:
    With these two pursue thy pleasure--Vahuca, abide with me."
    Thus addressed, did Nala, honoured--by king Rituparna long,
    With Varshneya in that city--and with Jivala abide:
    There abode he, sadly thinking--of Vidarbha's daughter still.
    In the evening, every evening--uttered he this single verse;
    "Where is she, by thirst and hunger--worn, and weary, pious still,
    Thinking of her unwise husband--in whose presence is she now!"
    Thus the raja, ever speaking--Jivala one night addressed;
    "Who is she, for whom thou grievest?--Vahuca, I fain would hear."
    [108]Answered thus the royal Nala--"To a man of sense bereft,
    Once belonged a peerless lady--most infirm of word was he;
    From some cause from her dissevered--went that frantic man away,
    In his foolish soul thus parted--wanders he, by sorrow racked;
    Night and day, and still for ever--by his parching grief consumed:
    Nightly brooding o'er his sorrows--sings he this sad single verse.
    O'er the whole wide earth a wanderer--chance-alighting in some place,
    Dwells that woful man, unworthy,--ever wakeful with his grief.
    Him that noble lady following--in the forest lone and dread,
    Lives, of that bad man forsaken--hard it is to say, she lives!
    Lone, and young, the ways unknowing--undeserving of such fate,
    Pines she there with thirst and hunger--hard it is to say, she lives.
    In that vast and awful forest--haunted by fierce beasts of prey,
    By her lord she roams forsaken--hapless, by that luckless lord."
    Thus remembering Damayanti--did Nishadha's king unknown,
    Long within that dwelling sojourn--in the palace of the king.




BOOK XVI.


    Nala thus bereft of kingdom--with his wife to slavery sunk,
    Forth king Bhima sent the Brahmins--Nala through the world to seek.
    Thus the royal Bhima charged them--with abundant wealth supplied:--
    "Go ye now and seek king Nala--Damayanti seek, my child:
    And, achieved this weighty business--found Nishadha's royal lord,
    Whosoe'er shall hither bring them--shall a thousand kine receive;
    And a royal grant for maintenance[109]--of a village like a town.
    If nor hither Damayanti--nor king Nala may be brought,
    Know we where they are, rich guerdon--still we give, ten hundred kine."
    Thus addressed, the joyful Brahmins--went to every clime of earth,
    Through the cities, through the kingdoms--seeking Nala and his queen:
    Nala, or king Bhima's daughter--in no place might they behold.
    Then a Brahmin, named Sudeva--came to pleasant Chedi-pur;
    There within the kingly palace--he Vidarbha's daughter saw,
    Standing with the fair Sunanda--on a royal holiday.[110]
    With her beauty once so peerless--worthy now of little praise,
    Like the sun-light feebly shining--through the dimness of a cloud.
    Gazing on the large-eyed princess--dull in look, and wasted still,
    Lo, he thought, king Bhima's daughter--pondering thus within his mind.--

    SUDEVA _spake_.

    "Even as once I wont to see her--such is yonder woman's form,
    I my work have done, beholding--like the goddess world-adored,
    Like the full moon, darkly beauteous--with her fair and swelling breasts,
    Her, the queen, that with her brightness--makes each clime devoid of gloom,
    With her lotus eyes expanding--like Manmatha's queen divine;[111]
    Like the moonlight in its fulness--the desire of all the world.
    From Vidarbha's pleasant waters--her by cruel fate plucked up,
    [112]Like a lotus flower uprooted--with the mire and dirt around:
    Like the pallid night, when Rahu[113]--swallows up the darkened moon:
    For her husband wan with sorrow--like a gentle stream dried up;
    Like a pool, where droops the lotus--whence the affrighted birds have fled,
    By the elephant's proboscis--in its quiet depths disturbed.
    Tender, soft-limbed, in a palace--fit, of precious stones, to dwell.
    Like the lotus stem, uprooted--parched and withered by the sun.
    Fair in form, in soul as generous--worthy of all bliss, unbless'd,
    Like the young moon's slender crescent--in the heavens by dark clouds
        veiled.
    Widowed now of all love's pleasures--of her noble kin despoiled,
    Wretched, bearing life, her husband--in her hope again to see.
    To the unadorned, a husband[114]--is the chiefest ornament;
    Of her husband if forsaken--she in splendour is not bright.
    Difficult must be the trial--does king Nala, reft of her,
    Still retain his wretched body--nor with sorrow pine away?
    Her with her dark flowing tresses--with her long and lotus eyes,
    Worthy of all joy, thus joyless--as I see, my soul is wrung.
    To the furthest shore of sorrow--when will pass this beauteous queen?
    To her husband reunited--as the moon's bride[115] to the moon?
    Her recovering shall king Nala--to his happiness return,
    King, albeit despoiled of kingdom--he his realm shall reassume;
    In their age and virtues equal--equal in their noble race,
    He alone of her is worthy--worthy she alone of him.
    Me beseems it of that peerless--of that brave and prudent king,
    To console the loyal consort--pining for her husband's sight.
    Her will I address with comfort--with her moonlike glowing face.
    Her with woe once unacquainted--woful now and lost in thought."
    Thus when he had gazed and noted--all her marks, her features well,
    To the daughter of king Bhima--thus the sage Sudeva spake:
    "I am named Sudeva, lady--I, thy brother's chosen friend,
    By king Bhima's royal mandate--hither come in search of thee.
    Well thy sire, thy royal mother--well thy noble brethren fare,
    And well fare those little infants--well and happy are they both.
    For thy sake thy countless kindred--sit as though of sense bereft:
    Seeking thee a hundred Brahmins--now are wandering o'er the earth."
    She no sooner knew Sudeva--Damayanti, of her kin,
    Many a question asked in order--and of every friend beloved.
    And the daughter of Vidarbha--freely wept, so sudden thus
    On Sudeva, best of Brahmins--gazing, on her brother's friend.
    Her beheld the young Sunanda--weeping, wasted with distress,
    As she thus her secret converse--with the wise Sudeva held.
    Thus she spake unto her mother--"Lo, how fast our handmaid weeps,
    Since her meeting with the Brahmin--who she is, thou now may'st know."
    Forth the king of Chedi's mother--from the inner chamber went,
    And she passed where with the Brahmin--that mysterious woman stood.
    Them the mother queen Sudeva--bade before her presence stand;
    And she asked, "Whose wife, whose daughter--may this noble stranger be?
    From her kindred how dissevered--from her husband, the soft-eyed?
    Is she known to thee, O Brahmin--canst thou tell from whence she came?
    This I fain would hear, and clearly--all her strange and wonderous tale.
    Tell me all that hath befallen--to this heaven-formed, plainly tell."
    Best of Brahmins, thus Sudeva--by the mother queen addressed,
    All the truth of Damayanti--sitting at his ease, declared.




BOOK XVII.


    "In Vidarbha the just monarch--Bhima, in his glory dwells.
    Of that king is she the daughter--Damayanti is her name;
    And the raja of Nishadha--Nala, Virasena's son,
    Of that king is she the consort--Punyasloka named, the Wise.
    Him in play his brother worsted--spoiled of realm the king of earth:
    He set forth with Damayanti--whither is unknown of men.
    For the sake of Damayanti--wander we about the earth;
    Till I found yon noble woman--in the palace of your son.
    Like to her of mortal women--is there none, her beauty's peer;
    In the midst, between her eyebrows--from her birth a lovely mole,
    Dark was seen, and like a lotus--that hath vanished from my sight,
    Covered over with defilement--like the moon behind a cloud.
    This soft mark of perfect beauty--fashioned thus by Brahma's self,
    As at change the moon's thin crescent--only dim and faintly gleams.
    Yet her beauty is not faded--clouded o'er with toil and mire
    Though she be, it shines apparent, like the native unwrought gold.
    With that beauteous form yon woman--gifted with that lovely mole,
    Instant knew I for the Princess--as the heat betrays the fire."

    VRIHADASVA _spake_.

    To Sudeva as she listened--uttering thus his strange discourse:
    All the dust that mole concealing--young Sunanda washed away.
    By the obscuring dust unclouded--shining out that mole appeared;
    On the brow of Damayanti--like the unclouded moon in heaven.
    Gazing on that mole, Sunanda--and the mother of the king,
    Wept as fondly they embraced her--and an instant silent stood.
    Then her tears awhile suppressing--thus the royal mother spake:
    "Thou art mine own sister's daughter--by that beauteous mole made known;
    I, Oh beauteous, and thy mother--of that lofty-minded king,
    Are the daughters, king Sudaman--he that in Dasarna[116] reigns;
    She was wedded to king Bhima--and to Viravahu I.
    In my fathers home, Dasarna--once I saw thee, newly born.
    As to me thy father's lineage--is akin, so mine to thee;
    Whatsoe'er my power commandeth--Damayanti, all is thine."
      To the queen did Damayanti--in the gladness of her heart,
    Having bowed in courteous homage--to her mother's sister, speak:
    "While unknown I might continue--gladly dwelt I here with thee;
    Every want supplied on th' instant--guarded by thy gentle care.
    Yet than even this pleasant dwelling--a more pleasant may there be;
    Long a banished woman, mother!--give me leave from hence to part,
    Thither where my infant children--dwell my tender little ones,
    Orphaned of their sire, in sorrow--orphaned, ah, how long of me!
    If thou yet wilt grant a favour--o'er all other favours dear,
    To Vidarbha would I journey--quick the palanquin command."
    "Be it so," her mother's sister--joyful, instant made reply.
    Guarded by a mighty army--with th' approval of her son,
    Sent the queen, that happy lady--in a palanquin, by men
    Borne aloft, and well provided--with all raiment, drink, and food.
      Thus the princess to Vidarbha--after brief delay returned.
    Her her whole assembled kindred--welcomed home with pride and joy,
    All in health she found her kinsmen-and that lovely infant pair,
    With her mother, with her father--and her sister troop of friends.
    To the gods she paid her worship--to the Brahmins in her joy;
    So the queenly Damayanti--all in noblest guise performed.
    And her royal sire Sudeva--with the thousand kine made glad,
    Joyous to behold his daughter,--with a village and much wealth.
    There, when in her father's palace--she the quiet night had passed,
    In these words the noble lady--to her mother gan to speak:
    "If in life thou would'st preserve me--mother, hear the truth I speak;
    Home to bring the hero Nala--be it now thy chiefest toil."
      Thus addressed by Damayanti--very sorrowful the queen
    Clouded all her face with weeping--not a word in answer spake.
    But the princess, thus afflicted--when the female train beheld,
    "Woe! oh woe!" they shrieked together--all in pitying sadness wept.
      To the mighty raja Bhima--did the queen that speech relate.
    "'Damayanti, Lo thy daughter--for her husband sits and mourns.'
    Breaking through all bashful silence--thus, oh king, to me she spake:
    'Be it now thy servants' business--to find out the king of men.'"
    Urged by her the king his Brahmins--to his will obedient all,
    Sent around to every region--"Be your care the king to find."
    Then those Brahmins at the mandate--of Vidarbha's royal lord,
    First drew near to Damayanti--"Lo, now set we forth," they said.
    Then to them spake Bhima's daughter--"In all realms be this your speech,
    Wheresoever men assemble--this repeat again, again:
    Whither went'st thou then, oh gamester!--half my garment severing off,
    Leaving me within the forest--all forsaken, thy beloved.
    Even as thou commandedst, sits she--sadly waiting thy return.
    Parched with sorrow sits that woman--in her scant half garment glad.
    Oh to her thus ever weeping--in the extreme of her distress,
    Grant thy pity, noble hero--answer to her earnest prayer.
    Be this also said, to move him--to compassionate my state,
    (By the wind within the forest--fanned, intensely burns the fire).[117]
    Ever by her consort cherished--and sustained the wife should be.
    Why hast thou forgot that maxim--thou in every duty skilled.
    Thou wert ever called the generous--thou the gentle and the wise.
    Art thou now estranged from pity--through my sad injurious fate.
    Prince of men, O grant thy pity--grant it, lord of men, to me;
    'Mercy is the chief of duties,'--oft from thine own lips I've heard.
    Thus as ye are ever speaking--should there any one reply,
    Mark him well, lest he be Nala--who he is, and where he dwells.
    He who to this speech hath listened--and hath thus his answer made,
    Be his words, O best of Brahmins--treasured and brought home to me,
    Lest he haply should discover--that by my command ye speak,
    That again ye may approach him--do ye this without delay.
    Whether he be of the wealthy--whether of the poor he be;
    Be he covetous of riches--learn ye all he would desire."
    Thus addressed, went forth the Brahmins--to the realms on every side,
    Seeking out the royal Nala--in his dark concealed distress.
    They through royal cities, hamlets--pastoral dwellings, hermits' cells,
    Nala every-where went seeking--yet those Brahmins found him not.
    All in every part went speaking--in the language they were taught;
    In the words of Damayanti--spake they in the ears of men.




BOOK XVIII.


    Long the time that passed, a Brahmin--wise Parnada was his name,
    Home returning to the city--thus to Bhima's daughter spake:
    "Damayanti! royal Nala--as I sought Nishadha's king,
    Came I to Ayodhya's city--the Bhangasuri's abode.
    Stood before me, eager listening--to the words thou bad'st us speak,
    He, the prosperous Rituparna--all excelling! such his name.
    Thus as spake I, answered nothing--Rituparna, king of men;
    Nor of all that full assemblage--more than once addressed by me.
    By the king dismissed, when sate I--in a solitary place,
    One of Rituparna's household--Vahuca, his name, drew near,
    Charioteer of that great raja--with short arms and all deformed,
    Skilled to drive the rapid chariot--skilled the viands to prepare.
    He, when much he'd groaned in anguish--and had wept again, again,
    First his courteous salutation--made, then spake in words like these:
    Even in the extreme of misery--noble women still preserve,
    Over their ownselves the mastery--by their virtues winning heaven;
    Of their faithless lords abandoned--anger feel not even then.
    In the breastplate of their virtue--noble women live unharmed.
    By the wretched, by the senseless--by the lost to every joy,
    She by such a lord forsaken--yet to anger will not yield.
    Against him his sustenance seeking--of his robe by birds despoiled,
    Him consumed with utmost misery--still no wrath the dark-hued feels;
    Treated well, or ill entreated--when her husband she beholds,
    Spoiled of bliss, bereft of kingdom--famine-wasted, worn with woe.
    Having heard the stranger's language--hither hasted I to come.
    Thou hast heard, be thine the judgment--to the king relate thou all."
    To Parnada having listened--with her eyes o'erflowed with tears,
    Secretly went Damayanti--and her mother thus addressed:
    "Let not what I speak to Bhima--O my mother, be made known--
    In thy presence to Sudeva--best of Brahmins, I would speak.
    Let not this my secret counsel--to king Bhima be disclosed;
    This the object we must compass--if thy daughter thou wouldst please,
    As myself was to my kindred--swiftly by Sudeva brought,
    With the same good fortune swiftly--may Sudeva part from hence,
    Home to bring the royal Nala--mother, to Ayodhya's town."
      Resting from his toil, Parnada--of the Brahmin race the best,
    Did the daughter of Vidarbha--honour, and with wealth reward.
    "Brahmin! home if come my Nala--richer guerdon will I give;
    Much hast thou achieved, and wisely--so as none but thou has done.
    That again with my lost husband--noblest Brahmin, I may meet."
    Thus addressed, his grateful homage--and his benedictions paid,
    Having thus achieved his mission--home the wise Parnada went.
      Then accosting good Sudeva--Damayanti thus began,
    And before her mother's presence--in her pain and grief she spake:
    "Go, Sudeva, to the city--where Ayodhya's raja dwells,
    Speak thou thus to Rituparna--Come, as of thine own accord.
    Once again her Swayembara--does king Bhima's daughter hold;
    Damayanti, thither hasten--all the kings and sons of kings;
    Closely now the time is reckoned--when to-morrow's dawn appears;
    If that thou would'st win the Princess--speed thou, tamer of thy foes.
    When the sun is in his rising--she a second lord will choose:
    Whether lives or is not living--royal Nala, no one knows."
    Thus, as he received his mission--hastening to the king, he spake,
    To the royal Rituparna--spake Sudeva, in these words.




BOOK XIX.


    Hearing thus Sudeva's language--Rituparna, king of men
    With a gentle voice and blandly--thus to Vahuca began.
    "Where the princess Damayanti--doth her Swayembara hold
    In one day to far Vidarbha--Vahuca, I fain would go."
    In these words the unknown Nala--by his royal lord addressed
    All his heart was torn with anguish--thus the lofty-minded thought--
    "Can she speak thus, Damayanti--thus with sorrow frantic act?
    Is't a stratagem thus subtly--for my sake devised and plann'd?
    To desire this deed unholy[118]--is that holy princess driven
    Wrong'd by me, her basest husband--miserable, mind-estranged!
    Fickle is the heart of woman--grievous too is my offence!
    Hence she thus might act ignobly--in her exile, reft of friends,
    Soul-disturbed by her great sorrow--in the excess of her despair.
    No! she could not thus have acted--she with noble offspring blest.
    Where the truth, and where the falsehood--setting forth, I best shall judge,
    I the will of Rituparna--for mine own sake, will obey."
    Thus within his mind revolving--Vahuca, his wretched mind,
    With his folded hands addressed he--Rituparna, king of men:
    "I thy mandate will accomplish--I will go, O king of men,
    In a single day, O raja--to Vidarbha's royal town."
    Vahuca of all the coursers--did a close inspection make
    Entering in the royal stable--by Bhangasuri's command.
    Ever urged by Rituparna--Vahuca, in horses skilled,
    Long within himself debating--which the fleetest steeds to choose,
    He approached four slender coursers--fit, and powerful for the road,
    Blending mighty strength with fleetness--high in courage and in blood;
    Free from all the well-known vices--broad of nostril--large of jaw;
    With the ten good marks distinguished[119]--born in Sindhu[120]--fleet as
        wind.
    As he gazed upon those coursers--spoke the king, almost in wrath:
    "Is then thus fulfilled our mandate?--think not to deceive us so.
    How will these my coursers bear us--slight in strength and slightly
        breathed--
    How can such a way be travelled--and so long, by steeds like these?"--

    VAHUCA _spake_.

    "Two on th' head, one on the forehead--two and two on either flank--
    Two, behold, the chest discloses--and upon the crupper one--
    These the horses to Vidharba--that will bear us, doubt not thou;
    Yet, if others thou preferest--speak, and I will yoke them straight."

    RITUPARNA _spake_.

    "In the knowledge thou of horses--Vahuca, hast matchless skill;
    Whichso'er thou think'st the fittest--harness thou without delay."

       *       *       *       *       *

    Then those four excelling horses--nobly bred--of courage high,
    In their harness to the chariot--did the skilful Nala yoke.--
    To the chariot yoked, as mounted--in his eager haste the king
    To the earth those best of horses--bowed their knees and stooped them down.
    Then the noblest of all heroes--Nala, with a soothing voice,
    Spake unto those horses, gifted--both with fleetness and with strength.
    Up the reins when he had gathered--he the charioteer bade mount,
    First, Varshneya, skilled in driving--at full speed then set he forth.
      Urged by Vahuca, those coursers--to the utmost of their speed,
    All at once in th' air sprung upward--as the driver to unseat.
    Then, as he beheld those horses--bearing him as fleet as wind,
    Did the monarch of Ayodhya--in his silent wonder sit.
    When the rattling of the chariot--when the guiding of the reins,
    When of Vahuca the science--saw he, thus Varshneya thought:
    "Is it Matali,[121] the chariot--of the king of heaven that drives?
    Lo, in Vahuca each virtue--of that godlike charioteer!
    Is it Salihotra skilful--in the race, the strength of steeds,
    That hath ta'en a human body--thus all-glorious to behold?
    Is't, or can it be, king Nala--conqueror of his foemen's realms?
    Is the lord of men before us?"--thus within himself he thought.
    "If the skill possessed by Nala--Vahuca possesseth too,
    Lo, of Vahuca the knowledge--and of Nala equal seems;
    And of Vahuca and Nala--thus alike the age should be.
    If 'tis not the noble Nala--it is one of equal skill.
    Mighty ones, disguised, are wandering--in the precincts of this earth.
    They, divine by inborn nature--but in earthly forms concealed.
    His deformity of body--that my judgment still confounds;
    Yet that proof alone is wanting--what shall then my judgment be?
    In their age they still are equal--though unlike that form misshaped,
    Nala gifted with all virtues--Vahuca I needs must deem."
    Thus the charioteer Varshneya--sate debating in his mind;
    Much, and much again he pondered--in the silence of his thought.
    But the royal Rituparna--Vahuca's surpassing skill,
    With the charioteer Varshneya--sate admiring, and rejoiced.
    In the guiding of the coursers--his attentive hand he watched,
    Wondered at his skill, consummate--in consummate joy himself.




BOOK XX.


    Over rivers, over mountains--through the forests, over lakes,
    Fleetly passed they, rapid gliding--like a bird along the air.
    As the chariot swiftly travelled--lo, Bhangasuri the king
    Saw his upper garment fallen--from the lofty chariot seat;
    Though in urgent haste, no sooner--he his fallen mantle saw,
    Than the king exclaimed to Nala--"Pause, and let us take it up:
    Check, an instant, mighty-minded!--check thy fiery-footed steeds,
    While Varshneya, swift dismounting--bears me back my fallen robe."
    Nala answered, "Far behind us--doth thy fallen garment lie;
    Ten miles,[122] lo, it lies behind us--turn we not, to gain it, back."
    Answered thus by noble Nala--then Bhangasuri the king,
    Bowed with fruit, within the forest--saw a tall Vibhitak[123] tree:
    Gazing on that tree, the raja--spake to Vahuca in haste,
    "Now, O charioteer, in numbers, thou shalt see my passing skill.
    Each one knows not every science--none there is that all things knows:
    Perfect skill in every knowledge--in one mind there may not be.
    On yon tree are leaves how many?--Vahuca, how many fruit?
    Say, how many are there fallen?--one above a hundred, there.
    One leaf is there 'bove a hundred--and one fruit, O Vahuca!
    And of leaves are five ten millions[124]--hanging on those branches two.
    Those two branches if thou gather--and the twigs that on them grow,
    On those two are fruits two thousand--and a hundred, less by five."
    Then, when he had check'd the chariot--answered Vahuca the king,
    "What thou speakest, to mine eyesight--all invisible appears;
    Visible I'll make it, counting--on yon boughs the leaves and fruit:
    Then, when we have strictly numbered--I mistrust mine eyes no more.
    In thy presence, king, I'll number--yonder tall Vibhitak-tree.
    Whether it may be, or may not--this not done, I cannot know.
    I will number, thou beholding--all its fruits, O king of men,
    But an instant let Varshneya--hold the bridles of the steeds."
    To the charioteer the raja--answered, "Time is none to stay."
    Vahuca replied, all eager--his own purpose to fulfil,
    "Either stay thou here an instant--or go onward in thy speed,
    With the charioteer Varshneya--go, for straight the road before."
    Answered him king Rituparna--with a bland and soothing voice:
    "Charioteer! on earth thine equal--Vahuca, there may not be;
    By thy guidance, skilled in horses!--to Vidarbha I would go:
    I in thee have placed reliance--interrupt not then our course:
    Willingly will I obey thee--Vahuca, in what thou ask'st,
    If this day we reach Vidarbha--ere the sun hath sunk in night."
    Vahuca replied, "No sooner--have I numbered yonder fruit,
    To Vidarbha will I hasten--grant me then my prayer, O king."
    Then the raja, all reluctant--"Stay then, and begin to count;
    Of one branch one part, O blameless--from the tall Vibhitak tree,
    Man of truth, begin to number--and make glad thine inmost heart."
    From the chariot quick alighting--Nala tore the branch away.
    Then, his soul possess'd with wonder--to the raja thus he said;
    "Having counted, an thou sawest--even so many fruits there are,
    Marvellous thy power, O monarch--by mine eyes beheld and proved,
    Of that wonder-working science--fain the secret would I hear."
    Then the raja spake in answer--eager to pursue his way,
    "I of dice possess the science--and in numbers thus am skilled."
    Vahuca replied; "That science--if to me thou wilt impart,
    In return, O king, receive thou--my surpassing skill in steeds."
    Then the raja Rituparna--by his pressing need induced,
    Eager for that skill in horses--"Be it so," thus 'gan to say;
    "Well, O Vahuca, thou speakest--thou my skill in dice receive,
    And of steeds thy wondrous knowledge--be to me a meet return."
    Rituparna, all his science--saying this, to Nala gave.
    Soon as he in dice grew skilful--Kali from his body passed:
    He Karkotaka's foul poison--vomiting from out his mouth,
    Went from forth his body Kali[125]--tortured by that fiery curse.
    Nala, wasted by that conflict--came not instant to himself,
    But, released from that dread venom--Kali his own form resumed:
    And Nishadha's monarch, Nala--fain would curse him in his ire.
    Him addressed the fearful Kali--trembling, and with folded hands;
