mystic raptures: its eye is fixed within, or, if not within, only upon
God. It is sweet rather than strong: more meditative than active: a
faint fragrance exhales from it, but it does not forget itself to
grapple with wrong, or descend upon the arena of human woes and
oppressions, full of the heat of battle, or, with a careless heroism,
spend itself to the last for the kingdom of God. I do not deny the
reality and the sweetness of this type of goodness; but it is not the
only type, and much less the type produced by the contagion of Christ
upon a strong nature and an eager vitality. I have said that the
abundant physical gift of life may carry with it a certain temptation to
an unsympathizing self-sufficiency. It is difficult not to be proud of
an untiring energy, and faculties that are always abreast of the demands
made upon them, and an immunity from pain and languor which is like a
double portion of strength. But what if all these things are only a
larger gift to lay upon the altar of humanity? What if strength be used
only to follow with swifter stride in the self-denying footsteps of
Christ? What if the sense of joyous energy only fortifies the soul
against disappointment, and makes light of hindrances, and enables
patience to have her perfect work? We envy the strong because we think
they can do more than we, and enjoy more than we--in a word, because
they live more than we. Let us envy them, if at all, because they have
more than we to give to God and men, and answer with a fuller and more
eager impulse to the breath of inspiration, and can throw a less
infinitesimal weight into the scale of the Divine purpose.

Such lives, believe me, are eminently happy. They have their full
measure of sensibility, and therefore their full share of trouble too.
What sorrows come to all, do not spare them; and it is the quickly
throbbing heart that is the tenderest. They cannot take life with dull
acquiescence, being neither keenly glad nor greatly sorry: to them, its
brightness is like opening Paradise; its gloom, a very valley of the
Shadow of Death. And as they emerge out of the narrowness of their
personal lot, to go down into the ringing battle of the world, they
encounter blows and bruises which more selfish lives are able to avoid;
they lay bare their hearts to sorrows not their own, and are stricken
with the disappointments of mankind. Was it not a part of the secret of
Christ that his affections were so wide, his sympathies so keen, his
identification with humanity so complete, that sin not his own cast a
shadow upon him almost like remorse, and all his tears were for others'
sorrows? So is it with his strong and eager disciples: they lay their
breast against the thorn, and would not have it otherwise. And yet they
are happy. If it be happiness to have life filled to the brim with
occupation that never tires and always brings with it its own reward: to
be conscious of the easy movement of power, the strong putting forth of
faculty: to be secure against disappointment in reliance upon the
righteous purposes of God, which must prevail at last: to have a sure
escape from personal grief in the largeness of human sympathy and the
vista of universal hope: to feel, as life wears away, no disenchantment
of purpose, no stealing languor upon the will, no freezing chill upon
the heart, but only a passionate desire to live to the last in the full
glow of service, and an absolute completeness of self-renunciation--then
are these strong souls happy. They cannot but find life good, because
everywhere in it they feel the touch of God's hand; they see the skirt
of Christ's garment as he goes before them in the way.

"He that believeth on me, out of him shall flow rivers of living water."
The privilege of giving life is not Christ's alone, though still his in
the first instance and the greatest degree: it is shared by all who are
truly one with him in spirit and in work. And I am not sure that a large
part of the value to humanity of these bright and strong souls does not
lie in the inspiration which goes out of them. The weaker ones are
always apt to take life in too low a key. They are easily daunted: they
resign themselves, as they say, to the inevitable: they have too keen a
sense of evils to be overborne and difficulties to be confronted: they
learn to distrust, if not to smile at, the ideal, to call acquiescence
common sense, and cowardice prudence. And upon them the presence of a
strong soul, with its carelessness of toil, its contempt of danger, its
faith in the better things that shall be, its trust in God, its generous
self-abandonment to men, passes like a breath of inspiration, bringing
