argued that wine and opium are unlawful, though not forbidden by name. The
Wahhabis would extend the prohibition to the use of tobacco.

From cases such as these, many jurisconsults hold that the Mujtahidin of
the earliest age established this fourth foundation of the faith which they
call Qias. It is also called I'tibar-ul-Amsal, or "imitation of an
example." The idea is taken from the verse: "Profit by this example, ye who
are men of insight" (Sura lix. 2). There are strict rules laid down which
regulate Qias, of which the most important is, that in all cases it must be
based on the Quran, the Sunnat, and the Ijma'. In fact, the fundamental
idea of Islam {28} is that a perfect law has been given, even unto details,
of social and political life. The teaching of Muhammad contains the
solution of every difficulty that can arise. Every law not provided by the
Prophet must be deduced analogically. This produces uniformity after a
fashion, but only because intellectual activity in higher pursuits ceases
and moral stagnation follows. Thus all who come within the range of this
system are bound down to political servitude. Whatever in feeling or
conviction goes beyond the limits of an out-worn set of laws is swept away.
There is a wonderful family likeness in the decay of all Musalman States,
which seems to point to a common cause. All first principles are contained
in the Quran and the Sunnat; all that does not coincide with them must be
wrong. They are above all criticism.

Qias, then, affords no hope of enlightened progress, removes no fetter of
the past, for in it there must be no divergence in principle from a
legislation imperfect in its relation to modern life and stationary in its
essence.[32] In the Nihayat-ul-Murad it is written:--"We are shut up to
following the four Imams." In the Tafsir-i-Ahmadi we read:--"To follow any
other than the four Imams is unlawful." An objector may say that such
respect is like the reverence the heathen pay to their ancestors. To this
an answer is given in the preface to the Tarjuma-i-Sharh-i-Waqayah. The
writer there says that it is nothing of the kind. "The Mujtahidin are not
the source of the orders of the Law, but they are the medium by which we
obtain the Law. Thus Imam Abu Hanifa said: 'We select first from the Quran,
then from the Traditions, then from the decrees of the Companions; we act
on what the Companions agreed upon; where they doubt, we doubt.' The
Commentator Jelal-ud-din Mahli says, 'The common people and others who have
{29} not reached the rank of a Mujtahid, must follow one of the four
Imams.' Then when he enters one Mazhab (sect) he must not change. Again, it
may be objected that God gave no order about the appointment of four Imams.
Now, it is recorded in a Tradition that the Prophet said, 'Follow the way
of the great company; whosoever departs from it will enter hell.' The
Followers of the Imams are a great company." It is moreover the unanimous
opinion, the "Ijma'-i-Ummat," that the Imams rightly occupy the position
accorded to them. It is a great blessing, as we read in the
Tafsir-i-Ahmadi: "It is of the grace of God, that we are shut up to these
four Imams. God approves of this, and into this matter proofs and
explanations do not enter." Should any one further object that, in the days
of the Prophet, there were no Mujtahidin, that each man acted on a "saying"
as he heard it, that he did not confine his belief or conduct to the
deductions made by some "appointed Companion," he may be answered
thus:--"For a long time after the death of the Prophet many Companions were
alive, and consequently the Traditions then current were trustworthy; but
now it is not so, hence the need for the Imams and their systems."

These four foundations,--the QURAN, the SUNNAT, IJMA' and QIAS--form in
orthodox Muslim opinion and belief a perfect basis of a perfect religion
and polity. They secure the permanence of the system, but they repress an
intelligent growth. The bearing of all this on modern politics is very
plain. Take again the case of Turkey. The constitution of the Government is
theocratic. The germs of freedom are wanting there as they have never been
wanting in any other country in Europe. The ruling power desires no change;
originality of thought, independence of judgment is repressed. Nothing good
has the Turk ever done for the world.[33] This rule has been one continued
display of brute {30} force unrelieved by any of the reflected glory which
shone for a while in Cordova and in Baghdad. No nation can possibly
progress, the foundations of whose legal and theocratic system are what has
been described in this chapter. When brought into diplomatic and commercial
intercourse with States possessing the energy and vigour of a national life
and liberal constitution, Muslim kingdoms must, in the long run, fail and
pass away. It has been well said that "Spain is the only instance of a
country once thoroughly infused with Roman civilisation which has been
actually severed from the empire; and even then the severance, though of
long duration, was but partial and temporary. After a struggle of nearly
eight centuries, the higher form of social organisation triumphed over the
lower and the usurping power of Islam was expelled." So it ought to be, and
so indeed it must ever be, for despotism must give way to freedom; the life
latent in the subject Christian communities must sooner or later cast off
the yoke of a barbarian rule, which even at its best is petrified and so is
incapable of progress. However low a Christian community may have fallen,
there is always the possibility of its rising again. A lofty ideal is
placed before it. All its most cherished beliefs point forward and upward.
In Islam there is no regenerative power. Its golden age was in the past.
When the work of conquest is done, when a Muhammadan nation has to live by
industry, intelligence and thrift, it always miserably fails.

In this chapter which must now draw to a close, I have tried to prove from
authentic and authoritative sources that {31} the Quran alone is to no
Muslim the sole guide of life. The fetters of a dogmatic system fasten
alike around the individual and the community. Islam is sterile, it gives
no new birth to the spirit of a man, leads him not in search of new forms
of truth, and so it can give no real life, no lasting vitality to a
nation.[34]

{32}

    NOTE TO CHAPTER I.

    IJTIHAD.

    Questions connected with Ijtihad are so important in Islam, that I
    think it well to give in the form of a note a fuller and more technical
    account of it, than I could do in the Chapter just concluded. This
    account which I shall now give is that of a learned Musalman, and is,
    therefore, of the highest value. It consists of extracts from an
    article in the Journal Asiatique, Quatrieme Serie, tome, 15, on "Le
    Marche et les Progres de la Jurisprudence parmi les Sectes orthodoxes
    Musalmanes" by Mirza Kazim Beg, Professor in the University of St.
    Petersburg. It entirely supports all that has been said of the rigid
    character of Muhammadan Law, and of the immobility of systems founded
    thereon.

    "Orthodox Musalmans admit the following propositions as axioms.

    1. God the only legislator has shown the way of felicity to the people
    whom He has chosen, and in order to enable them to walk in that way He
    has shown to them the precepts which are found, partly in the eternal
    Quran, and partly in the sayings of the Prophet transmitted to
    posterity by the Companions and preserved in the Sunnat. That way is
    called the "Shari'at." The rules thereof are called Ahkam.

    2. The Quran and the Sunnat, which since their manifestation are the
    primitive sources of the orders of the Law, form two branches of study,
    _viz._, Ilm-i-Tafsir, or the interpretation of the Quran and
    Ilm-i-Hadis, or the study of Tradition.

    3. All the orders of the Law have regard either to the actions (Din),
    or to the belief (Iman) of the Mukallifs.[35]

    4. As the Quran and the Sunnat are the principal sources from whence
    the precepts of the Shari'at have been drawn, so the rules recognized
    as the principal elements of actual jurisprudence are the subject of
    Ilm-i-Fiqh, or the science of Law.

    Fiqh in its root signifies conception, comprehension. Thus Muhammad
    prayed for Ibn Mas'ud: "May God make him {33} comprehend (Faqqihahu),
    and make him know the interpretation of the Quran." Muhammad in his
    quality of Judge and chief of the Believers decided, without appeal or
    contradiction, all the affairs of the people. His sayings served as a
    guide to the Companions. After the death of the Prophet the first
    Khalifs acted on the authority of the Traditions. Meanwhile the Quran
    and the Sunnat, the principal elements of religion and legislation,
    became little by little the subject of controversy. It was then that
    men applied themselves vigorously to the task of learning by heart the
    Quran and the Traditions, and then that jurisprudence became a separate
    science. No science had as yet been systematically taught, and the
    early Musalmans did not possess books which would serve for such
    teaching. A change soon, however, took place. In the year in which the
    great jurisconsult of Syria died (A.H. 80) N'iman bin Sabit, surnamed
    Abu Hanifa was born. He is the most celebrated of the founders of the
    schools of jurisprudence, a science which ranks first in all Muslim
    seats of learning. Until that time and for thirty years later the
    Mufassirs,[36] the Muhaddis,[37] and the Fuqiha,[38] had all their
    knowledge by heart, and those who possessed good memories were highly
    esteemed. Many of them knew by heart the whole Quran with the comments
    made on it by the Prophet and by the Companions; they also knew the
    Traditions and their explanations, and all the commands (Ahkam) which
    proceed from the Quran, and the Sunnat. Such men enjoyed the right of
    Mujtahidin. They transmitted their knowledge to their scholars orally.
    It was not till towards the middle of the second century A.H. that
    treatises on the different branches of the Law were written, after
    which six schools (Mazhabs) of jurisprudence were formed. The founders,
    all Imams of the first class, were Abu Hanifa, the Imam-i-A'zam or
    great Imam (A.H. 150),[39] Safian As-Sauri (A.H. 161), Malik (A.H.
    179), As-Shafa'i (A.H. 204), Hanbal (A.H. 241) and Imam Daud Az-Zahari
    (A.H. 270). The two sects founded by Sauri and Zahari became extinct in
    the eighth century of the Hijra. The other four still remain. These men
    venerated one another. The younger ones speak with great respect of the
    elder. Thus Shafa'i said:--"No one in the world was so well versed in
    jurisprudence as Abu Hanifa was, and he who has read neither his works,
    nor those of his disciples knows nothing of jurisprudence." Hanbal when
    sick wore a shirt which had belonged to Shafa'i, in order that he might
    be cured of his malady; but all this {34} did not prevent them starting
    schools of their own, for the right of Ijtihad is granted to those who
    are real Mujtahidin. There are three degrees of Ijtihad.

    1. Al-Ijtihad fi'l Shari': absolute independence in legislation

    2. Al-Ijtihad fi'l Mazhab: authority in the judicial systems founded by
    the Mujtahidin of the first class.

    3. Al-Ijtihad fi'l Masail: authority in cases which have not been
    decided by the authors of the four systems of jurisprudence.

    The first is called a complete and absolute authority, the second
    relative, the third special.

    THE FIRST DEGREE OF IJTIHAD.

    Absolute independence in legislation is the gift of God. He to whom it
    is given when seeking to discover the meaning of the Divine Law is not
    bound to follow any other teacher. He can use his own judgment. This
    gift was bestowed on the jurisconsults of the first, and to some in the
    second and third centuries. The Companions, however, who were closely
    connected with the Prophet, having transmitted immediately to their
    posterity the treasures of legislation, are looked upon as Mujtahidin
    of much higher authority than those of the second and third centuries.
    Thus Abu Hanifa says:--"That which comes to us from the Companions is
    on our head and eyes (_i.e._, to be received with respect): as to that
    which comes from the Tabi'in, they are men and we are men."

    Since the time of the Tabi'in this degree of Ijtihad has only been
    conferred on the six great Imams. Theoretically any Muslim can attain
    to this degree, but it is one of the principles of jurisprudence that
    the confirmation of this rank is dependent on many conditions, and so
    no one now gains the honour. These conditions are:--

    1. The knowledge of the Quran and all that is related to it; that is to
    say, a complete knowledge of Arabic literature, a profound acquaintance
    with the orders of the Quran and all their sub-divisions, their
    relationship to each other and their connection with the orders of the
    Sunnat. The candidate should know when, and why each verse of the Quran
    was written, he should have a perfect acquaintance with the literal
    meaning of the words, the speciality or generality of each clause, the
    abrogating and abrogated sentences. He should be able to make clear the
    meaning of the 'obscure' passages (Mutashabih), to discriminate between
    the literal and the allegorical, the universal and the particular.

    2. He must know the Quran by heart with all the Traditions and
    explanations. {35}

    3. He must have a perfect knowledge of the Traditions, or at least of
    three thousand of them.

    He must know their source, history, object and their connection with
    the laws of the Quran. He should know by heart the most important
    Traditions.

    4. A pious and austere life.

    5. A profound knowledge of all the sciences of the Law.

    Should any one _now_ aspire to such a degree another condition would be
    added, _viz_:--

    6. A complete knowledge of the four schools of jurisprudence.

    The obstacles, then, are almost insurmountable. On the one hand, there
    is the severity of the 'Ulama, which requires from the candidate things
    almost impossible; on the other, there is the attachment of the 'Ulama
    to their own Imams, for should such a man arise no one is bound now to
    listen to him. Imam Hanbal said:--"Draw your knowledge from whence the
    Imams drew theirs, and do not content yourself with following others
    for that is certainly blindness of sight". Thus the schools of the four
    Imams remain intact after a thousand years have passed, and so the
    'Ulama recognise since the time of these Imams no Mujtahid of the first
    degree. Ibn Hanbal was the last.

    The rights of the man who attained to this degree were very important.
    He was not bound to be a disciple of another, he was a mediator between
    the Law and his followers, for whom he established a system of
    legislation, without any one having the right to make any objection. He
    had the right to explain the Quran, the Sunnat and the Ijma' according
    as he understood them. He used the Prophet's words, whilst his
    disciples only used his. Should a disciple find some discrepancy
    between a decision of his own Imam and the Quran or Traditions, he must
    abide by the decision of the Imam. The Law does not permit him to
    interpret after his own fashion. When once the disciple has entered the
    sect of one Imam he cannot leave it and join another. He loses the
    right of private judgment, for only a Mujtahid of the first class can
    dispute the decision of one of the Imams. Theoretically such Mujtahidin
    may still arise; but, as we have already shown, practically they do
    not.

    THE SECOND DEGREE OF IJTIHAD.

    This degree has been granted to the immediate disciples of the great
    Imams who have elaborated the systems of their masters. They enjoyed
    the special consideration of the contemporary 'Ulama, and of their
    respective Imams who in some cases have allowed them {36} to retain
    their own opinion.' The most famous of these men are the two disciples
    of Abu Hanifa, Abu Yusuf and Muhammad bin al Hasan. In a secondary
    matter their opinion carries great weight. It is laid down as a rule
    that a Mufti may follow the unanimous opinion of these two even when it
    goes against that of Abu Hanifa.

    THE THIRD DEGREE OF IJTIHAD.

    This is the degree of special independence. The candidates for it
    should have a perfect knowledge of all the branches of jurisprudence
    according to the four schools of the Arabic language and literature.
    They can solve cases which come before them, giving reasons for their
    judgment, or decide on cases which have not been settled by previous
    Mujtahidin; but in either case their decisions must always be in
    absolute accordance with the opinions of the Mujtahidin of the first
    and second classes, and with the principles which guided them. Many of
    these men attained great celebrity during their lifetime, but to most
    of them this rank is not accorded till after their death. Since Imam
    Qazi Khan died (A.H. 592), no one has been recognised by the Sunnis as
    a Mujtahid even of the third class.

    There are three other inferior classes of jurists, called Muqallidin,
    or followers of the Mujtahidin; but all that the highest in rank
    amongst them can do is to explain obscure passages in the writings of
    the older jurisconsults. By some of the 'Ulama they are considered to
    be equal to the Mujtahidin of the third class. If there are several
    conflicting legal opinions on any point, they can select one opinion on
    which to base their decision. This a mere Qazi cannot do. In such a
    case he would have to refer to those men, or to their writings for
    guidance. They seem to have written commentaries on the legal systems
    without originating anything new. The author of the Hidayah, who lived
    at the end of the sixth century, was a Muqallid.

    Such is Mirza Kazim Beg's account. The whole article, of which I have
    only given the main points, is worthy of the closest study. It shows
    how "the system, as a whole, rejects experience as a guide to deeper
    insight or wider knowledge; tramples upon the teaching of the past;
    pays no heed to differences of climate, character, or history; but
    regards itself as a body of absolute truth, one jot or tittle of which
    cannot be rejected without incurring the everlasting wrath of God."[40]

{37}

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER II.

EXEGESIS OF THE QURAN AND THE TRADITIONS.

The following account of this branch of Muslim theology, technically called
'Ilm-i-Usul, may be introduced by a few remarks on the nature of
inspiration according to Islam, though that is not strictly speaking a
portion of this study.

There are two terms used to express different degrees of inspiration, Wahi
and Ilham. Wahi is the term applied to the inspiration of the Quran, and
implies that the very words are the words of God. It is divided into Wahi
Zahir (external inspiration), and Wahi Batin (internal inspiration). The
whole book was prepared in heaven. Muhammad, instructed by Gabriel, is
simply the medium through which the revelation of Wahi Zahir reaches man.
The Wahi Quran, _i.e._, the highest form of inspiration, always came to the
ear of the Prophet through the instrumentality of Gabriel. In Muhammadan
theology, this is the special work of Gabriel. Thus in the Traditions it is
related that he appeared to Adam twelve times, to Enoch four, to Noah
fifty, to Abraham forty-two, to Moses four hundred, to Jesus ten times, to
Muhammad twenty-four thousand times.

Ilham means the inspiration given to a saint or to a prophet when he,
though rightly guided, delivers the subject matter out of his own mind, and
