
3. A skilful (commander) strikes a decisive blow, and stops.  He does
not dare (by continuing his operations) to assert and complete his
mastery.  He will strike the blow, but will be on his guard against
being vain or boastful or arrogant in consequence of it.  He strikes
it as a matter of necessity; he strikes it, but not from a wish for
mastery.

4. When things have attained their strong maturity they become old.
This may be said to be not in accordance with the Tao: and what is not
in accordance with it soon comes to an end.


31. 1. Now arms, however beautiful, are instruments of evil omen,
hateful, it may be said, to all creatures.  Therefore they who have
the Tao do not like to employ them.

2. The superior man ordinarily considers the left hand the most
honourable place, but in time of war the right hand.  Those sharp
weapons are instruments of evil omen, and not the instruments of the
superior man;--he uses them only on the compulsion of necessity.  Calm
and repose are what he prizes; victory (by force of arms) is to him
undesirable.  To consider this desirable would be to delight in the
slaughter of men; and he who delights in the slaughter of men cannot
get his will in the kingdom.

3. On occasions of festivity to be on the left hand is the prized
position; on occasions of mourning, the right hand.  The second in
command of the army has his place on the left; the general commanding
in chief has his on the right;--his place, that is, is assigned to him
as in the rites of mourning.  He who has killed multitudes of men
should weep for them with the bitterest grief; and the victor in
battle has his place (rightly) according to those rites.


32. 1. The Tao, considered as unchanging, has no name.

2. Though in its primordial simplicity it may be small, the whole
world dares not deal with (one embodying) it as a minister.  If a
feudal prince or the king could guard and hold it, all would
spontaneously submit themselves to him.

3. Heaven and Earth (under its guidance) unite together and send down
the sweet dew, which, without the directions of men, reaches equally
everywhere as of its own accord.

4. As soon as it proceeds to action, it has a name.  When it once has
that name, (men) can know to rest in it.  When they know to rest in
it, they can be free from all risk of failure and error.

5. The relation of the Tao to all the world is like that of the great
rivers and seas to the streams from the valleys.


33. 1. He who knows other men is discerning; he who knows himself is
intelligent.  He who overcomes others is strong; he who overcomes
himself is mighty.  He who is satisfied with his lot is rich; he who
goes on acting with energy has a (firm) will.

2. He who does not fail in the requirements of his position, continues
long; he who dies and yet does not perish, has longevity.


34. 1. All-pervading is the Great Tao!  It may be found on the left
hand and on the right.

2. All things depend on it for their production, which it gives to
them, not one refusing obedience to it.  When its work is
accomplished, it does not claim the name of having done it.  It
clothes all things as with a garment, and makes no assumption of being
their lord;--it may be named in the smallest things.  All things
return (to their root and disappear), and do not know that it is it
which presides over their doing so;--it may be named in the greatest
things.

3. Hence the sage is able (in the same way) to accomplish his great
achievements.  It is through his not making himself great that he can
accomplish them.


35. 1. To him who holds in his hands the Great Image (of the invisible
Tao), the whole world repairs.  Men resort to him, and receive no
hurt, but (find) rest, peace, and the feeling of ease.

2. Music and dainties will make the passing guest stop (for a time).
But though the Tao as it comes from the mouth, seems insipid and has
no flavour, though it seems not worth being looked at or listened to,
the use of it is inexhaustible.


36. 1. When one is about to take an inspiration, he is sure to make a
(previous) expiration; when he is going to weaken another, he will
first strengthen him; when he is going to overthrow another, he will
first have raised him up; when he is going to despoil another, he will
first have made gifts to him:--this is called 'Hiding the light (of
his procedure).'

2. The soft overcomes the hard; and the weak the strong.

3. Fishes should not be taken from the deep; instruments for the
profit of a state should not be shown to the people.


37. 1. The Tao in its regular course does nothing (for the sake of
doing it), and so there is nothing which it does not do.

2. If princes and kings were able to maintain it, all things would of
themselves be transformed by them.

3. If this transformation became to me an object of desire, I would
express the desire by the nameless simplicity.

   Simplicity without a name
   Is free from all external aim.
   With no desire, at rest and still,
   All things go right as of their will.





PART II.


38. 1. (Those who) possessed in highest degree the attributes (of the
Tao) did not (seek) to show them, and therefore they possessed them
(in fullest measure).  (Those who) possessed in a lower degree those
attributes (sought how) not to lose them, and therefore they did not
possess them (in fullest measure).

2. (Those who) possessed in the highest degree those attributes did
nothing (with a purpose), and had no need to do anything.  (Those who)
possessed them in a lower degree were (always) doing, and had need to
be so doing.

3. (Those who) possessed the highest benevolence were (always seeking)
to carry it out, and had no need to be doing so.  (Those who)
possessed the highest righteousness were (always seeking) to carry it
out, and had need to be so doing.

4. (Those who) possessed the highest (sense of) propriety were (always
seeking) to show it, and when men did not respond to it, they bared
the arm and marched up to them.

5. Thus it was that when the Tao was lost, its attributes appeared;
when its attributes were lost, benevolence appeared; when benevolence
was lost, righteousness appeared; and when righteousness was lost, the
proprieties appeared.

6. Now propriety is the attenuated form of leal-heartedness and good
faith, and is also the commencement of disorder; swift apprehension is
(only) a flower of the Tao, and is the beginning of stupidity.

7. Thus it is that the Great man abides by what is solid, and eschews
what is flimsy; dwells with the fruit and not with the flower.  It is
thus that he puts away the one and makes choice of the other.


39. 1. The things which from of old have got the One (the Tao) are--

   Heaven which by it is bright and pure;
   Earth rendered thereby firm and sure;
   Spirits with powers by it supplied;
   Valleys kept full throughout their void
   All creatures which through it do live
   Princes and kings who from it get
   The model which to all they give.

All these are the results of the One (Tao).

2.

   If heaven were not thus pure, it soon would rend;
   If earth were not thus sure, 'twould break and bend;
   Without these powers, the spirits soon would fail;
   If not so filled, the drought would parch each vale;
   Without that life, creatures would pass away;
   Princes and kings, without that moral sway,
   However grand and high, would all decay.

3. Thus it is that dignity finds its (firm) root in its (previous)
meanness, and what is lofty finds its stability in the lowness (from
which it rises).  Hence princes and kings call themselves 'Orphans,'
'Men of small virtue,' and as 'Carriages without a nave.'  Is not this
