stating that the ecclesiastical modes have, for melodic purposes (which
is all that we are considering), advantages over the modern scale, by
which they are so surpassed in harmonic opportunities. Even such a
thoroughgoing admirer of the modern system as Sir Hubert Parry writes on
this subject, that it 'is now quite obvious that for melodic purposes
such modes as the Doric and Phrygian were infinitely (_sic_) preferable
to the Ionic,' i.e. to our modern major keys[11]. And it will be evident
to every one how much music has of late years sought its charm in modal
forms, under the guise of national character.

The second objection is their free rhythm. They are not written in barred
time, and cannot without injury be reduced to it.

As this question affects also other classes of hymns, I will here say all
that I have to say, or have space to say, about the rhythm of hymn-tunes;
confining my remarks generally to the proper dignified rhythms.

In all modern musical grammars it is stated that there are virtually only
two kinds of time. The time-beat goes either by twos or some multiple of
two, or by threes or some multiple of three, and the accent recurs at
regular intervals of time, and is marked by dividing off the music into
bars of equal length. Nothing is more important for a beginner to learn,
and yet from the point of view of rhythm nothing could be more
inadequate. _Rhythm is infinite._ These regular times are no doubt the
most important fundamental entities of it, and may even lie
undiscoverably at the root of all varieties of rhythm whatsoever, and
further they may be the only possible or permissible rhythms for a modern
composer to use, but yet the absolute dominion which they now enjoy over
all music lies rather in their practical necessity and convenience (since
it is only by attending to them that the elaboration of modern harmonic
music is possible), than in the undesirability (in itself) or unmusical
character of melody which ignores them. In the matter of hymn-melodies an
unbarred rhythm has very decided advantages over a barred rhythm. In the
former the melody has its own way, and dances at liberty with the voice
and sense; in barred time it has its accents squared out beforehand, and
makes steadily for its predetermined beat, plumping down, as one may say,
on the first note of every bar whether it will or no. Sing to any one a
Plain-song melody, _Ad coenam Agni_ for instance, once or twice, and then
Croft's 148th Psalm[12]. Croft will be undeniably fine and impressive,
but he provokes a smile: his tune is like a diagram beside a flower.

Now in this matter of rhythm our hymn-book compilers, since the
seventeenth century, have done us a vast injury. They have reduced all
hymns to the common times. Their procedure was, I suppose, dictated by
some argument such as this: 'The people must have what they can
understand: they only understand the simple two and three time: _ergo_ we
must reduce all the tunes to these measures.' Or again, 'It will be
easier for them to have all the tunes as much alike as possible:
therefore let us make them all alike, and write them all in equal
minims.'

Both these ideas are absolutely wrong. A hymn-tune, which they hastily
assume to be the commonest and lowest form of music, actually possesses
liberties coveted by other music[13]. It is a short melody, committed to
memory, and frequently repeated: there is no reason why it should submit
to any of the time-conveniences of orchestral music: there is no reason
why its rhythm should not be completely free; nor is there any _a priori_
necessity why any one tune should be exactly like another in rhythm. It
will be learned by the ear (most often in childhood), be known and loved
for its own sake, and blended in the heart with the words which interpret
it: and this advantage was instinctively felt by those of our early
church composers who, already understanding something of the value of
barred music, yet deliberately avoided cramping the rhythms of their
hymn-tunes by too great subservience to it[14]. One of the first duties
therefore which we owe to hymn-melodies is the restoration of their free
and original rhythms, keeping them as varied as possible: the Plain-song
melodies must be left unbarred and be taught as free rhythms, and all
other fine tunes which are worth using should be preserved in their
original rhythm; because free rhythm is better, and its variety is good,
and because the attraction of a hymn-melody lies in its individual
character and expression, and not at all in its time-likeness to other
tunes. This last idea has been a chief cause in the degradation of our
hymns.

I may conclude then that the best of these simpler Plain-song tunes are
very fit for congregational use. They should be offered as pure melody in
free rhythm and sung in unison: their accompaniment must not be entrusted
to a modern grammarian. It is well also to use most of them in their
English form, the _Old Sarum Use_ as it is called; which happily
preserves to us a national tradition, in the opinion of some experts
older and more correct than any known on the continent; and if the
differences in our English version are not due to purity of tradition,
they will have another and almost greater interest, as venerable records
of the genius of our national taste. These Plain-song tunes have probably
a long future before them; since, apart from their merit, they are
indissolubly associated with the most ancient Latin hymns, some of which
are the very best hymns of the Church.

The next class of tunes[15] is that of the Reformation hymns, English,
French, and German, dating from about 1550 to some way on in the
seventeenth century. The chief English group is known as _Sternhold and
Hopkins' Psalter_, which was mostly of eight-line tunes. This book was
virtually put together in Geneva about 1560, and antiquarians make much
of it. If stripped, however, of its stolen plumes and later additions it
is really an almost worthless affair, the true history of it being as
follows. A French musician named Louis Bourgeois, whom Calvin brought
with him to Geneva in 1541, turned out to be an extraordinary genius in
melody; he remained at Geneva about fifteen years, and in that time
compiled a Psalter of eighty-five tunes, almost all of which are of great
merit, and many of the very highest excellence. The splendour of his
work, which was merely appreciated as useful at the time, was soon
obscured, for immediately on his leaving Geneva, the French Psalter was
completed by inferior hands, whose work, being mixed in with his, lowered
the average of the whole book enormously, and Bourgeois' work was never
distinguished until, quite lately, the period of his office was
investigated and compared with the succeeding editions of his book. Now
the English refugees compiled their 'Sternhold and Hopkins' at Geneva, in
imitation of the French, during the time of Bourgeois' residence, and
took over a number of the French tunes; though they _mauled these most
unmercifully_ to bring them down to the measure of their doggerel psalms,
yet even after this barbarous treatment Bourgeois' spoilt tunes were
still far better than what they made for themselves, and sufficient not
only to float their book into credit, but to kindle the confused
enthusiasm of subsequent English antiquarians, whose blind leadership has
had some half-hearted following. But if these French tunes, and those
which are pieced in imitation of Bourgeois, be extracted from this
English Psalter, then, with one or two exceptions, there will remain
hardly anything of value[16].

To leave the English tunes for a moment and continue the subject, we
shall practically exhaust the French branch of this class by saying that
our duty by them is to use a great number of Bourgeois' tunes, _restoring
their original form_. They are masterpieces which have remained popular
on the continent from the first; thoroughly congenial to our national
taste, and the best that can be imagined for solemn congregational
singing of the kind which we might expect in England. The difficulty is
the same that beset the old original psalter-makers, i.e. to find words
to suit their varied measures. But this must be done[17]. These tunes in
dignity, solemnity, pathos, and melodic solidity leave nothing to desire.

The English eight-line tunes of Sternhold and Hopkins we may then, with
one or two exceptions, dismiss to neglect; but among the four-line
'common' tunes which gradually ousted them, there are about a dozen of
high merit: these being popular still at the present day require no
notice, except to 32 insist that they should be well harmonized in the
manner of their date, and generally have the long initials and finals of
all their lines observed. They are much finer than any one would guess
from their usual dull presentment. Their manner, as loved and praised by
Burns, is excellent, and there is no call to alter it[18].

Contemporary with this group there is a legacy of a dozen and more fine
tunes composed by Tallis and Orlando Gibbons, the neglect or treatment of
which is equally disgraceful to all concerned.

As for the German tunes of the Reformation, attempts to introduce the
German church-chorales into anything like general use in England have
never, so far as I know, been successful, owing, I suppose, to a
difference in the melodic sense of the two nations. But some few of them
are really popular, and more would be if they were properly presented
with suitable words; and it should not be a difficult task to provide
words even more suitable and kind than the original German, which seldom
observes an intelligent, dignified and consistent mood. These chorales
should be sung very slow indeed, and will admit of much accompaniment.
Bach's settings, when not too elaborate or of impossible compass in the
parts, may be well used where the choir is numerically strong. He has
made these chorales peculiarly his own, and, in accepting his
interpretation of them, we are only acquiescing in a universal judgement,
while we make an exception in favour of genius; for as a general rule
(which will of course apply to those chorales which we do not use in
Bach's version), all the music of this Reformation period must be
harmonized strictly in the vocal counterpoint which prevailed at the end
of the sixteenth century; since that is not only its proper musical
interpretation, but it is also the ecclesiastical style _par excellence_,
the field of which may reasonably be extended, but by no means
contracted. It is suitable both for simple and elaborate settings, for
hymns of praise or of the more intimate ideal emotions, and in a resonant
building a choir of six voices can produce complete effects with it. The
broad, sonorous swell of its harmonious intervals floods the air with
peaceful power, very unlike the broken sea of Bach's chromatics, which,
to produce anything like an equal effect of sound, needs to be powerfully
excited.

It is necessary to insist strongly on one caution, viz. that grammar is
not style, and settings which avoid modernisms are not for that reason a
