the gospel of peace, not of rebellion, not of insurrection: no, it
teacheth obedience, humility, and quietness; it maketh peace in the
conscience, and teacheth true faith in Jesus Christ, and to walk in God's
laws armed with God's armour, as Paul teacheth here.  Yea, if bishops in
England had been "shod for the preparation of this gospel," and had
endeavoured themselves to teach and set [it] forth, as our most noble
prince hath devised; and if certain gentlemen, being justices, had
executed his grace's commandment, in setting forth this gospel of peace,
this disturbance among the people had not happened.

But ye say, it is new learning.  Now I tell you it is the old learning.
Yea, ye say, it is old heresy new scoured.  Nay, I tell you it is old
truth, long rusted with your canker, and now new made bright and scoured.
What a rusty truth is this, _Quodcumque ligaveris_, "Whatsoever thou
bindest," &c.  This is a truth spoken to the apostles, and all true
preachers their successors, that with the law of God they should bind and
condemn all that sinned; and whosoever did repent, they should declare
him loosed and forgiven, by believing in the blood of Christ.  But how
hath this truth over-rusted with the pope's rust?  For he, by this text,
"Whatsoever thou bindeth," hath taken upon him to make what laws him
listed, clean contrary unto God's word, which willeth that every man
should obey the prince's law: and by this text, "Whatsoever thou
loosest," he hath made all people believe that, for money, he might
forgive what and whom he lusted; so that if any man had robbed his
master, or taken anything wrongfully, the pope would loose him, by this
pardon or that pardon, given to these friars or those friars, put in this
box or that box.  And, as it were, by these means a dividend of the spoil
was made, so that it was not restored, nor the person rightly discharged;
and yet most part of the spoil came to the hands of him and his
ministers.  What is this but a new learning; a new canker to rust and
corrupt the old truth?  Ye call your learning old: it may indeed be
called old, for it cometh of that serpent which did pervert God's
commandment and beguiled Eve; so it is an old custom to pervert God's
word, and to rust it, and corrupt it.

We be a great many that profess to be true ministers of the gospel; but
at the trial I think it will come to pass as it did with Gideon, a duke,
which God raised up to deliver the children of Israel from the
Midianites, in whose hands they were fallen, because they had broken
God's commandment, and displeased God: yet at the length he had
compassion on them, and raised up Gideon to deliver them.  When they
heard that they had a captain, or a duke, that should deliver them, they
assembled a great number, about thirty thousand: but when it came to pass
that they should fight, they departed all save five hundred.  So, I fear
me, that at the trial we shall be found but a few ministers of the true
gospel of peace, and armed in the true armour of God.

It followeth, "And in all things take the shield or buckler of faith."
The buckler is a thing wherewith a man most chiefly defendeth himself:
and that must be perfect faith in Jesus Christ, in our Captain, and in
his word.  It must also be a true faith, it is else no part of the armour
of God: it may not be feigned, but a buckler, which may stop or quench
the violence of the flaming darts of the most wicked.

"Take also the helmet or head-piece of health," or true health in Jesus
Christ; for there is no health in any other name: not the health of a
grey friar's coat, or the health of this pardon or that pardon; that were
a false helmet, and should not defend the violence of the wicked.

"And the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God."  Lo, St. Paul
teacheth you battle; to take in your left hand the shield of faith, to
defend and bear off the darts of the devil, and in the other hand a sword
to strike with against the enemy: for a good man of war may not stand
against, and defend only, but also strike against his enemy.  So St. Paul
giveth us here a sword, "The word of God."  For this sword is it that
beateth this great captain, our enemy.  Christ himself gave us ensample
to fight with this sword; for he answered the devil with the scripture,
and said, "It is written."  With this sword he drave away the devil: and
so let us break his head with this sword, the true word of God, and not
with any word of the bishop of Rome's making; not with his old learning,
nor his new learning, but with the pure word of God.

The time passeth: I will therefore make an end.  Let us fight manfully,
and not cease; for no man is crowned or rewarded but in the end.  We must
therefore fight continually, and with this sword; and thus armed, and we
shall receive the reward of victory.  And thus the grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ be with all your spirits.  Amen.




THE SERMON THAT THE REVEREND FATHER IN CHRIST, M. HUGH LATIMER, BISHOP OF
WORCESTER, MADE TO THE CONVOCATION OF THE CLERGY, BEFORE THE PARLIAMENT
BEGAN, THE 9 DAY OF JUNE, THE 28 YEAR OF THE REIGN OF OUR LATE KING HENRY
THE 8.  TRANSLATED OUT OF LATIN INTO ENGLISH, TO THE INTENT THAT THINGS
WELL SAID TO A FEW MAY BE UNDERSTOOD OF MANY, AND DO GOOD TO ALL THEM
THAT DESIRE TO UNDERSTAND THE TRUTH.


   _Filii hujus seculi_, &c.--Luc. xvi.

Brethren, ye be come together this day, as far as I perceive, to hear of
great and weighty matters.  Ye be come together to entreat of things that
most appertain to the commonwealth.  This being thus, ye look, I am
assured, to hear of me, which am commanded to make as a preface this
exhortation, (albeit I am unlearned and far unworthy,) such things as
shall be much meet for this your assembly.  I therefore, not only very
desirous to obey the commandment of our Primate, but also right greatly
coveting to serve and satisfy all your expectation; lo, briefly, and as
plainly as I can, will speak of matters both worthy to be heard in your
congregation, and also of such as best shall become mine office in this
place.  That I may do this the more commodiously, I have taken that
notable sentence in which our Lord was not afraid to pronounce "the
children of this world to be much more prudent and politic than the
children of light in their generation."  Neither will I be afraid,
trusting that he will aid and guide me to use this sentence, as a good
ground and foundation of all such things, as hereafter I shall speak of.

Now, I suppose that you see right well, being men of such learning, for
what purpose the Lord said this, and that ye have no need to be holpen
with any part of my labour in this thing.  But yet, if ye will pardon me,
I will wade somewhat deeper in this matter, and as nigh as I can, fetch
it from the first original beginning.  For undoubtedly, ye may much
marvel at this saying, if ye well ponder both what is said, and who saith
it.  Define me first these three things: what prudence is; what the
world; what light; and who be the children of the world; who of the
light: see what they signify in scripture.  I marvel if by and by ye all
agree, that the children of the world should be wiser than the children
of the light.  To come somewhat nigher the matter, thus the Lord
beginneth:

   There was a certain rich man that had a steward, which was accused
   unto him that he had dissipated and wasted his goods.  This rich man
   called his steward to him and said, What is this that I hear of thee?
   Come, make me an account of thy stewardship; thou mayest no longer
   bear this office.

Brethren, because these words are so spoken in a parable, and are so
wrapped in wrinkles, that yet they seem to have a face and a similitude
of a thing done indeed, and like an history, I think it much profitable
to tarry somewhat in them.  And though we may perchance find in our
hearts to believe all that is there spoken to be true; yet I doubt
whether we may abide it, that these words of Christ do pertain unto us,
and admonish us of our duty, which do and live after such sort, as though
Christ, when he spake any thing, had, as the time served him, served his
turn, and not regarded the time that came after him, neither provided for
us, or any matters of ours; as some of the philosophers thought, which
said, that God walked up and down in heaven, and thinketh never a deal of
our affairs.  But, my good brethren, err not you so; stick not you to
such your imaginations.  For if ye inwardly behold these words, if ye
diligently roll them in your minds, and after explicate and open them, ye
shall see our time much touched in these mysteries.  Ye shall perceive
that God by this example shaketh us by the noses and pulleth us by the
ears.  Ye shall perceive very plain, that God setteth before our eyes in
this similitude what we ought most to flee, and what we ought soonest to
follow.  For Luke saith, "The Lord spake these words to his disciples."
Wherefore let it be out of all doubt that he spake them to us, which even
as we will be counted the successors and vicars of Christ's disciples, so
we be, if we be good dispensers and do our duty.  He said these things
partly to us, which spake them partly of himself.  For he is that rich
man, which not only had, but hath, and shall have evermore, I say not
one, but many stewards, even to the end of the world.

He is man, seeing that he is God and man.  He is rich, not only in mercy
but in all kind of riches; for it is he that giveth to us all things
abundantly.  It is he of whose hand we received both our lives, and other
things necessary for the conservation of the same.  What man hath any
thing, I pray you, but he hath received it of his plentifulness?  To be
short, it is he that "openeth his hand, and filleth all beasts with his
blessing," and giveth unto us in most ample wise his benediction.  Neither
his treasure can be spent, how much soever he lash out; how much soever
we take of him, his treasure tarrieth still, ever taken, never spent.

He is also the good man of the house: the church is his household which
ought with all diligence to be fed with his word and his sacraments.
These be his goods most precious, the dispensation and administration
whereof he would bishops and curates should have.  Which thing St. Paul
affirmeth, saying, "Let men esteem us as the ministers of Christ, and
dispensers of God's mysteries."  But, I pray you, what is to be looked
for in a dispenser?  This surely, "That he be found faithful," and that
he truly dispense, and lay out the goods of the Lord; that he give meat
in time; give it, I say, and not sell it; meat, I say, and not poison.
For the one doth intoxicate and slay the eater, the other feedeth and
nourisheth him.  Finally, let him not slack and defer the doing of his
office, but let him do his duty when time is, and need requireth it.  This
is also to be looked for, that he be one whom God hath called and put in
office, and not one that cometh uncalled, unsent for; not one that of
himself presumeth to take honour upon him.  And surely, if all this that
I say be required in a good minister, it is much lighter to require them
all in every one, than to find one any where that hath them all.  Who is
a true and faithful steward?  He is true, he is faithful, that cometh no
new money, but taketh it ready coined of the good man of the house; and
neither changeth it, nor clippeth it, after it is taken to him to spend,
but spendeth even the self-same that he had of his Lord, and spendeth it
as his Lord's commandment is; neither to his own vantage uttering it, nor
as the lewd servant did, hiding it in the ground.  Brethren, if a
faithful steward ought to do as I have said, I pray you, ponder and
examine this well, whether our bishops and abbots, prelates and curates,
have been hitherto faithful stewards or no?  Ponder, whether yet many of
them be as they should be or no?  Go ye to, tell me now as your
conscience leadeth you (I will let pass to speak of many other), was
there not some, that despising the money of the Lord, as copper and not
current, either coined new themselves, or else uttered abroad newly
coined of other; sometime either adulterating the word of God or else
mingling it (as taverners do, which brew and utter the evil and good both
in one pot), sometime in the stead of God's word blowing out the dreams
of men? while they thus preached to the people the redemption that cometh
by Christ's death to serve only them that died before his coming, that
were in the time of the old testament; and that now since redemption and
forgiveness of sins purchased by money, and devised by men is of
efficacy, and not redemption purchased by Christ (they have a wonderful
pretty example to persuade this thing, of a certain married woman, which,
when her husband was in purgatory, in that fiery furnace that hath burned
away so many of our pence, paid her husband's ransom, and so of duty
claimed him to be set at liberty): while they thus preached to the
people, that dead images (which at the first, as I think, were set up,
only to represent things absent) not only ought to be covered with gold,
but also ought of all faithful and christian people (yea, in this
scarceness and penury of all things), to be clad with silk garments, and
those also laden with precious gems and jewels; and that beside all this,
they are to be lighted with wax candles, both within the church and
without the church, yea, and at noon days; as who should say, here no
cost can be too great; whereas in the mean time we see Christ's faithful
and lively images, bought with no less price than with his most precious
blood (alas, alas!) to be an hungred, a-thirst, a-cold, and to lie in
darkness, wrapped in all wretchedness, yea, to lie there till death take
away their miseries: while they preached these will-works, that come but
of our own devotion, although they be not so necessary as the works of
mercy, and the precepts of God, yet they said, and in the pulpit, that
will-works were more principal, more excellent, and (plainly to utter
what they mean) more acceptable to God than works of mercy; as though now
man's inventions and fancies could please God better than God's precepts,
or strange things better than his own: while they thus preached that more
fruit, more devotion cometh of the beholding of an image, though it be
but a Pater-noster while, than is gotten by reading and contemplation in
scripture, though ye read and contemplate therein seven years' space:
finally, while they preached thus, souls tormented in purgatory to have
most need of our help, and that they can have no aid, but of us in this
world: of the which two, if the one be not false, yet at the least it is
ambiguous, uncertain, doubtful, and therefore rashly and arrogantly with
such boldness affirmed in the audience of the people; the other, by all
men's opinions, is manifestly false: I let pass to speak of much other
such like counterfeit doctrine, which hath been blasted and blown out by
some for the space of three hours together.  Be these the Christian and
divine mysteries, and not rather the dreams of men?  Be these the
faithful dispensers of God's mysteries, and not rather false dissipators
of them? whom God never put in office, but rather the devil set them over
a miserable family, over an house miserably ordered and entreated.  Happy
were the people if such preached seldom.

And yet it is a wonder to see these, in their generation, to be much more
prudent and politic than the faithful ministers are in their generation;
while they go about more prudently to stablish men's dreams, than these
do to hold up God's commandments.

Thus it cometh to pass that works lucrative, will-works, men's fancies
reign; but christian works, necessary works, fruitful works, be trodden
under the foot.  Thus the evil is much better set out by evil men, than
the good by good men; because the evil be more wise than be the good in
their generation.  These be the false stewards, whom all good and
faithful men every day accuse unto the rich master of the household, not
without great heaviness, that they waste his goods; whom he also one day
will call to him, and say to them as he did to his steward, when he said,
"What is this that I hear of thee?"  Here God partly wondereth at our
ingratitude and perfidy, partly chideth us for them; and being both full
of wonder and ready to chide, asketh us, "What is this that I hear of
you?"  As though he should say unto us, "All good men in all places
complain of you, accuse your avarice, your exactions, your tyranny.  They
have required in you a long season, and yet require, diligence and
sincerity.  I commanded you, that with all industry and labour ye should
feed my sheep: ye earnestly feed yourselves from day to day, wallowing in
delights and idleness.  I commanded you to teach my commandments, and not
your fancies; and that ye should seek my glory and my vantage: you teach
your own traditions, and seek your own glory and profit.  You preach very
seldom; and when ye do preach, do nothing but cumber them that preach
truly, as much as lieth in you: that it were much better such were not to
preach at all, than so perniciously to preach.  Oh, what hear I of you?
You, that ought to be my preachers, what other thing do you, than apply
all your study hither, to bring all my preachers to envy, shame,
contempt?  Yea, more than this, ye pull them into perils, into prisons,
and, as much as in you lieth, to cruel deaths.  To be short, I would that
christian people should hear my doctrine, and at their convenient leisure
read it also, as many as would: your care is not that all men may hear
it, but all your care is, that no lay man do read it: surely, being
afraid lest they by the reading should understand it, and understanding,
learn to rebuke our slothfulness.  This is your generation, this is your
dispensation, this is your wisdom.  In this generation, in this
dispensation, you be most politic, most witty.  These be the things that
I hear of your demeanour.  I wished to hear better report of you.  Have
ye thus deceived me? or have ye rather deceived yourselves?  Where I had
but one house, that is to say, the church, and this so dearly beloved of
me, that for the love of her I put myself forth to be slain, and to shed
my blood; this church at my departure I committed unto your charge, to be
fed, to be nourished, and to be made much of.  My pleasure was ye should
occupy my place; my desire was ye should have borne like love to this
church, like fatherly affection, as I did: I made you my vicars, yea, in
matters of most importance.

"For thus I taught openly: 'He that should hear you, should hear me; he
that should despise you, should despise me.'  I gave you also keys, not
earthly keys, but heavenly.  I left my goods that I have evermore most
highly esteemed, that is, my word and sacraments, to be dispensed of you.
These benefits I gave you, and do you give me these thanks?  Can you find
in your hearts thus to abuse my goodness, my benignity, my gentleness?
Have you thus deceived me?  No, no, ye have not deceived me, but
yourselves.  My gifts and benefits towards you shall be to your greater
damnation.  Because you have contemned the lenity and clemency of the
master of the house, ye have right well deserved to abide the rigour and
severity of the judge.  Come forth then, let us see an account of your
stewardship.  An horrible and fearful sentence: Ye may have no longer my
goods in your hands.  A voice to weep at, and to make men tremble!"

You see, brethren, you see, what evil the evil stewards must come to.
Your labour is paid for, if ye can so take heed, that no such sentence be
spoken to you; nay, we must all take heed lest these threatenings one day
take place in us.  But lest the length of my sermon offend you too sore,
I will leave the rest of the parable and take me to the handling of the
end of it; that is, I will declare unto you how the children of this
world be more witty, crafty, and subtle, than are the children of the
light in their generation.  Which sentence would God it lay in my poor
tongue to explicate with such light of words, that I might seem rather to
have painted it before your eyes, than to have spoken it; and that you
might rather seem to see the thing, than to hear it!  But I confess
plainly this thing to be far above my power.  Therefore this being only
left to me, I wish for that I have not, and am sorry that that is not in
me which I would so gladly have, that is, power so to handle the thing
that I have in hand, that all that I say may turn to the glory of God,
your souls' health, and the edifying of Christ's body.  Wherefore I pray
you all to pray with me unto God, and that in your petition you desire,
that these two things he vouchsafe to grant us, first, a mouth for me to
speak rightly; next, ears for you, that in hearing me ye may take profit
at my hand: and that this may come to effect, you shall desire him, unto
whom our master Christ bad we should pray, saying even the same prayer
that he himself did institute.  Wherein ye shall pray for our most
gracious sovereign lord the king, chief and supreme head of the church of
England under Christ, and for the most excellent, gracious, and virtuous
lady queen Jane, his most lawful wife, and for all his, whether they be
of the clergy or laity, whether they be of the nobility, or else other
his grace's subjects, not forgetting those that being departed out of
this transitory life, and now sleep in the sleep of peace, and rest from
their labours in quietness and peaceable sleep, faithfully, lovingly, and
patiently looking for that that they clearly shall see when God shall be
so pleased.  For all these, and for grace necessary, ye shall say unto
God God's prayer, _Pater-noster_.



THE SECOND SERMON, IN THE AFTERNOON.


   _Filii hujus seculi_, &c.--Luc. xvi. [8].

Christ in this saying touched the sloth and sluggishness of his, and did
not allow the fraud and subtlety of others; neither was glad that it was
indeed as he had said, but complained rather that it should be so: as
many men speak many things, not that they ought to be so, but that they
are wont to be so.  Nay, this grieved Christ, that the children of this
world should be of more policy than the children of light; which thing
was true in Christ's time, and now in our time is most true.  Who is so
