charm. The black misery was lifted from his heart, and the evil spirit
was put to flight by the song of the shepherd boy.

It was no wonder, then, that the king, for a time at least, loved the
boy with his bright face and sunny hair, and wanted to keep him as his
armour-bearer. But perhaps, as Saul grew well and had no further need of
the music, David was no longer wanted, and so he went back again to the
Bethlehem fields to look after his sheep.

God had made use of David's skill in music, and before very long another
call came to him. This time the need was for one who could aim straight,
who had a quick eye and a steady hand.

War had broken out. The fierce Philistines had come up with their great
armies to try and conquer the land. Every man in Israel who could fight
was called up to protect his country. Already David's three elder
brothers had joined Saul's army, which was preparing to fight the enemy.

[Illustration: Jesse sends David to the camp.]

On either side of a narrow valley, divided by a stream which ran along
over smooth stones, the two armies faced each other. There they were
encamped, like wild beasts ready to fly at each other's throats. At any
moment the fight might begin, and that stream be stained red with blood.
Only the Philistines were far the strongest, and the Israelites had but
little chance of victory.

This valley was seven or eight miles distant from the little town of
Bethlehem, and Jesse waited anxiously, day after day, for news of his
three sons. At last he could bear the anxiety no longer, and he
determined to send David to the camp to carry food to his brothers and
bring back news how they fared.

So, very early one morning, David set out on his errand. He had
carefully put his sheep under the care of another shepherd, and he took
with him parched corn and loaves of bread for his brothers, as well as
ten cheeses which his father was sending to the officers under whom they
served.

It was not long before the boy came within sight of the valley, and his
heart began to beat with excitement, for he saw that he had arrived just
as something was about to happen. The armies were drawn up in battle
array, and suddenly a great shout went up from both sides. It was the
battle-cry of the two armies which sounded in his ears.

There was no time now to carry food and gifts, so David quickly left his
load at the entrance to the camp and hurried on to search for his
brothers. He had learned to find his way about a camp, where for a
short time he had been Saul's armour-bearer. So now he went swiftly
among the soldiers, until at last he found his brothers. "Were they
well?" he eagerly asked them; "and what were they doing?"

[Illustration: Eagerly David began to ask them what it meant.]

But even while he spoke there was a stir among the Philistines, and all
eyes were turned to watch, all ears were strained to hear the enemy's
challenge, which rang out clearly across the narrow valley.

Out of the rank of the Philistines there had stepped a man so tall and
strong that he appeared to be a giant. He was more than nine feet high,
and the armour which he wore was so solid and heavy that it would have
crushed any ordinary man to the earth.

This was Goliath, the great champion of the Philistines. Every morning
and every evening he strode proudly out and defied the Israelites,
bidding them find a champion who would come and fight with him. Once
again his challenge rang out on the clear air,--

"Choose you a man for you, and let him come down to me. If he be able to
fight with me and to kill me, then will we be your servants; but if I
prevail against him and kill him, then shall ye be our servants and
serve us. I defy the armies of Israel this day. Give me a man that we
may fight together."

A great silence fell after the champion had shouted his last words of
defiance. There was no answer from the Israelites. No man had courage
enough to dream of accepting the challenge.

David looked round him in amazement, and his cheeks burned with shame.
What were the people doing to allow this boasting heathen Philistine to
defy the armies of the living God? Eagerly he turned to the men around
him and began to ask them what it meant. The soldiers answered him
shortly. No, there was no one who dared to go forth and fight Goliath.
The king had promised great rewards to any man who would kill the giant.
But no one had dared to try.

