    Is all I need to comfort mine.

    Come when the shadows fall,
      And night grows deeply dark;
    The barren brood, O call
      With song of morning lark;
        And from above,
        Dear heart of Love,
    Send us thy white-winged dove.

    Pleasant View, Concord, N. H., 1899.




_FLOWERS_


    Mirrors of morn
    Whence the dewdrop is born,
    Soft tints of the rainbow and skies--
    Sisters of song,
    What a shadowy throng
    Around you in memory rise!

    Far do ye flee,
    From your green bowers free,
    Fair floral apostles of love,
    Sweetly to shed
    Fragrance fresh round the dead,
    And breath of the living above.

    Flowers for the brave--
    Be he monarch or slave,
    Whose heart bore its grief and is still!
    Flowers for the kind--
    Aye, the Christians who wind
    Wreaths for the triumphs o'er ill!

    Pleasant View, Concord, N. H., _May 21, 1904_.




_TO THE OLD YEAR--1865_


        Pass on, returnless year!
    The track behind thee is with glory crowned;
    The turf where thou hast trod is holy ground.
        Pass proudly to thy bier!

        Chill was thy midnight day,
    While Justice grasped the sword to hold her throne,
    And on her altar our loved Lincoln's own
        Great willing heart did lay.

        Thy purpose hath been won!
    Thou point'st thy phantom finger, grim and cold,
    To the dark record of our guilt unrolled,
        And smiling, say'st, "'Tis done!

        "This record I will bear
    To the dim chambers of eternity--
    The chain and charter I have lived to see
        Purged by the cannon's prayer;

        "Convulsion, carnage, war;
    The pomp and tinsel of unrighteous power;
    Bloated oppression in its awful hour,--
        I, dying, dare abhor!"

        One word, receding year,
    Ere thou grow tremulous with shadowy night!
    Say, will the young year dawn with wisdom's light
        To brighten o'er thy bier?

        Or we the past forget,
    And heal her wounds too tenderly to last?
    Or let today grow difficult and vast
        With traitors unvoiced yet?

        Though thou must leave the tear,--
    Hearts bleeding ere they break in silence yet,
    Wrong jubilant and right with bright eye wet,--
        Thou fast expiring year,

        Thy work is done, and well:
    Thou hast borne burdens, and may take thy rest,
    Pillow thy head on time's untired breast.
        Illustrious year, farewell!

    Lynn, Mass., _January 1, 1866_.




_INVOCATION FOR 1868_


    Father of every age,
      Of every rolling sphere,
    Help us to write a deathless page
      Of truth, this dawning year!

    Help us to humbly bow
      To Thy all-wise behest--
    Whate'er the gift of joy or woe,
      Knowing Thou knowest best.

    Aid our poor soul to sing
      Above the tempest's glee;
    Give us the eagle's fearless wing,
      The dove's to soar to Thee!

    All-merciful and good,
      Hover the homeless heart!
    Give us this day our daily food
      In knowing what Thou art!

    Swampscott, Mass., _January 1, 1868_.




_CHRISTMAS MORN_


    Blest Christmas morn, though murky clouds
        Pursue thy way,
    Thy light was born where storm enshrouds
        Nor dawn nor day!

    Dear Christ, forever here and near,
        No cradle song,
    No natal hour and mother's tear,
        To thee belong.

    Thou God-idea, Life-encrowned,
        The Bethlehem babe--
    Beloved, replete, by flesh embound--
        Was but thy shade!

    Thou gentle beam of living Love,
        And deathless Life!
    Truth infinite,--so far above
        All mortal strife,

    Or cruel creed, or earth-born taint:
        Fill us today
    With all thou art--be thou our saint,
        Our stay, alway.

    _December, 1898._




_EASTER MORN_


    Gently thou beckonest from the giant hills
      The new-born beauty in the emerald sky,
    And wakening murmurs from the drowsy rills--
      O gladsome dayspring! 'reft of mortal sigh
    To glorify all time--eternity--
    With thy still fathomless Christ-majesty.

    E'en as Thou gildest gladdened joy, dear God,
      Give risen power to prayer; fan Thou the flame
    Of right with might; and midst the rod,
      And stern, dark shadows cast on Thy blest name,
    Lift Thou a patient love above earth's ire,
    Piercing the clouds with its triumphal spire.

    While sacred song and loudest breath of praise
      Echo amid the hymning spheres of light,--
    With heaven's lyres and angels' loving lays,--
      Send to the loyal struggler for the right,
    Joy--not of time, nor yet by nature sown,
    But the celestial seed dropped from Love's throne.

    Prolong the strain "Christ risen!" Sad sense, annoy
      No more the peace of Soul's sweet solitude!
    Deep loneness, tear-filled tones of distant joy,
      Depart! Glad Easter glows with gratitude--
    Love's verdure veils the leaflet's wondrous birth--
    Rich rays, rare footprints on the dust of earth.

    Not life, the vassal of the changeful hour,
      Nor burdened bliss, but Truth and Love attest
    The solemn splendor of immortal power,--
      The ever Christ, and glorified behest,
    Poured on the sense which deems no suffering vain
    That wipes away the sting of death--sin, pain.

    Pleasant View, Concord, N. H., _April 18, 1900_.




_RESOLUTIONS FOR THE DAY_


    To rise in the morning and drink in the view--
      The home where I dwell in the vale,
    The blossoms whose fragrance and charms ever new
      Are scattered o'er hillside and dale;

    To gaze on the sunbeams enkindling the sky--
      A loftier life to invite--
    A light that illumines my spiritual eye,
      And inspires my pen as I write;

    To form resolutions, with strength from on high,
      Such physical laws to obey,
    As reason with appetite, pleasures deny,
      That health may my efforts repay;

    To kneel at the altar of mercy and pray
      That pardon and grace, through His Son,
    May comfort my soul all the wearisome day,
      And cheer me with hope when 'tis done;

    To daily remember my blessings and charge,
      And make this my humble request:
    Increase Thou my faith and my vision enlarge,
      And bless me with Christ's promised rest;

    To hourly seek for deliverance strong
