53:3    meaning. Jesus was no ascetic. He did not fast as did
        the Baptist's disciples; yet there never lived a man so far
        removed from appetites and passions as the Nazarene.
53:6    He rebuked sinners pointedly and unflinchingly, because
        he was their friend; hence the cup he drank.

                        Reputation and character

        The reputation of Jesus was the very opposite of his
53:9    character. Why? Because the divine Principle and
        practice of Jesus were misunderstood. He
        was at work in divine Science. His words
53:12   and works were unknown to the world because above
        and contrary to the world's religious sense. Mortals be-
        lieved in God as humanly mighty, rather than as divine,
53:15   infinite Love.

                          Inspiring discontent

        The world could not interpret aright the discomfort
        which Jesus inspired and the spiritual blessings which
53:18   might flow from such discomfort. Science
        shows the cause of the shock so often pro-
        duced by the truth, - namely, that this shock arises from
53:21   the great distance between the individual and Truth.
        Like Peter, we should weep over the warning, instead of
        denying the truth or mocking the lifelong sacrifice which
53:24   goodness makes for the destruction of evil.

                            Bearing our sins

        Jesus bore our sins in his body. He knew the
        mortal errors which constitute the material body, and
53:27   could destroy those errors; but at the time
        when Jesus felt our infirmities, he had not
        conquered all the beliefs of the flesh or his sense of ma-
53:30   terial life, nor had he risen to his final demonstration of
        spiritual power.

        Had he shared the sinful beliefs of others, he would
54:1    have been less sensitive to those beliefs. Through the
        magnitude of his human life, he demonstrated the divine
54:3    Life. Out of the amplitude of his pure affection, he de-
        fined Love. With the affluence of Truth, he vanquished
        error. The world acknowledged not his righteousness,
54:6    seeing it not; but earth received the harmony his glorified
        example introduced.

                        Inspiration of sacrifice

        Who is ready to follow his teaching and example? All
54:9    must sooner or later plant themselves in Christ, the true
        idea of God. That he might liberally pour
        his dear-bought treasures into empty or sin-
54:12   filled human storehouses, was the inspiration of Jesus'
        intense human sacrifice. In witness of his divine com-
        mission, he presented the proof that Life, Truth, and
54:15   Love heal the sick and the sinning, and triumph over
        death through Mind, not matter. This was the highest
        proof he could have offered of divine Love. His hearers
54:18   understood neither his words nor his works. They
        would not accept his meek interpretation of life nor
        follow his example.

                          Spiritual friendship

54:21   His earthly cup of bitterness was drained to the
        dregs. There adhered to him only a few unpretentious
        friends, whose religion was something more
54:24   than a name. It was so vital, that it en-
        abled them to understand the Nazarene and to share
        the glory of eternal life. He said that those who fol-
54:27   lowed him should drink of his cup, and history has con-
        firmed the prediction.

                        Injustice to the Saviour

        If that Godlike and glorified man were physically on
54:30   earth to-day, would not some, who now pro-
        fess to love him, reject him? Would they
        not deny him even the rights of humanity, if he enter-
55:1    tained any other sense of being and religion than theirs?
        The advancing century, from a deadened sense of the
55:3    invisible God, to-day subjects to unchristian comment and
        usage the idea of Christian healing enjoined by Jesus; but
        this does not affect the invincible facts.
55:6    Perhaps the early Christian era did Jesus no more
        injustice than the later centuries have bestowed upon
        the healing Christ and spiritual idea of being. Now
55:9    that the gospel of healing is again preached by the
        wayside, does not the pulpit sometimes scorn it? But
        that curative mission, which presents the Saviour in a
55:12   clearer light than mere words can possibly do, cannot be
        left out of Christianity, although it is again ruled out of
        the synagogue.

55:15   Truth's immortal idea is sweeping down the centuries,
        gathering beneath its wings the sick and sinning. My
        weary hope tries to realize that happy day, when man shall
55:18   recognize the Science of Christ and love his neighbor as
        himself, - when he shall realize God's omnipotence and
        the healing power of the divine Love in what it has done
55:21   and is doing for mankind. The promises will be ful-
        filled. The time for the reappearing of the divine healing
        is throughout all time; and whosoever layeth his earthly
55:24   all on the altar of divine Science, drinketh of Christ's
        cup now, and is endued with the spirit and power of
        Christian healing.

55:27   In the words of St. John: "He shall give you another
        Comforter, that he may abide with you /forever/." This
        Comforter I understand to be Divine Science.




        CHAPTER III - MARRIAGE

        What therefore God hath joined together, let not man put
        asunder. In the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given
        in marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven. - JESUS.

56:1    WHEN our great Teacher came to him for baptism,
        John was astounded. Reading his thoughts, Jesus
56:3    added: "Suffer it to be so now: for thus it becometh us
        to fulfil all righteousness." Jesus' concessions (in certain
        cases) to material methods were for the advancement of
56:6    spiritual good.

                            Marriage temporal

        Marriage is the legal and moral provision for genera-
        tion among human kind. Until the spiritual creation
56:9    is discerned intact, is apprehended and under-
        stood, and His kingdom is come as in the vision
        of the Apocalypse, - where the corporeal sense of crea-
56:12   tion was cast out, and its spiritual sense was revealed from
        heaven, - marriage will continue, subject to such moral
        regulations as will secure increasing virtue.

                            Fidelity required

56:15   Infidelity to the marriage covenant is the social scourge
        of all races, "the pestilence that walketh in darkness,
        . . . the destruction that wasteth at noonday."
56:18   The commandment, "Thou shalt not com-
        mit adultery," is no less imperative than the one, "Thou
        shalt not kill."

57:1    Chastity is the cement of civilization and progress.
        Without it there is no stability in society, and without it
57:3    one cannot attain the Science of Life.

                             Mental elements

        Union of the masculine and feminine qualities consti-
        tutes completeness. The masculine mind reaches a
57:6    higher tone through certain elements of the
        feminine, while the feminine mind gains cour-
        age and strength through masculine qualities. These
57:9    different elements conjoin naturally with each other, and
        their true harmony is in spiritual oneness. Both sexes
        should be loving, pure, tender, and strong. The attrac-
57:12   tion between native qualities will be perpetual only as it
        is pure and true, bringing sweet seasons of renewal like
        the returning spring.

                           Affection's demands

57:15   Beauty, wealth, or fame is incompetent to meet the
        demands of the affections, and should never weigh
        against the better claims of intellect, good-
57:18   ness, and virtue. Happiness is spiritual,
        born of Truth and Love. It is unselfish; therefore
        it cannot exist alone, but requires all mankind to
57:21   share it.

                           Help and discipline

        Human affection is not poured forth vainly, even
        though it meet no return. Love enriches the nature, en-
57:24   larging, purifying, and elevating it. The wintry
        blasts of earth may uproot the flowers of affec-
        tion, and scatter them to the winds; but this severance
57:27   of fleshly ties serves to unite thought more closely to
        God, for Love supports the struggling heart until it ceases
        to sigh over the world and begins to unfold its wings for
57:30   heaven.

        Marriage is unblest or blest, according to the disap-
        pointments it involves or the hopes it fulfils. To happify
58:1    existence by constant intercourse with those adapted to
        elevate it, should be the motive of society. Unity of
58:3    spirit gives new pinions to joy, or else joy's drooping
        wings trail in dust.

                            Chord and discord

        Ill-arranged notes produce discord. Tones of the
58:6    human mind may be different, but they should be con-
        cordant in order to blend properly. Unselfish
        ambition, noble life-motives, and purity, -
58:9    these constituents of thought, mingling, constitute in-
        dividually and collectively true happiness, strength, and
        permanence.

                             Mutual freedom

58:12   There is moral freedom in Soul. Never contract the
        horizon of a worthy outlook by the selfish exaction of
        all another's time and thoughts. With ad-
58:15   ditional joys, benevolence should grow more
        diffusive. The narrowness and jealousy, which would
        confine a wife or a husband forever within four walls, will
58:18   not promote the sweet interchange of confidence and love;
        but on the other hand, a wandering desire for incessant
        amusement outside the home circle is a poor augury for
58:21   the happiness of wedlock. Home is the dearest spot on
        earth, and it should be the centre, though not the bound-
        ary, of the affections.

                           A useful suggestion

58:24   Said the peasant bride to her lover: "Two eat no more
        together than they eat separately." This is a hint that
        a wife ought not to court vulgar extravagance
58:27   or stupid ease, because another supplies her
        wants. Wealth may obviate the necessity for toil or the
        chance for ill-nature in the marriage relation, but noth-
58:30   ing can abolish the cares of marriage.

                            Differing duties

        "She that is married careth . . . how she may please
        her husband," says the Bible; and this is the pleasantest
59:1    thing to do. Matrimony should never be entered into
        without a full recognition of its enduring obligations on
59:3    both sides. There should be the most tender
        solicitude for each other's happiness, and mu-
        tual attention and approbation should wait on all the years
59:6    of married life.

        Mutual compromises will often maintain a compact
        which might otherwise become unbearable. Man should
59:9    not be required to participate in all the annoyances and
        cares of domestic economy, nor should woman be ex-
        pected to understand political economy. Fulfilling the
59:12   different demands of their united spheres, their sympa-
        thies should blend in sweet confidence and cheer, each
        partner sustaining the other, - thus hallowing the union
59:15   of interests and affections, in which the heart finds peace
        and home.

                            Trysting renewed

        Tender words and unselfish care in what promotes the
59:18   welfare and happiness of your wife will prove more salutary
        in prolonging her health and smiles than stolid
        indifference or jealousy. Husbands, hear this
59:21   and remember how slight a word or deed may renew the
        old trysting-times.

        After marriage, it is too late to grumble over incompati-
59:24   bility of disposition. A mutual understanding should
        exist before this union and continue ever after, for decep-
        tion is fatal to happiness.

                          Permanent obligation

59:27   The nuptial vow should never be annulled, so long as
        its moral obligations are kept intact; but the frequency
        of divorce shows that the sacredness of this re-
59:30   lationship is losing its influence, and that fatal
        mistakes are undermining its foundations. Separation
        never should take place, and it never would, if both
60:1    husband and wife were genuine Christian Scientists.
        Science inevitably lifts one's being higher in the scale of
60:3    harmony and happiness.

                           Permanent affection

        Kindred tastes, motives, and aspirations are necessary
        to the formation of a happy and permanent companion-
60:6    ship. The beautiful in character is also the
        good, welding indissolubly the links of affec-
        tion. A mother's affection cannot be weaned from her
60:9    child, because the mother-love includes purity and con-
        stancy, both of which are immortal. Therefore maternal
        affection lives on under whatever difficulties.
60:12   From the logic of events we learn that selfishness
        and impurity alone are fleeting, and that wisdom will
        ultimately put asunder what she hath not joined
60:15   together.

                          Centre for affections

        Marriage should improve the human species, becoming
        a barrier against vice, a protection to woman, strength to
60:18   man, and a centre for the affections. This,
        however, in a majority of cases, is not its
        present tendency, and why? Because the education of
60:21   the higher nature is neglected, and other considerations,
        - passion, frivolous amusements, personal adornment,
        display, and pride, - occupy thought.

                            Spiritual concord

60:24   An ill-attuned ear calls discord harmony, not appreciat-
        ing concord. So physical sense, not discerning the true
        happiness of being, places it on a false basis.
60:27   Science will correct the discord, and teach us
        life's sweeter harmonies.

        Soul has infinite resources with which to bless mankind,
60:30   and happiness would be more readily attained and would
        be more secure in our keeping, if sought in Soul. Higher
        enjoyments alone can satisfy the cravings of immortal
61:1    man. We cannot circumscribe happiness within the
        limits of personal sense. The senses confer no real
61:3    enjoyment.

                           Ascendency of good

        The good in human affections must have ascendency
        over the evil and the spiritual over the animal, or happi-
61:6    ness will never be won. The attainment of
        this celestial condition would improve our
        progeny, diminish crime, and give higher aims to ambi-
61:9    tion. Every valley of sin must be exalted, and every
        mountain of selfishness be brought low, that the highway
        of our God may be prepared in Science. The offspring
61:12   of heavenly-minded parents inherit more intellect, better
        balanced minds, and sounder constitutions.

                         Propensities inherited

        If some fortuitous circumstance places promising chil-
61:15   dren in the arms of gross parents, often these beautiful
        children early droop and die, like tropical
        flowers born amid Alpine snows. If perchance
61:18   they live to become parents in their turn, they may re-
        produce in their own helpless little ones the grosser traits
        of their ancestors. What hope of happiness, what noble
61:21   ambition, can inspire the child who inherits propensities
        that must either be overcome or reduce him to a loath-
        some wreck?

61:24   Is not the propagation of the human species a greater
        responsibility, a more solemn charge, than the culture of
        your garden or the raising of stock to increase your flocks
61:27   and herds? Nothing unworthy of perpetuity should be
        transmitted to children.

        The formation of mortals must greatly improve to
61:30   advance mankind. The scientific /morale/ of marriage is
        spiritual unity. If the propagation of a higher human
        species is requisite to reach this goal, then its material con-
62:1    ditions can only be permitted for the purpose of gener-
        ating. The foetus must be kept mentally pure and the
62:3    period of gestation have the sanctity of virginity.

        The entire education of children should be such as to
        form habits of obedience to the moral and spiritual law,
62:6    with which the child can meet and master the belief in so-
        called physical laws, a belief which breeds disease.

                           Inheritance heeded

        If parents create in their babes a desire for incessant
62:9    amusement, to be always fed, rocked, tossed, or talked
        to, those parents should not, in after years,
        complain of their children's fretfulness or fri-
62:12   volity, which the parents themselves have occasioned.
        Taking less "thought for your life, what ye shall eat, or
        what ye shall drink"; less thought "for your body what
62:15   ye shall put on," will do much more for the health of the
        rising generation than you dream. Children should be
        allowed to remain children in knowledge, and should
62:18   become men and women only through growth in the
        understanding of man's higher nature.

                            The Mind creative

        We must not attribute more and more intelligence
62:21   to matter, but less and less, if we would be wise and
        healthy. The divine Mind, which forms the
        bud and blossom, will care for the human
62:24   body, even as it clothes the lily; but let no mortal inter-
        fere with God's government by thrusting in the laws of
        erring, human concepts.

                          Superior law of Soul

62:27   The higher nature of man is not governed by the lower;
        if it were, the order of wisdom would be reversed.
        Our false views of life hide eternal harmony,
62:30   and produce the ills of which we complain.
        Because mortals believe in material laws and reject the
        Science of Mind, this does not make materiality first and
63:1    the superior law of Soul last. You would never think
        that flannel was better for warding off pulmonary disease
63:3    than the controlling Mind, if you understood the Science
        of being.

                            Spiritual origin

        In Science man is the offspring of Spirit. The beauti-
63:6    ful, good, and pure constitute his ancestry. His origin is
        not, like that of mortals, in brute instinct, nor
        does he pass through material conditions prior
63:9    to reaching intelligence. Spirit is his primitive and ulti-
        mate source of being; God is his Father, and Life is the
        law of his being.

                           The rights of woman

63:12   Civil law establishes very unfair differences between the
        rights of the two sexes. Christian Science furnishes no
        precedent for such injustice, and civilization
63:15   mitigates it in some measure. Still, it is a
        marvel why usage should accord woman less rights than
        does either Christian Science or civilization.

                          Unfair discrimination

63:18   Our laws are not impartial, to say the least, in their
        discrimination as to the person, property, and parental
        claims of the two sexes. If the elective fran-
63:21   chise for women will remedy the evil with-
        out encouraging difficulties of greater magnitude, let us
        hope it will be granted. A feasible as well as rational
63:24   means of improvement at present is the elevation of
        society in general and the achievement of a nobler
        race for legislation, - a race having higher aims and
63:27   motives.

        If a dissolute husband deserts his wife, certainly the
        wronged, and perchance impoverished, woman should be
63:30   allowed to collect her own wages, enter into business
        agreements, hold real estate, deposit funds, and own her
        children free from interference.

64:1    Want of uniform justice is a crying evil caused by the
        selfishness and inhumanity of man. Our forefathers
64:3    exercised their faith in the direction taught by the Apostle
        James, when he said: "Pure religion and undefiled before
        God and the Father, is this, To visit the fatherless and
64:6    widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted
        from the world."

                          Benevolence hindered

        Pride, envy, or jealousy seems on most occasions to
64:9    be the master of ceremonies, ruling out primitive Chris-
        tianity. When a man lends a helping hand
        to some noble woman, struggling alone with
64:12   adversity, his wife should not say, "It is never well to
        interfere with your neighbor's business." A wife is
        sometimes debarred by a covetous domestic tyrant from
64:15   giving the ready aid her sympathy and charity would
        afford.

                         Progressive development

        Marriage should signify a union of hearts. Further-
64:18   more, the time cometh of which Jesus spake, when he
        declared that in the resurrection there should
        be no more marrying nor giving in marriage,
64:21   but man would be as the angels. Then shall Soul re-
        joice in its own, in which passion has no part. Then
        white-robed purity will unite in one person masculine wis-
64:24   dom and feminine love, spiritual understanding and per-
        petual peace.

        Until it is learned that God is the Father of all, mar-
64:27   riage will continue. Let not mortals permit a disregard
        of law which might lead to a worse state of society than
        now exists. Honesty and virtue ensure the stability of
64:30   the marriage covenant. Spirit will ultimately claim its
        own, - all that really is, - and the voices of physical
        sense will be forever hushed.

                           Blessing of Christ

65:1    Experience should be the school of virtue, and human
        happiness should proceed from man's highest nature.
65:3    May Christ, Truth, be present at every bridal
        altar to turn the water into wine and to give to
        human life an inspiration by which man's spiritual and
65:6    eternal existence may be discerned.

                          Righteous foundations

        If the foundations of human affection are consistent
        with progress, they will be strong and enduring. Divorces
65:9    should warn the age of some fundamental error
        in the marriage state. The union of the sexes
        suffers fearful discord. To gain Christian Science and its
65:12   harmony, life should be more metaphysically regarded.

                           Powerless promises

        The broadcast powers of evil so conspicuous to-day
        show themselves in the materialism and sensualism of
65:15   the age, struggling against the advancing
        spiritual era. Beholding the world's lack of
        Christianity and the powerlessness of vows to make home
65:18   happy, the human mind will at length demand a higher
        affection.

                          Transition and reform

        There will ensue a fermentation over this as over many
65:21   other reforms, until we get at last the clear straining of
        truth, and impurity and error are left among
        the lees. The fermentation even of fluids is
65:24   not pleasant. An unsettled, transitional stage is never
        desirable on its own account. Matrimony, which was once
        a fixed fact among us, must lose its present slippery foot-
65:27   ing, and man must find permanence and peace in a more
        spiritual adherence.

        The mental chemicalization, which has brought con-
65:30   jugal infidelity to the surface, will assuredly throw off
        this evil, and marriage will become purer when the scum
        is gone.

        Thou art right, immortal Shakespeare, great poet of
        humanity:
66:3           Sweet are the uses of adversity;
             Which, like the toad, ugly and venomous,
             Wears yet a precious jewel in his head.

                             Salutary sorrow

66:6    Trials teach mortals not to lean on a material staff, -
        a broken reed, which pierces the heart. We do not
        half remember this in the sunshine of joy
66:9    and prosperity. Sorrow is salutary. Through
        great tribulation we enter the kingdom. Trials are
        proofs of God's care. Spiritual development germi-
66:12   nates not from seed sown in the soil of material hopes,
        but when these decay, Love propagates anew the higher
        joys of Spirit, which have no taint of earth. Each suc-
66:15   cessive stage of experience unfolds new views of divine
        goodness and love.

        Amidst gratitude for conjugal felicity, it is well to re-
66:18   member how fleeting are human joys. Amidst conjugal
        infelicity, it is well to hope, pray, and wait patiently on
        divine wisdom to point out the path.

                           Patience is wisdom

66:21   Husbands and wives should never separate if there
        is no Christian demand for it. It is better to await the
        logic of events than for a wife precipitately
66:24   to leave her husband or for a husband to
        leave his wife. If one is better than the other, as must
        always be the case, the other pre-eminently needs good
66:27   company. Socrates considered patience salutary under
        such circumstances, making his Xantippe a discipline for
        his philosophy.

                           The gold and dross

66:30   Sorrow has its reward. It never leaves us
        where it found us. The furnace separates
        the gold from the dross that the precious metal may
67:1    be graven with the image of God. The cup our Father
        hath given, shall we not drink it and learn the lessons
67:3    He teaches?

                          Weathering the storm

        When the ocean is stirred by a storm, then the clouds
        lower, the wind shrieks through the tightened shrouds,
67:6    and the waves lift themselves into mountains.
        We ask the helmsman: "Do you know your
        course? Can you steer safely amid the storm?" He
67:9    answers bravely, but even the dauntless seaman is not
        sure of his safety; nautical science is not equal to the
        Science of Mind. Yet, acting up to his highest under-
67:12   standing, firm at the post of duty, the mariner works on
        and awaits the issue. Thus should we deport ourselves
        on the seething ocean of sorrow. Hoping and work-
67:15   ing, one should stick to the wreck, until an irresistible
        propulsion precipitates his doom or sunshine gladdens
        the troubled sea.

                             Spiritual power

67:18   The notion that animal natures can possibly give force
        to character is too absurd for consideration, when we
        remember that through spiritual ascendency
67:21   our Lord and Master healed the sick, raised
        the dead, and commanded even the winds and waves to
        obey him. Grace and Truth are potent beyond all other
67:24   means and methods.

        The lack of spiritual power in the limited demonstration
        of popular Christianity does not put to silence the labor
67:27   of centuries. Spiritual, not corporeal, consciousness is
        needed. Man delivered from sin, disease, and death
        presents the true likeness or spiritual ideal.

                         Basis of true religion

67:30   Systems of religion and medicine treat of physical pains
        and pleasures, but Jesus rebuked the suffering from any
        such cause or effect. The epoch approaches when the
68:1    understanding of the truth of being will be the basis of
        true religion. At present mortals progress slowly for
68:3    fear of being thought ridiculous. They are
        slaves to fashion, pride, and sense. Some-
        time we shall learn how Spirit, the great architect, has
68:6    created men and women in Science. We ought to weary
        of the fleeting and false and to cherish nothing which
        hinders our highest selfhood.

68:9    Jealousy is the grave of affection. The presence of
        mistrust, where confidence is due, withers the flowers
        of Eden and scatters love's petals to decay. Be not
68:12   in haste to take the vow "until death do us part."
        Consider its obligations, its responsibilities, its rela-
        tions to your growth and to your influence on other
68:15   lives.

                        Insanity and agamogenesis

        I never knew more than one individual who believed
        in agamogenesis; she was unmarried, a lovely charac-
68:18   ter, was suffering from incipient insanity, and
        a Christian Scientist cured her. I have named
        her case to individuals, when casting my bread upon
68:21   the waters, and it may have caused the good to ponder
        and the evil to hatch their silly innuendoes and lies, since
        salutary causes sometimes incur these effects. The per-
68:24   petuation of the floral species by bud or cell-division is
        evident, but I discredit the belief that agamogenesis
        applies to the human species.

                          God's creation intact

68:27   Christian Science presents unfoldment, not accretion;
        it manifests no material growth from molecule to mind,
        but an impartation of the divine Mind to man
68:30   and the universe. Proportionately as human
        generation ceases, the unbroken links of eternal, har-
        monious being will be spiritually discerned; and man,
69:1    not of the earth earthly but coexistent with God, will
        appear. The scientific fact that man and the universe
69:3    are evolved from Spirit, and so are spiritual, is as fixed in
        divine Science as is the proof that mortals gain the sense
        of health only as they lose the sense of sin and disease.
69:6    Mortals can never understand God's creation while believ-
        ing that man is a creator. God's children already created
        will be cognized only as man finds the truth of being.
69:9    Thus it is that the real, ideal man appears in proportion
        as the false and material disappears. No longer to marry
        or to be "given in marriage" neither closes man's con-
69:12   tinuity nor his sense of increasing number in God's in-
        finite plan. Spiritually to understand that there is but
        one creator, God, unfolds all creation, confirms the Scrip-
69:15   tures, brings the sweet assurance of no parting, no pain,
        and of man deathless and perfect and eternal.

        If Christian Scientists educate their own offspring
69:18   spiritually, they can educate others spiritually and not
        conflict with the scientific sense of God's creation. Some
        day the child will ask his parent: "Do you keep the First
69:21   Commandment? Do you have one God and creator, or
        is man a creator?" If the father replies, "God creates
        man through man," the child may ask, "Do you teach
69:24   that Spirit creates materially, or do you declare that
        Spirit is infinite, therefore matter is out of the ques-
        tion?" Jesus said, "The children of this world marry,
69:27   and are given in marriage: But they which shall be ac-
        counted worthy to obtain that world, and the resur-
        rection from the dead, neither marry, nor are given in
69:30   marriage."




        CHAPTER IV - CHRISTIAN SCIENCE VERSUS SPIRITUALISM

        And when they shall say unto you,
        Seek unto them that have familiar spirits,
        And unto wizards that peep and that mutter;
        Should not a people seek unto their God? - ISAIAH.

        Verily, verily, I say unto you, If a man keep my saying, he
        shall never see death. Then said the Jews unto him, Now we
        know that thou hast a devil. - JOHN.

                         The infinite one Spirit

70:1    MORTAL existence is an enigma. Every day is a
        mystery. The testimony of the corporeal senses
70:3    cannot inform us what is real and what is delusive, but
        the revelations of Christian Science unlock the treasures
        of Truth. Whatever is false or sinful can
70:6    never enter the atmosphere of Spirit. There
        is but one Spirit. Man is never God, but spiritual man,
        made in God's likeness, reflects God. In this scientific
70:9    reflection the Ego and the Father are inseparable. The
        supposition that corporeal beings are spirits, or that there
        are good and evil spirits, is a mistake.

                        Real and unreal identity

70:12   The divine Mind maintains all identities, from a blade
        of grass to a star, as distinct and eternal. The
        questions are: What are God's identities?
70:15   What is Soul? Does life or soul exist in the thing
        formed?

71:1    Nothing is real and eternal, - nothing is Spirit, - but
        God and His idea. Evil has no reality. It is neither
71:3    person, place, nor thing, but is simply a belief, an illusion
        of material sense.

        The identity, or idea, of all reality continues forever;
71:6    but Spirit, or the divine Principle of all, is not /in/ Spirit's
        formations. Soul is synonymous with Spirit, God, the
        creative, governing, infinite Principle outside of finite form,
71:9    which forms only reflect.

                              Dream-lessons

        Close your eyes, and you may dream that you see a
        flower, - that you touch and smell it. Thus you learn
71:12   that the flower is a product of the so-called
        mind, a formation of thought rather than of
        matter. Close your eyes again, and you may see land-
71:15   scapes, men, and women. Thus you learn that these
        also are images, which mortal mind holds and evolves
        and which simulate mind, life, and intelligence. From
71:18   dreams also you learn that neither mortal mind nor
        matter is the image or likeness of God, and that im-
        mortal Mind is not in matter.

                              Found wanting

71:21   When the Science of Mind is understood, spiritualism
        will be found mainly erroneous, having no scientific basis
        nor origin, no proof nor power outside of
71:24   human testimony. It is the offspring of the
        physical senses. There is no sensuality in Spirit. I never
        could believe in spiritualism.

71:27   The basis and structure of spiritualism are alike ma-
        terial and physical. Its spirits are so many corporealities,
        limited and finite in character and quality. Spiritualism
71:30   therefore presupposes Spirit, which is ever infinite, to be
        a corporeal being, a finite form, - a theory contrary to
        Christian Science.

72:1    There is but one spiritual existence, - the Life of
        which corporeal sense can take no cognizance. The
72:3    divine Principle of man speaks through immortal sense.
        If a material body - in other words, mortal, material
        sense - were permeated by Spirit, that body would
72:6    disappear to mortal sense, would be deathless. A con-
        dition precedent to communion with Spirit is the gain of
        spiritual life.
                            Spirits obsolete

72:9    So-called /spirits/ are but corporeal communicators. As
        light destroys darkness and in the place of darkness all
        is light, so (in absolute Science) Soul, or God,
72:12   is the only truth-giver to man. Truth de-
        stroys mortality, and brings to light immortality. Mortal
        belief (the material sense of life) and immortal Truth
72:15   (the spiritual sense) are the tares and the wheat, which
        are not united by progress, but separated.

        Perfection is not expressed through imperfection.
72:18   Spirit is not made manifest through matter, the anti-
        pode of Spirit. Error is not a convenient sieve through
        which truth can be strained.

                          Scientific phenomena

72:21   God, good, being ever present, it follows in divine
        logic that evil, the suppositional opposite of good, is never
        present. In Science, individual good derived
72:24   from God, the infinite All-in-all, may flow
        from the departed to mortals; but evil is neither com-
        municable nor scientific. A sinning, earthly mortal is
72:27   not the reality of Life nor the medium through which
        truth passes to earth. The joy of intercourse becomes
        the jest of sin, when evil and suffering are communicable.
72:30   Not personal intercommunion but divine law is the com-
        municator of truth, health, and harmony to earth and
        humanity. As readily can you mingle fire and frost as
73:1    Spirit and matter. In either case, one does not support
        the other.

73:3    Spiritualism calls one person, living in this world, /ma-
        terial/, but another, who has died to-day a sinner and sup-
        posedly will return to earth to-morrow, it terms a /spirit/.
73:6    The fact is that neither the one nor the other is infinite
        Spirit, for Spirit is God, and man is His likeness.

                             One government

        The belief that one man, as spirit, can control an-
73:9    other man, as matter, upsets both the individuality and
        the Science of man, for man is image. God
        controls man, and God is the only Spirit. Any
73:12   other control or attraction of so-called spirit is a mortal
        belief, which ought to be known by its fruit, - the repe-
        tition of evil.

73:15   If Spirit, or God, communed with mortals or controlled
        them through electricity or any other form of matter, the
        divine order and the Science of omnipotent, omnipresent
73:18   Spirit would be destroyed.

                           Incorrect theories

        The belief that material bodies return to dust, hereafter
        to rise up as spiritual bodies with material sensations and
73:21   desires, is incorrect. Equally incorrect is the
        belief that spirit is confined in a finite, ma-
        terial body, from which it is freed by death, and that, when
73:24   it is freed from the material body, spirit retains the sensa-
        tions belonging to that body.

                             No me-diumship

        It is a grave mistake to suppose that matter is any part
73:27   of the reality of intelligent existence, or that Spirit and
        matter, intelligence and non-intelligence, can
        commune together. This error Science will
73:30   destroy. The sensual cannot be made the mouthpiece of
        the spiritual, nor can the finite become the channel of
        the infinite. There is no communication between so-
74:1    called material existence and spiritual life which is not
        subject to death.

                           Opposing conditions

74:3    To be on communicable terms with Spirit, persons must
        be free from organic bodies; and their return to a mate-
        rial condition, after having once left it, would
74:6    be as impossible as would be the restoration
        to its original condition of the acorn, already absorbed
        into a sprout which has risen above the soil. The seed
74:9    which has germinated has a new form and state of exist-
        ence. When here or hereafter the belief of life in matter
        is extinct, the error which has held the belief dissolves
74:12   with the belief, and never returns to the old condition.
        No correspondence nor communion can exist between
        persons in such opposite dreams as the belief of having
74:15   died and left a material body and the belief of still living
        in an organic, material body.

                           Bridgeless division

        The caterpillar, transformed into a beautiful insect,
74:18   is no longer a worm, nor does the insect return to
        fraternize with or control the worm. Such
        a backward transformation is impossible in
74:21   Science. Darkness and light, infancy and manhood,
        sickness and health, are opposites, - different beliefs,
        which never blend. Who will say that infancy can utter
74:24   the ideas of manhood, that darkness can represent light,
        that we are in Europe when we are in the opposite hemi-
        sphere? There is no bridge across the gulf which divides
74:27   two such opposite conditions as the spiritual, or incor-
        poreal, and the physical, or corporeal.

        In Christian Science there is never a retrograde step,
74:30   never a return to positions outgrown. The so-called dead
        and living cannot commune together, for they are in
        separate states of existence, or consciousness.

                        Unscientific investiture

75:1    This simple truth lays bare the mistaken assumption
        that man dies as matter but comes to life as spirit. The
75:3    so-called dead, in order to reappear to those
        still in the existence cognized by the physical
        senses, would need to be tangible and material, - to have
75:6    a material investiture, - or the material senses could take
        no cognizance of the so-called dead.

        Spiritualism would transfer men from the spiritual sense
75:9    of existence back into its material sense. This gross mate-
        rialism is scientifically impossible, since to infinite Spirit
        there can be no matter.

                            Raising the dead

75:12   Jesus said of Lazarus: "Our friend Lazarus sleepeth;
        but I go, that I may awake him out of sleep." Jesus
        restored Lazarus by the understanding that
75:15   Lazarus had never died, not by an admis-
        sion that his body had died and then lived again. Had
        Jesus believed that Lazarus had lived or died in his
75:18   body, the Master would have stood on the same plane of
        belief as those who buried the body, and he could not have
        resuscitated it.

75:21   When you can waken yourself or others out of the belief
        that all must die, you can then exercise Jesus' spiritual
        power to reproduce the presence of those who have thought
