as a personal designation. The meaning and reference of such use of it
appear to have been familiar both to the earlier and later Jews. See the
chapters relating to the Chaldee Paraphrases.




CHAPTER III.

    Reasons for rendering the formula, "Melach Jehovah," the
    Messenger (who is) Jehovah; and not _the_ Angel, or _an_ Angel
    _of_ the Lord.


An examination of the numerous passages in which the denominative
_Melach_ is coupled with the name Jehovah, or Elohim, or used
interchangeably with those names, renders it conclusively manifest that
in each and every instance the reference is to one and the same official
Person. This, however, is not entirely obvious from our common version,
owing to the circumstance that the translators rendered the formula,
Melach Jehovah, _the_ angel, or sometimes _an_ angel _of_ the Lord. The
word Jehovah, in the original, never has the article; nor the word
Melach, when coupled with Jehovah, though when employed alone to
designate the same official Person, the article is sometimes prefixed,
as in Gen. xlviii. 16: "_The_ Melach, which redeemed me." The word
Elohim often has the article, and retains it in most of the instances in
which the formula Melach Elohim occurs, requiring it to be read, Melach
_the_, or who is _the_, Elohim. See some twelve instances in the book of
Ezra, and more than twenty in Nehemiah, where there was a special
occasion to distinguish the true from the false God. In the formula,
Melach Jehovah, there is nothing in the original to forbid the two words
being considered as in apposition, and the rendering consequently _the
Messenger Jehovah_, or the Messenger who is Jehovah. And that such
should be the rendering, instead of the angel or messenger _of_ Jehovah,
is apparent from the following considerations:

1st. That the Person identified by this name of office is Jehovah, as is
shown by the use, in numerous passages, of the two names interchangeably.
The word Melach, it may be observed, is, when coupled with the name
Jehovah, and when used separately or interchangeably, with the same
personal reference, always in the singular number; and, when coupled with
that name, generally precedes it; by which circumstances, and the
relations in which it occurs separately, all confusion as to its reference
is precluded.

2d. From the consideration that this rendering corresponds with the
official character of the Person designated. His office is that of a
messenger, sent of the Father--the Mediator, the Christ. The designation
in question is in no instance applied to any created angel, and no doubt
it was intended to distinguish the delegated Person from the Father who
sent him. But to render it, the angel or messenger _of_ Jehovah,
especially in sentences in which the Person designated is called Melach
Jehovah, and also called Jehovah, Adonai, or Elohim, is not to
distinguish but to confuse.

3d. This rendering comports with the official agency of the delegated
Person, as the creator, upholder, lawgiver, and ruler of all creatures.
The works ascribed to him are, in the same sentences and connections,
ascribed to Jehovah.

4th. It comports with the designation by which, when he became
incarnate, he was familiarly known, and which is translated _Lord_, as
the equivalent of the name _Jehovah_ in Hebrew. Thus, Luke ii. 11, he is
announced as the "Saviour, which is Christ _the_ Lord." Campbell renders
it, _The Lord Messiah_. The sense is the same as that of _Jehovah who is
the Messiah_, or the Messenger _who is_ Jehovah, or the Anointed _who
is_ Jehovah. Again, when Thomas saw him after his resurrection, he
exclaimed, "My Lord and my God"--my Jehovah and my Elohe. John xx.

5th. It comports with Hebrew usage in other cases. The instances are
common in which particular persons are designated by two words in
apposition, indicating different characteristics. Thus, 1 Kings iv. 1:
"So king Solomon was king over all Israel;" literally, so was _the_
king, Solomon (or, who is Solomon) king, &c. Ibid. vii. 13, 14: And
_the_ king, Solomon, sent and fetched Hiram, son of a _woman_, a
_widow_--_i. e._, _a woman who was a widow_; and xvii. 9, a woman (_who
is_) a widow. Deut. xxii. 23, 28: A _damsel_, a _virgin_--_i. e._, a
damsel who is a virgin.

When the article is prefixed to the word Elohim, it often and perhaps
always is meant expressly to distinguish the True God from the false; as
when the people, seeing the triumph of Elijah over the prophets of Baal,
exclaimed, "Jehovah, he is _the_ Elohim:" he, and not the pretended
Elohim of idolaters, is the true God. The import of the formula, Jehovah
Elohim, is Jehovah _the true_ Elohim, and is not clearly or fully
expressed by the translation _Lord God_, any more than it would be by a
repetition of one or the other of those words. The meaning is, _Jehovah
who is the true God_. So _Melach Jehovah_, the respective terms
referring indisputably to the same person, means, _the Messenger who is
Jehovah_.

But our translators render Melach Jehovah, the angel _of_ the Lord, as
though the angel was a created agent; or, as though Jehovah in this
connection was the Father. McCaul, in his observations on Kimchi's
translation of Zechariah, defends this rendering: First, on the ground,
that if the words _Melach Jehovah_ are in apposition, the translation
should be, not, the Angel Jehovah, but _an_ angel, or _a_ Messenger
Jehovah. But, since the word Jehovah never admits the article, and since
in the formula in question the word Melach never admits it, no reason
can be assigned why the rendering should not be _the_ Angel, or _the_
Messenger Jehovah; it being admitted that one and the same Person is
uniformly designated by this formula. On the contrary, if this objection
were well founded, then in rendering the word _Jehovah_, where it occurs
alone, it should read in English, _a_ Lord, instead of _the_ Lord.

Moreover, if his criticisms were well founded, such a passage as 2
Chron. xxxii. 21, where the order of the designations is _Jehovah
Melach_, would require to be rendered, Lord of the angel, instead of
Jehovah the Messenger, or the Jehovah Messenger. The statement in the
text just quoted from 2 Chronicles is repeated in Isaiah xxxvii. 36,
where the order of the words in question is _Melach Jehovah_. Again, the
formula, (_the_) _Elohim Melach_, occurs in 1 Chron. xxi. 15, and also
in that and the next verse, _Melach Jehovah_, referring to the same
Person.

2d. He urges that if the words Melach Jehovah were to be rendered the
Angel Jehovah, then we should expect to find the article before the word
Melach; because, he says, the word Adon uniformly has it when employed
to designate Jehovah. But this is a misstatement. When so employed, that
word, in its different forms, is generally without the article; as
Joshua iii. 11 and 13: "The ark of the covenant of _Adon_," translated
_the_ Lord, "of all the earth." "The ark of Adon Jehovah, Adon of all
the earth," rendered in our version, "the ark of _the_ Lord, _the_ Lord
of all the earth." Here the translators suppress the word Adon where it
first occurs; probably assuming, as in the case of Melach above referred
to, that it was not in apposition with the next word, Jehovah; and
seeing that if it was not, the version must be, the Lord _of_ the Lord,
as they rendered Melach Jehovah, the angel _of_ the Lord. But the
reference of the word Adon being in every such connection identical with
that of the word Jehovah, and the two words, when conjoined, being, like
Melach Jehovah, in apposition, the version should have been, the Lord
(who is) Jehovah, the Lord of all the earth.

Again, 1 Kings ii. 26: "The ark of Adon Jehovah," rendered, the ark of
the Lord God; where the two words are taken to be in apposition: and if
the translator felt a difficulty, he would seem to have sought to avoid
it, as in other like instances, by an unusual version of the word
Jehovah. Again, 2 Kings xxii. 6: "Go up, for Adon," rendered _the_ Lord,
"shall deliver it." And to give but one other out of very numerous
instances, Ps. lxviii. 20: "Unto Jehovah Adon," rendered God the Lord,
"belong the issues from death." In all the foregoing and similar
instances the sense requires the words "who is" to be inserted or
understood.

McCaul further observes, that the word Jehovah must sometimes be taken
as the genitive case, and cites Mal. ii. 7: "The priests' lips should
keep knowledge, and _they_ should seek the law at his mouth, [referring
to Jehovah Zebaoth, vs. 2 and 4,] for he is _Melach_ Jehovah Zebaoth,"
rendered, "the messenger _of_ the Lord of hosts." But he gives no reason
why Melach Jehovah in this passage should not be rendered, _the_
Messenger Jehovah, as well as in any other passage. Again, he observes,
that to translate the formula, Melach Jehovah, the angel Jehovah, is
plainly against the Masoretic punctuation. But that is not conclusive;
for the points formed no part of the original text, and no one pretends
that they were inspired. The authors of that system of punctuation were
governed, in their application of the points, by their theological, as
well as by their grammatical theory; and however grammatically correct
they may have been in their appropriation of them in all ordinary cases,
in those passages of which they held an erroneous theological or
exegetical theory, they of course arranged the points conformably, so as
to make the text express their preconceived opinions. In relation to the
present instance, for example, Kimchi, as McCaul observes, "considered
the Person designated the 'angel of the Lord,' as nothing more than one
of the many angels to whom he supposes the governance of this lower
world is committed." Observations, page 9. Doubtless the authors of the
points held the same opinion. McCaul observes, in his introduction, that
Kimchi and other Rabbies of his day "endeavored to get rid of the
Christian interpretations, and to root out the Christian doctrines which
had descended from the ancient Jewish Church."




CHAPTER IV.

    Visible Appearance of the Messenger Jehovah to Hagar.


The first recorded instance of the visible appearance of the Angel or
Messenger Jehovah, is that to Hagar, Gen. xvi., where the designation
Melach Jehovah is repeated several times. The Messenger Jehovah found
Hagar by a fountain of water. He called her by name; directed her to
return to her mistress; promised to multiply her seed exceedingly; and
directed her to call her son Ishmael, "because _Jehovah_ had heard her
affliction." "And she called the name of _Jehovah_ that spake unto her,
Thou El seest me: for she said, Have I also here looked after him that
seeth me?" The visible Person whom she saw, and who spoke to her, and
promised what none but a Divine Person could promise, is called Melach
Jehovah, and also Jehovah, and El. He was therefore not a messenger _of_
Jehovah, or a distinct person from him, but Jehovah himself, as
recognized and worshipped under the several designations here applied to
him. Considered as the administrator of Providence, the things said and
done by him were in keeping with his delegated character, and with the
acts ascribed to him on other occasions. There is a further notice of
his dealings with Ishmael, Gen. xxii. 17, after his expulsion, with
Hagar, from Abraham's house, and her abandonment of him in despair of
his life. "And Elohim heard the voice of the lad: and Melach Elohim [in
our version, the angel _of_ God] called to Hagar out of heaven, and said
unto her, What aileth thee, Hagar? Fear not; for Elohim hath heard the
voice of the lad, where he is. Arise, lift up the lad, and hold him in
thy hand; for _I_ will make of him a great nation. And Elohim opened her
eyes, and she saw a well of water; and Elohim was with the lad," &c.
Here the speaker is Melach Elohim, which designation must refer to the
same official Person as that of Melach Jehovah in the former instance,
for he personally promised the same thing; saying in the one case, "_I_
will multiply thy seed exceedingly, that it shall not be numbered for
multitude;" and in the other, "_I_ will make him a great nation." That
the import and reference of the two formulas is the same, is also
evident beyond a question from other passages, where both are
indifferently applied to the same person; as Judges vi. 20, 21: "And
_Melach (the) Elohim_ said unto him, Take the flesh and the unleavened
cakes and lay them upon this rock, and pour out the broth. And he did
so. Then _Melach Jehovah_ put forth the end of the staff that was in his
hand, and touched the flesh," &c. And again, Judges xiii. 3-9: "And
Melach Jehovah appeared unto the woman, and (the) Elohim hearkened to
the voice of Manoah, and Melach (the) Elohim came _again_ unto the
woman." The narratives in which these passages occur clearly restrict
the reference to one and the same Person.

In the original of these quotations, the article is prefixed to the word
Elohim, as it is also elsewhere, (underscored, or included above and
hereafter in parenthesis,) which is by some supposed to require the
rendering to be, as in our common version, _the angel or messenger_ of
Elohim. But this conclusion cannot be sustained: 1st, because it
indicates something different in respect to the Person referred to from
the formula Melach Jehovah; and 2d, because in other instances of
similar formulas the article does not occur, as in Gen. xxi. 17: "And
Melach Elohim called to Hagar." The occurrence of the article does not
determine the construction. It is often redundant, and is prefixed to
the word Elohim where it cannot be a sign of the genitive, because not
immediately preceded by a noun to govern it. Thus in the passage above
quoted from Judges xiii. we read, "and _the_ Elohim hearkened," &c., the
article being prefixed in the original. So Gen. vi. 11: "The earth also
was corrupt before _the_ Elohim." Gen. xvii. 18: "And Abraham said unto
_the_ Elohim." Gen. xxii. 3, 9, xxvii. 28, and many other places.




CHAPTER V.

    No visible Divine Appearances ever made except of the Messiah,
    the Mediator in all the Relations of God to the World.


Having shown that the denominative Melach, when coupled with the name
Jehovah, or the name Elohim, or used interchangeably with either of
those or with other Divine names, is a designation of the Messiah; that
when that denominative is employed interchangeably with the names
Jehovah, Elohim, or Adonai, those names designate the same official
Person; and that the formulas Melach Jehovah and Melach Elohim have one
and the same personal import and reference, the way is prepared for an
examination of other Scriptures in which occur the same designations of
the delegated ONE of whom Moses and the prophets wrote, the WORD who was
in the beginning, and by whom all things were created and are upheld.

This wonderful Person often, in the course of the ancient dispensations,
manifested himself visibly in the likeness of that form which in due
time he permanently assumed, by taking human nature into union with his
person. In his delegated official character, being the agent in all
external and visible works and manifestations, and the medium of all
relations between creatures and the Self-existent, he was from the
beginning the image and acting representative of the invisible Deity;
delegated of the Father to accomplish the works which, pursuant to the
counsels of eternity, belong to his comprehensive administration. To
him, in this character and in distinction from the Father, belonged all
visible personal manifestations. And hence, to enforce the necessary
discrimination, and prevent erroneous impressions, the Evangelist John,
chap. i., on announcing the visible WORD, the WORD incarnate, as the
visible expression of the glory of the Father, says: "No man hath seen
God (the Father) at any time; it is [see Campbell's version] the
only-begotten Son, that is in the bosom of the Father, who hath made him
known." And again, chap. vi. 45: "Every man that hath heard and learned
of the Father cometh unto me; not that any man hath seen the Father;"
(or, as rendered by Campbell,) "not that any man, except him who is from
God, hath seen the Father. He, indeed, hath seen the Father," Again xiv.
9: "He that hath seen me, hath seen the Father;" that is, hath seen the
image, the only visible representative of the Father. And in his first
epistle, chap. iv: "No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one
another, God dwelleth in us. And we have seen and do testify that the
Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world."

These statements preclude the supposition of any visible personal
appearance during the preceding dispensations, excepting of the
delegated official Person to whom the revelation of the Invisible was
assigned; and who when referred to as Creator is called Elohim and
Jehovah, and when referred to as the administrator of Providence, or in
his relations to individuals and to the house of Israel, is called
indiscriminately by all the Divine names and titles, whether significant
especially of his Divine nature, or of his official person, agency or
character.

In these multiform relations he was the great theme, as he was the
lawgiver, administrator and revealer of the ancient dispensations;
asserting the same prerogatives and performing the same acts when
referred to by official titles, as when specially denominated Jehovah or
Elohim. In both cases, from the nature and historical connection of the
acts ascribed to him, it is evident that the actor was personally one
and the same.

The word Elohim is a general term, employed, it may be presumed,
originally, with reference only to the Supreme Being, but subsequently
appropriated to imaginary deities. In the Hebrew Scriptures it occurs in
several forms, as El, Elohe, Eloah, Elohim, referring sometimes to the
Divine Being absolutely, sometimes definitely to the Father, sometimes
to the Holy Spirit, but commonly to the Son; as is the case with
corresponding and equivalent designations in the New Testament. The
radical idea of this word, in its simplest form, is, according to some
Hebrew lexicographers, that of interposer, intervener, mediator; derived
from the intervention of air and light between all bodies in space, and
indicating the universal agency of the Divine Person, primarily
designated as interposer or mediator. And undoubtedly the scope of
numerous passages implies this special reference, though not always
apparent, without reference to other scriptures; as in Psalm xlv. 6:
"Thy throne, Elohim, is for ever and ever;" and cii. 24: "I said, El,
[with the suffix for my, and rendered O my God,] take me not away in the
midst of my days: thy years are throughout all generations. Of old hast
thou laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the work of
thy hands. They shall perish," &c. These passages are quoted, Heb. i.,
as having referred expressly to Christ.
