turned half around, and pointing in the direction of Dun Aengus, which
was in full view on the sharp sky-line of Aranmore, said that there, in
a large tumulus on the hill-side below it, they had one of their
favourite abodes. But, he added, 'The rocks are full of them, and they
are small fellows.' Just across the road from where we were standing, in
a spot near Oak Quarter, another place was pointed out where the fairies
are often seen dancing. The name of it is _Moneen an Damhsa_, 'the
Little Bog of the Dance.' Other sorts of fairies live in the sea; and
some of them who live on Aranmore (probably in conjunction with those in
the sea) go out over the water and cause storms and wind.


THE TESTIMONY OF A ROMAN CATHOLIC THEOLOGIAN

The following evidence, by the Rev. Father ----, came out during a
discussion concerning spirits and fairies as regarded by Roman Catholic
theology, which he and I enjoyed when we met as fellow travellers in
Galway Town:--

_Of Magic and Place-spirits._--'Magic, according to Catholic theology,
is nothing else than the solicitation of spiritual powers to help us. If
evil spirits are evoked by certain irrational practices it is unholy
magic, and this is altogether forbidden by our Church. All charms,
spells, divination, necromancy, or geomancy are unholy magic. Holy magic
is practised by carrying the Cross in Christ. Now evil magic has been
practised here in Ireland: butter has been _taken_ so that none came
from the churning; cows have been made to die of maladies; and fields
made unproductive. A cow was bought from an old woman in Connemara, and
no butter was ever had from the cow until exorcism with holy water was
performed. This is reported to me as a fact.' And in another relation
the Rev. Father ---- said what for us is highly significant:--'My
private opinion is that in certain places here in Ireland where pagan
sacrifices were practised, evil spirits through receiving homage gained
control, and still hold control, unless driven out by exorcisms.'


THE TESTIMONY OF THE TOWN CLERK OF TUAM

To the town clerk of Tuam, Mr. John Glynn, who since his boyhood has
taken a keen interest in the traditions of his native county, I am
indebted for the following valuable summary of the fairy creed in that
part of North Galway where Finvara rules:--

_Fairies of the Tuam Country._--'The whole of Knock Ma (_Cnoc
Meadha_[13]), which probably means Hill of the Plain, is said to be the
palace of Finvara, king of the Connaught fairies. There are a good many
legends about Finvara, but very few about Queen Meave in this region.'

_Famine of 1846-7 caused by Fairies._--'During 1846-7 the potato crop in
Ireland was a failure, and very much suffering resulted. At the time,
the country people in these parts attributed the famine to disturbed
conditions in the fairy world. Old Thady Steed once told me about the
conditions then prevailing, "Sure, we couldn't be any other way; and I
saw the _good people_ and hundreds besides me saw them fighting in the
sky over Knock Ma and on towards Galway." And I heard others say they
saw the fighting also.'

_Fairyland; and the Seeress._--'Fairies are said to be immortal, and the
fairy world is always described as an immaterial place, though I do not
think it is the same as the world of the dead. Sick persons, however,
are often said to be with the fairies, and when cured, to have come
back. A woman who died here about thirty years ago was commonly believed
to have been with the fairies during her seven years' sickness when she
was a maiden. She married after coming back, and had children; and she
was always able to see the _good people_ and to talk with them, for she
had the second-sight. And it is said that she used to travel with the
fairies at night. After her marriage she lived in Tuam, and though her
people were six or seven miles out from Tuam in the country, she could
always tell all that was taking place with them there, and she at her
own home at the time.'

_Fairies on May Day._--'On May Day the _good people_ can steal butter if
the chance is given them. If a person enters a house then, and churning
is going on, he must take a hand in it, or else there will be no butter.
And if fire is given away on May Day nothing will go right for the whole
year.'

_The Three Fairy Drops._--'Even yet certain things are due the fairies;
for example, two years ago, in the Court Room here in Tuam, a woman was
on trial for watering milk, and to the surprise of us all who were
conducting the proceedings, and, it can be added, to the great amusement
of the onlookers, she swore that she had only added "the three fairy
drops".'

_Food of Fairies._--'Food, after it has been put out at night for the
fairies, is not allowed to be eaten afterwards by man or beast, not even
by pigs. Such food is said to have no real substance left in it, and to
let anything eat it wouldn't be thought of. The underlying idea seems to
be that the fairies extract the spiritual essence from food offered to
them, leaving behind the grosser elements.'

_Fairy Warfare._--'When the fairy tribes under the various kings and
queens have a battle, one side manages to have a living man among them,
and he by knocking the fairies about turns the battle in case the side
he is on is losing. It is always usual for the Munster fairy king to
challenge Finvara, the Connaught fairy king.'


COUNTY SLIGO, AND THE TESTIMONY OF A PEASANT SEER[14]

The Ben Bulbin country in County Sligo is one of those rare places in
Ireland where fairies are thought to be visible, and our first witness
from there claims to be able to see the fairies or 'gentry' and to talk
with them. This mortal so favoured lives in the same townland where his
fathers have lived during four hundred years, directly beneath the
shadows of Ben Bulbin, on whose sides Dermot is said to have been killed
while hunting the wild-boar. And this famous old mountain, honeycombed
with curious grottoes ages ago when the sea beat against its
perpendicular flanks, is the very place where the 'gentry' have their
chief abode. Even on its broad level summit, for it is a high square
tableland like a mighty cube of rock set down upon the earth by some
antediluvian god, there are treacherous holes, wherein more than one
hunter may have been lost for ever, penetrating to unknown depths; and
by listening one can hear the tides from the ocean three or four miles
away surging in and out through ancient subterranean channels, connected
with these holes. In the neighbouring mountains there are long caverns
which no man has dared to penetrate to the end, and even dogs, it is
said, have been put in them never to emerge, or else to come out miles
away.

One day when the heavy white fog-banks hung over Ben Bulbin and its
neighbours, and there was a weird almost-twilight at midday over the
purple heather bog-lands at their base, and the rain was falling, I sat
with my friend before a comfortable fire of fragrant turf in his cottage
and heard about the 'gentry':--

_Encounters with the 'Gentry'._--'When I was a young man I often used to
go out in the mountains over there (pointing out of the window in their
direction) to fish for trout, or to hunt; and it was in January on a
cold, dry day while carrying my gun that I and a friend with me, as we
were walking around Ben Bulbin, saw one of the _gentry_ for the first
time. I knew who it was, for I had heard the _gentry_ described ever
since I could remember; and this one was dressed in blue with a
head-dress adorned with what seemed to be frills.[15] When he came up to
us, he said to me in a sweet and silvery voice, "The seldomer you come
to this mountain the better. A young lady here wants to take you away."
Then he told us not to fire off our guns, because the _gentry_ dislike
being disturbed by the noise. And he seemed to be like a soldier of the
_gentry_ on guard. As we were leaving the mountains, he told us not to
look back, and we didn't. Another time I was alone trout-fishing in
nearly the same region when I heard a voice say, "It is ---- barefooted
and fishing." Then there came a whistle like music and a noise like the
beating of a drum, and soon one of the _gentry_ came and talked with me
for half an hour. He said, "Your mother will die in eleven months, and
do not let her die unanointed." And she did die within eleven months. As
he was going away he warned me, "You must be in the house before sunset.
Do not delay! Do not delay! They can do nothing to you until I get back
in the castle." As I found out afterwards, he was going to _take_ me,
but hesitated because he did not want to leave my mother alone. After
these warnings I was always afraid to go to the mountains, but lately I
have been told I could go if I took a friend with me.'

_'Gentry' Protection._--'The _gentry_ have always befriended and
protected me. I was drowned twice but for them. Once I was going to
Durnish Island, a mile off the coast. The channel is very deep, and at
the time there was a rough sea, with the tide running out, and I was
almost lost. I shrieked and shouted, and finally got safe to the
mainland. The day I talked with one of the _gentry_ at the foot of the
mountain when he was for _taking_ me, he mentioned this, and said they
were the ones who saved me from drowning then.'

_'Gentry' Stations._--'Especially in Ireland, the _gentry_ live inside
the mountains in beautiful castles; and there are a good many branches
of them in other countries. Like armies, they have various stations and
move from one to another. Some live in the Wicklow Mountains near
Dublin.'

_'Gentry' Control Over Human Affairs._--'The _gentry_ take a great
interest in the affairs of men, and they always stand for justice and
right. Any side they favour in our wars, that side wins. They favoured
the Boers, and the Boers did get their rights. They told me they
favoured the Japanese and not the Russians, because the Russians are
tyrants. Sometimes they fight among themselves. One of them once said,
"I'd fight for a friend, or I'd fight for Ireland."'

_The 'Gentry' Described._--In response to my wish, this description of
the 'gentry' was given:--'The folk are the grandest I have ever seen.
They are far superior to us, and that is why they are called the
_gentry_. They are not a working class, but a military-aristocratic
class, tall and noble-appearing. They are a distinct race between our
own and that of spirits, as they have told me. Their qualifications are
tremendous. "We could cut off half the human race, but would not," they
said, "for we are expecting salvation." And I knew a man three or four
years ago whom they struck down with paralysis. Their sight is so
penetrating that I think they could see through the earth. They have a
silvery voice, quick and sweet. The music they play is most beautiful.
They _take_ the whole body and soul of young and intellectual people who
are interesting, transmuting the body to a body like their own. I asked
them once if they ever died, and they said, "No; we are always kept
young." Once they take you and you taste food in their palace you cannot
come back. You are changed to one of them, and live with them for ever.
They are able to appear in different forms. One once appeared to me, and
seemed only four feet high, and stoutly built. He said, "I am bigger
than I appear to you now. We can make the old young, the big small, the
small big." One of their women told all the secrets of my family. She
said that my brother in Australia would travel much and suffer
hardships, all of which came true; and foretold that my nephew, then
about two years old, would become a great clergyman in America, and that
is what he is now. Besides the _gentry_, who are a distinct class, there
are bad spirits and ghosts, which are nothing like them. My mother once
saw a leprechaun beside a bush hammering. He disappeared before she
could get to him, but he also was unlike one of the _gentry_.'[16]


EVIDENCE FROM GRANGE

Our next witness, who lives about three miles from our last witness, is
Hugh Currid, the oldest man in Grange; and so old is he that now he does
little more than sit in the chimney-corner smoking, and, as he looks at
the red glow of the peat, dreaming of the olden times. Hugh knows
English very imperfectly, and so what he narrated was in the ancient
Gaelic which his fathers spoke. When Father Hines took me to Hugh's
cottage, Hugh was in his usual silent pose before the fire. At first he
rather resented having his thoughts disturbed, but in a few minutes he
was as talkative as could be, for there is nothing like the mention of
Ireland to get him started. The Father left us then; and with the help
of Hugh's sister as an interpreter I took down what he said:--

_The Flax-Seller's Return from Faerie._--'An old woman near Lough More,
where Father Patrick was drowned,[17] who used to make her living by
selling flax at the market, was _taken_ by the _gentry_, and often came
back afterwards to her three children to comb their hair. One time she
told a neighbour that the money she saved from her dealings in flax
would be found near a big rock on the lake-shore, which she indicated,
and that she wanted the three children to have it.'

_A Wife Recovered from the 'Gentry'._--'A man's young wife died in
confinement while he was absent on some business at Ballingshaun, and
one of the _gentry_ came to him and said she had been _taken._ The
husband hurried home, and that night he sat with the body of his wife
all alone. He left the door open a little, and it wasn't long before his
wife's spirit came in and went to the cradle where her child was
sleeping. As she did so, the husband threw at her a charm of hen's dung
which he had ready, and this held her until he could call the
neighbours. And while they were coming, she went back into her body, and
lived a long time afterwards. The body was stiff and cold when the
husband arrived home, though it hadn't been washed or dressed.'


A TAILOR'S TESTIMONY

Our next witness is Patrick Waters, by trade a tailor, living in
Cloontipruckilish, a cross-road hamlet less than two miles from Hugh
Currid's home. His first story is a parallel to one told about the
minister of Aberfoyle who was _taken_ by the 'good people' (pp. 89
ff.):--

_The Lost Bride._--'A girl in this region died on her wedding-night
while dancing. Soon after her death she appeared to her husband, and
said to him, "I'm not dead at all, but I am put from you now for a time.
It may be a long time, or a short time, I cannot tell. I am not badly
off. If you want to get me back you must stand at the gap near the house
and catch me as I go by, for I live near there, and see you, and you do
not see me." He was anxious enough to get her back, and didn't waste any
time in getting to the gap. When he came to the place, a party of
strangers were just coming out, and his wife soon appeared as plain as
could be, but he couldn't stir a hand or foot to save her. Then there
was a scream and she was gone. The man firmly believed this, and would
not marry again.'

_The Invisible Island._--'There is an enchanted island which is an
invisible island between Innishmurray and the mainland opposite. It is
only seen once in seven years. I saw it myself, and so did four or five
others with me. A boatman from Sligo named Carr took two strange men
with him towards Innishmurray, and they disappeared at the spot where
the island is, and he thought they had fallen overboard and been
drowned. Carr saw one of the same men in Connelly (County Donegal), some
six months or so after, and with great surprise said to him, "Will you
tell me the wonders of the world? Is it you I saw drowned near
Innishmurray?" "Yes," he said; and then asked, "Do you see me?" "Yes,"
answered Carr. "But," said the man again, "you do not see me with both
eyes?" Then Carr closed one eye to be sure, and found that he saw him
with one eye only. And he told the man which one it was. At this
information the fairy man blew on Carr's face, and Carr never saw him
again.'

_A Dream._--'My father dreamt he saw two armies coming in from the sea,
walking on the water. Reaching the strand, they lined up and commenced a
battle, and my father was in great terror. The fighting was long and
bloody, and when it was over every fighter vanished, the wounded and
dead as well as the survivors. The next morning an old woman who had the
reputation of talking with the fairies came in the house to my father,
who, though greatly disturbed over the dream, had told us nothing of it,
and asked him, "Have you anything to tell? I couldn't but laugh at you,"
she added, and before my father could reply, continued, "Well, Jimmy,
you won't tell the news, so I will." And then she began to tell about
the battle. "Ketty!" exclaimed my father at this, "can it be true? And
who were the men beside me?" When Ketty told him, they turned out to be
some of his dead friends. She received her information from a drowned
man whom she met on the spot where the _gentry_ armies had come ashore;
and, in the place where they fought, the sand was all burnt red, as from
fire.'

As the narrator reflected on this dream story, he remarked about dreams
generally:--'The reason our dreams appear different from what they are
is because while in them we can't touch the body and transform it.
People believe themselves to be with the dead in dreams.'

During September 1909, when I had several fresh interviews with Patrick
Waters, I verified all of his 1908 testimony such as it appears above;
and among unimportant anecdotes I have omitted from the matter taken
down in 1908 one anecdote about our seer-witness from County Sligo,
because it proved to be capable of opposite interpretations. Patrick
Waters, however, like many of his neighbours, thoroughly supports Hugh
Currid's opinion that our seer-witness 'surely sees something, and it
must be the _gentry_'; and of Hugh Currid himself, Patrick Waters said,
'Hugh Currid did surely see the _gentry_; he saw them passing this way
like a blast of wind.' Patrick's fresh testimony now follows, the story
about Father Patrick and Father Dominick coming first:--

_Father Patrick and Father Dominick._--'Father Patrick Noan while
bathing in the harbour at Carns (about three miles north-west of Grange)
was drowned. His body was soon brought ashore, and his brother, Father
Dominick Noan, was sent for. When Father Dominick arrived, one of the
men who had collected around the body said to him, "Why don't you do
something for your brother Patrick?" "Why don't somebody ask me?" he
replied, "for I must be asked in the name of God." So Jimmy McGowan went
on his knees and asked for the honour of God that Father Dominick should
bring Father Patrick back to life; and, at this, Father Dominick took
out his breviary and began to read. After a time he whistled, and began
to read again. He whistled a second time, and returned to the reading.
Upon his whistling the third time, Father Patrick's spirit appeared in
the doorway.

'"Where were you when I whistled the first time?" Father Dominick asked.
"I was at a hurling match with the _gentry_ on Mulloughmore strand."
"And where were you at the second whistle?" "I was coming over Corrick
Fadda; and when you whistled the third time I was here at the door."
Father Patrick's spirit had gone back into the body, and Father Patrick
lived round here as a priest for a long time afterwards.

'There was no such thing as artificial respiration known hereabouts when
this happened some fifty or sixty years ago. I heard this story, which I
know is true, from many persons who saw Father Dominick restore his
brother to life.'

_A Druid Enchantment._--After this strange psychical narrative, there
followed the most weird legend I have heard in Celtic lands about Druids
and magic. One afternoon Patrick Waters pointed out to me the field,
near the sea-coast opposite Innishmurray, in which the ancient menhir
containing the 'enchantment' used to stand; and, at another time, he
said that a bronze wand covered with curious marks (or else interlaced
designs) was found not far from the ruined dolmen and _allee couverte_
on the farm of Patrick Bruan, about two miles southward. This last
statement, like the story itself, I have been unable to verify in any
way.

'In times before Christ there were Druids here who enchanted one another
with Druid rods made of brass, and metamorphosed one another into stone
and lumps of oak. The question is, Where are the spirits of these Druids
now? Their spirits are wafted through the air, and the man or beast they
meet is smitten, while their own bodies are still under enchantment. I
had such a Druid enchantment in my hand; it wasn't stone, nor marble,
nor flint, and had human shape. It was found in the centre of a big rock
on Innis-na-Gore; and round this rock light used to appear at night. The
man who owned the stone decided to blast it up, and he found at its
centre the enchantment--just like a man, with head and legs and
arms.[18] Father Healy took the enchantment away, when he was here on a
visit, and said that it was a Druid enchanted, and that to get out of
the rock was one part of the releasement, and that there would be a
second and complete releasement of the Druid.'

_The Fairy Tribes Classified._--Finally I asked Patrick to classify, as
far as he could, all the fairy tribes he had ever heard about, and he
said:--'The leprechaun is a red-capped fellow who stays round pure
springs, generally shoemaking for the rest of the fairy tribes. The
lunantishees are the tribes that guard the blackthorn trees or sloes;
they let you cut no stick on the eleventh of November (the original
November Day), or on the eleventh of May (the original May Day). If at
such a time you cut a blackthorn, some misfortune will come to you.
Pookas are black-featured fellows mounted on good horses; and are
horse-dealers. They visit racecourses, but usually are invisible. The
_gentry_ are the most noble tribe of all; and they are a big race who
came from the planets--according to my idea; they usually appear white.
The _Daoine Maithe_ (though there is some doubt, the same or almost the
same as the _gentry_) were next to Heaven at the Fall, but did not fall;
they are a people expecting salvation.'


BRIDGET O'CONNER'S TESTIMONY

Our next witness is Bridget O'Conner, a near neighbour to Patrick
Waters, in Cloontipruckilish. When I approached her neat little cottage
she was cutting sweet-pea blossoms with a pair of scissors, and as I
stopped to tell her how pretty a garden she had, she searched out the
finest white bloom she could find and gave it to me. After we had talked
a little while about America and Ireland, she said I must come in and
rest a few minutes, and so I did; and it was not long before we were
talking about fairies:--

_The Irish Legend of the Dead._--'Old Peggy Gillin, dead these thirty
years, who lived a mile beyond Grange, used to cure people with a secret
herb shown to her by her brother, dead of a fairy-stroke. He was drowned
and _taken_ by the fairies, in the big drowning here during the herring
season. She would pull the herb herself and prepare it by mixing spring
water with it. Peggy could always talk with her dead relatives and
friends, and continually with her brother, and she would tell everybody
that they were with the fairies. Her daughter, Mary Short, who inherited
some of her mother's power, died here about three or four years ago.

'I remember, too, about Mary Leonard and her daughter, Nancy Waters.
Both of them are dead now. The daughter was the first to die, as it
happened, and in child-birth. When she was gone, her mother used to wail
and cry in an awful manner; and one day the daughter appeared to her in
the garden, and said, "The more you wail for me, the more I am in
torment. Pray for me, but do not wail."'

_A Midwife Story._--'A country nurse was requested by a strange man on
horseback to go with him to exercise her profession; and she went with
him to a castle she didn't know. When the baby was born, every woman in
the place where the event happened put her finger in a basin of water
and rubbed her eyes, and so the nurse put her finger in and rubbed it on
one of her eyes. She went home and thought no more about it. But one day
she was at the fair in Grange and saw some of the same women who were in
the castle when the baby was born; though, as she noticed, she only
could see them with the one eye she had wet with the water from the
basin. The nurse spoke to the women, and they wanted to know how she
recognized them; and she, in reply, said it was with the one eye, and
asked, "How is the baby?" "Well," said one of the fairy women; "and what
eye do you see us with?" "With the left eye," answered the nurse. Then
the fairy woman blew her breath against the nurse's left eye, and said,
"You'll never see me again." And the nurse was always blind in the left
eye after that.'


THE SPIRIT WORLD AT CARNS

The Carns or Mount Temple country, about three miles from Grange, County
Sligo, has already been mentioned by witnesses as a 'gentry' haunt, and
so now we shall hear what one of its oldest and most intelligent native
inhabitants says of it. John McCann had been referred to, by Patrick
Waters, as one who knows much about the 'gentry' at first hand, and we
can be sure that what he offers us is thoroughly reliable evidence. For
many years, John McCann, born in 1830, by profession a carpenter and
boat-builder, has been official mail-carrier to Innishmurray; and he
knows quite as much about the strange little island and the mainland
opposite it as any man living. His neat little cottage is on the shore
of the bay opposite the beautiful fairy-haunted Darnish Island; and, as
we sat within it beside a brilliant peat fire, and surrounded by all the
family, this is what was told me:--

_A 'Gentry' Medium._--'Ketty Rourk (or Queenan) could tell all that
would happen--funerals, weddings, and so forth. Sure some spirits were
coming to her. She said they were the _gentry_; that the _gentry_ are
everywhere; and that my drowned uncles and grandfather and other dead
are among them. A drowned man named Pat Nicholson was her adviser. He
used to live just a mile from here; and she knew him before he was
drowned.'

Here we have, clearly enough, a case of 'mediumship', or of
communication with the dead, as in modern Spiritualism. And the
following story, which like this last has numerous Irish parallels,
illustrates an ancient and world-wide animistic belief, that in
sickness--as in dreams--the soul goes out of the body as at death, and
meets the dead in their own fairy world.

_The Clairvoyance of Mike Farrell._--'Mike Farrell, too, could tell all
about the _gentry_, as he lay sick a long time. And he told about Father
Brannan's youth, and even the house in Roscommon in which the Father was
born; and Father Brannan never said anything more against Mike after
that. Mike surely saw the _gentry_; and he was with them during his
illness for twelve months. He said they live in _forts_ and at Alt Darby
("the Big Rock"). After he got well, he went to America, at the time of
the famine.'

_The 'Gentry' Army._--'The _gentry_ were believed to live up on this
hill (Hill of the Brocket Stones, _Cluach-a-brac_), and from it they
would come out like an army and march along the road to the strand. Very
few persons could see them. They were thought to be like living people,
but in different dress. They seemed like soldiers, yet it was known they
were not living beings such as we are.'

_The Seership of Dan Quinn._--'On Connor's Island (about two miles
southward from Carns by the mainland) my uncle, Dan Quinn, often used to
see big crowds of the _gentry_ come into his house and play music and
dance. The house would be full of them, but they caused him no fear.
Once on such an occasion, one of them came up to him as he lay in bed,
and giving him a green leaf told him to put it in his mouth. When he did
this, instantly he could not see the _gentry_, but could still hear
their music. Uncle Dan always believed he recognized in some of the
_gentry_ his drowned friends. Only when he was alone would the _gentry_
visit him. He was a silent old man, and so never talked much; but I know
that this story is as true as can be, and that the _gentry_ always took
an interest in him.'


UNDER THE SHADOW OF BEN BULBIN AND BEN WASKIN

I was driving along the Ben Bulbin road, on the ocean side, with Michael
Oates, who was on his way from his mountain-side home to the lowlands to
cut hay; and as we looked up at the ancient mountain, so mysterious and
silent in the shadows and fog of a calm early morning of summer, he told
me about its invisible inhabitants:--

_The 'Gentry' Huntsmen._--'I knew a man who saw the _gentry_ hunting on
the other side of the mountain. He saw hounds and horsemen cross the
road and jump the hedge in front of him, and it was one o'clock at
night. The next day he passed the place again, and looked for the tracks
of the huntsmen, but saw not a trace of tracks at all.'

_The 'Taking' of the Turf-Cutter._--After I had heard about two boys who
were drowned opposite Innishmurray, and who afterwards appeared as
apparitions, for the _gentry_ had them, this curious story was
related:--'A man was cutting turf out on the side of Ben Bulbin when a
strange man came to him and said, "You have cut enough turf for to-day.
You had better stop and go home." The turf-cutter looked around in
surprise, and in two seconds the strange man had disappeared; but he
decided to go home. And as soon as he was home, such a feeling came over
him that he could not tell whether he was alive or dead. Then he took to
his bed and never rose again.'

_Hearing the 'Gentry' Music._--At this Michael said to his companion in
the cart with us, William Barber, 'You tell how you heard the music';
and this followed:--'One dark night, about one o'clock, myself and
another young man were passing along the road up there round Ben Bulbin,
when we heard the finest kind of music. All sorts of music seemed to be
playing. We could see nothing at all, though we thought we heard voices
like children's. It was the music of the _gentry_ we heard.'

My next friend to testify is Pat Ruddy, eighty years old, one of the
most intelligent and prosperous farmers living beside Ben Bulbin. He
greeted me in the true Irish way, but before we could come to talk about
fairies his good wife induced me to enter another room where she had
secretly prepared a great feast spread out on a fresh white cloth, while
Pat and myself had been exchanging opinions about America and Ireland.
When I returned to the kitchen the whole family were assembled round the
blazing turf fire, and Pat was soon talking about the 'gentry':--

_Seeing the 'Gentry' Army._--'Old people used to say the _gentry_ were
in the mountains; that is certain, but I never could be quite sure of it
myself. One night, however, near midnight, I did have a sight: I set out
from Bantrillick to come home, and near Ben Bulbin there was the
greatest army you ever saw, five or six thousand of them in armour
shining in the moonlight. A strange man rose out of the hedge and
stopped me, for a minute, in the middle of the road. He looked into my
face, and then let me go.'

_An Ossianic Fragment._--'A man went away with the _good people_ (or
_gentry_), and returned to find the townland all in ruins. As he came
back riding on a horse of the _good people_, he saw some men in a quarry
trying to move a big stone. He helped them with it, but his saddle-girth
broke, and he fell to the ground. The horse ran away, and he was left
there, an old man'[19] (cf. pp. 346-7).


A SCHOOLMASTER'S TESTIMONY

A schoolmaster, who is a native of the Ben Bulbin country, offers this
testimony:--'There is implicit belief here in the _gentry_, especially
among the old people. They consider them the spirits of their departed
relations and friends, who visit them in joy and in sorrow. On the death
of a member of a family, they believe the spirits of their near
relatives are present; they do not see them, but feel their presence.
They even have a strong belief that the spirits show them the future in
dreams; and say that cases of affliction are always foreshown in a
dream.

'The belief in changelings is not now generally prevalent; but in olden
times a mother used to place a pair of iron tongs over the cradle before
leaving the child alone, in order that the fairies should not change the
child for a weakly one of their own. It was another custom to take a
wisp of straw, and, lighting one end of it, make a fiery sign of the
cross over a cradle before a babe could be placed in it.'


WITH THE IRISH MYSTICS IN THE _SIDHE_ WORLD

Let us now turn to the Rosses Point country, which, as we have already
said, is one of the very famous places for seeing the 'gentry', or, as
educated Irish seers who make pilgrimages thither call them, the
_Sidhe_. I have been told by more than one such seer that there on the
hills and Greenlands (a great stretch of open country, treeless and
grass-grown), and on the strand at Lower Rosses Point--called Wren Point
by the country-folk--these beings can be seen and their wonderful music
heard; and a well-known Irish artist has shown me many drawings, and
paintings in oil, of these _Sidhe_ people as he has often beheld them at
those places and elsewhere in Ireland. They are described as a race of
majestic appearance and marvellous beauty, in form human, yet in nature
divine. The highest order of them seems to be a race of beings evolved
to a superhuman plane of existence, such as the ancients called gods;
and with this opinion, strange as it may seem in this age, all the
educated Irish seers with whom I have been privileged to talk agree,
though they go further, and say that these highest _Sidhe_ races still
inhabiting Ireland are the ever-young, immortal divine race known to the
ancient men of Erin as the Tuatha De Danann.

Of all European lands I venture to say that Ireland is the most
mystical, and, in the eyes of true Irishmen, as much the Magic Island of
Gods and Initiates now as it was when the Sacred Fires flashed from its
purple, heather-covered mountain-tops and mysterious round towers, and
the Greater Mysteries drew to its hallowed shrines neophytes from the
West as well as from the East, from India and Egypt as well as from
Atlantis;[20] and Erin's mystic-seeing sons still watch and wait for the
relighting of the Fires and the restoration of the old Druidic
Mysteries. Herein I but imperfectly echo the mystic message Ireland's
seers gave me, a pilgrim to their Sacred Isle. And until this mystic
message is interpreted, men cannot discover the secret of Gaelic myth
and song in olden or in modern times, they cannot drink at the
ever-flowing fountain of Gaelic genius, the perennial source of
inspiration which lies behind the new revival of literature and art in
Ireland, nor understand the seeming reality of the fairy races.


AN IRISH MYSTIC'S TESTIMONY

Through the kindness of an Irish mystic, who is a seer, I am enabled to
present here, in the form of a dialogue, very rare and very important
evidence, which will serve to illustrate and to confirm what has just
been said above about the mysticism of Ireland. To anthropologists this
evidence may be of more than ordinary value when they know that it
comes from one who is not only a cultured seer but who is also a man
conspicuously successful in the practical life of a great city:--

_Visions._--

Q.--Are all visions which you have had of the same character?

A.--'I have always made a distinction between pictures seen in the
memory of nature and visions of actual beings now existing in the inner
world. We can make the same distinction in our world: I may close my
eyes and see you as a vivid picture in memory, or I may look at you with
my physical eyes and see your actual image. In seeing these beings of
which I speak, the physical eyes may be open or closed: mystical beings
in their own world and nature are never seen with the physical eyes.'

_Otherworlds._--

Q.--By the inner world do you mean the Celtic Otherworld?

A.--'Yes; though there are many Otherworlds. The _Tir-na-nog_ of the
ancient Irish, in which the races of the _Sidhe_ exist, may be described
as a radiant archetype of this world, though this definition does not at
all express its psychic nature. In _Tir-na-nog_ one sees nothing save
harmony and beautiful forms. There are other worlds in which we can see
horrible shapes.'

_Classification of the 'Sidhe'._--

Q.--Do you in any way classify the _Sidhe_ races to which you refer?

A.--'The beings whom I call the _Sidhe_, I divide, as I have seen them,
into two great classes: those which are shining, and those which are
opalescent and seem lit up by a light within themselves. The shining
beings appear to be lower in the hierarchies; the opalescent beings are
more rarely seen, and appear to hold the positions of great chiefs or
princes among the tribes of Dana.'

_Conditions of Seership._--

Q.--Under what state or condition and where have you seen such beings?

A.--'I have seen them most frequently after being away from a city or
town for a few days. The whole west coast of Ireland from Donegal to
Kerry seems charged with a magical power, and I find it easiest to see
while I am there. I have always found it comparatively easy to see
visions while at ancient monuments like New Grange and Dowth, because I
think such places are naturally charged with psychical forces, and were
for that reason made use of long ago as sacred places. I usually find it
possible to throw myself into the mood of seeing; but sometimes visions
have forced themselves upon me.'

_The Shining Beings._--

Q.--Can you describe the shining beings?

A.--'It is very difficult to give any intelligible description of them.
The first time I saw them with great vividness I was lying on a
hill-side alone in the west of Ireland, in County Sligo: I had been
listening to music in the air, and to what seemed to be the sound of
bells, and was trying to understand these aerial clashings in which wind
seemed to break upon wind in an ever-changing musical silvery sound.
Then the space before me grew luminous, and I began to see one beautiful
being after another.'

_The Opalescent Beings._--

Q.--Can you describe one of the opalescent beings?

A.--'The first of these I saw I remember very clearly, and the manner of
its appearance: there was at first a dazzle of light, and then I saw
that this came from the heart of a tall figure with a body apparently
shaped out of half-transparent or opalescent air, and throughout the
body ran a radiant, electrical fire, to which the heart seemed the
centre. Around the head of this being and through its waving luminous
hair, which was blown all about the body like living strands of gold,
there appeared flaming wing-like auras. From the being itself light
seemed to stream outwards in every direction; and the effect left on me
after the vision was one of extraordinary lightness, joyousness, or
ecstasy.

'At about this same period of my life I saw many of these great beings,
and I then thought that I had visions of Aengus, Manannan, Lug, and
other famous kings or princes among the Tuatha De Danann; but since then
I have seen so many beings of a similar character that I now no longer
would attribute to any one of them personal identity with particular
beings of legend; though I believe that they correspond in a general way
to the Tuatha De Danann or ancient Irish gods.'

_Stature of the 'Sidhe'._--

Q.--You speak of the opalescent beings as great beings; what stature do
you assign to them, and to the shining beings?

A.--'The opalescent beings seem to be about fourteen feet in stature,
though I do not know why I attribute to them such definite height, since
I had nothing to compare them with; but I have always considered them as
much taller than our race. The shining beings seem to be about our own
stature or just a little taller. Peasant and other Irish seers do not
usually speak of the _Sidhe_ as being little, but as being tall: an old
schoolmaster in the West of Ireland described them to me from his own
visions as tall beautiful people, and he used some Gaelic words, which I
took as meaning that they were shining with every colour.'

_The worlds of the 'Sidhe.'_--

Q.--Do the two orders of _Sidhe_ beings inhabit the same world?

A.--'The shining beings belong to the mid-world; while the opalescent
beings belong to the heaven-world. There are three great worlds which we
can see while we are still in the body: the earth-world, mid-world, and
heaven-world.'

_Nature of the 'Sidhe.'_--

Q.--Do you consider the life and state of these _Sidhe_ beings superior
to the life and state of men?

A.--'I could never decide. One can say that they themselves are
certainly more beautiful than men are, and that their worlds seem more
beautiful than our world.

'Among the shining orders there does not seem to be any individualized
life: thus if one of them raises his hands all raise their hands, and if
one drinks from a fire-fountain all do; they seem to move and to have
their real existence in a being higher than themselves, to which they
are a kind of body. Theirs is, I think, a collective life, so
unindividualized and so calm that I might have more varied thoughts in
five hours than they would have in five years; and yet one feels an
extraordinary purity and exaltation about their life. Beauty of form
with them has never been broken up by the passions which arise in the
developed egotism of human beings. A hive of bees has been described as
a single organism with disconnected cells; and some of these tribes of
shining beings seem to be little more than one being manifesting itself
in many beautiful forms. I speak this with reference to the shining
beings only: I think that among the opalescent or _Sidhe_ beings, in the
heaven-world, there is an even closer spiritual unity, but also a
greater individuality.'

_Influence of the 'Sidhe' on Men._--

Q.--Do you consider any of these _Sidhe_ beings inimical to humanity?

A.--'Certain kinds of the shining beings, whom I call wood beings, have
never affected me with any evil influences I could recognize. But the
water beings, also of the shining tribes, I always dread, because I felt
whenever I came into contact with them a great drowsiness of mind and, I
often thought, an actual drawing away of vitality.'

_Water Beings Described._--
