
It was about this time, viz, during the summer of 1852, that the
"stake of Zion" in Lee county, Illinois, founded by William Smith's
church, went to pieces and a number of the members thereof joined this
Josephite movement set on foot by Messrs. Briggs and Gurley.

The next conference of the Josephite church was held in October, 1852,
at the Yellow Stone branch, and then more especially was considered
the question of authority to preside in the church that was forming,
pending the coming forth of "young Joseph" to be its president. The
pamphlet which the June conference had ordered written, announced that
the "highest authority presides always," and the deliberations of the
conference resulted in the following:

    Resolved, That in the opinion of this conference, the one holding
    the highest priesthood in the church is to preside, and represent
    the rightfull heir to the presidency of the high priesthood in a
    presiding capacity.

These men, however, found great difficulty in determining who held the
highest authority as many unwarrantable ordinations had taken place in
the various factions.

    After earnest discussion it was determined that all ordinations
    not within the limits of the law should be ignored, and all within
    the limit recognized. This excluded all above an high priest, who
    being the highest recognized, was sustained as the presiding
    authority.[A]

[Footnote A: Life of Joseph the Prophet, Josephite edition, p. 592.]

I have been unable to learn, however, that any one of the high priests
was selected to preside over the Josephite church at this juncture,
and one is left to infer that the whole body of so-called high priests
were to preside. During the winter of 1853, the "spirit" intimated to
Mr. Gurley, that they must "organize;" but this they knew not how to
do, further than they had done.[A] They were even unable to decide on
the validity of the ordinations of the men who had attended the
October conference.[B]

[Footnote A: Ibid, p. 594.]

[Footnote B: Life of Joseph the Prophet, Josephite edition, p. 594.]

In the month of March, 1853, the subject of organization being still
agitated, the question was put to the Lord: "Were those ordained
apostles by William Smith recognized by God?" The answer was that
those ordinations were not acceptable--were not of God.[A] Near the
close of this revelation the men engaged in this movement were
commanded to organize themselves:

[Footnote A: Ibid, 595.]

    "'For ere long,' saith the Lord, 'I will require the prophet at
    your hand.'"

But how to organize they did not know. They claim to have had two high
priests and one senior president of the seventies among them. "But how
could these men organize the church?" asks Mr. Gurley:

    It was impossible, utterly impossible. We counseled upon it, and
    concluded that possibly, under the present circumstances, it might
    be right for high priests, and for the senior President of
    seventies to ordain seventies; but when done what would it
    accomplish? Nothing, just nothing. We were in trouble--deep
    trouble! To refuse to organize was disobedience; to go forward in
    the attempt was darkness. There was but one alternative, and that
    was to seek wisdom from above.[A]

[Footnote A: Life of Joseph the Prophet, Josephite edition, p. 595.]

The result of inquiring of the Lord, according to the statement of Mr.
Gurley, was that a commandment was given appointing a day of fasting
and prayer, and the Lord promised to show them how to organize. When
the meeting assembled the following question was put to the Lord:

    Will the Lord please to tell us how to organize. . . . . And who
    among us will he acknowledge as the representative of the legal
    heir to the Presidency of the Church.

To this inquiry it is claimed that an answer was obtained through a
"revelation" to one H. H. Deam, a high priest, which reads as follows:

    Verily thus saith the Lord, as I said unto my servant Moses,--see
    thou do all things according to the pattern,--so I say unto you.
    Behold the pattern is before you. It is my will that you respect
    authority in my Church; therefore let the greatest among you
    preside at your conference. Let three men be appointed by the
    conference to select seven men from among you, who shall compose
    the majority of the Twelve, for it is my will that that quorum
    should not be filled up at present. Let the President of the
    conference, assisted by two others, ordain them. The senior of
    them shall stand as the representative. Let them select twelve men
    from among you, and ordain them to compose the high council.
    Behold ye understand the order of the bishopric, the seventies,
    the elders, the priests, the teachers, and deacons. Therefore
    organize according to the pattern; behold I will be with you unto
    the end.[A]

[Footnote A: Life of Joseph, the Prophet, Josephite edition, p.
596-7.]

This alleged revelation was given on the 20th of March, 1853, and at
the April conference following an organization was effected on the
above indicated plan. After a long discussion, about whose priesthood
was the highest--in the course of which a great deal of ill-feeling
was manifested--finally the controversy ended in favor of Mr. Briggs,
and he was called to preside at the conference. Ethan Griffith,
William Cline and Cyrus Newkirk were appointed the committee to select
the seven "apostles" to form the majority of the quorum of the Twelve.
The men selected were Zenas H. [Father] Gurley, Henry H. Deam, Jason
W. Briggs, Daniel B. Razy, John Cunningham, George White and Reuben
Newkirk. It was voted that a "stake of Zion" be organized in the town
of Argyle, Lafayette Co., Wisconsin, of which William Cline, Cyrus
Newkirk and Isaac Butterfield were chosen and ordained the presidency.
A number of "seventies" were also ordained. At the close of the
conference a "revelation" was received informing the conference that
what had been done was recorded in heaven, and to the seven "apostles"
it was said:

    I give unto you the care of my flock on earth; take the oversight
    of them, as you shall give an account unto me in the day of
    judgment.[A]

[Footnote A: Life of Joseph the Prophet, Josephite edition, p. 601.]

The period between the time of this organization effected in April,
1853, and the time when Joseph Smith, son of the prophet became its
president, April, 1860, is called by the Josephite historian Tullidge,
"an apostolic interval." During that interval the Josephite church
seemed not to make much progress. Joseph Smith was several times
solicited to take the Presidency of it, but he seemed not at all
anxious for the place.

In 1856, the "reorganized church" sent to the predicted head of it,
the word of the Lord, urging him to come and take his place. The
document was signed by J. W. Briggs, "representative president of the
church and the priesthood in Zarahemla." Messrs. Briggs and Gurley
were appointed a committee to present this message to Mr. Smith, which
they did at his home near Nauvoo. According to Mr. Smith's own amount
of this visit, these messengers did not meet with a very cordial
reception; and when Mr. Briggs vehemently urged the matter upon him,
and "announced the culmination of the message in tones of thunder, and
almost dictatorially" urged him to accept the message and do as
directed therein, or reject it at his peril, he says he met this
"vehemence indignantly, and almost turned these messengers out of
doors."[A]

[Footnote A: Life of Joseph the Prophet, Josephite edition, p. 767.]

The effort on the part of Messrs. Briggs and Gurley to induce Mr.
Smith to become their president ended on this occasion in
disappointment, though before leaving Nauvoo the whole situation was
talked over in the presence of Mrs. Emma Smith, mother of Joseph.

It is to be remarked as passing strange that neither on this occasion,
nor on any other that Josephite history speaks of, was it urged upon
Joseph Smith that he had already been formally anointed by his father
to be the President of the church.

Early in February, 1860, a call was issued, signed by Z. H. Gurley and
Reuben Newkirk, calling for a general conference to assemble at Amboy,
Illinois, the following April. All the branches of the church in
Wisconsin, Illinois and Michigan were urged to send representatives,
as it was desirable to choose a high council and organize and set in
order all the quorums under the First Presidency; and an intimation
was made that much more than was anticipated might be realized--was it
an intimation that Joseph Smith would come and accept the Presidency
of their church?

Meantime Joseph Smith who, according to his own autobiography, had
failed as storekeeper, railroad contractor, in the study of law, in
farming, and while keeping soul and body together by labor and from
his fees as justice of the peace, was confronted with the question of
his connection with his "father's work;" and in the winter of 1859,
resolved to put himself in communication with the "reorganized
church."[A]

[Footnote A: For the above acts see his autobiography in the Life of
Joseph, Josephite ed., pp. 743-773.]

He accordingly wrote to Mr. William Marks, informing him that he was
"soon going to take his father's place at the head of the Mormon
church," and requested him and others that he considered nearest him,
to come to Nauvoo and confer with him.[A] Mr. Smith states as his
reason for sending for Mr. Marks that he was president of the stake of
Zion at Nauvoo at the death of Joseph, the prophet; that he had
retained his faith in Mormonism as taught by Joseph and Hyrum; and
hence his council would be valuable. Mr. Smith also announced his
intention to his mother and step-father; the former approved his
course, the latter took a speculative view of it and built fond
schemes for obtaining wealth through the position to be taken by his
step-son.

[Footnote A: William Marks, according to the statement of Joseph Smith
in his autobiography, came in company with James J. Strang to Fulton
City, where Emma Smith and her son Joseph lived during the winter of
1845-6, and had a brief interview with Joseph and his mother,
promising to meet them again. Messrs. Marks and Strang held meetings
in the neighborhood, but Mr. Smith says he did not see them again. It
was claimed by Mr. Strang that he on this occasion ordained "young
Joseph" to the same priesthood that his uncle Hyrum held, and it seems
that he afterwards so reported to some of his followers. As late as
June, 1891, Mr L. D. Hickey, a Strangite, wrote a tract entitled,
"_Who was the Successor of Joseph Smith?_" in which the following
occurs: "Nov. 6 1846, James J. Strang was commanded to go and anoint
and ordain Joseph Smith, the son of the martyr, to the same priesthood
his uncle Hyrum held. We have all the proof we want that James did
obey God; and that left the son of Joseph as one of the Presidents of
the church, and the Book of Rules says in case of the death of either
of the First Presidents, the other shall preside until the vacancy is
filled. This was the situation of the church at the dead of James [J.
Strang]. So that by virtue of the ordination Joseph obtained under the
hands of James and no other ordination, we [the Strangites] hold him
the legal President of the Church from the death of James to this
day."--(page 5.) Joseph Smith denies any such ordination having taken
place unless it was done when he was unconscious and unknown to
William Marks.--See _Life of Joseph the Prophet_, Josephite edition,
p. 754.]

Soon after this, Mr. Marks, one Israel L. Rogers and William W. Blair,
all interested in the "Reorganized church" movement, visited Mr. Smith
at his mother's home in Nauvoo, and held an interview with them. It
was finally decided that Mr. Smith and his mother should attend the
ensuing April conference, called to assemble at Amboy, Lee county,
Illinois, and the matter was to be laid before the church and a
decision arrived at:

    "For, said Elder Marks; we have had enough of man-made prophets,
    and we don't want any more of that sort. If God has called you, we
    want to know it. If he has, the Church is ready to sustain you; if
    not, we want nothing to do with you."[A]

[Footnote A: Life of Joseph the Prophet, Josephite edition p. 767.]

Messrs. Marks, Rogers and Blair, in 1860, seem not to have been so
urgent as Messrs. Briggs and Gurley had been in 1856; the latter had
commanded him to take the Presidency of the church, or refuse to do so
at his peril; the former merely agreed to see about it, by presenting
the matter to the church. Indeed for men who professed to have
evidence that Mr. Smith had been called, blessed and anointed by
Joseph the prophet to be the President of the church, and to possess
the right to that position by virtue of lineage, the reply of Mr.
Marks to Mr. Smith's proposition to take the Presidency of the
Reorganized church seems unaccountably cold, and too much burdened
with doubt and independence when addressing the only man who, on the
theory of the "Reorganized church," could possibly succeed to the
Presidency. Mr. Smith affects to have been made indignant at the
urgency of Messrs. Briggs and Gurley, in 1856; the coldness and
independence of Messrs. Marks, Rogers and Blair must have been a still
greater source of annoyance.

Mr. Smith went to the conference at Amboy, and in the afternoon of the
6th of April, 1860, made a speech, at the conclusion of which it was
moved that he be received as a prophet,--the successor of his father.
The motion was carried by a unanimous vote, after which Mr. Gurley
who, assisted by Mr. William Marks, presided at the conference, arose
and said:

    Brother Joseph, I present this Church to you in the name of Jesus
    Christ!

And of course Mr. Smith accepted it.

The speech made by Mr. Smith at the above mentioned conference is
remarkable only for its tameness; but I quote a few sentences that may
be of special interest; first as showing that he claimed to be called
to his position by a power not his own:--

    I came not here of myself, but by the influence of the spirit. For
    some time past I have received manifestations pointing to the
    position I am about to assume. I wish to say that I have come here
    not to be dictated by any men or set of men. I have come in
    obedience to a power not my own, and shall be dictated by the
    power which sent me.

    . . . Some, who ought to know the proprieties of the church, have
    told me that no certain form was necessary in order for me to
    assume the leadership, that the position came by right of lineage,
    yet I know that if I attempted to lead as a prophet by these
    considerations, and _not by a call from heaven_, men would not be
    lead to believe who do not believe now. And so I have come not of
    my own dictation to this sacred office.

As to revelations he said:

    I have my peculiar notions in regard to revelations, but am happy
    to say that they accord with those I am to associate with, at
    least with those of them with whom I have conversed. I am not very
    conversant with those books (pointing to a volume before him), not
    so conversant as I should be and will be.

That his "notions in regard to revelations" were indeed "peculiar,"
one only has to read the following to be convinced:

    _I pledge myself to promulgate no doctrine that shall not be
    approved by you_, or the code of good morals.

How different this from the reply of one of the ancient prophets, when
some sought to have him give out no prophecy or revelation but what
should be approved by them:

    And Micaiah said, as the Lord liveth what the Lord saith unto me,
    that will I speak![A]

[Footnote A: I Kings xxii, 7-14]

How different, too, from the spirit of Brigham Young who shortly after
being chosen President of the church wrote:

    As the Lord's will is my will all the time--as He dictates so will
    I perform. If He don't guide the ship, we'll go down in the
    whirlpool.[A]

[Footnote A: Letter to Orson Spencer, Jan. 23rd. 1848, _Mill. Star_,
Vol. X, p. 115.]

What a contrast also between his "I-pledge-myself-to-promulgate-no-
doctrine-that-shall-not-be-approved-by-you" position of the son of the
great prophet, and the position in which the Almighty God of heaven
placed his father. The prophet Joseph's position may be learned from
the following revelation given the very day the church was organized:

    Behold there shall be a record kept among you, and in it thou
    shalt be called a seer, a translator, a prophet, an apostle of
    Jesus Christ, an elder of the church, through the will of God the
    Father and the grace of your Lord Jesus Christ. . . . Wherefore,
    meaning the church, thou shalt give heed unto all his words and
    commandments which he shall give unto you _as he receiveth them_,
    walking in all holiness before me. _For his words ye shall
    receive, as if from mine own mouth_, in all patience and faith;
    for by doing these things the gates of hell shall not prevail
    against you; yea, and the Lord God will disperse the powers of
    darkness from before you, and cause the heavens to shake for your
    good and his name's glory.[A]

[Footnote A: Doc. and Cov., sec. xxi.]

As the heavens are higher than the earth, so is this position given to
the prophet Joseph by the Lord higher than that assumed by his son,
who claims to be his successor, and yet stands pledged to promulgate
no doctrine that shall not be approved by his associates! What manner
of prophet is this?

Following Mr. Smith's acceptance of the church at the hands of Mr.
Gurley, he was ordained to the office of President of the high
priesthood and President of the church by William Marks, Zenas H.
Gurley, Samuel Powers and W. W. Blair. Mr. Marks was president of the
Nauvoo stake of Zion at the death of the prophet, and the other three
gentlemen were "apostles" in the Reorganized church.[A]

[Footnote A: _The Successor_, (Josephite pamphlet,) pp. 10, II, also
_The Saint's Herald_, Vol XXXIX, No. 24. p. 375.]

We have now followed the history of the "Reorganized church" as far as
it is necessary. It only remains to remark that it is a stream formed
by the confluence of two other streams; one of which, represented by
Mr. Gurley and his following, flows from Strangism; and the other,
represented by Mr. Briggs and his following, flows from the church
organized by William Smith. We leave it for Josephites to inform us on
what principle of philosophy two corrupt, apostate streams by uniting,
make a pure one!




VI.


Let us now consider the claims of Mr. Joseph Smith to be of right the
President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. His
claims, or those made in his behalf by his friends and followers, are
based upon the following assumptions:--

First, that he was called to that position when a boy, through his
father, (1) by prophecy and blessing in Liberty jail, Missouri, where
his father was confined in the winter of 1838-9 (2) by revelation in
1841; and (3) by a formal anointing in a council of the priesthood at
Nauvoo, in 1844:--

Second, that the position in his by lineage--it is his birthright:--

Third, that he was called to the position by "revelation" to himself;
and,

Fourth, he was ordained to it by those holding legal authority.[A]

[Footnote A: See _The Saint's Herald_, Vol. XXXIX, p. 337; and also
_The Successor_, a Josephite pamphlet, pp. 8, 9, 10, 11.]

It is my purpose to consider these claims in their order, one by one,
and show the untrustworthiness of the evidence upon which they are
based, the weakness of the argument by which they are sustained, and
finally how these claims contradict both the facts of history and the
order that exists in the holy priesthood. I take up the first
assumption in its several parts:

He was called to that position [_i. e._, to be President of the
church], through his father, by prophecy and blessing in Liberty jail.

This claim is based solely upon the testimony of Lyman Wight. They
quote him as follows:

    In the private journal of Lyman Wight, . . . . this is found:
    "Sunday, December 8th, 1850, bore testimony that Joseph Smith
    appointed those of his own posterity to be his successor."

    And in a letter he wrote in July, 1855, from Medina river, Texas,
    to the _Northern Islander_, a Strangite paper, Brother Wight said:
    Now Mr. Editor, if you had been present _when Joseph called on me
    shortly after we came out of jail_,[A] [Liberty jail, Missouri.
    --Ed.] to lay hands with him on the head of a youth, and heard him
    cry aloud, "you are my successor when I depart." and heard the
    blessings poured on his head,--I say had you heard all this, and
    seen the tears streaming from his eyes--you would not have been
    led [into following Strang] by blind fanaticism, or a zeal without
    knowledge.[B]

[Footnote A: The _italics_ are mine, note them. R.]

[Footnote B: _The Saint's Herald_, Vol. XXXIX, No. 22, p. 338-9.]

Of this testimony it is to be said, first on the entry in Mr. Wight's
journal, that it is too general in its character to be of much service
in supporting the claims of "young Joseph." We are not certain that he
refers to him at all. Then if Lyman Wight knew in 1850 that Joseph the
prophet had blessed his son Joseph to be his successor, as prophet and
president of the church, Mr. Wight knew it in 1844; and is it not
strange that he did not speak of it and advocate it when the question
of a successor was warmly discussed in Nauvoo, during the autumn of
1844? Why is it that we have nothing from him on the subject earlier
than 1850? And this silence on the part of Mr. Wight is the more
significant when it is remembered that he was a bold, fearless man. It
cannot be said in truth, that Brigham Young's influence was so
masterly as to awe him into silence. As a matter of fact he violently
opposed Brigham Young in some of his measures, and at last rebelled
against him; but nothing is said by him until 1850, about the
appointment of any of the prophet's posterity to succeed to the
presidency of the church.

The letter quoted from the _Northern Islander_, might be of some force
if its statements were not contradicted as to time and place and
circumstance by another statement, also made in a Josephite
publication. Let it be observed that according to the testimony of Mr
Wight, in the _Northern Islander_, the "blessing and prophecy" under
consideration was given at a time that the prophet called on Mr.
Wight, _shortly after they came out of Liberty jail_. With that in
mind read the following in _The Successor:_--[A]

[Footnote A: A Josephite tract sustaining the claims of "young
Joseph," p. 3.]

    Lyman Wight, one of the Twelve, always taught the saints whom he
    led into Texas, that none but "little Joseph" could lead the
    church, as successor to the martyr. He said he knew it, _for in
    1839, when Hyrum, Joseph, and himself were in prison, in Liberty
    jail, Missouri_, "little Joseph" was brought by his mother _and
    left with his father in the jail_, while she was attending to
    business affairs in the town--_and that then and there_[A] Joseph,
    with Hyrum and himself, laid their hands upon the lad's head, and
    Joseph proceeded to bless him, and prophesied that he would yet
    lead the church of the living God; and he blessed him to that end.
    Such was the testimony of Lyman Wight up to 1858, the year in
    which he died.

[Footnote A: The _italics_ are mine. R.]

This statement makes the "blessing and prophecy" to have been
pronounced upon the head of "young Joseph," in Liberty jail; whereas
the statement made by Mr. Wight in the _Northern Islander_, places it
shortly after they came out of Liberty jail. And be it further
remarked, that if it took place after they came out of prison, then it
must have taken place in Illinois and not in Missouri at all. For the
family of the prophet started from Far West on the 7th of February,
1839, in charge of Stephen Markham, and after many hardships arrived
on the banks of the Mississippi, opposite the town of Quincy,
Illinois, on the 15th of the same month.[A] Joseph Smith and his
fellow prisoners were taken from Liberty jail to Gallatin, for trial,
in April. They applied for and obtained a change of venue from Daviess
to Boone county, and while en route escaped from their guards. After
making their escape the prophet says:

[Footnote A: History of Joseph Smith, _Mill. Star_, Vol. XVI., p.
