1 But when the crafty Satan saw them, that they were going to the
garden, he gathered together his host, and came in appearance on a
cloud, intent on deceiving them.

2 But when Adam and Eve saw him thus in a vision, they thought they
were angels of God come to comfort them about having left the garden,
or to bring them back again into it.

3 And Adam spread his hands before God, beseeching Him to make him
understand what they were.

4 Then Satan, the hater of all good, said to Adam, "O Adam, I am an
angel of the great God; and, behold the hosts that surround me.

5 God has sent us to take you and bring you to the border of the garden
northwards; to the shore of the clear sea, and bathe you and Eve in it,
and raise you to your former gladness, that you return again to the
garden."

6 These words sank into the heart of Adam and Eve.

7 Yet God withheld His Word from Adam, and did not make him understand
at once, but waited to see his strength; whether he would be overcome
as Eve was when in the garden, or whether he would prevail.

8 Then Satan called to Adam and Eve, and said, "Behold, we go to the
sea of water," and they began to go.

9 And Adam and Eve followed them at some little distance.

10 But when they came to the mountain to the north of the garden, a
very high mountain, without any steps to the top of it, the Devil drew
near to Adam and Eve, and made them go up to the top in reality, and
not in a vision; wishing, as he did, to throw them down and kill them,
and to wipe off their name from the earth; so that this earth should
remain to him and his hosts alone.




Chapter XXIX - God tells Adam of the Devil's purpose. (v. 4).

1 But when the merciful God saw that Satan wished to kill Adam with his
many tricks, and saw that Adam was meek and without guile, God spoke to
Satan in a loud voice, and cursed him.

2 Then he and his hosts fled, and Adam and Eve remained standing on the
top of the mountain, from there they saw below them the wide world,
high above which they were.  But they saw none of the host which time
after time were by them.

3 They cried, both Adam and Eve, before God, and begged for forgiveness
of Him.

4 Then came the Word from God to Adam, and said to him, "Know you and
understand concerning this Satan, that he seeks to deceive you and your
descendants after you."

5 And Adam cried before the Lord God, and begged and prayed to Him to
give him something from the garden, as a token to him, wherein to be
comforted.

6 And God considered Adam's thought, and sent the angel Michael as far
as the sea that reaches India, to take from there golden rods and bring
them to Adam.

7 This did God in His wisdom in order that these golden rods, being
with Adam in the cave, should shine forth with light in the night
around him, and put an end to his fear of the darkness.

8 Then the angel Michael went down by God's order, took golden rods, as
God had commanded him, and brought them to God.




Chapter XXX - Adam receives the first worldly goods.

1 After these things, God commanded the angel Gabriel to go down to the
garden, and say to the cherub who kept it, "Behold, God has commanded
me to come into the garden, and to take from it sweet smelling incense,
and give it to Adam."

2 Then the angel Gabriel went down by God's order to the garden, and
told the cherub as God had commanded him.

3 The cherub then said, "Well."  And Gabriel went in and took the
incense.

4 Then God commanded his angel Raphael to go down to the garden, and
speak to the cherub about some myrrh, to give to Adam.

5 And the angel Raphael went down and told the cherub as God had
commanded him, and the cherub said, "Well." Then Raphael went in and
took the myrrh.

6 The golden rods were from the Indian sea, where there are precious
stones.  The incense was from the eastern border of the garden; and the
myrrh from the western border, from where bitterness came over Adam.

7 And the angels brought these things to God, by the Tree of Life, in
the garden.

8 Then God said to the angels, "Dip them in the spring of water; then
take them and sprinkle their water over Adam and Eve, that they be a
little comforted in their sorrow, and give them to Adam and Eve.

9 And the angels did as God had commanded them, and they gave all those
things to Adam and Eve on the top of the mountain on which Satan had
placed them, when he sought to make an end of them.

10 And when Adam saw the golden rods, the incense and the myrrh, he was
rejoiced and cried because he thought that the gold was a token of the
kingdom from where he had come, that the incense was a token of the
bright light which had been taken from him, and that the myrrh was a
token of the sorrow in which he was.




Chapter XXXI - They make themselves more comfortable in the Cave of
Treasures on the third day.

1 After these things God said to Adam, "You asked Me for something from
the garden, to be comforted therewith, and I have given you these three
tokens as a consolation to you; that you trust in Me and in My covenant
with you.

2 For I will come and save you; and kings shall bring me when in the
flesh, gold, incense and myrrh; gold as a token of My kingdom; incense
as a token of My divinity; and myrrh as a token of My suffering and of
My death.

3 But, O Adam, put these by you in the cave; the gold that it may shed
light over you by night; the incense, that you smell its sweet savor;
and the myrrh, to comfort you in your sorrow."

4 When Adam heard these words from God, he worshipped before Him.  He
and Eve worshipped Him and gave Him thanks, because He had dealt
mercifully with them.

5 Then God commanded the three angels, Michael, Gabriel and Raphael,
each to bring what he had brought, and give it to Adam.  And they did
so, one by one.

6 And God commanded Suriyel and Salathiel to bear up Adam and Eve, and
bring them down from the top of the high mountain, and to take them to
the Cave of Treasures.

7 There they laid the gold on the south side of the cave, the incense
on the eastern side, and the myrrh on the western side.  For the mouth
of the cave was on the north side.

8 The angels then comforted Adam and Eve, and departed.

9 The gold was seventy rods*; the incense, twelve pounds; and the
myrrh, three pounds.

10 These remained by Adam in the Cave of Treasures**.

11 God gave these three things to Adam on the third day after he had
come out of the garden, in token of the three days the Lord should
remain in the heart of the earth.

12 And these three things, as they continued with Adam in the cave,
gave him light by night; and by day they gave him a little relief from
his sorrow.


* A rod is a unit of linear measure equivalent to 5.5 yards and also a
unit of area measure equivalent to 30.25 square yards.  In this case,
the word rod simply means a kind of long, thin piece of gold of
unspecified size and weight.

** This is the original text which appears to contain embedded
editorial content:  "These remained by Adam in the House of Treasures;
therefore was it called 'of concealment.'  But other interpreters say
it was called the 'Cave of Treasures,' by reason of the bodies of
righteous men that were in it.




Chapter XXXII - Adam and Eve go into the water to pray.

1 And Adam and Eve remained in the Cave of Treasures until the seventh
day; they neither ate of the fruit the earth, nor drank water.

2 And when it dawned on the eighth day, Adam said to Eve, "O Eve, we
prayed God to give us something from the garden, and He sent his angels
who brought us what we had desired.

3 But now, get up, let us go to the sea of water we saw at first, and
let us stand in it, praying that God will again be favorable to us and
take us back to the garden; or give us something; or that He will give
us comfort in some other land than this in which we are."

4 Then Adam and Eve came out of the cave, went and stood on the border
of the sea in which they had before thrown themselves, and Adam said to
Eve:--

5 Come, go down into this place, and come not out of it until the end
of thirty days, when I shall come to you.  And pray to God with burning
heart and a sweet voice, to forgive us.

6 And I will go to another place, and go down into it, and do like you."

7 Then Eve went down into the water, as Adam had commanded her.  Adam
also went down into the water; and they stood praying; and besought the
Lord to forgive them their offense, and to restore them to their former
state.

8 And they stood like that praying, until the end of the thirty-five
days.




Chapter XXXIII - Satan falsely promises the "bright light."

1 But Satan, the hater of all good, sought them in the cave, but found
them not, although he searched diligently for them.

2 But he found them standing in the water praying and thought within
himself, "Adam and Eve are standing like that in that water praying to
God to forgive them their transgression, and to restore them to their
former state, and to take them from under my hand.

3 But I will deceive them so that they shall come out of the water, and
not fulfil their vow."

4 Then the hater of all good, went not to Adam, but he went to Eve, and
took the form of an angel of God, praising and rejoicing, and said to
her:--

5 "Peace be to you!  Be glad and rejoice!  God is favorable to you, and
He sent me to Adam.  I have brought him the glad tidings of salvation,
and of his being filled with bright light as he was at first.

6 And Adam, in his joy for his restoration, has sent me to you, that
you come to me, in order that I crown you with light like him.

7 And he said to me, 'Speak to Eve; if she does not come with you, tell
her of the sign when we were on the top of the mountain; how God sent
his angels who took us and brought us to the Cave of Treasures; and
laid the gold on the southern side; incense, on the eastern side; and
myrrh on the western side.'  Now come to him."

8 When Eve hear these words from him, she rejoiced greatly.  And
thinking Satan's appearance was real, she came out of the sea.

9 He went before, and she followed him until they came to Adam.  Then
Satan hid himself from her, and she saw him no more.

10 She then came and stood before Adam, who was standing by the water
and rejoicing in God's forgiveness.

11 And as she called to him, he turned around, found her there and
cried when he saw her, and beat his chest; and from the bitterness of
his grief, he sank into the water.

12 But God looked at him and at his misery, and at his being about to
breathe his last.  And the Word of God came from heaven, raised him out
of the water, and said to him, "Go up the high bank to Eve."  And when
he came up to Eve he said to her, "Who told you to come here?"

13 Then she told him the discourse of the angel who had appeared to her
and had given her a sign.

14 But Adam grieved, and gave her to know it was Satan.  He then took
her and they both returned to the cave.

15 These things happened to them the second time they went down to the
water, seven days after their coming out of the garden.

16 They fasted in the water thirty-five days; altogether forty-two days
since they had left the garden.




Chapter XXXIV - Adam recalls the creation of Eve.  He eloquently
appeals for food and drink.

1 And on the morning of the forty-third day, they came out of the cave,
sorrowful and crying.  Their bodies were lean, and they were parched
from hunger and thirst, from fasting and praying, and from their heavy
sorrow on account of their transgression.

2 And when they had come out of the cave they went up the mountain to
the west of the garden.

3 There they stood and prayed and besought God to grant them
forgiveness of their sins.

4 And after their prayers Adam began to beg God, saying, "O my Lord, my
God, and my Creator, You commanded the four elements* to be gathered
together, and they were gathered together by Thine order.

5 Then You spread Your hand and created me out of one element, that of
dust of the earth; and You brought me into the garden at the third
hour, on a Friday, and informed me of it in the cave.

6 Then, at first, I knew neither night nor day, for I had a bright
nature; neither did the light in which I lived ever leave me to know
night or day.

7 Then, again, O Lord, in that third hour in which You created me, You
brought to me all beasts, and lions, and ostriches, and fowls of the
air, and all things that move in the earth, which You had created at
the first hour before me of the Friday.

8 And Your will was that I should name them all, one by one, with a
suitable name.  But You gave me understanding and knowledge, and a pure
heart and a right mind from you, that I should name them after Thine
own mind regarding the naming of them.

9 O God, You made them obedient to me, and ordered that not one of them
break from my sway, according to Your commandment, and to the dominion
which You had given me over them.  But now they are all estranged from
me.

10 Then it was in that third hour of Friday, in which You created me,
and commanded me concerning the tree, to which I was neither to go
near, nor to eat thereof; for You said to me in the garden, 'When you
eat of it, of death you shall die.'

11 And if You had punished me as You said, with death, I should have
died that very moment.

12 Moreover, when You commanded me regarding the tree, I was neither to
approach nor to eat thereof, Eve was not with me; You had not yet
created her, neither had You yet taken her out of my side; nor had she
yet heard this order from you.

13 Then, at the end of the third hour of that Friday, O Lord, You
caused a slumber and a sleep to come over me, and I slept, and was
overwhelmed in sleep.

14 Then You drew a rib out of my side, and created it after my own
likeness and image.  Then I awoke; and when I saw her and knew who she
was, I said, 'This is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh; from now
on she shall be called woman.'

15 It was of Your good will, O God, that You brought a slumber in a
sleep over me, and that You immediately brought Eve out of my side,
until she was out, so that I did not see how she was made; neither
could I witness, O my Lord, how awful and great are Your goodness and
glory.

16 And of Your goodwill, O Lord, You made us both with bodies of a
bright nature, and You made us two, one; and You gave us Your grace,
and filled us with praises of the Holy Spirit; that we should be
neither hungry nor thirsty, nor know what sorrow is, nor yet faintness
of heart; neither suffering, fasting nor weariness.

17 But now, O God, since we transgressed Your commandment and broke
Your law, You have brought us out into a strange land, and have caused
suffering, and faintness, hunger  and thirst to come over us.

18 Now, therefore, O God, we pray you, give us something to eat from
the garden, to satisfy our hunger with it; and something wherewith to
quench our thirst.

19 For, behold, many days, O God, we have tasted nothing and drunk
nothing, and our flesh is dried up, and our strength is wasted, and
sleep is gone from our eyes from faintness and crying.

20 Then, O God, we dare not gather anything from the fruit of trees,
from fear of you.  For when we transgress at first You spared us and
did not make us die.

21 But now, we thought in our hearts, if we eat of the fruit of the
trees, without God's order, He will destroy us this time, and will wipe
us off from the face of the earth.

22 And if we drink of this water, without God's order, He will make an
end of us and root us up at once.

23 Now, therefore, O God, that I am come to this place with Eve, we beg
You to give us some fruit from the garden, that we may be satisfied
with it.

24 For we desire the fruit that is on the earth, and all else that we
lack in it."


* The medieval belief that there were only four elements--fire, earth,
air, and water--was widely accepted until about 1500 AD when the
current atomic theory was in its infancy.




Chapter XXXV - God's reply.

1 Then God looked again at Adam and his crying and groaning, and the
Word of God came to him, and said to him:--

2 "O Adam, when you were in My garden, you knew neither eating nor
drinking; neither faintness nor suffering; neither leanness of flesh,
nor change; neither did sleep depart from thine eyes.  But since you
transgressed, and came into this strange land, all these trials are
come over you."




Chapter XXXVI - Figs.

1 Then God commanded the cherub, who kept the gate of the garden with a
sword of fire in his hand, to take some of the fruit of the fig-tree,
and to give it to Adam.

2 The cherub obeyed the command of the Lord God, and went into the
garden and brought two figs on two twigs, each fig hanging to its leaf;
they were from two of the trees among which Adam and Eve hid themselves
when God went to walk in the garden, and the Word of God came to Adam
and Eve and said to them, "Adam, Adam, where are you?"

3 And Adam answered, "O God, here I am.  When I heard the sound of You
and Your voice, I hid myself, because I am naked."

4 Then the cherub took two figs and brought them to Adam and Eve.  But
he threw them to them from a distance; for they might not come near the
cherub by reason of their flesh, that could not come near the fire.

5 At first, angels trembled at the presence of Adam and were afraid of
him.  But now Adam trembled before the angels and was afraid of them.

6 Then Adam came closer and took one fig, and Eve also came in turn and
took the other.

7 And as they took them up in their hands, they looked at them, and
knew they were from the trees among which they had hidden themselves.




Chapter XXXVII - Forty-three days of penance do not redeem one hour of
sin (v. 6).

1 Then Adam said to Eve, "Do you not see these figs and their leaves,
with which we covered ourselves when we were stripped of our bright
nature?  But now, we do not know what misery and suffering may come
over us from eating them.

2 Now, therefore, O Eve, let us restrain ourselves and not eat of them,
you and I; and let us ask God to give us of the fruit of the Tree of
Life."

3 Thus did Adam and Eve restrain themselves, and did not eat of these
figs.

4 But Adam began to pray to God and to beseech Him to give him of the
fruit of the Tree of Life, saying thus: "O God, when we transgressed
Your commandment at the sixth hour of Friday, we were stripped of the
bright nature we had, and did not continue in the garden after our
transgression, more than three hours.

5 But in the evening You made us come out of it.  O God, we
transgressed against You one hour, and all these trials and sorrows
have come over us until this day.

6 And those days together with this the forty-third day, do not redeem
that one hour in which we transgressed!

7 O God, look at us with an eye of pity, and do not avenge us according
to our transgression of Your commandment, in Your presence.

8 O God, give us of the fruit of the Tree of Life, that we may eat of
it, and live, and turn not to see sufferings and other trouble, in this
earth; for You are God.

9 When we transgressed Your commandment, You made us come out of the
garden, and sent a cherub to keep the Tree of Life, lest we should eat
thereof, and live; and know nothing of faintness after we transgressed.
