patriarch, and it became one of the characteristics of Zen.



5. Bodhidharma's Disciples and the Transmission of the Law.[FN#31]


[FN#31]  For details, see Chwen Tang Luh and Den Ka Roku, by Kei Zan.
 As for the life of Bodhidharma, Dr. B. Matsumoto's 'A Life of
Bodhidharma' may well be recommended to the reader.


Bodhidharma's labour of nine years in China resulted in the
initiation of a number of disciples, whom some time before his death
he addressed as follows: "Now the time (of my departure from this
world) is at hand.  Say, one and all, how do you understand the Law?"
 Tao Fu (Do-fuku) said in response to this: "The Law does not lie in
the letters (of the Scriptures), according to my view, nor is it
separated from them, but it works."  The Master said: "Then you have
obtained my skin."  Next Tsung Chi (So-ji), a nun, replied: "As
Ananda[FN#32] saw the kingdom of Aksobhya[FN#33] only once but not
twice, so I understand the Law".  The master said: "Then you have
attained to my flesh."  Then Tao Yuh (Do-iku) replied: "The four
elements[FN#34] are unreal from the first, nor are the five
aggregates[FN#35] really existent.  All is emptiness according to my
view."  The master said: "Then you have acquired my bone."  Lastly,
Hwui Ko (E-ka), which was the Buddhist name given by Bodhidharma, to
Shang Kwang, made a polite bow to the teacher and stood in his place
without a word.  "You have attained to my marrow."  So saying,
Bodhidharma handed over the sacred Kachaya, [FN#36] which he had
brought from India to Hwui Ko, as a symbol of the transmission of the
Law, and created him the Second Patriarch.


[FN#32]  A favourite disciple of Shakya Muni, and the Third Patriarch
of Zen.

[FN#33]  The: name means I Immovable,' and represents the firmness of
thought.

[FN#34]  Earth, water, fire, and air.

[FN#35]  (1) Rupa, or form; (2) Vedana, or perception; (3) Samjnya,
or consciousness; (4) Karman (or Samskara), or action; (5) Vijnyana,
or knowledge.

[FN#36]  The clerical cloak, which is said to have been dark green.
It became an object of great veneration after the Sixth Patriarch,
who abolished the patriarchal system and did not hand the symbol over
to successors.



6. The Second and the Third Patriarchs.

After the death of the First Patriarch, in A.D. 528, Hwui Ko did his
best to propagate the new faith over sixty years.  On one occasion a
man suffering from some chronic disease called on him, and requested
him in earnest: "Pray, Reverend Sir, be my confessor and grant me
absolution, for I suffer long from an incurable disease."  "Bring out
your sin (if there be such a thing as sin)," replied the Second
Patriarch, "here before me.  I shall grant you absolution."  "It is
impossible," said the man after a short consideration, "to seek out
my sin."  "Then," exclaimed the master, "I have absolved you.
Henceforth live up to Buddha, Dharma, and Samgha."[FN#37]  "I know,
your reverence," said the man, "that you belong to Samgha; but what
are Buddha and Dharma?"  "Buddha is Mind itself.  Mind itself is
Dharma.  Buddha is identical with Dharma.  So is Samgha."  "Then I
understand," replied the man, "there is no such thing as sin within
my body nor without it, nor anywhere else.  Mind is beyond and above
sin.  It is no other than Buddha and Dharma."  Thereupon the Second
Patriarch saw the man was well qualified to be taught in the new
faith, and converted him, giving him the name of Sang Tsung (So-san).
 After two years' instruction and discipline, he[FN#38] bestowed on
Sang Tsung the Kachaya handed down from Bodhidharma, and authorized
him as the Third Patriarch.  It is by Sang Tsung that the doctrine of
Zen was first reduced to writing by his composition of Sin Sin[FN#39]
Ming (Sin zin-mei, On Faith and Mind), a metrical exposition of the
faith.


[FN#37]  The so-called Three Treasures of the Buddha, the Law, and
the Order.

[FN#38]  The Second Patriarch died in A.D. 593--that is, sixty-five
years after the departure of the First Patriarch.

[FN#39]  A good many commentaries were written on the book, and it is
considered as one of the best books on Zen.



7. The Fourth Patriarch and the Emperor Tai Tsung (Tai-so).

The Third[FN#40] Patriarch was succeeded by Tao Sin (Do-shin), who
being initiated at the age of fourteen, was created the Fourth
Patriarch after nine years' study and discipline.  Tao Sin is said
never to have gone to bed for more than forty years of his
patriarchal career.[FN#41]  In A.D. 643 the Emperor Tai Tsung
(627-649), knowing of his virtues, sent him a special messenger,
requesting him to call on His Majesty at the palace.  But he declined
the invitation by a memorial, saying that be was too aged and infirm
to visit the august personage.  The Emperor, desirous of seeing the
reputed patriarch, sent for him thrice, but in vain.  Then the
enraged monarch ordered the messenger to behead the inflexible monk,
and bring the head before the throne, in case he should disobey the
order for the fourth time.  As Tao Sin was told of the order of the
Emperor, he stretched out his neck ready to be decapitated.  The
Emperor, learning from the messenger what had happened, admired all
the more the imperturbable patriarch, and bestowed rich gifts upon
him.  This example of his was followed by later Zen masters, who
would not condescend to bend their knees before temporal power, and
it became one of the characteristics of Zen monks that they would
never approach rulers and statesmen for the sake of worldly fame and
profit, which they set at naught.


[FN#40]  He died in A.D. 606, after his labour of thirteen years as
the teacher.

[FN#41]  He died in A.D. 651-that is, forty-five years after the
death of the Third Patriarch.



8. The Fifth and the Sixth Patriarchs.

Tao Sin transmitted the Law to Hung Jan (Ko-nin), who being educated
from infancy, distinguished himself as the Abbot of the Hwang Mei
Monastery at Ki Cheu.  The Fifth Patriarch, according to his
biographer, gathered about him seven hundred pupils, who came from
all quarters.  Of these seven hundred pupils the venerable Shang Sin
(Jin-shu) was most noted for his learning and virtues, and he might
have become the legitimate successor of Hung Jan, had not the Kachaya
of Bodhidharma been carried away by a poor farmer's son of Sin Cheu.
Hwui Nang, the Sixth Patriarch, seems to have been born a Zen
teacher.  The spiritual light of Buddha first flashed in his mind
when he happened to hear a monk reciting a sutra.  On questioning the
monk, be learned that the book was
Vajracchedika-prajnya-paramita-sutra,[FN#42] and that Hung Jan, the
Abbot of the Hwang Mei Monastery, was used to make his disciples
recite the book that it might help them in their spiritual
discipline.  Hereupon he made up his mind to practise Zen, and called
on Hung Jan at the Monastery.  "Who are you," demanded the Fifth
Patriarch, "and whence have you come?"  "I am a son of the farmer,"
replied the man, "of Sin Cheu in the South of Ta Yu Ling."  "What has
brought you here?" asked the master again.  "I have no other purpose
than to attain to Buddhahood," answered the man.  "O, you, people of
the South," exclaimed the patriarch, "you are not endowed with the
nature of Buddha."  "There may be some difference between the
Southern and the Northern people," objected the man, "but how could
you distinguish one from the other as to the nature of Buddha?"  The
teacher recognized a genius in the man, but he did not admit the
promising newcomer into the order, so Hwui Nang had to stay in the
Monastery for eight months as a pounder of rice in order to qualify
himself to be a Zen teacher.


[FN#42]  The book was translated into Chinese by Kumarajiva in A.D.
384. 417; also by Bodhiruci in A.D. 509, and by Paramartha in A.D.
592; then by Hiuen Tsang in A.D. 648.  Many commentaries have been
written on it by the prominent Buddhist authors of China and Japan.



9. The Spiritual Attainment of the Sixth Patriarch.

Some time before his death (in 675 A.D.) the Fifth Patriarch
announced to all disciples that the Spirit of Shakya Muni is hard to
realize, that they should express their own views on it, on condition
that anyone who could prove his right realization should be given
with the Kachaya and created the Sixth Patriarch.  Then the venerable
Sung Siu, the head of the seven hundred disciples, who was considered
by his brothers to be the man entitled to the honour, composed the
following verses:

"The body is the Bodhi-tree.[FN#43]
The mind is like a mirror bright on its stand.
Dust it and wipe it from time to time,
Lest it be dimmed by dust and dirt."


[FN#43]  The idea expressed by these lines is clear enough.  Body is
likened to the Bodhi-tree, under which Shakya Muni attained to his
supreme enlightenment; for it is not in another body in the future
existence, but in this very body that one had to get enlightened.
And mind is pure and bright in its nature like a mirror, but the dirt
and dust of passions and of low desires often pollute and dim it.
Therefore one should dust and wipe it from time to time in order to
keep it bright.


All who read these lines thought that the writer was worthy of the
expected reward, and the Fifth Patriarch also, appreciating the
significance of the verses, said: "If men in the future would
practise Zen according to this view, they would acquire an excellent
result."  Hwui Nang, the rice-pounder, hearing of them, however,
secretly remarked that they are beautiful, but hardly expressive of
the Spirit of Shakya Muni, and wrote his own verses, which ran as
follows:

"There is no Bodhi-tree,[FN#44]
Nor is there a mirror stand.
Nothing exists from the first
What can be dimmed by dust and dirt?"


[FN#44]  These verses have often been misunderstood as expressive of
a nihilistic view, but the real meaning is anything but nihilistic.
Mind is pure and bright in its essence.  It is always free from
passions and mean desires, just as the sun is always bright, despite
of cloud and mist that cover its face.  Therefore one must get an
insight into this essential nature of Mind, and realize that one has
no mean desires and passions from the first, and also that there is
no tree of Bodhi nor the mirror of Enlightenment without him, but
they are within him.


Perhaps nobody ever dreamed such an insignificant fellow as the
rice-pounder could surpass the venerable scholar in a religious
insight, but the Fifth Patriarch saw at once an Enlightened Soul
expressed in those lines; therefore he made up his mind to give the
Kachaya to the writer, in whom he found a great spiritual leader of
future generations.  But he did it secretly at midnight, lest some of
the disciples from envy do violence to Hwui Nang.  He was, moreover,
cautious enough to advise his successor to leave the Monastery at
once, and go back to the South, that the latter might conceal his
Enlightenment until a time would come for his missionary activities.



10. Flight of the Sixth Patriarch.

On the following morning the news of what had happened during the
night flew from mouth to mouth, and some of the enraged brothers
attempted to pursue the worthy fugitive.  The foremost among them,
Hwui Ming (E-myo), overtook the Sixth Patriarch at a mountain pass
not very far from the Monastery.  Then Hwui Nang, laying down the
Kachaya on a rock by the road, addressed the pursuer: "This is a mere
symbol of the patriarchal authority, and it is not a thing to be
obtained by force.  Take it along with you, if you long for it."
Upon this Hwui Ming, who began to be ashamed of his base act, tried
to lift the Kachaya, but in vain, for it was, as he felt, as heavy as
the rock itself.  At last he said to the Sixth Patriarch: "I have
come here, my brother, not for the sake of this robe, but for the
sake of the Law.  Grant my hearty desire of getting Enlightened."
"If you have come for the Law," replied Hwui Nang, "you must put an
end to all your struggles and longings.  Think neither of good nor of
evil (make your mind pure from all idle thoughts), then see how is,
Hwui Ming, your original (mental) physiognomy!"  Being thus
questioned, Ming found in an instant the Divine Light of Buddha
within himself, and became a disciple of the Sixth Patriarch.



11. The Development of the Southern and of the Northern School of Zen.

After the death of the Fifth Patriarch the venerable Shang Siu,
though not the legitimate successor of his master, was not inactive
in the propagation of the faith, and gathered about him a number of
enthusiastic admirers.  This led to the foundation of the Northern
school of Zen in opposition to the Southern school led by the Sixth
Patriarch.  The Empress Tseh Tien Wa Heu,[FN#45] the real ruler of
China at that time, was an admirer of Shang Siu, and patronized his
school, which nevertheless made no further development.


[FN#45]  The Emperor Chung Tsung (Chu-so, A.D. 684-704) was a nominal
sovereign, and the Empress was the real ruler from A.D. 684 to 705.


In the meanwhile the Sixth Patriarch, who had gone to the South,
arrived at the Fah Sing Monastery in Kwang Cheu, where Yin Tsung
(In-shu), the abbot, was giving lectures on the Mahayana sutras to a
number of student monks.  It was towards evening that he happened to
overhear two monks of the Monastery discussing about the flag
floating in air.  One of them said: "It is the wind that moves in
reality, but not the flag."  "No," objected the other, "it is the
flag that moves in reality, but not the wind."  Thus each of them
insisted on his own one-sided view, and came to no proper conclusion.
 Then the Sixth Patriarch introduced himself and said to them: "It is
neither the wind nor the flag, but your mind that moves in reality."
Yin Tsung, having heard these words of the stranger, was greatly
astonished, and thought the latter should have been an extraordinary
personage.  And when he found the man to be the Sixth Patriarch of
Zen, he and all his disciples decided to follow Zen under the master.
 Consequently Hwui Nang, still clad like a layman, changed his
clothes, and began his patriarchal career at that Monastery.  This is
the starting-point of the great development of Zen in China.



12. Missionary Activity of the Sixth Patriarch.

As we have seen above, the Sixth Patriarch was a great genius, and
may be justly called a born Zen teacher.  He was a man of no
erudition, being a poor farmer, who had served under the Fifth
Patriarch as a rice-pounder only for eight months, but he could find
a new meaning in Buddhist terms, and show how to apply it to
practical life.  On one occasion, for instance, Fah Tah (Ho-tatsu), a
monk who had read over the Saddharma-pundarika-sutra[FN#46] three
thousand times, visited him to be instructed in Zen.  "Even if you
read the sutra ten thousand times," said the Sixth Patriarch, who
could never read the text, "it will do you no good, if you cannot
grasp the spirit of the sutra."  "I have simply recited the book,"
confessed the monk, "as it is written in characters.  How could such
a dull fellow as I grasp its spirit?"  "Then recite it once,"
responded the master; "I shall explain its spirit."  Hereupon Fah Tah
began to recite the sutra, and when he read it until the end of the
second chapter the teacher stopped him, saying: "You may stop there.
Now I know that this sutra was preached to show the so-called
greatest object of Shakya Muni's appearing on earth.  That greatest
object was to have all sentient beings Enlightened just as He
Himself."  In this way the Sixth Patriarch grasped the essentials of
the Mahayana sutras, and freely made use of them as the explanation
of the practical questions about Zen.


[FN#46]  One of the most noted Mahayana sutras, translated by
Dharmaraksa (A.D. 286) and by Kumarajiva (A.D. 406).  The reader has
to note that the author states the essential doctrine in the second
chapter.  See " Sacred Books of the East," vol. xxi., pp. 30-59.



13. The Disciples under the Sixth Patriarch.

Some time after this the Sixth Patriarch settled himself down at the
Pao Lin Monastery, better known as Tsao Ki Shan (So-kei-zan), in Shao
Cheu, and it grow into a great centre of Zen in the Southern States.
Under his instruction many eminent Zen masters qualified themselves
as Leaders of the Three Worlds.  He did not give the patriarchal
symbol, the Kachaya, to his successors, lest it might cause needless
quarrels among the brethren, as was experienced by himself.  He only
gave sanction to his disciples who attained to Enlightenment, and
allowed them to teach Zen in a manner best suited to their own
personalities.  For instance, Huen Kioh (Gen-kaku), a scholar of the
Tien Tai doctrine,[FN#47] well known as the Teacher of Yung
Kia[FN#48] (Yo-ka), received a sanction for his spiritual attainment
after exchanging a few words with the master in their first
interview, and was at once acknowledged as a Zen teacher.  When he
reached the zenith of his fame, he was presented with a crystal bowl
together with rich gifts by the Empress Tseh Tien; and it was in A.D.
705 that the Emperor Chung Tsung invited him in vain to proceed to
the palace, since the latter followed the example of the Fourth
Patriarch.

