separated from home and kindred, and all surroundings. The command to
Abram was no mere arbitrary test of obedience. God could not have done
what He meant with him, unless He had got him by himself. So Isaiah
(li. 2) put his finger on the essential when he says, 'I called him
alone.' God's communications are made to solitary souls, and His voice
to us always summons us to forsake friends and companions, and to go
apart with God. No man gets speech of God in a crowd. If you desired to
fill a person with electricity, you used to put him on a stool with
glass legs, to keep him from earthly contact. If the quickening impulse
from the great magnet is to charge the soul, that soul must be
isolated. 'He that loveth father or mother more than Me is not worthy
of Me.'

The vagueness of the command is significant. Abram did not know
'whither he went.' He is not told that Canaan is the land, till he has
reached Canaan. A true obedience is content to have orders enough for
present duty. Ships are sometimes sent out with sealed instructions, to
be opened when they reach latitude and longitude so-and-so. That is how
we are all sent out. Our knowledge goes no farther ahead than is
needful to guide our next step. If we 'go out' as He bids us, He will
show us what to do next.

  'I do not ask to see
  The distant scene; one step enough for me.'

Observe the promise. We may notice that it needed a soul raised above
the merely temporal to care much for such promises. They would have
been but thin diet for earthly appetites. 'A great nation'; a divine
blessing; to be a source of blessing to the whole world, and a
touchstone by their conduct to which men would be blessed or
cursed;--what was there in these to fascinate a man, unless he had
faith to teach him the relative importance of the earthly and the
heavenly, the present and the future? Notice that the whole promise
appeals to unselfish desires. It is always, in some measure, elevating
to live for a future, rather than a present, good; but if it be only
the same kind of good as the present would yield, it is a poor affair.
The only really ennobling faith is one which sets before itself a
future full of divine blessing, and of diffusion of that blessing
through us, and which therefore scorns delights, and for such gifts is
content to be solitary and a wanderer.

2. The obedience of faith.--We have here a wonderful example of prompt,
unquestioning obedience to a bare word. We do not know how the divine
command was conveyed to Abram. We simply read, 'The Lord said'; and if
we contrast this with verse 7, 'The Lord appeared ... and said,' it
will seem probable that there was no outward sign of the divine will.
The patriarch knew that he was following a divine command, and not his
own purpose; but there seems to have been no appeal to sense to
authenticate the inward voice. He stands, then, on a high level,
setting the example of faith as unconditional acceptance of, and
obedience to, God's bare word.

Observe that faith, which is the reliance on a person, and therefore
trust in his word, passes into both forms of confidence in that word as
promise, and obedience to that word as command. We cannot cut faith in
halves, and exercise the one aspect without the other. Some people's
faith says that it delights in God's promises, but it does not delight
in His commandments. That is no faith at all. Whoever takes God at His
word, will take all His words. There is no faith without obedience;
there is no obedience without faith.

We have already said enough about the separation which was effected by
Abram's journey; but we may just notice that the departure from his
father's house was but the necessary result of the gulf between them
and him, which had been opened by his faith. They were idolaters; he
worshipped one God. That drove them farther apart than the distance
between Sichem and Haran. When sympathy in religion was at an end, the
breach of all other ties was best. So to-day, whether there be outward
separation or no, depends on circumstances; but every true Christian is
parted from the dearest who is not a Christian, by an abyss wider than
any outward distance can make. The law for us is Abram's law, 'Get thee
out.' Either our faith will separate us from the world, or the world
will separate us from our faith and our God.

The companionship of Lot, who attaches himself to Abram, teaches that
religion, in its true possessors, exercises an attractive influence
over even common natures, and may win them to a loftier life. Some weak
eyes may discern more glory in the sunshine tinting a poor bit of mist
into ruddy light than in the beam which is too bright to look at. A
faithful Abram will draw Lot after him.

'They went forth to go into the land of Canaan; and into the land of
Canaan they came.' Compare this singular expression with chapter xi.
31, where we have Terah's emigration from Ur described in the same
terms, with the all-important difference in the end, 'They came' not
into Canaan, but 'unto Haran, and dwelt there.' Many begin the course;
one finishes it. Terah's journeying was only in search of pasture and
an abode. So he dropped his wider scheme when the narrower served his
purpose. It was an easy matter to go from Ur to Haran. Both were on the
same bank of the Euphrates. But to cross the broad, deep, rapid river
was a different thing, and meant an irrevocable cutting loose from the
past life. Only the man of faith did that. There are plenty of
half-and-half Christians, who go along merrily from Ur to Haran; but
when they see the wide stream in front, and realise how completely the
other side is separated from all that is familiar, they take another
thought, and conclude they have come far enough, and Haran will serve
their turn.

Again, the phrase teaches us the certain issue of patient pilgrimage
and persistent purpose. There is no mystery in getting to the journey's
end. 'One foot up, and the other foot down,' continued long enough,
will bring to the goal of the longest march. It looks a weary journey,
and we wonder if we shall ever get thither. But the magic of 'one step
at a time' does it. The guide is also the upholder of our way. 'Every
one of them appeareth before God in Zion.'

3. The life in the land.--The first characteristic of it is its
continual wandering. This is the feature which the Epistle to the
Hebrews marks as significant. There was no reason but his own choice
why Abram should continue to journey, and prefer to pitch his tent now
under the terebinth tree of Moreh, now by Hebron, rather than to enter
some of the cities of the land. He dwelt in tents because he looked for
the city. The clear vision of the future detached him, as it will
always detach men, from close participation in the present. It is not
because we are mortal, and death is near at the furthest, that the
Christian is to sit loose to this world, but because he lives by the
hope of the inheritance. He must choose to be a pilgrim, and keep
himself apart in feeling and aims from this present. The great lesson
from the wandering life of Abram is, 'Set your affection on things
above.' Cultivate the sense of belonging to another polity than that in
the midst of which you dwell. The Canaanites christened Abram 'The
Hebrew' (Genesis xiv. 13), which may be translated 'The man from the
other side.' That is the name which all true Christians should deserve.
They should bear their foreign extraction in their faces, and never be
naturalised subjects here. Life is wholesomer in the tent under the
spreading tree, with the fresh air blowing about us and clear sky
above, than in the Canaanite city.

Observe, too, that Abram's life was permeated with worship. Wherever he
pitches his tent, he builds an altar. So he fed his faith, and kept up
his communion with God. The only condition on which the pilgrim life is
possible, and the temptations of the world cease to draw our hearts, is
that all life shall be filled with the consciousness of the divine
presence, our homes altars, and ourselves joyful thankofferings. Then
every abode is blessed. The undefended tent is a safe fortress, in
which dwelling we need not envy those who dwell in palaces. Common
tasks will then be fresh, full of interest, because we see God in them,
and offer them up to Him. The wandering life will be a life of walking
with God, and progressive knowledge of Him; and over all the
roughnesses and the sorrows and the trivialities of it will be spread
'the light that never was on sea or land, the consecration' of God's
presence, and the peacefulness of communion with Him.

Again, we may notice that the life of obedience was followed by fuller
manifestations of God, and of His will. God 'appeared' when Abram was
in the land. Is it not always true that obedience is blessed by closer
vision and more knowledge? To him that hath shall be given; and he who
has followed the unseen Guide through dimly discerned paths to an
invisible goal, will be gladdened when he reaches the true Canaan, by
the sight of Him whom, having not seen, he loved. Even here on earth
obedience is the path to fuller knowledge; and when the pilgrims who
have left all and followed the Captain of salvation through a deeper,
darker stream than Abram crossed, have touched the other side, God will
appear to them, and say, as the enraptured eye gazes amazed on the
goodly land, 'Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in
the breadth of it; for I will give it unto thee.'




ABRAM AND THE LIFE OF FAITH


II


A great act of renunciation at the divine call lies at the foundation
of Israel's history, as it does at the foundation of every life that
blesses the world or is worth living. The divine Word to Abram first
gives the command in all its authoritativeness and plain setting forth
of how much had to be surrendered, and then in its exuberant setting
forth of how much was to be won by obedience. God does not hide the
sacrifices that have to be made if we will be true to His command. He
will enlist no recruits on false pretences. All ties of country,
kindred, and father's house have to be loosened, and, if need be, to be
cut, for His command is to be supreme, and clinging hands that would
hold back the pilgrim have to be disengaged. If a man realises God's
hold on him, he feels all others relaxed. The magnetism of the divine
command overcomes gravitation, and lifts him high above earth. The life
of faith ever begins as that of 'the Father of the Faithful' began,
with the solemn recognition of a divine will which separates. Further,
Abram saw plainly what he had to leave, but not what he was to win. He
had to make a venture of faith, for 'the land that I will shew thee'
was undefined. Certainly it was somewhere, but where was it? He had to
fling away substance for what seemed shadow to all but the eye of
faith, as we all have to do. The familiar, undeniable good of the
present has to be waived in favour of what 'common sense' calls a misty
possibility in the future. To part with solid acres and get nothing but
hopes of an inheritance in the skies looks like insanity, and is the
only true wisdom. 'Get thee out' is plain; 'the land that I will shew
thee' looks like the doubtful outlines seen from afar at sea, which may
be but clouds.

But Abram had a great hope blazing in front, none the less bright or
guiding because it all rested on the bare promise of God. It is the
prerogative of faith to give solidity and reality to what the world
thinks has neither. The wanderer who had left his country was to
receive a land for his own; the solitary who had left his kindred was
to become the founder of a nation; the unknown stranger was to win a
great name,--and how wonderfully that has come true! Not only was he to
be blessed, but also to be a blessing, for from him was to flow that
which should bless all the earth,--and how transcendently that has come
true! The attitude of men to him (and to the universal blessing that
should descend from him) was to determine their position in reference
to God and 'blessings' or 'cursings' from him. So the migration of
Abram was a turning-point in universal history.

Obedience followed the command, immediate as the thunder on the flash,
and complete. 'So Abram went, as the Lord had spoken unto
him,'--blessed they of whose lives that may be the summing-up! Happy
the life which has God's command at the back of every deed, and no
command of His unobeyed! If our acts are closely parallel with God's
speech to us, they will prosper, and we shall be peaceful wherever we
may have to wander. Success followed obedience in Abram's case, as in
deepest truth it always does. That is a pregnant expression: 'They went
forth to go into the land of Canaan; and into the land of Canaan they
came.' A strange itinerary of a journey, which omits all but the start
and the finish! And yet are these not the most important points in any
journey or life,--whither it was directed and where it arrived? How
little will the weary tramps in the desert be remembered when the goal
has been reached! Dangers and privations soon pass from memory, and we
shall think little of sorrows, cares, and pains, when we arrive at
home. The life of faith is the only one which is always sure of getting
to the place to which it seeks to journey. Others miss their aim, or
drop dead on the road, like the early emigrants out West; Christian
lives get to the city.

Once in the land, Abram was still a stranger and pilgrim. He first
planted himself in its heart by Sichem, but outside the city, under the
terebinth tree of Moreh. The reason for his position is given in the
significant statement that 'the Canaanite was then in the land.' So he
had to live in the midst of an alien civilisation, and yet keep apart
from it. As Hebrews says, he was 'dwelling in tabernacles,' because he
'looked for a city.' The hope of the permanent future made him keep
clear of the passing present; and we are to feel ourselves pilgrims and
sojourners, not so much because earth is fleeting and we are mortal, as
because our true affinities are with the unseen and eternal. But the
presence of 'the Canaanite' is connected also with the following words,
which tell that 'the Lord appeared unto Abram,' and now after his
obedience told him that this was the land that was to be his. He
unfolds His purposes to those who keep His commandments; obedience is
the mother of insight. The revelation put a further strain on faith,
for the present occupiers of the land were many and strong; but it
matters not how formidably and firmly rooted the Canaanite is, God's
children can be sure that the promise will be fulfilled. We can calmly
look on his power and reckon on its decay, if the Lord appears to us,
as to Abram--and He surely will if we have followed His separating
voice, and dwell as strangers here, because our hearts are with Him.

After the appearance of God and the promise, we have an outline of the
pilgrim's life, as seen in Abram. He signalised God's further opening
of His purposes, by building an altar on the place where He had been
seen by him. Thankful recognition and commemoration of the times in our
lives when He has most plainly drawn near and shown us glimpses of His
will, are no less blessed than due, and they who thus rear altars to
Him will wonder, when they come to count up how many they have had to
build. But the life of faith is ever a pilgrim life, and Bethel has
soon to be the home instead of Shechem. There, too, Abram keeps outside
the city, and pitches his tent. There, too, the altar rises by the side
of the tent. The transitory provision for housing the pilgrim contrasts
with the solid structure for offering sacrifices. The tent is
'pitched,' and may be struck and carried away to-morrow, but the altar
is 'builded.' That part of our lives which is concerned with the
material and corporeal is, after all, short in duration and small in
importance; that which has to do with God, His revelations, and His
worship and service, lasts. What is left in ancient historic lands,
like Egypt or Greece, is the temples of the gods, while the huts of the
people have perished long centuries ago. What we build for God lasts;
what we pitch for ourselves is transient as we are.




GOING FORTH


    'They went forth to go into the land of Canaan, and into
    the land of Canaan they came.'--GENESIS xii. 5.


I


The reference of these words is to Abram's act of faith in leaving
Haran and setting out on his pilgrimage. It is a strange narrative of a
journey, which omits the journey altogether, with its weary marches,
privations, and perils, and notes but its beginning and its end. Are
not these the main points in every life, its direction and its
attainment? There are--

  'Two points in the adventure of the diver,
   One--when, a beggar, he prepares to plunge,
   One--when, a prince, he rises with his pearl.'

Abram and his company had a clear aim. But does not the Epistle to the
Hebrews magnify him precisely because he 'went out, not knowing whither
he went'? Both statements are true, for Abram had the same combination
of knowledge and ignorance as we all have. He knew that he was to go to
a land that he should afterwards inherit, and he knew that, in the
first place, Canaan was to be his 'objective point,' but he did not
know, till long after he had crossed the Euphrates and pitched his tent
by Bethel, that it was the land. The ultimate goal was clear, and the
first step towards it was plain, but how that first step was related to
the goal was not plain, and all the steps between were unknown. He went
forth with sealed orders, to go to a certain place, where he would have
further instructions. He knew that he was to go to Canaan, and beyond
that point all was dark, except for the sparkle of the great hope that
gleamed on the horizon in front, as a sunlit summit rises above a sea
of mist between it and the traveller. Like such a traveller, Abram
could not accurately tell how far off the shining peak was, nor where,
in the intervening gorges full of mist, the path lay; but he plunged
into the darkness with a good heart, because he had caught a glimpse of
his journey's end. So with us. We may have clear before us the ultimate
aim and goal of our lives, and also the step which we have to take now,
in pressing towards it, while between these two there stretches a
valley full of mist, the breadth of which may be measured by years or
by hours, for all that we know, and the rough places and green pastures
of which are equally hidden from us. We have to be sure that the
mountain peak far ahead, with the sunshine bathing it, is not delusive
cloud but solid reality, and we have to make sure that God has bid us
step out on the yard of path which we _can_ see, and, having secured
these two certainties, we are to cast ourselves into the obscurity
before us, and to bear in our hearts the vision of the end, to cheer us
amid the difficulties of the road.

Life is strenuous, fruitful, and noble, in the measure in which its
ultimate aim is kept clearly visible throughout it all. Nearer aims,
prescribed by physical necessities, tastes, circumstances, and the
like, are clear enough, but a melancholy multitude of us have never
reflected on the further question: 'What then?' Suppose I have made my
fortune, or won my wife, or established my position, or achieved a
reputation, behind all these successes lies the larger question. These
are not ends but means, and it is fatal to treat them as being the goal
of our efforts or the chief end of our being. There would be fewer
wrecked lives, and fewer bitter and disappointed old men, if there were
more young ones who, at starting, put clearly before themselves the
question: 'What am I living for? and what am I going to do when I have
secured the nearer aims necessarily prescribed to me?'

What that aim should be is not doubtful. The only worthy end befitting
creatures with hearts, minds, consciences, and wills like ours is God
Himself. Abram's 'Canaan' is usually regarded as an emblem of heaven,
and that is correct, but the land of our inheritance is not wholly
beyond the river, for God is the portion of our hearts. He _is_ heaven.
To dwell with Him, to have all the current of our being running towards
Him, to set Him before us in the strenuous hours of effort and in the
quiet moments of repose, in the bright and in the dark days, are the
conditions of blessedness, strength, and peace.

That aim clearly apprehended and persistently pursued gives continuity
to life, such as nothing else can do. How many of the things that drew
us to themselves, and were for a while the objects of desire and
effort, have sunk below the horizon! The lives that are not directed to
God as their chief end are like the voyages of old-time sailors, who
had to creep from one headland to another, and steer for points which,
one after another, were reached, left behind, and forgotten. There is
only one aim so great, so far in advance that we can never reach, and
therefore can never pass and drop it. Life then becomes a chain, not a
heap of unrelated fragments. That aim made ours, stimulates effort to
its highest point, and therefore secures blessedness. It emancipates
from many bonds, and takes the poison out of the mosquito bites of
small annoyances, and the stings of great sorrows. It gleams ever
before a man, sufficiently attained to make him at rest, sufficiently
unattained to give the joy of progress. The pilgrims who had but one
single aim, 'to go to the land of Canaan,' were delivered from the
miseries of conflicting desires, and with simplicity of aim came
concentration of force and calm of spirit.




COMING IN


II


If life has a clear, definite aim, and especially if its aim is the
highest, there will be detachment from, and abandonment of, many lower
ones. Nothing worth doing is done, and nothing worth being is realised
in ourselves, except on condition of resolutely ignoring much that
attracts. 'They went forth'; Haran must be given up if Canaan is to be
reached. Artists are content to pay the price for mastery in their art,
students think it no hardship to remain ignorant of much in order to
know their own subject thoroughly; men of business feel it no sacrifice
to give up culture, leisure, and sometimes still higher things, such as
love and purity, to win wealth. And we shall not be Christians after
Christ's heart unless we practise similar restrictions. The stream that
is to flow with impetus sufficient to scour its bed clear of
obstructions must not be allowed to meander in side branches, but be
banked up in one channel. Sometimes there must be actual surrender and
outward withdrawal from lower aims which, by our weakness, have become
rival aims; always there must be subordination and detachment in heart
and mind. The compass in an iron ship is disturbed by the iron, unless
it has been adjusted; the golden apples arrest the runner, and there
are clogs and weights in every life, which have to be laid aside if the
race is to be won. The old pilgrim fashion is still the only way. We
must do as Abram did: leave Haran and its idols behind us, and go
forth, ready to dwell, if need be, in deserts, and as sojourners even
when among cities, or we shall not reach the 'land that is very far
off.' It is near us if we forsake self and the 'things seen and
temporal,' but it recedes when we turn our hearts to these.

'Into the land of Canaan they came.' No man honestly and rightly seeks
God and fails to find Him. No man has less goodness and Christ-likeness
than he truly desires and earnestly pursues. Nearer aims are often
missed, and it is well that they should be. We should thank God for
disappointments, for hopes unfulfilled, or proving still greater
disappointments when fulfilled. It is mercy that often makes the
harvest from our sowing a scanty one, for so we are being taught to
turn from the quest in which searching has no assurance of finding, to
that in which to seek is to find. 'I have never said to any of the seed
of Jacob, Seek ye me in vain.' We may not reach other lands which seem
to us to be lands of promise, or when we do, may find that the land is
'evil and naughty,' but this land we shall reach, if we desire it, and
if, desiring it, we go forth from this vain world. The Christian life
is the only one which has no failures, no balked efforts, no frustrated
aims, no brave settings out and defeated returnings. The literal
meaning of one of the Old Testament words for _sin_ is missing the
mark, and that embodies the truth that no man wins what he seeks who
seeks satisfaction elsewhere than in God. Like the rivers in Asiatic
deserts, which are lost in the sand and never reach the sea, all lives
which flow towards anything but God are dissipated and vain.

But the supreme realisation of an experience like Abram's is reserved
for another life. No pilgrim Zion-ward perishes in the wilderness, or
loses his way or fails to come to 'the city of habitation.' 'They go
from strength to strength, every one of them in Zion appeareth before
God.' And when they appear there, they will think no more, just as this
narrative says nothing, of the sandy, salt, waterless wildernesses, or
the wearinesses, dangers, and toils of the road. The experience of the
happy travellers, who have found all which they sought and are at home
for ever in the fatherland towards which they journeyed, will all be
summed up in this, that 'they went forth to go into the land of Canaan,
and into the land of Canaan they came.'




THE MAN OF FAITH


    'And Abram passed through the land unto the place of
    Sichem, unto the plain of Moreh. And the Canaanite was
    then in the land. And the Lord appeared unto Abram, and
    said, Unto thy seed will I give this land: and there
    builded he an altar unto the Lord, who appeared unto
    him.'--GENESIS xii. 6, 7.

Great epoch and man. Steps of Abram's training. First he was simply
called to go--no promise of inheritance--obeyed--came to Canaan-found a
thickly peopled land with advanced social order, and received no divine
vision till he was face to face with the Canaanite.

1. _God's bit-by-bit leading of us._

How slowly the divine purpose was revealed--the trial before the
promise--did not know where, nor that Canaan was land, but only told
enough for his first march.

So with us--our ignorance of future is meant to have the effect of
keeping us near God and training us to live a day at a time.

God's finger on the page points to a word at a time. Each day's route
is given morning by morning in the order for the day.

2. _Obedience often brings us into very difficult places._

Abram was ready to say, no doubt, 'This cannot be the land for me,
peopled as it is with all these Canaanites.' We are ever ready to think
that, if we find obstacles, we must have misunderstood God's
directions, but 'many adversaries' often indicate an 'open door.'

3. _The presence of enemies brings the presence of God._

This is the first time we read that God _appeared_ to men.

As the darkness thickens, the pillar of fire brightens. But not only
does God appear more clearly, but our spirits are more eager and
therefore able to see Him. We are mercifully left to feel the enemies
before we see Him present in His strength.

4. _The victory for us lies in the vision of God and of His loving
purpose._

How superb the confidence of 'Unto thy seed will I give _this_ land.'

That vision is our true strength. And it will make us feel as pilgrims,
which is in itself more than half the battle.




LIFE IN CANAAN


    'And he removed from thence unto a mountain on the east
    of Beth-el, and pitched his tent, having Beth-el on the
    west, and Hai on the east: and there he builded an altar
    unto the Lord, and called upon the name of the Lord.'
    GENESIS xii. 3.

These are the two first acts of Abram in the land of Canaan.

1. _All life should blend earthly and heavenly._

They are not to be separated. Religion should run through everything
and take the whole of life for its field. Where we cannot carry it is
no place for us. It is a shame that heathenism should be more
penetrated by its religion than Christendom is.

2. _The family should be a church._

Domestic religion. New Testament households. Abram a priest. The decay
of family religion, worship, and instruction.

3. _The service to God should be more costly than to ourselves._

Pitching a tent cheaper than building an altar. Give God the best. We
build ourselves ceiled houses and the ark dwells in curtains. Pagans
build elaborate temples, but their houses are hovels. Too many
Christians do the opposite.

4. _Building for God lasts, for selves perishes._

A tent is stricken, and no trace remains but embers. The stones of
Jacob's altar may be standing yet. The Parthenon of Athens remains:
where are the hovels of the people? 'He that doeth the will of God
abideth for ever.' Permanent results of transitory deeds.




THE IMPORTANCE OF A CHOICE


    'And Abram went up out of Egypt, he, and his wife, and
    all that he had, and Lot with him, into the south. And
    Abram was very rich in cattle, in silver, and in gold.
    And he went on his journeys from the south even to Beth-el,
    unto the place where his tent had been at the beginning,
    between Beth-el and Hal; Unto the place of the altar,
    which he had made there at the first: and there Abram
    called on the name of the Lord. And Lot also, which went
    with Abram, had flocks, and herds, and tents. And the
    land was not able to bear them, that they might dwell
    together: for their substance was great, so that they
    could not dwell together. And there was a strife between
    the herdmen of Abram's cattle and the herdmen of Lot's
    cattle; and the Canaanite and the Perizzite dwelled then
    in the land. And Abram said unto Lot, Let there be no
    strife, I pray thee, between me and thee, and between my
    herdmen and thy herdmen; for we be brethren. Is not the
    whole land before thee? Separate thyself, I pray thee,
    from me: if thou wilt lake the left hand, then I will
    go to the right; or if thou depart to the right hand,
    then I will go to the left. And Lot lifted up his eyes,
    and beheld all the plain of Jordan, that it was well
    watered every where, before the Lord destroyed Sodom and
    Gomorrah, even as the garden of the Lord, like the land
    of Egypt, as thou comest unto Zoar. Then Lot chose him
    all the plain of Jordan; and Lot journeyed east: and
    they separated themselves the one from the other. Abram
    dwelled in the land of Canaan, and Lot dwelled in the
    cities of the plain, and pitched his tent toward Sodom.
    But the men of Sodom were wicked and sinners before the
    Lord exceedingly.'--GENESIS xiii. 1-13.

The main lesson of this section is the wisdom of seeking spiritual
rather than temporal good. That is illustrated on both sides.
Prosperity attends Abram and Lot while they think more of obeying God
than of flocks and herds. Lot makes a mistake, as far as this world is
concerned, when he chooses his place of abode for the sake of its
material advantages. But the introductory verses (vv. 1-4) suggest a
question, and seem to teach an important lesson. Was Abram right in so
soon leaving the land to which God had led him, and going down to
Egypt? Was that not taking the bit between his teeth? He had been
commanded to go to Canaan; should he not have stopped there--famine or
no famine--till the same authority commanded him to leave the land? If
God had put him there, should he not have trusted God to keep him alive
in famine? The narrative seems to imply that his going to Egypt was a
failure of faith. It gives no hint of a divine voice leading him
thither. We do not hear that he builded any altar beside his tent
there, as he had done in the happier days of life by trust. His stay
resulted in peril and in something very like lying, for which he had to
bear the disgrace of being rebuked by an idolater, and having no word
of excuse to offer. The great lesson of the whole section, and indeed
of Abram's whole life, receives fresh illustration from the story thus
understood, which preaches loudly that trust is safety and wellbeing,
and that it is always sin and always folly to leave Canaan, where God
has put us, even if there be a famine, and to go down into Egypt, even
if its harvests be abundant.

But another lesson is also taught. After the interruption of the
Egyptian journey, Abram had to begin all his Canaan life over again.
Very emphatically the narrative puts it, that he went to 'the place
where his tent had been at the beginning,' to the altar which he had
made at the first. Yes! that is the only place for a man who has
faltered and gone aside from the course of obedience. He must begin
over again. The backsliding Christian has to resort anew to the place
of the penitent, and to come to Christ, as he did at first for pardon.
It is a solemn thought that years of obedience and heroisms of
self-surrender, may be so annihilated by some act of self-seeking
distrust that the whole career has, as it were, to be begun anew from
the very starting-point. It is a blessed thought that, however far and
long we may have wandered, we can always return to the place where we
were at the beginning, and there call on the name of the Lord.

Note how we are taught here the great truth for the Old Testament, that
outward prosperity follows most surely those who do not seek for it.
Abram's wealth has increased, and his companion, Lot, has shared in the
prosperity. It is because he 'went with Abram' that he 'had flocks, and
herds, and tents.' Of course, the connection between despising the
world and possessing it is not thus close in New Testament times. But
even now, one often sees that the men who _will_ be rich fall into a
pit of poverty, and that a heart set on higher things, which counts
earthly advantages second and not first, wins a sufficiency of these
most surely. Foxlike cunning, and wolf-like rapacity, and Devil-like
selfishness, which make up a large portion of what the world calls
'great business capacity,' do not always secure the prize. But the real
possession of earth and all its wealth depends to-day, as much as ever
it did in Abram's times, on seeking 'first the kingdom of God, and His
righteousness.' Only when we are Christ's are all things ours. They are
ours, not by the vulgar way of what the world calls ownership, but in
proportion as we use them to the highest ends of helping us to grow in
wisdom and Christ-likeness, in the measure in which we subordinate them
to heavenly good, in the degree in which we employ them as means of
serving Christ. We can see the Pleiades best by not looking directly
at, but somewhat away from, them; and just as pleasure, if made the
direct object of life, ceases to be pleasure, so the world's goods, if
taken for our chief aim, cease to yield even the imperfect good which
they can bestow.

But now we have to look at the two dim figures which the remainder of
this story presents to us, and which shine there, in that far-off past,
types and instances of the two great classes into which men are
divided,--Abram, the man of faith; Lot, the man of sense.

Mark the conduct of the man of faith. Why should he, who has God's
promise that all the land is his, squabble with his kinsman about
pasture and wells? The herdsmen naturally would come to high words and
blows, especially as the available land was diminished by the claims of
the 'Canaanite and Perizzite.' But the direct effect of Abram's faith
was to make him feel that the matter in dispute was too small to
warrant a quarrel. A soul truly living in the contemplation of the
future, and filled with God's promises, will never be eager to insist
on its rights, or to stand on its dignity, and will take too accurate a
measure of the worth of things temporal to get into a heat about them.
The clash of conflicting interests, and the bad blood bred by them,
seem infinitely small, when we are up on the height of communion with
God. An acre or two more or less of grass land does not look
all-important, when our vision of the city which hath foundations is
clear. So an elevated calm and 'sweet reasonableness' will mark the man
who truly lives by faith, and he will seek after the things that make
for peace. Abram could fight, as Old Testament morality permitted, when
occasion arose, as Lot found out to his advantage before long. But he
would not strive about such trifles.

May we not venture to apply his words to churches and sects? They too,
if they have faith strong and dominant, will not easily fall out with
one another about intrusions on each other's territory, especially in
the presence, as at this day, of the common foe. When the Canaanite and
the Perizzite are in the land, and Unbelief in militant forms is
arrayed against us, it is more than folly, it is sin, for brethren to
be turning their weapons against each other. The common foe should make
them stand shoulder to shoulder. Abram's faith led, too, to the noble
generosity of his proposal. The elder and superior gives the younger
and inferior the right of option, and is quite willing to take Lot's
leavings. Right or left--it mattered not to him; God would be with him,
whichever way he went; and the glorious Beyond, for which he lived,
blazed too bright before his inward sight to let him be very solicitous
where he was. 'I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to
be content.' It does not matter much what accommodation we have on
ship-board, when the voyage is so short. If our thoughts are stretching
across the sea to the landing at home, and the welcome there, we shall
not fight with our fellow-passengers about our cabins or places at the
table. And notice what rest comes when faith thus dwindles the worth of
the momentary arrangements here. The less of our energies are consumed
in asserting ourselves, and scrambling for our rights, and cutting in
before other people, so as to get the best places for ourselves, the
more we shall have to spare for better things; and the more we live in
the future, and leave God to order our ways, the more shall our souls
be wrapped in perfect peace.  Mark the conduct of the man of sense. We
can fancy the two standing on the barren hills by Bethel, from one of
which, as travellers tell us, there is precisely the view which Lot
saw. He lifted up his greedy eyes, and there, at his feet, lay that
strange Jordan valley with its almost tropical richness, its dark lines
of foliage telling of abundant water, the palm-trees of Jericho
perhaps, and the glittering cities. Up there among the hills there was
little to tempt,--rocks and scanty herbage; down below, it was like the
lost Eden, or the Egypt from which they had but lately come.

What need for hesitation? True, the men of the plain were 'wicked and
sinners before the Lord exceedingly,' as the chapter says with grim
emphasis. But Lot evidently never thought about that. He knew it,
though, and ought to have thought about it. It was his sin that he was
guided in his choice only by considerations of temporal advantage. Put
his action into words, and it says, 'Grass for my sheep is more to me
than fellowship with God, and a good conscience.' No doubt he would
have had salves enough. 'I do not need to become like them, though I
live among them.' 'A man must look after his own interests.' 'I can
serve God down there as well as up here.' Perhaps he even thought that
he might be a missionary among these sinners. But at bottom he did not
seek first the kingdom of God, but the other things.

We have seldom the choice put before us so dramatically and sharply;
but it is as really presented to each. There is the shameless cynicism
of the men who avowedly only ask the question, 'Will it pay?' But there
are subtler forms which affect us all. It is the standing temptation of
Englishmen to apply a money standard to everything, to adopt courses of
action of which the only recommendation is that they promote getting on
in the world. Men who call themselves Christians select schools for
their children, or professions for their boys, or marriages for their
daughters, down in Sodom, because it will give them a lift in life
which they would not get up in the starved pastures at Bethel, with
nobody but Abram and his like to associate with. If the earnestness
with which men pursue an end is to be taken as any measure of its
importance in their eyes, it certainly does not look much as if modern
average Christians did believe that it was of more moment to be united
to God, and to be growing like Him, than to secure a good large share
of earthly possessions. Tried by the test of conduct, their faith in
getting on is a great deal deeper than their faith in getting up. But
if our religion does not make us put the world beneath our feet, and
count all things but loss that we may win Christ, we had better ask
ourselves whether our religion is any better than Lot's, which was
second-hand, and was much more imitation of Abram than obedience to God.

Lot teaches us that material good may tempt and conquer, even after it
has once been overcome. His early life had been heroic; in his young
enthusiasm, he had thrown in his portion with Abram in his great
venture. He had not been thinking of his flocks when he left Haran.
Probably, as I have just said, he was a good deal galvanised into
imitation; but still, he had chosen the better part. But now he has
tired of a pilgrim's life. There are men who cut down the thorns, and
in whom the seed is sown; but thorns are tenacious of life, and quick
growing, and so they spread over the field and choke the seed. It is
easier to take some one bold step than to keep true through life to its
spirit. Youth contemns, but too often middle-age worships, worldly
success. The world tightens its grasp as we grow older, and Lot and
Demas teach us that it is hard to keep for a lifetime on the heights.
Faith, strong and ever renewed by communion, can do it; nothing else
can.

Lot's history teaches what comes of setting the world first, and God's
kingdom second. For one thing, the association with it is sure to get
closer. Lot began with choosing the plain; then he crept a little
nearer, and pitched his tent 'towards' Sodom; next time we hear of him,
he is living in the city, and mixed up inextricably with its people.
The first false step leads on to connections unforeseen, from which the
man would have shrunk in horror, if he had been told that he would make
them. Once on the incline, time and gravity will settle how far down we
go. We shall see, in subsequent sections, how far Lot's own moral
