
"You are young." The sage surveyed me thoughtfully. "India too is
young. The ancient RISHIS {FN5-3} laid down ineradicable patterns
of spiritual living. Their hoary dictums suffice for this day
and land.  Not outmoded, not unsophisticated against the guiles
of materialism, the disciplinary precepts mold India still. By
millenniums-more than embarrassed scholars care to compute!-the
skeptic Time has validated Vedic worth. Take it for your heritage."

As I was reverently bidding farewell to the eloquent SADHU, he
revealed a clairvoyant perception:

"After you leave here today, an unusual experience will come your
way."

I quitted the temple precincts and wandered along aimlessly. Turning
a corner, I ran into an old acquaintance-one of those long-winded
fellows whose conversational powers ignore time and embrace eternity.

"I will let you go in a very short while, if you will tell me all
that has happened during the six years of our separation."

"What a paradox! I must leave you now."

But he held me by the hand, forcing out tidbits of information.
He was like a ravenous wolf, I thought in amusement; the longer I
spoke, the more hungrily he sniffed for news. Inwardly I petitioned
the Goddess Kali to devise a graceful means of escape.

My companion left me abruptly. I sighed with relief and doubled my
pace, dreading any relapse into the garrulous fever. Hearing rapid
footsteps behind me, I quickened my speed. I dared not look back.
But with a bound, the youth rejoined me, jovially clasping my
shoulder.

"I forgot to tell you of Gandha Baba (Perfume Saint), who is gracing
yonder house." He pointed to a dwelling a few yards distant. "Do
meet him; he is interesting. You may have an unusual experience.
Good-by," and he actually left me.

The similarly worded prediction of the SADHU at Kalighat Temple
flashed to my mind. Definitely intrigued, I entered the house and
was ushered into a commodious parlor. A crowd of people were sitting,
Orient-wise, here and there on a thick orange-colored carpet. An
awed whisper reached my ear:

"Behold Gandha Baba on the leopard skin. He can give the natural
perfume of any flower to a scentless one, or revive a wilted blossom,
or make a person's skin exude delightful fragrance."

I looked directly at the saint; his quick gaze rested on mine. He
was plump and bearded, with dark skin and large, gleaming eyes.

"Son, I am glad to see you. Say what you want. Would you like some
perfume?"

"What for?" I thought his remark rather childish.

"To experience the miraculous way of enjoying perfumes."

"Harnessing God to make odors?"

"What of it? God makes perfume anyway."

"Yes, but He fashions frail bottles of petals for fresh use and
discard. Can you materialize flowers?"

"I materialize perfumes, little friend."

"Then scent factories will go out of business."

"I will permit them to keep their trade! My own purpose is to
demonstrate the power of God."

"Sir, is it necessary to prove God? Isn't He performing miracles
in everything, everywhere?"

"Yes, but we too should manifest some of His infinite creative
variety."

"How long did it take to master your art?"

"Twelve years."

"For manufacturing scents by astral means! It seems, my honored
saint, you have been wasting a dozen years for fragrances which
you can obtain with a few rupees from a florist's shop."

"Perfumes fade with flowers."

"Perfumes fade with death. Why should I desire that which pleases
the body only?"

"Mr. Philosopher, you please my mind. Now, stretch forth your right
hand." He made a gesture of blessing.

I was a few feet away from Gandha Baba; no one else was near
enough to contact my body. I extended my hand, which the yogi did
not touch.

"What perfume do you want?"

"Rose."

"Be it so."

To my great surprise, the charming fragrance of rose was wafted
strongly from the center of my palm. I smilingly took a large white
scentless flower from a near-by vase.

"Can this odorless blossom be permeated with jasmine?"

"Be it so."

A jasmine fragrance instantly shot from the petals. I thanked the
wonder-worker and seated myself by one of his students. He informed
me that Gandha Baba, whose proper name was Vishudhananda, had
learned many astonishing yoga secrets from a master in Tibet. The
Tibetan yogi, I was assured, had attained the age of over a thousand
years.

"His disciple Gandha Baba does not always perform his perfume-feats
in the simple verbal manner you have just witnessed." The student
spoke with obvious pride in his master. "His procedure differs
widely, to accord with diversity in temperaments. He is marvelous!
Many members of the Calcutta intelligentsia are among his followers."

I inwardly resolved not to add myself to their number. A guru too
literally "marvelous" was not to my liking. With polite thanks to
Gandha Baba, I departed. Sauntering home, I reflected on the three
varied encounters the day had brought forth.

My sister Uma met me as I entered our Gurpar Road door.

"You are getting quite stylish, using perfumes!"

Without a word, I motioned her to smell my hand.

"What an attractive rose fragrance! It is unusually strong!"

Thinking it was "strongly unusual," I silently placed the astrally
scented blossom under her nostrils.

"Oh, I love jasmine!" She seized the flower. A ludicrous bafflement
passed over her face as she repeatedly sniffed the odor of jasmine
from a type of flower she well knew to be scentless. Her reactions
disarmed my suspicion that Gandha Baba had induced an auto-suggestive
state whereby I alone could detect the fragrances.

Later I heard from a friend, Alakananda, that the "Perfume Saint"
had a power which I wish were possessed by the starving millions
of Asia and, today, of Europe as well.

"I was present with a hundred other guests at Gandha Baba's home
in Burdwan," Alakananda told me. "It was a gala occasion. Because
the yogi was reputed to have the power of extracting objects
out of thin air, I laughingly requested him to materialize some
out-of-season tangerines. Immediately the LUCHIS {FN5-4} which
were present on all the banana-leaf plates became puffed up. Each
of the bread-envelopes proved to contain a peeled tangerine. I bit
into my own with some trepidation, but found it delicious."

Years later I understood by inner realization how Gandha Baba
accomplished his materializations. The method, alas! is beyond the
reach of the world's hungry hordes.

The different sensory stimuli to which man reacts-tactual, visual,
gustatory, auditory, and olfactory-are produced by vibratory
variations in electrons and protons. The vibrations in turn are
regulated by "lifetrons," subtle life forces or finer-than-atomic
energies intelligently charged with the five distinctive sensory
idea-substances.

Gandha Baba, tuning himself with the cosmic force by certain yogic
practices, was able to guide the lifetrons to rearrange their
vibratory structure and objectivize the desired result. His perfume,
fruit and other miracles were actual materializations of mundane
vibrations, and not inner sensations hypnotically produced. {FN5-5}

Performances of miracles such as shown by the "Perfume Saint" are
spectacular but spiritually useless. Having little purpose beyond
entertainment, they are digressions from a serious search for God.

Hypnotism has been used by physicians in minor operations as a sort
of psychical chloroform for persons who might be endangered by an
anesthetic. But a hypnotic state is harmful to those often subjected to
it; a negative psychological effect ensues which in time deranges
the brain cells. Hypnotism is trespass into the territory of
another's consciousness. Its temporary phenomena have nothing in
common with the miracles performed by men of divine realization.
Awake in God, true saints effect changes in this dream-world by
means of a will harmoniously attuned to the Creative Cosmic Dreamer.

Ostentatious display of unusual powers are decried by masters. The
Persian mystic, Abu Said, once laughed at certain FAKIRS who were
proud of their miraculous powers over water, air, and space.

"A frog is also at home in the water!" Abu Said pointed out in gentle
scorn. "The crow and the vulture easily fly in the air; the Devil
is simultaneously present in the East and in the West! A true man
is he who dwells in righteousness among his fellow men, who buys
and sells, yet is never for a single instant forgetful of God!"
On another occasion the great Persian teacher gave his views on
the religious life thus: "To lay aside what you have in your head
(selfish desires and ambitions); to freely bestow what you have in
your hand; and never to flinch from the blows of adversity!"

Neither the impartial sage at Kalighat Temple nor the Tibetan-trained
yogi had satisfied my yearning for a guru. My heart needed no
tutor for its recognitions, and cried its own "Bravos!" the more
resoundingly because unoften summoned from silence. When I finally
met my master, he taught me by sublimity of example alone the
measure of a true man.

{FN5-1} Kali represents the eternal principle in nature. She is
traditionally pictured as a four-armed woman, standing on the form
of the God Shiva or the Infinite, because nature or the phenomenal
world is rooted in the Noumenon. The four arms symbolize cardinal
attributes, two beneficent, two destructive, indicating the essential
duality of matter or creation.

{FN5-2} Cosmic illusion; literally, "the measurer." MAYA is the
magical power in creation by which limitations and divisions are
apparently present in the Immeasurable and Inseparable.  Emerson
wrote the following poem, to which he gave the title of MAYA:

Illusion works impenetrable,
Weaving webs innumerable,
Her gay pictures never fail,
Crowd each other, veil on veil,
Charmer who will be believed
By man who thirsts to be deceived.

{FN5-3} The RISHIS, literally "seers," were the authors of the
VEDAS in an indeterminable antiquity..

{FN5-4} Flat, round Indian bread..

{FN5-5} Laymen scarcely realize the vast strides of twentieth-century
science. Transmutation of metals and other alchemical dreams are
seeing fulfillment every day in centers of scientific research over
the world. The eminent French chemist, M. Georges Claude, performed
"miracles" at Fontainebleau in 1928 before a scientific assemblage
through his chemical knowledge of oxygen transformations. His
"magician's wand" was simple oxygen, bubbling in a tube on a table.
The scientist "turned a handful of sand into precious stones,
iron into a state resembling melted chocolate and, after depriving
flowers of their tints, turned them into the consistency of glass.

"M. Claude explained how the sea could be turned by oxygen
transformations into many millions of pounds of horsepower; how
water which boils is not necessarily burning; how little mounds of
sand, by a single whiff of the oxygen blowpipe, could be changed
into sapphires, rubies, and topazes; and he predicted the time when
it will be possible for men to walk on the bottom of the ocean minus
the diver's equipment. Finally the scientist amazed his onlookers
by turning their faces black by taking the red out of the sun's
rays."

This noted French scientist has produced liquid air by an expansion
method in which he has been able to separate the various gases of
the air, and has discovered various means of mechanical utilization
of differences of temperature in sea water.



CHAPTER: 6

THE TIGER SWAMI

"I have discovered the Tiger Swami's address. Let us visit him
tomorrow."

This welcome suggestion came from Chandi, one of my high school
friends. I was eager to meet the saint who, in his premonastic
life, had caught and fought tigers with his naked hands. A boyish
enthusiasm over such remarkable feats was strong within me.

The next day dawned wintry cold, but Chandi and I sallied forth
gaily.  After much vain hunting in Bhowanipur, outside Calcutta, we
arrived at the right house. The door held two iron rings, which I
sounded piercingly. Notwithstanding the clamor, a servant approached
with leisurely gait. His ironical smile implied that visitors,
despite their noise, were powerless to disturb the calmness of a
saint's home.

Feeling the silent rebuke, my companion and I were thankful to be
invited into the parlor. Our long wait there caused uncomfortable
misgivings. India's unwritten law for the truth seeker is patience;
a master may purposely make a test of one's eagerness to meet him.
This psychological ruse is freely employed in the West by doctors
and dentists!

Finally summoned by the servant, Chandi and I entered a sleeping
apartment. The famous Sohong {FN6-1} Swami was seated on his bed.
The sight of his tremendous body affected us strangely. With bulging
eyes, we stood speechless. We had never before seen such a chest or
such football-like biceps. On an immense neck, the swami's fierce
yet calm face was adorned with flowing locks, beard and moustache.
A hint of dovelike and tigerlike qualities shone in his dark eyes.
He was unclothed, save for a tiger skin about his muscular waist.

Finding our voices, my friend and I greeted the monk, expressing
our admiration for his prowess in the extraordinary feline arena.

"Will you not tell us, please, how it is possible to subdue with
bare fists the most ferocious of jungle beasts, the royal Bengals?"

"My sons, it is nothing to me to fight tigers. I could do it today
if necessary." He gave a childlike laugh. "You look upon tigers as
tigers; I know them as pussycats."

"Swamiji, I think I could impress my subconsciousness with the
thought that tigers are pussycats, but could I make tigers believe
it?"

"Of course strength also is necessary! One cannot expect victory
from a baby who imagines a tiger to be a house cat! Powerful hands
are my sufficient weapon."

He asked us to follow him to the patio, where he struck the edge
of a wall. A brick crashed to the floor; the sky peered boldly
through the gaping lost tooth of the wall. I fairly staggered in
astonishment; he who can remove mortared bricks from a solid wall
with one blow, I thought, must surely be able to displace the teeth
of tigers!

"A number of men have physical power such as mine, but still lack
in cool confidence. Those who are bodily but not mentally stalwart
may find themselves fainting at mere sight of a wild beast bounding
freely in the jungle. The tiger in its natural ferocity and habitat
is vastly different from the opium-fed circus animal!

"Many a man with herculean strength has nonetheless been terrorized
into abject helplessness before the onslaught of a royal Bengal.
Thus the tiger has converted the man, in his own mind, to a state
as nerveless as the pussycat's. It is possible for a man, owning a
fairly strong body and an immensely strong determination, to turn
the tables on the tiger, and force it to a conviction of pussycat
defenselessness. How often I have done just that!"

I was quite willing to believe that the titan before me was able to
perform the tiger-pussycat metamorphosis. He seemed in a didactic
mood; Chandi and I listened respectfully.

"Mind is the wielder of muscles. The force of a hammer blow depends
on the energy applied; the power expressed by a man's bodily instrument
depends on his aggressive will and courage. The body is literally
manufactured and sustained by mind. Through pressure of instincts
from past lives, strengths or weaknesses percolate gradually into
human consciousness. They express as habits, which in turn ossify
into a desirable or an undesirable body. Outward frailty has
mental origin; in a vicious circle, the habit-bound body thwarts
the mind. If the master allows himself to be commanded by a servant,
the latter becomes autocratic; the mind is similarly enslaved by
submitting to bodily dictation."

At our entreaty, the impressive swami consented to tell us something
of his own life.

"My earliest ambition was to fight tigers. My will was mighty, but
my body was feeble."

An ejaculation of surprise broke from me. It appeared incredible
that this man, now "with Atlantean shoulders, fit to bear," could
ever have known weakness.

"It was by indomitable persistency in thoughts of health and
strength that I overcame my handicap. I have every reason to extol
the compelling mental vigor which I found to be the real subduer
of royal Bengals."

"Do you think, revered swami, that I could ever fight tigers?" This
was the first, and the last, time that the bizarre ambition ever
visited my mind!

"Yes." He was smiling. "But there are many kinds of tigers; some
roam in jungles of human desires. No spiritual benefit accrues
by knocking beasts unconscious. Rather be victor over the inner
prowlers."

"May we hear, sir, how you changed from a tamer of wild tigers to
a tamer of wild passions?"

The Tiger Swami fell into silence. Remoteness came into his gaze,
summoning visions of bygone years. I discerned his slight mental
struggle to decide whether to grant my request. Finally he smiled
in acquiescence.

"When my fame reached a zenith, it brought the intoxication of
pride.  I decided not only to fight tigers but to display them in
various tricks. My ambition was to force savage beasts to behave
like domesticated ones. I began to perform my feats publicly, with
gratifying success.

"One evening my father entered my room in pensive mood.

"'Son, I have words of warning. I would save you from coming ills,
produced by the grinding wheels of cause and effect.'

"'Are you a fatalist, Father? Should superstition be allowed to
discolor the powerful waters or my activities?'

"'I am no fatalist, son. But I believe in the just law of retribution,
as taught in the holy scriptures. There is resentment against you
in the jungle family; sometime it may act to your cost.'

"'Father, you astonish me! You well know what tigers are-beautiful
but merciless! Even immediately after an enormous meal of some
hapless creature, a tiger is fired with fresh lust at sight of new
prey. It may be a joyous gazelle, frisking over the jungle grass.
Capturing it and biting an opening in the soft throat, the malevolent
beast tastes only a little of the mutely crying blood, and goes
its wanton way.

"'Tigers are the most contemptible of the jungle breed! Who knows?
my blows may inject some slight sanity of consideration into their
thick heads. I am headmaster in a forest finishing school, to teach
them gentle manners!

"'Please, Father, think of me as tiger tamer and never as tiger
killer. How could my good actions bring ill upon me? I beg you not
to impose any command that I change my way of life.'"

Chandi and I were all attention, understanding the past dilemma.
In India a child does not lightly disobey his parents' wishes.

"In stoic silence Father listened to my explanation. He followed
it with a disclosure which he uttered gravely.

"'Son, you compel me to relate an ominous prediction from the lips
of a saint. He approached me yesterday as I sat on the veranda in
my daily meditation.

"'"Dear friend, I come with a message for your belligerent son. Let
him cease his savage activities. Otherwise, his next tiger-encounter
shall result in his severe wounds, followed by six months of deathly
sickness. He shall then forsake his former ways and become a monk."'

"This tale did not impress me. I considered that Father had been
the credulous victim of a deluded fanatic."

The Tiger Swami made this confession with an impatient gesture, as
though at some stupidity. Grimly silent for a long time, he seemed
oblivious of our presence. When he took up the dangling thread of
his narrative, it was suddenly, with subdued voice.

"Not long after Father's warning, I visited the capital city of
Cooch Behar. The picturesque territory was new to me, and I expected
a restful change. As usual everywhere, a curious crowd followed me
on the streets. I would catch bits of whispered comment:

"'This is the man who fights wild tigers.'

"'Has he legs, or tree-trunks?'

"'Look at his face! He must be an incarnation of the king of tigers
himself!'

"You know how village urchins function like final editions of a
newspaper! With what speed do the even-later speech-bulletins of
the women circulate from house to house! Within a few hours, the
whole city was in a state of excitement over my presence.

"I was relaxing quietly in the evening, when I heard the hoofbeats
of galloping horses. They stopped in front of my dwelling place.
In came a number of tall, turbaned policemen.

"I was taken aback. 'All things are possible unto these creatures
of human law,' I thought. 'I wonder if they are going to take me to
task about matters utterly unknown to me.' But the officers bowed
with unwonted courtesy.

"'Honored Sir, we are sent to welcome you on behalf of the Prince
of Cooch Behar. He is pleased to invite you to his palace tomorrow
morning.'

"I speculated awhile on the prospect. For some obscure reason I
felt sharp regret at this interruption in my quiet trip. But the
suppliant manner of the policemen moved me; I agreed to go.

"I was bewildered the next day to be obsequiously escorted from my
door into a magnificent coach drawn by four horses. A servant held
an ornate umbrella to protect me from the scorching sunlight. I
enjoyed the pleasant ride through the city and its woodland outskirts.
The royal scion himself was at the palace door to welcome me. He
proffered his own gold-brocaded seat, smilingly placing himself in
a chair of simpler design.

"'All this politeness is certainly going to cost me something!' I
thought in mounting astonishment. The prince's motive emerged after
a few casual remarks.

"'My city is filled with the rumor that you can fight wild tigers
with nothing more than your naked hands. Is it a fact?'

"'It is quite true.'

"'I can scarcely believe it! You are a Calcutta Bengali, nurtured
on the white rice of city folk. Be frank, please; have you not been
fighting only spineless, opium-fed animals?' His voice was loud
and sarcastic, tinged with provincial accent.

"I vouchsafed no reply to his insulting question.

"'I challenge you to fight my newly-caught tiger, Raja Begum.
{FN6-2} If you can successfully resist him, bind him with a chain,
and leave his cage in a conscious state, you shall have this royal
Bengal! Several thousand rupees and many other gifts shall also be
bestowed. If you refuse to meet him in combat, I shall blazon your
name throughout the state as an impostor!'

"His insolent words struck me like a volley of bullets. I shot an
angry acceptance. Half risen from the chair in his excitement, the
prince sank back with a sadistic smile. I was reminded of the Roman
emperors who delighted in setting Christians in bestial arenas.

"'The match will be set for a week hence. I regret that I cannot
give you permission to view the tiger in advance.'

"Whether the prince feared I might seek to hypnotize the beast, or
secretly feed him opium, I know not!

"I left the palace, noting with amusement that the royal umbrella
and panoplied coach were now missing.

"The following week I methodically prepared my mind and body for
the coming ordeal. Through my servant I learned of fantastic tales.
The saint's direful prediction to my father had somehow got abroad,
enlarging as it ran. Many simple villagers believed that an evil
spirit, cursed by the gods, had reincarnated as a tiger which took
various demoniac forms at night, but remained a striped animal
during the day. This demon-tiger was supposed to be the one sent
to humble me.

"Another imaginative version was that animal prayers to Tiger
Heaven had achieved a response in the shape of Raja Begum. He was
to be the instrument to punish me-the audacious biped, so insulting
to the entire tiger species! A furless, fangless man daring
to challenge a claw-armed, sturdy-limbed tiger! The concentrated
venom of all humiliated tigers-the villagers declared-had gathered
momentum sufficient to operate hidden laws and bring about the fall
of the proud tiger tamer.

"My servant further apprized me that the prince was in his element
as manager of the bout between man and beast. He had supervised
the erection of a storm-proof pavilion, designed to accommodate
thousands.  Its center held Raja Begum in an enormous iron cage,
surrounded by an outer safety room. The captive emitted a ceaseless
series of blood-curdling roars. He was fed sparingly, to kindle a
wrathful appetite.  Perhaps the prince expected me to be the meal
of reward!

"Crowds from the city and suburbs bought tickets eagerly in response
to the beat of drums announcing the unique contest. The day of
battle saw hundreds turned away for lack of seats. Many men broke
through the tent openings, or crowded any space below the galleries."

As the Tiger Swami's story approached a climax, my excitement
mounted with it; Chandi also was raptly mute.

"Amidst piercing sound-explosions from Raja Begum, and the hubbub
of the somewhat terrified crowd, I quietly made my appearance. Scantily
clad around the waist, I was otherwise unprotected by clothing. I
opened the bolt on the door of the safety room and calmly locked
it behind me. The tiger sensed blood. Leaping with a thunderous
crash on his bars, he sent forth a fearsome welcome. The audience
was hushed with pitiful fear; I seemed a meek lamb before the raging
beast.

"In a trice I was within the cage; but as I slammed the door, Raja
Begum was headlong upon me. My right hand was desperately torn.
Human blood, the greatest treat a tiger can know, fell in appalling
streams.  The prophecy of the saint seemed about to be fulfilled.

"I rallied instantly from the shock of the first serious injury
I had ever received. Banishing the sight of my gory fingers by
thrusting them beneath my waist cloth, I swung my left arm in a
bone-cracking blow. The beast reeled back, swirled around the rear
of the cage, and sprang forward convulsively. My famous fistic
punishment rained on his head.

"But Raja Begum's taste of blood had acted like the maddening first
sip of wine to a dipsomaniac long-deprived. Punctuated by deafening
roar, the brute's assaults grew in fury. My inadequate defense
of only one hand left me vulnerable before claws and fangs. But I
dealt out dazing retribution. Mutually ensanguined, we struggled
as to the death. The cage was pandemonium, as blood splashed in
all directions, and blasts of pain and lethal lust came from the
bestial throat.

"'Shoot him!' 'Kill the tiger!' Shrieks arose from the audience.
So fast did man and beast move, that a guard's bullet went amiss.
I mustered all my will force, bellowed fiercely, and landed a final
concussive blow. The tiger collapsed and lay quietly.

"Like a pussycat!" I interjected.

The swami laughed in hearty appreciation, then continued the
engrossing tale.

"Raja Begum was vanquished at last. His royal pride was further
humbled: with my lacerated hands, I audaciously forced open his
jaws.  For a dramatic moment, I held my head within the yawning
deathtrap. I looked around for a chain. Pulling one from a pile
on the floor, I bound the tiger by his neck to the cage bars. In
triumph I moved toward the door.

"But that fiend incarnate, Raja Begum, had stamina worthy of his
supposed demoniac origin. With an incredible lunge, he snapped
the chain and leaped on my back. My shoulder fast in his jaws, I
fell violently. But in a trice I had him pinned beneath me. Under
merciless blows, the treacherous animal sank into semiconsciousness.
This time I secured him more carefully. Slowly I left the cage.

"I found myself in a new uproar, this time one of delight. The crowd's
cheer broke as though from a single gigantic throat. Disastrously
mauled, I had yet fulfilled the three conditions of the fight-stunning
the tiger, binding him with a chain, and leaving him without
requiring assistance for myself. In addition, I had so drastically
injured and frightened the aggressive beast that he had been content
to overlook the opportune prize of my head in his mouth!

"After my wounds were treated, I was honored and garlanded; hundreds of
gold pieces showered at my feet. The whole city entered a holiday
period. Endless discussions were heard on all sides about my
victory over one of the largest and most savage tigers ever seen.
Raja Begum was presented to me, as promised, but I felt no elation.
A spiritual change had entered my heart. It seemed that with my
final exit from the cage I had also closed the door on my worldly
ambitions.

"A woeful period followed. For six months I lay near death from
blood poisoning. As soon as I was well enough to leave Cooch Behar,
I returned to my native town.

"'I know now that my teacher is the holy man who gave the wise
warning.' I humbly made this confession to my father. 'Oh, if I
could only find him!' My longing was sincere, for one day the saint
arrived unheralded.

"'Enough of tiger taming.' He spoke with calm assurance. 'Come with
me; I will teach you to subdue the beasts of ignorance roaming in
jungles of the human mind. You are used to an audience: let it be
a galaxy of angels, entertained by your thrilling mastery of yoga!'

"I was initiated into the spiritual path by my saintly guru. He
opened my soul-doors, rusty and resistant with long disuse. Hand
in hand, we soon set out for my training in the Himalayas."

Chandi and I bowed at the swami's feet, grateful for his vivid
outline of a life truly cyclonic. I felt amply repaid for the long
probationary wait in the cold parlor!

{FN6-1} SOHONG was his monastic name. He was popularly known as
the "Tiger Swami."

{FN6-2} "Prince Princess"-so named to indicate that this beast
possessed the combined ferocity of tiger and tigress.



CHAPTER: 7

THE LEVITATING SAINT

"I saw a yogi remain in the air, several feet above the ground,
