year comprising six seasons. The man is Parjanya, the deity of rain, and
the horse is Agni, the god of fire. The bull that thou hast seen on the
road is Airavata, the king of elephants; the man mounted thereon is Indra;
and the dung of the bull which was eaten by thee was Amrita. It was
certainly for this (last) that thou hast not met with death in the region
of the Nagas; and Indra who is my friend having been mercifully inclined
showed thee favour. It is for this that thou returnest safe, with the ear-
rings about thee. Then, O thou amiable one, I give thee leave to depart.
Thou shall obtain good fortune.'

"And Utanka, having obtained his master's leave, moved by anger and
resolved to avenge himself on Takshaka, proceeded towards Hastinapura.
That excellent Brahmana soon reached Hastinapura. And Utanka then waited
upon King Janamejaya who had some time before returned victorious from
Takshashila. And Utanka saw the victorious monarch surrounded on all sides
by his ministers. And he pronounced benedictions on him in a proper form.
And Utanka addressed the monarch at the proper moment in speech of correct
accent and melodious sounds, saying, 'O thou the best of monarchs! How is
it that thou spendest thy time like a child when there is another matter
that urgently demandeth thy attention?'"

Sauti said, "The monarch Janamejaya, thus addressed, saluting that
excellent Brahmana replied unto him, 'In cherishing these my subjects I do
discharge the duties of my noble tribe. Say, what is that business to be
done by me and which hath brought thee hither.'

"The foremost of Brahmanas and distinguished beyond all for good deeds,
thus addressed by the excellent monarch of large heart, replied unto him,
'O King! the business is thy own that demandeth thy attention; therefore
do it, please. O thou King of kings! Thy father was deprived of life by
Takshaka; therefore do thou avenge thy father's death on that vile serpent.
The time hath come, I think, for the act of vengeance ordained by the
Fates. Go then avenge the death of thy magnanimous father who, being
bitten without cause by that vile serpent, was reduced to five elements
even like a tree stricken by thunder. The wicked Takshaka, vilest of the
serpent race, intoxicated with power committed an unnecessary act when he
bit the King, that god-like father, the protector of the race of royal
saints. Wicked in his deeds, he even caused Kasyapa (the prince of
physicians) to run back when he was coming for the relief of thy father.
It behoveth thee to burn the wicked wretch in the blazing fire of a snake-
sacrifice. O King! Give instant orders for the sacrifice. It is thus thou
canst avenge the death of thy father. And a very great favour shall have
also been shown to me. For by that malignant wretch, O virtuous Prince, my
business also was, on one occasion, obstructed, while proceeding on
account of my preceptor.'"

Sauti continued, "The monarch, having heard these words, was enraged with
Takshaka. By the speech of Utanka was inflamed the prince, even as the
sacrificial fire with clarified butter. Moved by grief also, in the
presence of Utanka, the prince asked his ministers the particulars of his
father's journey to the regions of the blessed. And when he heard all
about the circumstances of his father's death from the lips of Utanka, he
was overcome with pain and sorrow."

And thus endeth the section called Paushya of the Adi Parva of the blessed
Mahabharata.


SECTION IV

(Pauloma Parva)

Ugrasrava Sauti, the son of Lomaharshana, versed in the Puranas, while
present in the forest of Naimisha, at the twelve years' sacrifice of
Saunaka, surnamed Kulapati, stood before the Rishis in attendance. Having
studied Puranas with meticulous devotion and thus being thoroughly
acquainted with them, he addressed them with joined hands thus, "I have
graphically described to you the history of Utanka which is one of the
causes of King Janamejaya's Snake-sacrifice. What, revered Sirs, do ye
wish to hear now? What shall I relate to you?" The holy men replied, "O
son of Lomaharshana, we shall ask thee about what we are anxious to hear
and thou wilt recount the tales one by one. Saunaka, our revered master,
is at present attending the apartment of the holy fire. He is acquainted
with those divine stories which relate to the gods and asuras. He
adequately knoweth the histories of men, serpents, and Gandharvas. Further,
O Sauti, in this sacrifice that learned Brahmana is the chief. He is able,
faithful to his vows, wise, a master of the Sastras and the Aranyaka, a
speaker of truth, a lover of peace, a mortifier of the flesh, and an
observer of the penances according to the authoritative decrees. He is
respected by us all. It behoveth us therefore to wait for him. And when he
is seated on his highly respected seat, thou wilt answer what that best of
Dwijas shall ask of thee."

Sauti said, "Be it so. And when the high-souled master hath been seated I
shall narrate, questioned by him, sacred stories on a variety of subjects."
After a while that excellent Brahmana (Saunaka) having duly finished all
his duties, and having propitiated the gods with prayers and the manes
with oblations of water, came back to the place of sacrifice, where with
Sauti seated before was the assembly of saints of rigid vows sitting at
ease. And when Saunaka was seated in the midst of the Ritwiks and Sadhyas,
who were also in their seats, he spake as followeth.


SECTION V

(Pauloma Parva continued)

Saunaka said, "Child, thy father formerly read the whole of the Puranas,
O son of Lomaharshana, and the Bharata with Krishna-Dwaipayana. Hast thou
also made them thy study? In those ancient records are chronicled
interesting stories and the history of the first generations of the wise
men, all of which we heard being rehearsed by thy sire. In the first place,
I am desirous of hearing the history of the race of Bhrigu. Recount thou
that history, we shall attentively listen to thee."

Sauti answered, "By me hath been acquired all that was formerly studied
by the high-souled Brahmanas including Vaisampayana and repeated by them;
by me hath been acquired all that had been studied by my father. O
descendant of the Bhrigu race, attend then to so much as relateth to the
exalted race of Bhrigu, revered by Indra and all the gods, by the tribes
of Rishis and Maruts (Winds). O great Muni, I shall first properly recount
the story of this family, as told in the Puranas.

"The great and blessed saint Bhrigu, we are informed, was produced by the
self-existing Brahma from the fire at the sacrifice of Varuna. And Bhrigu
had a son, named Chyavana, whom he dearly loved. And to Chyavana was born
a virtuous son called Pramati. And Pramati had a son named Ruru by
Ghritachi (the celestial dancer). And to Ruru also by his wife Pramadvara,
was born a son, whose name was Sunaka. He was, O Saunaka, thy great
ancestor exceedingly virtuous in his ways. He was devoted to asceticism,
of great reputation, proficient in law, and eminent among those having a
knowledge of the Vedas. He was virtuous, truthful, and of well-regulated
fare."

Saunaka said, "O son of Suta, I ask thee why the illustrious son of
Bhrigu was named Chyavana. Do tell me all."

Sauti replied, "Bhrigu had a wife named Puloma whom he dearly loved. She
became big with child by Bhrigu. And one day while the virtuous continent
Puloma was in that condition, Bhrigu, great among those that are true to
their religion, leaving her at home went out to perform his ablutions. It
was then that the Rakshasa called Puloma came to Bhrigu's abode. And
entering the Rishi's abode, the Rakshasa saw the wife of Bhrigu,
irreproachable in everything. And seeing her he became filled with lust
and lost his senses. The beautiful Puloma entertained the Rakshasa thus
arrived, with roots and fruits of the forest. And the Rakshasa who burnt
with desire upon seeing her, became very much delighted and resolved, O
good sage, to carry her away who was so blameless in every respect.

"'My design is accomplished,' said the Rakshasa, and so seizing that
beautiful matron he carried her away. And, indeed, she of agreeable smiles,
had been betrothed by her father himself, to him, although the former
subsequently bestowed her, according to due rites, on Bhrigu. O thou of
the Bhrigu race, this wound rankled deep in the Rakshasa's mind and he
thought the present moment very opportune for carrying the lady away.

"And the Rakshasa saw the apartment in which the sacrificial fire was kept
burning brightly. The Rakshasa then asked the flaming element 'Tell me, O
Agni, whose wife this woman rightfully is. Thou art the mouth of gods;
therefore thou art bound to answer my question. This lady of superior
complexion had been first accepted by me as wife, but her father
subsequently bestowed her on the false Bhrigu. Tell me truly if this fair
one can be regarded as the wife of Bhrigu, for having found her alone, I
have resolved to take her away by force from the hermitage. My heart
burneth with rage when I reflect that Bhrigu hath got possession of this
woman of slender waist, first betrothed to me.'"

Sauti continued, "In this manner the Rakshasa asked the flaming god of
fire again and again whether the lady was Bhrigu's wife. And the god was
afraid to return an answer. 'Thou, O god of fire,' said he, 'residest
constantly within every creature, as witness of her or his merits and
demerits. O thou respected one, then answer my question truly. Has not
Bhrigu appropriated her who was chosen by me as my wife? Thou shouldst
declare truly whether, therefore, she is my wife by first choice. After
thy answer as to whether she is the wife of Bhrigu, I will bear her away
from this hermitage even in sight of thee. Therefore answer thou truly.'"

Sauti continued, "The Seven flamed god having heard these words of the
Rakshasa became exceedingly distressed, being afraid of telling a
falsehood and equally afraid of Bhrigu's curse. And the god at length made
answer in words that came out slowly. 'This Puloma was, indeed, first
chosen by thee, O Rakshasa, but she was not taken by thee with holy rites
and invocations. But this far-famed lady was bestowed by her father on
Bhrigu as a gift from desire of blessing. She was not bestowed on thee O
Rakshasa, this lady was duly made by the Rishi Bhrigu his wife with Vedic
rites in my presence. This is she--I know her. I dare not speak a
falsehood. O thou best of the Rakshasas, falsehood is never respected in
this world.'"


SECTION VI

(Pauloma Parva continued)

Sauti said, "O Brahmana, having heard these words from the god of fire,
the Rakshasa assumed the form of a boar, and seizing the lady carried her
away with the speed of the wind--even of thought. Then the child of Bhrigu
lying in her body enraged at such violence, dropped from his mother's womb,
for which he obtained the name of Chyavana. And the Rakshasa perceiving
the infant drop from the mother's womb, shining like the sun, quitted his
grasp of the woman, fell down and was instantly converted into ashes. And
the beautiful Pauloma, distracted with grief, O Brahmana of the Bhrigu
race, took up her offspring Chyavana, the son of Bhrigu and walked away.
And Brahma, the Grandfather of all, himself saw her, the faultless wife of
his son, weeping. And the Grandfather of all comforted her who was
attached to her son. And the drops of tears which rolled down her eyes
formed a great river. And that river began to follow the foot-steps of the
wife of the great ascetic Bhrigu. And the Grandfather of the worlds seeing
that river follow the path of his son's wife gave it a name himself, and
he called it Vadhusara. And it passeth by the hermitage of Chyavana. And
in this manner was born Chyavana of great ascetic power, the son of Bhrigu.

"And Bhrigu saw his child Chyavana and its beautiful mother. And the Rishi
in a rage asked her, 'By whom wast thou made known to that Rakshasa who
resolved to carry thee away? O thou of agreeable smiles, the Rakshasa
could not know thee as my wife. Therefore tell me who it was that told the
Rakshasa so, in order that I may curse him through anger.' And Pauloma
replied, 'O possessor of the six attributes! I was identified to the
Rakshasa by Agni (the god of fire). And he (the Rakshasa) bore me away,
who cried like the Kurari (female osprey). And it was only by the ardent
splendour of this thy son that I was rescued, for the Rakshasa (seeing
this infant) let me go and himself falling to the ground was turned into
ashes.'"

Sauti continued, "Bhrigu, upon hearing this account from Pauloma, became
exceedingly enraged. And in excess of passion the Rishi cursed Agni,
saying, 'Thou shalt eat of all things.'"

So ends the sixth section called "the curse on Agni" in the Adi Parva.


SECTION VII

(Pauloma Parva continued)

Sauti said, "the god of fire enraged at the curse of Bhrigu, thus
addressed the Rishi, 'What meaneth this rashness, O Brahmana, that thou
hast displayed towards me? What transgression can be imputed to me who was
labouring to do justice and speak the truth impartially? Being asked I
gave the true answer. A witness who when interrogated about a fact of
which he hath knowledge, representeth otherwise than it is, ruineth his
ancestors and descendants both to the seventh generation. He, too, who,
being fully cognisant of all the particulars of an affair, doth not
disclose what he knoweth, when asked, is undoubtedly stained with guilt. I
can also curse thee, but Brahmanas are held by me in high respect.
Although these are known to thee, O Brahmana, I will yet speak of them, so
please attend! Having, by ascetic power, multiplied myself, I am present
in various forms, in places of the daily homa, at sacrifices extending for
years, in places where holy rites are performed (such as marriage, etc.),
and at other sacrifices. With the butter that is poured upon my flame
according to the injunctions prescribed in the Vedas, the Devas and the
Pitris are appeased. The Devas are the waters; the Pitris are also the
waters. The Devas have with the Pitris an equal right to the sacrifices
called Darshas and Purnamasas. The Devas therefore are the Pitris and the
Pitris, the Devas. They are identical beings, worshipped together and also
separately at the changes of the moon. The Devas and the Pitris eat what
is poured upon me. I am therefore called the mouth of the Devas and the
Pitris. At the new moon the Pitris, and at the full moon the Devas, are
fed through my mouth, eating of the clarified butter that is poured on me.
Being, as I am, their mouth, how am I to be an eater of all things (clean
and unclean)?'

"Then Agni, after reflecting for a while, withdrew himself from all places;
from places of the daily homa of the Brahmanas, from all long-extending
sacrifices, from places of holy rites, and from other ceremonies. Without
their Oms and Vashats, and deprived of their Swadhas and Swahas
(sacrificial mantras during offerings), the whole body of creatures became
much distressed at the loss of their (sacrificial) fire. The Rishis in
great anxiety went to the gods and addressed them thus, 'Ye immaculate
beings! The three regions of the universe are confounded at the cessation
of their sacrifices and ceremonies in consequence of the loss of fire!
Ordain what is to be done in this matter, so that there may be no loss of
time.' Then the Rishis and the gods went together to the presence of
Brahma. And they represented to him all about the curse on Agni and the
consequent interruption of all ceremonies. And they said, 'O thou greatly
fortunate! Once Agni hath been cursed by Bhrigu for some reason. Indeed,
being the mouth of the gods and also the first who eateth of what is
offered in sacrifices, the eater also of the sacrificial butter, how will
Agni be reduced to the condition of one who eateth of all things
promiscuously?' And the creator of the universe hearing these words of
theirs summoned Agni to his presence. And Brahma addressed Agni, the
creator of all and eternal as himself, in these gentle words, 'Thou art
the creator of the worlds and thou art their destroyer! Thou preserves
the three worlds and thou art the promoter of all sacrifices and
ceremonies! Therefore behave thyself so that ceremonies be not interrupted.
And, O thou eater of the sacrificial butter, why dost thou act so
foolishly, being, as thou art, the Lord of all? Thou alone art always pure
in the universe and thou art its stay! Thou shall not, with all thy body,
be reduced to the state of one who eateth of all things promiscuously. O
thou of flames, the flame that is in thy viler parts shall alone eat of
all things alike. The body of thine which eateth of flesh (being in the
stomach of all carnivorous animals) shall also eat of all things
promiscuously. And as every thing touched by the sun's rays becometh pure,
so shall everything be pure that shall be burnt by thy flames. Thou art, O
fire, the supreme energy born of thy own power. Then, O Lord, by that
power of thine make the Rishi's curse come true. Continue to receive thy
own portion and that of the gods, offered at thy mouth.'"

Sauti continued, "Then Agni replied to the Grandfather, 'So be it.' And
he then went away to obey the command of the supreme Lord. The gods and
the Rishis also returned in delight to the place whence they had come. And
the Rishis began to perform as before their ceremonies and sacrifices. And
the gods in heaven and all creatures of the world rejoiced exceedingly.
And Agni too rejoiced in that he was free from the prospect of sin.

"Thus, O possessor of the six attributes, had Agni been cursed in the days
of yore by Bhrigu. And such is the ancient history connected with the
destruction of the Rakshasa, Pauloma and the birth of Chyavana."

Thus endeth the seventh section of the Pauloma Parva of the Adi Parva of
the blessed Mahabharata.


SECTION VIII

(Pauloma Parva continued)

Sauti said, "O Brahmana, Chyavana, the son of Bhrigu, begot a son in the
womb of his wife Sukanya. And that son was the illustrious Pramati of
resplendent energy. And Pramati begot in the womb of Ghritachi a son
called Ruru. And Ruru begot on his wife Pramadvara a son called Sunaka.
And I shall relate to you in detail, O Brahmana, the entire history of
Ruru of abundant energy. O listen to it then in full!

"Formerly there was a great Rishi called Sthulakesa possessed of ascetic
power and learning and kindly disposed towards all creatures. At that time,
O Brahmana sage, Viswavasu, the King of the Gandharvas, it is said, had
intimacy with Menaka, the celestial dancing-girl. And the Apsara, Menaka,
O thou of the Bhrigu race, when her time was come, brought forth an infant
near the hermitage of Sthulakesa. And dropping the newborn infant on the
banks of the river, O Brahmana, Menaka, the Apsara, being destitute of
pity and shame, went away. And the Rishi, Sthulakesa, of great ascetic
power, discovered the infant lying forsaken in a lonely part of the river-
side. And he perceived that it was a female child, bright as the offspring
of an Immortal and blazing, as it were, with beauty: And the great
Brahmana, Sthulakesa, the first of Munis, seeing that female child, and
filled with compassion, took it up and reared it. And the lovely child
grew up in his holy habitation, the noble-minded and blessed Rishi
Sthulakesa performing in due succession all the ceremonies beginning with
that at birth as ordained by the divine law. And because she surpassed all
of her sex in goodness, beauty, and every quality, the great Rishi called
her by the name of Pramadvara. And the pious Ruru having seen Pramadvara
in the hermitage of Sthulakesa became one whose heart was pierced by the
god of love. And Ruru by means of his companions made his father Pramati,
the son of Bhrigu, acquainted with his passion. And Pramati demanded her
of the far-famed Sthulakesa for his son. And her foster-father betrothed
the virgin Pramadvara to Ruru, fixing the nuptials for the day when the
star Varga-Daivata (Purva-phalguni) would be ascendant.

"Then within a few days of the time fixed for the nuptials, the beautiful
virgin while at play with companions of her own sex, her time having come,
impelled by fate, trod upon a serpent which she did not perceive as it lay
in coil. And the reptile, urged to execute the will of Fate, violently
darted its envenomed fangs into the body of the heedless maiden. And stung
by that serpent, she instantly dropped senseless on the ground, her colour
faded and all the graces of her person went off. And with dishevelled hair
she became a spectacle of woe to her companions and friends. And she who
was so agreeable to behold became on her death what was too painful to
look at. And the girl of slender waist lying on the ground like one
asleep--being overcome with the poison of the snake--once more became more
beautiful than in life. And her foster-father and the other holy ascetics
who were there, all saw her lying motionless upon the ground with the
splendour of a lotus. And then there came many noted Brahmanas filled with
compassion, and they sat around her. And Swastyatreya, Mahajana, Kushika,
Sankhamekhala, Uddalaka, Katha, and Sweta of great renown, Bharadwaja,
Kaunakutsya, Arshtishena, Gautama, Pramati, and Pramati's son Ruru, and
other inhabitants of the forest, came there. And when they saw that maiden
lying dead on the ground overcome with the poison of the reptile that had
bitten her, they all wept filled with compassion. But Ruru, mortified
beyond measure, retired from the scene."

So ends the eighth section of the Pauloma Parva of the Adi Parva of the
blessed Mahabharata.


SECTION IX

(Pauloma Parva continued)

Sauti said, "While those illustrious Brahmanas were sitting around the
dead body of Pramadvara, Ruru, sorely afflicted, retired into a deep wood
and wept aloud. And overwhelmed with grief he indulged in much piteous
lamentation. And, remembering his beloved Pramadvara, he gave vent to his
sorrow in the following words, 'Alas! The delicate fair one that
increaseth my affliction lieth upon the bare ground. What can be more
deplorable to us, her friends? If I have been charitable, if I have
performed acts of penance, if I have ever revered my superiors, let the
merit of these arts restore to life my beloved one! If from my birth I
have been controlling my passions, adhered to my vows, let the fair
Pramadvara rise from the ground.'

"And while Ruru was indulging in these lamentations for the loss of his
bride, a messenger from heaven came to him in the forest and addressed him
thus, 'The words thou utterest, O Ruru, in thy affliction are certainly
ineffectual. For, O pious man, one belonging to this world whose days have
run out can never come back to life. This poor child of a Gandharva and
Apsara has had her days run out! Therefore, O child, thou shouldst not
consign thy heart to sorrow. The great gods, however, have provided
beforehand a means of her restoration to life. And if thou compliest with
it, thou mayest receive back thy Pramadvara.'

"And Ruru replied, 'O messenger of heaven! What is that which the gods have
ordained. Tell me in full so that (on hearing) I may comply with it. It
behoveth thee to deliver me from grief!' And the celestial messenger said
unto Ruru, 'Resign half of thy own life to thy bride, and then, O Ruru of
the race of Bhrigu, thy Pramadvara shall rise from the ground.' 'O best of
celestial messengers, I most willingly offer a moiety of my own life in
favour of my bride. Then let my beloved one rise up once more in her dress
and lovable form.'"

Sauti said, "Then the king of Gandharvas (the father of Pramadvara) and
the celestial messenger, both of excellent qualities, went to the god
Dharma (the Judge of the dead) and addressed him, saying, 'If it be thy
will, O Dharmaraja, let the amiable Pramadvara, the betrothed wife of Ruru,
now lying dead, rise up with a moiety of Ruru's life.' And Dharmaraja
answered, 'O messenger of the gods, if it be thy wish, let Pramadvara, the
betrothed wife of Ruru, rise up endued with a moiety of Ruru's life.'"

Sauti continued, "And when Dharmaraja had said so, that maiden of
superior complexion, Pramadvara, endued with a moiety of Ruru's life, rose
as from her slumber. This bestowal by Ruru of a moiety of his own span of
life to resuscitate his bride afterwards led, as it would be seen, to a
curtailment of Ruru's life.

"And on an auspicious day their fathers gladly married them with due rites.
And the couple passed their days, devoted to each other. And Ruru having
obtained such a wife, as is hard to be found, beautiful and bright as the
filaments of the lotus, made a vow for the destruction of the serpent-race.
And whenever he saw a serpent he became filled with great wrath and always
killed it with a weapon.

"One day, O Brahmana, Ruru entered an extensive forest. And there he saw
an old serpent of the Dundubha species lying stretched on the ground. And
Ruru thereupon lifted up in anger his staff, even like to the staff of
Death, for the purpose of killing it. Then the Dundubha, addressing Ruru,
said, 'I have done thee no harm, O Brahmana! Then wherefore wilt thou slay
me in anger?'"

So ends the ninth section of the Pauloma Parva of the Adi Parva of the
blessed Mahabharata.


SECTION X

(Pauloma Parva continued)

Sauti said, "And Ruru, on hearing those words, replied, 'My wife, dear to
me as life, was bit by a snake; upon which, I took, O snake, a dreadful
vow, viz., that I would kill every snake that I might come across.
Therefore shall I smite thee and thou shalt be deprived of life.'

"And the Dundubha replied, 'O Brahmana, the snakes that bite man are quite
different in type. It behoveth thee not to slay Dundubhas who are serpents
only in name. Subject like other serpents to the same calamities but not
sharing their good fortune, in woe the same but in joy different, the
Dundubhas should not be slain by thee under any misconception.'"

Sauti continued, "And the Rishi Ruru hearing these words of the serpent,
and seeing that it was bewildered with fear, albeit a snake of the
Dundubha species, killed it not. And Ruru, the possessor of the six
attributes, comforting the snake addressed it, saying, 'Tell me fully, O
snake, who art thou thus metamorphosed?' And the Dundubha replied, 'O
Ruru! I was formerly a Rishi by name Sahasrapat. And it is by the curse of
a Brahmana that I have been transformed into a snake.' And Ruru asked, 'O
thou best of snakes, for what wast thou cursed by a Brahmana in wrath? And
how long also will thy form continue so?'"

And so ends the tenth section of the Pauloma Parva of the Adi Parva.


SECTION XI

(Pauloma Parva continued)

Sauti continued "The Dundubha then said, 'In former times, I had a friend
Khagama by name. He was impetuous in his speech and possessed of spiritual
power by virtue of his austerities. And one day when he was engaged in the
Agni-hotra (Fire-sacrifice), I made a mock snake of blades of grass, and
in a frolic attempted to frighten him with it. And anon he fell into a
swoon. On recovering his senses, that truth-telling and vow-observing
ascetic, burning with wrath, exclaimed, "Since thou hast made a powerless
mock snake to frighten me, thou shalt be turned even into a venomless
serpent thyself by my curse." O ascetic, I well knew the power of his
penances; therefore with an agitated heart, I addressed him thus, bending
low with joined hands, "Friend, I did this by way of a joke, to excite thy
laughter. It behoveth thee to forgive me and revoke thy curse." And seeing
me sorely troubled, the ascetic was moved, and he replied, breathing hot
and hard. "What I have said must come to pass. Listen to what I say and
lay it to thy heart. O pious one! when Ruru the pure son of Pramati, will
appear, thou shall be delivered from the curse the moment thou seest him."
Thou art the very Ruru and the son of Pramati. On regaining my native form,
I will tell thee something for thy good.'

"And that illustrious man and the best of Brahmanas then left his snake-
body, and attained his own form and original brightness. He then addressed
the following words to Ruru of incomparable power, 'O thou first of
created beings, verily the highest virtue of man is sparing the life of
others. Therefore a Brahmana should never take the life of any creature. A
Brahmana should ever be mild. This is the most sacred injunction of the
Vedas. A Brahmana should be versed in the Vedas and Vedangas, and should
inspire all creatures with belief in God. He should be benevolent to all
creatures, truthful, and forgiving, even as it is his paramount duty to
retain the Vedas in his memory. The duties of the Kshatriya are not thine.
To be stern, to wield the sceptre and to rule the subjects properly are
the duties of the Kshatriya. Listen, O Ruru, to the account of the
destruction of snakes at the sacrifice of Janamejaya in days of yore, and
the deliverance of the terrified reptiles by that best of Dwijas, Astika,
profound in Vedic lore and might in spiritual energy.'"

And so ends the eleventh section of the Pauloma Parva of the Adi Parva.


SECTION XII

(Pauloma Parva continued)

Sauti continued, "Ruru then asked, 'O best of Dwijas, why was king
Janamejaya bent upon destroying the serpents?--And why and how were they
saved by the wise Astika? I am anxious to hear all this in detail.'

"The Rishi replied, 'O Ruru, the important history of Astika you will
learn from the lips of Brahmanas.' Saying this, he vanished."

Sauti continued, "Ruru ran about in search of the missing Rishi, and
having failed to find him in all the woods, fell down on the ground,
fatigued. And revolving in his mind the words of the Rishi, he was greatly
confounded and seemed to be deprived of his senses. Regaining
consciousness, he came home and asked his father to relate the history in
question. Thus asked, his father related all about the story."

So ends the twelfth section in the Pauloma Parva of the Adi Parva.


SECTION XIII

(Astika Parva)

Saunaka said, "For what reason did that tiger among kings, the royal
Janamejaya, determine to take the lives of the snakes by means of a
sacrifice? O Sauti, tell us in full the true story. Tell us also why
Astika, that best of regenerate ones, that foremost of ascetics, rescued
the snakes from the blazing fire. Whose son was that monarch who
celebrated the snake-sacrifice? And whose son also was that best of
regenerate ones?"

Sauti said, "O best of speakers, this story of Astika is long. I will
duly relate it in full, O listen!"

Saunaka said, "I am desirous of hearing at length the charming story of
that Rishi, that illustrious Brahmana named Astika."

Sauti said, "This history (first) recited by Krishna-Dwaipayana, is
called a Purana by the Brahmanas. It was formerly narrated by my wise
father, Lomaharshana, the disciple of Vyasa, before the dwellers of the
Naimisha forest, at their request. I was present at the recital, and, O
Saunaka, since thou askest me, I shall narrate the history of Astika
exactly as I heard it. O listen, as I recite in full that sin-destroying
story.

"The father of Astika was powerful like Prajapati. He was a Brahmacharin,
always engaged in austere devotions. He ate sparingly, was a great ascetic,
and had his lust under complete control. And he was known by the name of
Jaratkaru. That foremost one among the Yayavaras, virtuous and of rigid
vows, highly blessed and endued with great ascetic power, once undertook a
journey over the world. He visited diverse places, bathed in diverse
sacred waters, and rested where night overtook him. Endued with great
energy, he practised religious austerities, hard to be practised by men of
unrestrained souls. The sage lived upon air only, and renounced sleep for
ever. Thus going about like a blazing fire, one day he happened to see his
ancestors, hanging heads down in a great hole, their feet pointing upwards.
On seeing them, Jaratkaru addressed them, saying:

"'Who are you thus hanging heads down in this hole by a rope of virana
fibres that is again secretly eaten into on all sides by a rat living
here?'

"The ancestors said, 'We are Rishis of rigid vows, called Yayavaras. We
are sinking low into the earth for want of offspring. We have a son named
Jaratkaru. Woe to us! That wretch hath entered upon a life of austerities
only! The fool doth not think of raising offspring by marriage! It is for
that reason, viz., the fear of extinction of our race, that we are
suspended in this hole. Possessed of means, we fare like unfortunates that
have none! O excellent one, who art thou that thus sorrowest as a friend
on our account? We desire to learn, O Brahmana, who thou art that standest
by us, and why, O best of men, thou sorrowest for us that are so
unfortunate.'

"Jaratkaru said, 'Ye are even my sires and grandsires; I am that Jaratkaru!
O, tell me, how I may serve you.'

"The fathers then answered, 'Try thy best, O child, to beget a son to
extend our line. Thou wilt then, O excellent one, have done a meritorious
act for both thyself and us. Not by the fruits of virtue, not by ascetic
penances well hoarded up, acquireth the merit which one doth by becoming a
father. Therefore, O child, by our command, set thy heart upon marriage
and offspring. Even this is our highest good.'

"Jaratkaru replied, 'I shall not marry for my sake, nor shall I earn
wealth for enjoyment, but I shall do so for your welfare only. According
to this understanding, I shall, agreeably to the Sastric ordinance, take a
wife for attaining the end. I shall not act otherwise. If a bride may be
had of the same name with me, whose friends would, besides, willingly give
her to me as a gift in charity, I shall wed her duly. But who will give
his daughter to a poor man like me for wife. I shall, however, accept any
daughter given to me as alms. I shall endeavour, ye sires, even thus to
wed a girl! Having given my word, I will not act otherwise. Upon her I
will raise offspring for your redemption, so that, ye fathers, ye may
attain to eternal regions (of bliss) and may rejoice as ye like.'"

So ends the thirteenth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.


SECTION XIV

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "That Brahmana of rigid vows then wandered over the earth for
a wife but a wife found he not. One day he went into the forest, and
recollecting the words of his ancestors, he thrice prayed in a faint voice
for a bride. Thereupon Vasuki rose and offered his sister for the Rishi's
acceptance. But the Brahmana hesitated to accept her, thinking her not to
be of the same name with himself. The high-souled Jaratkaru thought within
himself, 'I will take none for wife who is not of the same name with
myself.' Then that Rishi of great wisdom and austere penances asked him,
saying, 'Tell me truly what is the name of this thy sister, O snake.'

"Vasuki replied, 'O Jaratkaru, this my younger sister is called Jaratkaru.
Given away by me, accept this slender-waisted damsel for thy spouse. O
best of Brahmanas, for thee I reserved her. Therefore, take her.' Saying
this, he offered his beautiful sister to Jaratkaru who then espoused her
with ordained rites."

So ends the thirteenth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.


SECTION XV

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "O foremost of persons acquainted with Brahma, the mother of
the snakes had cursed them of old, saying, 'He that hath the Wind for his
charioteer (viz., Agni) shall burn you all in Janamejaya's sacrifice!' It
was to neutralise that curse that the chief of the snakes married his
sister to that high-souled Rishi of excellent vows. The Rishi wedded her
according to the rites ordained (in the scriptures), and from them was
born a high-souled son called Astika. An illustrious ascetic, versed in
the Vedas and their branches, he regarded all with an even eye, and
removed the fears of both his parents.

"Then, after a long space of time, a king descending from the Pandava line
celebrated a great sacrifice known as the Snake-sacrifice. After that
sacrifice had commenced for the destruction of the snakes, Astika
delivered the Nagas, viz., his brothers and maternal uncles and other
snakes (from a fiery death). And he delivered his fathers also by
begetting offspring. And by his austerities, O Brahmana, and various vows
and study of the Vedas, he freed himself from all his debts. By sacrifices,
at which various kinds of offerings were made, he propitiated the gods. By
practising the Brahmacharya mode of life he conciliated the Rishis; and by
begetting offspring he gratified his ancestors.

"Thus Jaratkaru of rigid vows discharged the heavy debt he owed to his
sires who being thus relieved from bondage ascended to heaven. Thus having
acquired great religious merit, Jaratkaru, after a long course of years,
went to heaven, leaving Astika behind. There is the story of Astika that I
have related duly. Now, tell me, O tiger of Bhrigu's race, what else I
shall narrate."

So ends the fifteenth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.


SECTION XVI

(Astika Parva continued)

Saunaka said, "O Sauti, relate once more in detail this history of the
learned and virtuous Astika. Our curiosity for hearing it is great. O
amiable one, thou speakest sweetly, with proper accent and emphasis; and
we are well-pleased with thy speech. Thou speakest even as thy father. Thy
sire was ever ready to please us. Tell us now the story as thy father had
related it."

Sauti said, "O thou that art blest with longevity, I shall narrate the
history of Astika as I heard it from my father. O Brahmana, in the golden
age, Prajapati had two daughters. O sinless one, the sisters were endowed
with wonderful beauty. Named Kadru and Vinata, they became the wives of
Kasyapa. Kasyapa derived great pleasure from his two wedded wives and
being gratified he, resembling Prajapati himself, offered to give each of
them a boon. Hearing that their lord was willing to confer on them their
choice blessings, those excellent ladies felt transports of joy. Kadru
wished to have for sons a thousand snakes all of equal splendour. And
Vinata wished to bring forth two sons surpassing the thousand offsprings
of Kadru in strength, energy, size of body, and prowess. Unto Kadru her
lord gave that boon about a multitude of offspring. And unto Vinata also,
Kasyapa said, 'Be it so!' Then Vinata, having obtained her prayer,
rejoiced greatly. Obtaining two sons of superior prowess, she regarded her
boon fulfilled. Kadru also obtained her thousand sons of equal splendour.
'Bear the embryos carefully,' said Kasyapa, and then he went into the
forest, leaving his two wives pleased with his blessings."

Sauti continued, "O best of regenerate ones, after a long time, Kadru
brought forth a thousand eggs, and Vinata two. Their maid-servants
deposited the eggs separately in warm vessels. Five hundred years passed
away, and the thousand eggs produced by Kadru burst and out came the
progeny. But the twins of Vinata did not appear. Vinata was jealous, and
therefore she broke one of the eggs and found in it an embryo with the
upper part developed but the lower one undeveloped. At this, the child in
the egg became angry and cursed his mother, saying. 'Since thou hast
prematurely broken this egg, thou shall serve as a slave. Shouldst thou
wait five hundred years and not destroy, or render the other egg half-
developed, by breaking it through impatience, then the illustrious child
within it will deliver thee from slavery! And if thou wouldst have the
child strong, thou must take tender care of the egg for all this time!'
Thus cursing his mother, the child rose to the sky. O Brahmana, even he is
the charioteer of Surya, always seen in the hour of morning!

"Then at the expiration of the five hundred years, bursting open the other
egg, out came Garuda, the serpent-eater. O tiger of Bhrigu's race,
immediately on seeing the light, that son of Vinata left his mother. And
the lord of birds, feeling hungry, took wing in quest of the food assigned
to him by the Great Ordainer of all.".

So ends the sixteenth section in the Astika Parva of the Adi Parva.


SECTION XVII

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "O ascetic, about this time the two sisters saw approaching
near, that steed of complacent appearance named Uchchaihsravas who was
worshipped by the gods, that gem of steeds, who arose at the churning of
the Ocean for nectar. Divine, graceful, perpetually young, creation's
master-piece, and of irresistible vigour, it was blest with every
auspicious mark."

Saunaka asked, "Why did the gods churn the Ocean for nectar, and under
what circumstances and when as you say, did that best of steeds so
powerful and resplendent spring?"

Sauti said, "There is a mountain named Meru, of blazing appearance, and
looking like a heap of effulgence. The rays of the Sun falling on its
peaks of golden lustre are dispersed by them. Decked with gold and
