delighting the heart of every creature by its splendour. Hearing, O
bull of the Bharata race, of the merits of that Sabha, I became, O
king, desirous of beholding it. I then asked Aditya, saying,--"O
exalted one, I desire to behold the sacred Sabha of the Grandsire. O
lord of light, tell me, O exalted one, by what ascetic penances, or by
what acts, or by what charms or by what rites, I may be enabled to
behold that excellent sin-cleaning Sabha."--Hearing these words of
mine, Aditya the god of day, the deity of a thousand rays, answered me,
"O chief of the Bharata race, thus: Observe thou, with mind rapt in
meditation, the Brahma vow extending for a thousand years." Repairing
then to the breast of the Himavat, I commenced that great vow, and
after I had completed it the exalted and sinless deity Surya endued
with great energy, and knowing no fatigue, took me with him to the
Sabha of the Grandsire. O king, it is impossible to describe that
Sabha, saying--it is such, for within a moment it assumes a different
form that language fails to paint. O Bharata, it is impossible to
indicate its dimensions or shape. I never saw anything like it before.
Ever contributing to the happiness of those within it, its atmosphere
is neither cold nor warm. Hunger and thirst or any kind of uneasiness
disappear as soon as one goeth thither. It seems to be made up of
brilliant gems of many kinds. It doth not seem to be supported on
columns, it knoweth no deterioration, being eternal. That self
effulgent mansion, by its numerous blazing, celestial indications of
unrivalled splendour, seems to surpass the moon, the sun and the fire
in splendour. Stationed in heaven, it blazes forth, censuring as it
were the maker of the day. In that mansion O king, the Supreme Deity,
the Grand-sire of all created things, having himself created everything
by virtue of his creative illusion, stayeth ever. And Daksha,
Prachetas, Pulaha, Marichi, the master Kasyapa, Bhrigu, Atri, and
Vasistha and Gautama, and also Angiras, and Pulastya, Kraut, Prahlada,
and Kardama, these Prajapatis, and Angirasa of the Atharvan Veda, the
Valikhilyas, the Marichipas; Intelligence, Space, Knowledge, Air, Heat,
Water, Earth, Sound, Touch, Form, Taste, Scent; Nature, and the Modes
(of Nature), and the elemental and prime causes of the world,--all stay
in that mansion beside the lord Brahma. And Agastya of great energy,
and Markandeya, of great ascetic power, and Jamadagni and Bharadwaja,
and Samvarta, and Chyavana, and exalted Durvasa, and the virtuous
Rishyasringa, the illustrious Sanatkumara of great ascetic merit and
the preceptor in all matters affecting Yoga; Asita and Devala, and
Jaigishavya acquainted with truth; Rishava, Ajitasatru, and Mani of
great energy; and the Science of healing with its eight branches--all
in their personified forms, O Bharata; the moon with all the stars and
the stellar conjunctions; Aditya with all his rays; the winds; the
Sacrifices, the Declarations of purpose (in sacrifices), the Vital
principles,--these illustrious and vow-observing beings in their
personified forms, and many others too numerous to mention, attend all
upon Brahma in that mansion. Wealth and Religion and Desire, and Joy,
and Aversion, and Asceticism and Tranquillity--all wait together upon
the Supreme Deity in that palace. The twenty tribes of the Gandharvas
and Apsaras, as also their seven other tribes, and all the Lokapalas
(chief protectors of several regions), and Sukra, and Vrihaspati, and
Vudha, and Angaraka (Mangala), Sani, Rahu, and the other planets; the
Mantras (of the Sama Veda), the special Mantras (of the same Veda);
(the rites of) Harimat and Vasumat, the Adityas with Indra, the two
Agnis mentioned by name (viz. Agnisoma and Indragni), the Marutas,
Viswakarman, and the Vasus, O Bharata; the Pitris, and all kinds of
sacrificial libations, the four Vedas. viz., Rig, Sama, Yajuh, and
Atharva; all Sciences and branches of learning; Histories and all minor
branches of learning; the several branches of the Vedas; the planets,
the Sacrifices, the Soma, all the deities; Savitri (Gayatri), the seven
kinds of rhyme; Understanding, Patience, Memory, Wisdom, Intelligence,
Fame, Forgiveness; the Hymns of the Sama Veda; the Science of hymns in
general, and various kinds of Verses and Songs; various Commentaries
with arguments;--all in their personified forms, O king, and various
Dramas and Poems and Stories and abridged Glosses--these also, and many
others wait upon the Supreme Deity in that Sabha, Kshanas, Lavas,
Muhurtas, Day, Night, Fortnights, Months, the six Seasons, O Bharata,
Years, Yugas, the four kinds of Days and Nights (viz., appearing to
man, to the Pitris, to the gods, and to Brahma) and that eternal,
indestructible, undeteriorating, excellent Wheel of Time and also the
Wheel of Virtue,--these always wait there, O Yudhishthira; and Aditi,
Diti, Danu, Surasa, Vinata, Ira, Kalika, Suravi, Devi, Sarama, Gautami
and the goddesses Pradha, and Kadru;--these mothers of the celestials,
and Rudrani, Sree, Lakshmi, Bhadra, Shashthi, the Earth, Ganga, Hri,
Swaha, Kriti, the goddess Sura, Sachi Pushti, Arundhati, Samvritti,
Asa, Niyati, Srishti, Rati,--these and many other goddesses wait upon
the Creator of all. The Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Marutas, Aswinas, the
Viswadevas Sadhyas, and the Pitris gifted with the speed of the mind;
these all wait there upon the Grandsire. And, O bull amongst men, know
thou that there are seven classes of Pitris, of which four classes have
embodied forms and the remaining three without embodied forms. It is
well known that the illustrious Vairajas and Agniswattas and
Garhapattyas (three classes of Pitris) range in heaven. And those
amongst the Pitris that are called the Somapas, the Ekasringras, the
Chaturvedas, and the Kalas, are ever worshipped amongst the four orders
of men. Gratified with the Soma (juice), first, these gratify Soma
afterwards. All these tribes of Pitris wait upon the Lord of the
creation and cheerfully worship the Supreme Deity of immeasurable
energy. And Rakshasas, Pisachas, the Danavas and Guhyakas; Nagas,
Birds, and various animals; and all mobile and immobile great
beings;--all worship the Grandsire. And Purandara the chief of the
celestials, and Varuna and Kuvera and Yama, and Mahadeva accompanied by
Uma, always repair thither. And, O king of kings, Mahasena (Kartikeya)
also adoreth there the Grandsire. Narayana himself, and the celestial
Rishis, and those Rishis called Valakhillyas, and all beings born of
females and all those not born of females, and whatever else is seen in
the three worlds--both mobile and immobile, were all seen by me there,
know O king. And eighty thousand Rishis with vital seed drawn up, and O
Pandu, fifty thousand Rishis having sons, were all seen by me there.
And all the dwellers in heaven repairing thither behold the Supreme
Deity when they please, and worshipping him with a bow of their head
return whence they came. And, O king of men, the Grandsire of all
created beings, the Soul of the universe, the Self create Brahma of
immeasurable intelligence and glory, equally kind unto all creatures,
honoureth as they deserve, and gratifieth with sweet speech and gift of
wealth and other enjoyable articles, the gods, the Daityas, the Nagas,
the Brahmanas, the Yakshas, the Birds, the Kaleyas, the Gandharvas, the
Apsaras, and all other exalted beings that came to him as his guests.
And that delicious Sabha, O child, is always crowded with persons
coming and going. Filled with every kind of energy, and worshipped by
Brahmarshis, that celestial Sabha blazes forth with the graceful
possessions of Brahma and looks extremely handsome, O tiger among kings
as this Sabha of yours is unrivalled in the world of men, so is that
Sabha of Brahma, seen by me unrivalled in all the worlds. I have seen
these Sabhas, O Bharata, in regions of the celestials. This thy Sabha
is unquestionably the foremost in the world of men!'


SECTION XII

"Yudhishthira said,--'O thou foremost of eloquent men, as thou hast
described the different Sabhas unto me, it appeareth that almost all
the monarchs of the earth are to be found in the Sabha of Yama. And, O
master, almost all the Nagas, and principal Daityas, and rivers, and
oceans, are to be found in the Sabha of Varuna. And so the Yakshas, the
Guhyakas, the Rakshasas, the Gandharvas and Apsaras and the Deity
(Yama) having the bull for his vehicle, are to be found in the Sabha of
the lord of treasures. Thou hast said that in the Sabha of the
Grandsire are to be seen all the great Rishis, all the gods, all the
branches of learning. As regards the Sabha of Sakra, however, thou hast
named, O Muni, all the gods, the Gandharvas, and various Rishis. But, O
great Muni, thou hast mentioned one and only one king, viz., the royal
Rishi Harishchandra as living in the Sabha of the illustrious chief of
the gods. What act was performed by that celebrated king, or what
ascetic penances with steady vows, in consequence of which he hath been
equal to Indra himself? O Brahmana, how didst thou also meet with my
father, the exalted Pandu, now a guest in the region of the Pitris? O
exalted one of excellent vows hath he told thee anything? O tell me all
as I am exceedingly curious to hear all this from thee.'

"Narada said,--'O king of kings, I shall tell thee all that thou askest
me about Harischandra, I shall presently tell thee of his high
excellence. He was a powerful king, in fact, an emperor over all the
kings of the earth. Indeed, all the kings of the earth obeyed his sway.
O monarch, mounted alone upon a victorious car adorned with gold, that
king by the prowess of his weapons brought the whole earth with her
seven islands under his sway. And, O monarch, having subjugated the
whole earth with her mountains, forests, and woods, he made
preparations for the great sacrifice called the Rajasuya. And all the
kings of the earth brought at his command wealth unto that sacrifice.
All of them consented to become distributors of food and gifts unto the
Brahmanas that were fed on the occasion. At that sacrifice king
Harishchandra gave away unto all who asked, wealth that was five times
what each had solicited. At the conclusion of the sacrifice, the king
gratified the Brahmanas that came from various countries with large
presents of various kinds of wealth. The Brahmanas gratified with
various kinds of food and enjoyable articles, given away unto them to
the extent of their desires, and with the heaps of jewels distributed
amongst them, began to say,--"King Harischandra is superior to all
kings in energy and renown."--And know, O monarch, O bull of the
Bharata race, it was for this reason that Harischandra shone more
brightly than thousands of other kings. The powerful Harischandra
having concluded his great sacrifice, became installed, O king, in the
sovereignty of the earth and looked resplendent on his throne. O bull
of the Bharata race, all those monarchs that perform the sacrifice of
Rajasuya, (attaining to the region of Indra) pass their time in
felicity in Indra's company. And, O bull of the Bharata race, those
kings also that yield up their lives without turning their backs on the
field of battle attain to the mansion of Indra and live in joy with
him. Those again that yield up their bodies after severe ascetic
penances also attain to the same region and shine brightly there for
ages. O king of the Kuru race, O son of Kunti, thy father Pandu,
beholding the good fortune of Harischandra and wondering much thereat,
hath told thee something. Knowing that I was coming to the world of
men, he bowed unto me and said,--"Thou shouldst tell Yudhishthira, O
Rishi, that he can subjugate the whole Earth inasmuch as his brothers
are all obedient to him. And having done this let him commence the
grand sacrifice called Rajasuya. He is my son; if he performeth that
sacrifice, I may, like Harischandra, soon attain to the region of
Indra, and there in his Sabha pass countless years in continuous joy."
I told him in reply,--"O King, I shall tell thy son all this, if I go
to the world of man." I have now told thee what he said, O tiger among
men. Accomplish then, O son of Pandu, the desires of thy father. If
thou performest that sacrifice, thou shall then be able to go, along
with thy deceased ancestors, into the same region that is inhabited by
the chief of the immortals. It hath been said,--O king, that the
performance of this great sacrifice is attended with many obstacles. A
class of Rakshasas called Brahma Rakshasas, employed in obstructing all
sacrifices, always search for loop-holes when this great sacrifice is
commenced. On the commencement of such a sacrifice a war may take place
destroying the Kshatriyas and even furnishing occasion for the
destruction of the whole Earth. A slight obstacle may involve the whole
Earth in ruin. Reflecting upon all this, O king of kings do what is for
thy good. Be thou watchful and ready in protecting the four orders of
thy subjects. Grow, thou in prosperity, and enjoy thou felicity.
Gratify thou the Brahmanas with gifts of wealth. I have now answered in
detail all that thou hast asked me. With thy leave I will now go to the
city (Dwaravati) of that Dasarhas.'"

Vaisampayana said,--"O Janamejaya, having said this unto the son of
Pritha, Narada went away, accompanied by those Rishis with whom he had
come. And after Narada had gone away, king Yudhishthira, O thou of the
Kuru race, began to think, along with his brothers, of that foremost of
sacrifices called Rajasuya."


SECTION XIII

Vaisampayana said,--"Yudhishthira, having heard these words of Narada,
began to sigh heavily. And, O Bharata, engaged in his thoughts about
the Rajasuya, the king had no peace of mind. Having heard of this glory
of the illustrious monarchs (of old) and being certain about the
acquisition of regions of felicity by performers of sacrifices in
consequence of their sacred deeds, and thinking especially of that
royal sage Harischandra who had performed the great sacrifice king
Yudhishthira desired to make preparations for the Rajasuya sacrifice.
Then worshipping his counsellors and others present at his Sabha, and
worshipped by them in return, he began to discuss with them about that
sacrifice. Having reflected much, that king of kings, that bull amongst
the Kurus, inclined his mind towards making preparations for the
Rajasuya. That prince of wonderful energy and prowess, however,
reflecting upon virtue and righteousness, again set his heart to find
out what would be for the good of all his people. For Yudhishthira,
that foremost of all virtuous men, always kind unto his subjects,
worked for the good of all without making any distinctions. Indeed,
shaking off both anger and arrogance, Yudhishthira always said,--'Give
unto each what is due to each,'--and the only sounds that he could hear
were,--'Blessed be Dharma! Blessed be Dharma!' Yudhishthira conducting
himself thus and giving paternal assurance to everybody, there was none
in the kingdom who entertained any hostile feelings towards him. He
therefore came to be called Ajatasatru (one with no enemy at all). The
king cherished every one as belonging to his family, and Bhima ruled
over all justly. Arjuna, used to employing both his hands with equal
skill, protected the people from (external) enemies. And the wise
Sahadeva administered justice impartially. And Nakula behaved towards
all with humility that was natural to him. Owing to all this, the
kingdom became free from disputes and fear of every kind. And all the
people became attentive to their respective occupations. The rain
became so abundant as to leave no room for desiring more; and the
kingdom grew in prosperity. And in consequence of the virtues of the
king, money-lenders, the articles required for sacrifices,
cattle-rearing, tillage, and traders, all and everything grew in
prosperity. Indeed, during the reign of Yudhishthira who was ever
devoted to truth, there was no extortion, no stringent realisation of
arrears of rent, no fear of disease, of fire, or of death by poisoning
and incantations, in the kingdom. It was never heard at that time that
thieves or cheats or royal favourites ever behaved wrongfully towards
the king or towards one another amongst themselves. Kings conquered on
the six occasions (of war, treaty, &c) were wont to wait upon him in
order to do good unto the monarch and worship him ever, while the
traders of different classes came to pay him the taxes leviable on
their respective occupations. And accordingly during the reign of
Yudhishthira who was ever devoted to virtue, his dominion grew in
prosperity. Indeed, the prosperity of the kingdom was increased not by
these alone but even by persons wedded to voluptuousness and indulging
in all luxuries to their fill. And the king of kings, Yudhishthira,
whose sway extended over all, was possessed of every accomplishment and
bore everything with patience. And, O king, whatever countries the
celebrated and illustrious monarch conquered, the people everywhere,
from Brahmanas to swains, were all more attached to him than to their
own fathers and mothers."

Vaisampayana said,--"King Yudhishthira, then, that foremost of
speakers, summoning together his counsellors and brothers, asked them
repeatedly about the Rajasuya sacrifice. Those ministers in a body,
thus asked by the wise Yudhishthira desirous of performing the
sacrifice, then told him these words of grave import,--'One already in
possession of a kingdom desireth all the attributes of an emperor by
means of that sacrifice which aideth a king in acquiring the attributes
of Varuna. O prince of Kuru race, thy friends think that as thou art
worthy of the attributes of an emperor, the time is even come for thee
for the performance of the Rajasuya sacrifice. The time for the
performance of that sacrifice in which Rishis of austere vows kindle
six fires with mantras of the Sama Veda, is come for thee in
consequence of thy Kshatriya possessions. At the conclusion of the
Rajasuya sacrifice when the performer is installed in the sovereignty
of the empire, he is rewarded with the fruits of all sacrifices
including the Agnihotra. It is for this that he is called the conqueror
of all. Thou art quite able, O strong-armed one, to perform this
sacrifice. All of us are obedient to thee. Soon will you be able, O
great king, to perform the Rajasuya sacrifice. Therefore, O great king,
let thy resolution be taken to perform this sacrifice without further
discussion.' Thus spoke unto the king all his friends and counsellors
separately and jointly. And, O king, Yudhishthira that slayer of all
enemies, having heard these virtuous, bold, agreeable and weighty words
of theirs, accepted them mentally. And having heard those words of his
friends and counsellors, and knowing his own strength also, the king, O
Bharata, repeatedly thought over the matter. After this the intelligent
and virtuous Yudhishthira, wise in counsel, again consulted with his
brothers, with the illustrious Ritwijas about him, with his ministers
and with Dhaumya and Dwaipayana and others."

"Yudhishthira said,--'How may this wish that I entertain of performing
the excellent sacrifice of Rajasuya that is worthy of an emperor, bear
fruit, in consequence of my faith and speech alone.'"

Vaisampayana said,--"O thou of eyes like lotus-petals, thus asked by
the king, they replied at that time unto Yudhishthira the just in these
words,--'Being conversant with the dictates of morality, thou art, O
king, worthy to perform the grand sacrifice of Rajasuya.' After the
Ritwijas and the Rishis had told these words unto the king, his
ministers and brothers highly approved of the speech. The king,
however, possessed of great wisdom, and with mind under complete
control, actuated by the desire of doing good unto the world, again
resolved the matter in his mind, thinking of his own strength and
means, the circumstances of time and place and his income and
expenditure. For he knew that the wise never come to grief owing to
their always acting after full deliberation. Thinking that the
sacrifice should not be commenced, pursuant to his own resolution only,
Yudhishthira, carefully bearing upon his shoulder the weight of affairs
thought of Krishna that persecutor of all sinners as the fittest person
to decide the matter, in as much as he knew him to be the foremost of
all persons, possessed of immeasurable energy, strong-armed, without
birth but born amongst men from Will alone. Reflecting upon his
god-like feats the son of Pandu concluded that there was nothing that
was unknown to him, nothing that he could not achieve, and nothing that
he could not bear, and Yudhishthira, the son of Pritha, having come to
this settled resolution soon sent a messenger unto that master of all
beings, conveying through him blessings and speeches such as one senior
in age might send to one that is younger. And that messenger riding in
a swift car arrived amongst the Yadavas and approached Krishna who was
then residing in Dwaravati. And Achyuta (Krishna) hearing that the son
of Pritha had become desirous of seeing him, desired to see his cousin.
And quickly passing over many regions, being drawn by his own swift
horses, Krishna arrived at Indraprastha, accompanied by Indrasena. And
having arrived at Indraprastha, Janardana approached Yudhisthira
without loss of time. And Yudhisthira received Krishna with
paternal-affection, and Bhima also received him likewise. And Janardana
then went with a cheerful heart to his father's sister (Kunti). And
worshipped then with reverence by the twins, he began to converse
cheerfully with his friend Arjuna who was overjoyed at seeing him. And
after he had rested awhile in a pleasant apartment and had been fully
refreshed, Yudhishthira approached him at his leisure and informed him
all about the Rajasuya sacrifice.

"Yudhishthira said,--'I have wished to perform the Rajasuya sacrifice.
That sacrifice, however, cannot be performed by one's wishing alone to
perform it. Thou knowest, O Krishna, even thing about the means by
which it may be accomplished. He alone can achieve this sacrifice in
whom everything is possible, who is worshipped everywhere and who is
the king of kings. My friends and counsellors approaching me have said
that I should perform that sacrifice. But, O Krishna, in respect of
that matter, thy words shall be my guide. Of counsellers some from
friendship do not notice the difficulties; others from motives of
self-interest say only what is agreeable. Some again regard that which
is beneficial to themselves as worthy of adoption. Men are seen to
counsel thus on matters awaiting decision. But thou, O Krishna, art
above such motives. Thou hast conquered both desire and anger. It
behoveth thee to tell me what is most beneficial to the world.'


SECTION XIV

(Rajasuyarambha Parva)

"Krishna said,--'O great king, thou art a worthy possessor of all the
qualities essential for the performance of the Rajasuya sacrifice. Thou
knowest everything, O Bharata. I shall, however, still tell thee
something. Those persons in the world that now go by the name of
Kshatriyas are inferior (in everything) to those Kshatriyas that Rama,
the son of Jamadagnya, exterminated. O lord of the earth, O bull of the
Bharata race, thou knowest what form of rule these Kshatriyas, guided
by the instructions traditionally handed down from generation to
generation, have established amongst their own order, and how far they
are competent to perform the Rajasuya sacrifice. The numerous royal
lines and other ordinary Kshatriyas all represent themselves to be the
descendants of Aila and Ikshwaku. The descendants of Aila, O king, as,
indeed, the kings of Ikshwaku's race, are, know O bull of the Bharata
race, each divided into a hundred separate dynasties. The descendants
of Yayati and the Bhojas are great, both in extent (number) and
accomplishments. O king, these last are to-day scattered all over the
earth. And all the Kshatriyas worship the prosperity of those monarchs.
At present, however, O monarch, king Jarasandha, overcoming that
prosperity enjoyed by their whole order, and overpowering them by his
energy hath set himself over the heads of all these kings. And
Jarasandha, enjoying the sovereignty over the middle portion of the
earth (Mathura), resolved to create a disunion amongst ourselves. O
monarch, the king who is the lord paramount of all kings, and in whom
alone the dominion of the universe is centered, properly deserves to be
