can say--that the feeling, not only of horror and pity, but of real rage 
and indignation, with which men see (what God grant you never may see) a 
wild beast kill a man, is a witness in man's conscience that the text is 
true somehow, though how we know not.  I received a letter a few weeks 
since from an officer, a very remarkable person, in which he described 
his horror and indignation at seeing a friend of his struck down and 
eaten by a tiger, and how, when next day he stood over what had been but 
the day before a human being, he looked up to heaven, and kept repeating 
the words of the text, "in the image of God made He man," in rage and 
shame, and almost accusing God for allowing His image to be eaten by a 
brute beast.  It shook, for the moment, his faith in God's justice and 
goodness.  That man was young then, and has grown calmer and wiser now, 
and has regained a deeper and sounder faith in God.  But the shock, he 
said, was dreadful to him.  He felt that the matter was not merely 
painful and pitiable, but that it was a wrong and a crime; and on the 
faith of this very text, a wrong and a crime I believe it to be, and one 
which God knows how to avenge and to correct when man cannot.  Somehow--
for He has ways of which we poor mortals do not dream--at the hand of 
every beast will He require the blood of man.

But more; at the hand of every man will He require it.  And how?  The 
text tells us, "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be 
shed:  for in the image of God made He man."  Now, I do not doubt but 
that the all-seeing God, looking back on what had most probably happened 
on this earth already, and looking forward to what would happen, and 
happens, alas! too often now, meant to warn men against the awful crime 
of cannibalism, of eating their fellow-men as they would eat an animal.  
By so doing, they not only treated their fellow-men as beasts, but they 
behaved like beasts themselves.  They denied that their victim was made 
in the likeness of God; they denied that they were made in the likeness 
of God; they willingly and deliberately put on the likeness of beasts, 
and as beasts they were to perish.  Now, this is certain, that savages 
who eat men--and alas! there are thousands even now who do so--usually 
know in their hearts that they are doing wrong.  As soon as their 
consciences are the least awakened, they are ashamed of their 
cannibalism; they lie about it, try to conceal it; and as soon as God's 
grace begins to work on them, it is the very first sin that they give up.  
And next, this is certain, that there is a curse upon it.  No cannibal 
people, so far as I can find, have ever risen or prospered in the world; 
and the cannibal peoples now-a-days, and for the last three hundred 
years, have been dying out.  By their own vices, diseases, and wars, they 
perish off the face of the earth, in the midst of comfort and plenty; 
and, in spite of all the efforts of missionaries, even their children and 
grand-children, after giving up the horrid crime, and becoming 
Christians, seem to have no power of living and increasing, but dwindle 
away, and perish off the earth.  Yes, God's laws work in strange and 
subtle ways; so darkly, so slowly, that the ungodly and sinners often 
believe that there are no laws of God, and say--"Tush, how should God 
perceive it?  Is there knowledge in the Most High?"  But the laws work, 
nevertheless, whether men are aware of them or not.  "The mills of God 
grind slowly," but sooner or later they grind the sinner to powder.

And now I will leave this hateful subject and go on to another, on which 
I am moved to speak once and for all, because it is much in men's minds 
just now--I mean what is vulgarly called "capital punishment," the 
punishing of murder by death.  Now the text, which is the ancient 
covenant of God with man, speaks very clearly on this point.  "Whosoever 
sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed."  Man is made in 
the likeness of God.  That is the ground of our law about murder, as it 
is the ground of all just and merciful law; that gives man his right to 
slay the murderer; that makes it his duty to slay the murderer.  He has 
to be jealous of God's likeness, and to slay, in the name of God, the man 
who, by murder, outrages the likeness of God in himself and in his 
victim.

You all know that there is now-a-days a strong feeling among some persons 
about capital punishment; that there are those who will move heaven and 
earth to interfere with the course of justice, and beg off the worst of 
murderers, on any grounds, however unreasonable, fanciful, even unfair; 
simply because they have a dislike to human beings being hanged.  I 
believe, from long consideration, that these persons' strange dislike 
proceeds from their not believing sufficiently that man is made in the 
image of God.  And, alas! it proceeds, I fear, in some of them, from not 
believing in a God at all--believing, perhaps, in some mere maker of the 
world, but not in the living God which Scripture sets forth.  For how 
else can they say, as I have known some say, that capital punishment is 
wrong, because "we have no right to usher a man into the presence of his 
Maker."

Into the presence of his Maker!  Why, where else is every man, you and I, 
heathen and Christian, bad and good, save in the presence of his Maker 
already?  Do we not live and move and have our being in God?  Whither can 
we go from His spirit, or whither can we flee from His presence?  If we 
ascend into heaven, He is there.  If we go down to hell He is there also.  
And if the law puts a man to death, it does not usher him into the 
presence of his Maker, for he is there already.  It simply says to him, 
"God has judged you on earth, not we.  God will judge you in the next 
world, not we.  All we know is, that you are not fit to live in this 
world.  All our duty is to send you out of it.  Where you will go in the 
other world is God's matter, not ours, and the Lord have mercy on your 
soul."

And this want of faith in a living God lies at the bottom of another 
objection.  We are to keep murderers alive in order to convert and 
instruct and amend them.  The answer is, We shall be most happy to amend 
anybody of any fault, however great:  but the experience of ages is that 
murderers are past mending; that the fact of a man's murdering another is 
a plain proof that he has no moral sense, and has become simply a brute 
animal Our duty is to punish not to amend, and to say to the murderer, 
"If you can be amended; God will amend you, and so have mercy on your 
soul.  God must amend you, if you are to be amended.  If God cannot amend 
you, we cannot.  If God will not amend you, certainly we cannot force Him 
to do so, if we kept you alive for a thousand years."  That would seem 
reasonable, as well as reverent and faithful to God.  But men now-a-days 
fancy that they love their fellow creatures far better than God loves 
them, and can deal far more wisely and lovingly with them than God is 
willing to deal.  Of these objections I take little heed.  I look on them 
as merely loose cant, which does not quite understand the meaning of its 
own words, and I trust to sound, hard, English common sense to put them 
aside.

But there is another objection to capital punishment, which we must deal 
with much more respectfully and tenderly; for it is made by certain good 
people, people whom we must honour, though we differ from them, for no 
set of people have done more (according to their numbers) for education, 
for active charity, and for benevolence, and for peace and good will 
among the nations of the earth.  And they say, you must not take the life 
of a murderer, just because he is made in God's image.  Well, I should 
have thought that God Himself was the best judge of that.  That, if God 
truly said that man was made in His image, and said, moreover, as it were 
at the same moment, that, therefore, whoso sheds man's blood, by man 
shall his blood be shed--our duty was to trust God, to obey God, and to 
do our duty against the murderer, however painful to our feelings it 
might be.  But I believe these good people make their mistake from 
forgetting this; that if the murderer be made in God's image and 
likeness, so is the man whom he murders; and so also is the jury who 
convict him, the judge who condemns him, and the nation (the society of 
men) for whom they act.

And this, my dear friends, brings us to the very root of the meaning of 
law.  Man has sense to make laws (which animals cannot do), just because 
he is made in the likeness of God, and has the sense of right and wrong.  
Man has the right to enforce laws, to see right done and wrong punished, 
just because he is made in the likeness of God.  The laws of a country, 
as far as they are just and righteous, are the copy of what the men of 
that country have found out about right and wrong, and about how much 
right they can get done, and how much wrong punished.  So, just as the 
men of a country are (in spite of all their sins) made in the likeness of 
God, so the laws of a country (in spite of all their defects) are a copy 
of God's will, as to what men should or should not do.  And that, and no 
other, is the true reason why the judge or magistrate has authority over 
either property, liberty, or life.  He is God's servant, the servant of 
Christ, who is King of this land and of all lands, and of all 
governments, and all kings and rulers of the earth.  He sits there in 
God's name, to see God's will done, as far as poor fallible human beings 
can get it done.  And, because he is, not merely as a man, but, by his 
special authority, in the likeness of God, who has power over life and 
death, therefore he also, as far as his authority goes, has power over 
life and death.  That is my opinion, and that was the opinion of St. 
Paul.  For what does he say--and say not (remember always) of Christian 
magistrates in a Christian country, but actually of heathen Roman 
magistrates?  "Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers.  For 
there is no power but of God:  the powers that be are ordained of God.  
Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God:  
and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation."  Thus spoke 
out the tenderest-hearted, most Christ-like human being, perhaps, who 
ever trod this earth, who, in his intense longing to save sinners, 
endured a life of misery and danger, and finished it by martyrdom.  But 
there was no sentimentality, no soft indulgence in him.  He knew right 
from wrong; common sense from cant; duty from public opinion; and divine 
charity from the mere cowardly dislike of witnessing pain, not so much 
because it pains the person punished, as because it pains the spectator.  
He knew that Christ was King of kings, and what Christ's kingdom was 
like.  He had discovered the divine and wonderful order of men and 
angels.  He saw that one part of that order was--"the soul that sinneth, 
it shall die."

But some say that capital punishment is inconsistent with the mild 
religion of Christ--the religion of mercy and love.  "The mild religion 
of Christ!"  Do these men know of Whom they talk?  Do they know that, if 
the Bible be true, the God who said, "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man 
shall his blood be shed," is the very same Being, the very same God, who 
was born of the Virgin Mary, crucified under Pontius Pilate--the very 
same Christ who took little children up in His arms and blessed them, the 
very same Word of God, too, of whom it is written, that out of His mouth 
goeth a two-edged sword, that He may smite the nations, and He shall rule 
them with a rod of iron, and He treadeth the wine press of the fierceness 
and wrath of Almighty God?  These are awful words, but, my dear friends, 
I can only ask you if you think them too awful to be true?  Do you 
believe the Christian religion?  Do you believe the Creeds?  Do you 
believe the Bible?  For if you do, then you believe that the Lord Christ, 
who was born of the Virgin Mary, and crucified under Pontius Pilate, is 
the Maker, the Master, the Ruler of this world, and of all worlds.  By 
what laws He rules other worlds we know not, save that they are, because 
they must be--just and merciful laws.  But of the laws by which He rules 
this world we do know, by experience, that His laws are of most terrible 
and unbending severity, as I have warned you again and again, and shall 
warn you, as long as there is a liar or an idler, a drunkard or an 
adulteress in this parish.

And if this be so--if Christ be a God of severity as well as a God of 
love, a God who punishes sinners as well as a God who forgives penitents-
-what then?  We are, He tells us, made in His likeness.  Then, according 
to His likeness we must behave.  We must copy His love, by helping the 
poor and afflicted, the weak and the oppressed.  But we must copy His 
severity, by punishing whenever we have the power, without cowardice or 
indulgence, all wilful offenders; and, above all, the man who destroys 
God's image in himself, by murdering and destroying the mortal life of a 
man made in the image of God.  And more; if we be made in the likeness of 
God and of Christ, we must remember, morning and night, and all day long, 
that most awful and most blessed fact.  We must say to ourselves, again 
and again, "I am not a mere animal, and like a mere animal I must not 
behave; I dare not behave like a mere animal, for I was made in the 
likeness of God; and when I was baptised the Spirit of God took 
possession of me to restore me to God's likeness, and to call out and 
perfect God's likeness in me all my life long.  Therefore, I am no mere 
animal; and never was intended to be.  I am the temple of God; my body 
and soul belong to God, and not to my own fancies and passions and lusts, 
and whosoever defiles the temple of God, him will God destroy."

Therefore, this is our duty, this is our only hope or safety--to do our 
best to keep alive and strong the likeness of God in ourselves; to try to 
grow, not more and more mean, and brutal, and carnal, but more and more 
noble, and human, and spiritual; to crush down our base passions, our 
selfish inclinations, by the help of the Spirit of God, and to think of 
and to pray for, whatsoever is like Christ and like God; to pray for a 
noble love of what is good and noble, for a noble hate of what is bad; 
and whatsoever things are pure and lovely and of good report to think of 
these things.  And to pray, too, for forgiveness from Christ, and for the 
sake of Christ, whenever we have yielded to our low passions, and defiled 
the likeness of God in us, and grieved His Spirit, lest at the last day 
it be said to us, if not in words yet in acts, which there will be no 
mistaking, no escaping,--"I made thee in My likeness in the beginning of 
the creation, I redeemed thee into My likeness on the cross, I baptised 
thee into My likeness by my Holy Spirit; and what hast thou hast done 
with My likeness?  Thou hast cast it away, thou hast let it die out in 
thee, thou hast lived after the flesh and not after the spirit, and hast 
put on the likeness of the carnal man, the likeness of the brute.  Thou 
hast copied the vanity of the peacock, the silliness of the ape, the 
cunning of the fox, the rapacity of the tiger, the sensuality of the 
swine; but thou hast not copied God, thy God, who died that thou mightest 
live, and be a man.  Then, thou hast destroyed God's likeness, for thou 
hast destroyed it in thyself.  Thou hast slain a man, for thou hast slain 
thy own manhood, and art thine own murderer, and thine own blood shall be 
required at thy hand.  That which thou hast done to God's likeness in 
thee, shall be done to that which remains of thee in a second death."

And from that may Christ in His mercy deliver us all.  Amen.



SERMON VII.  TEMPTATION



Eversley, 1872.  Chester Cathedral, 1872.

St Matt. iv. 3.  "And when the tempter came to Him, he said, If Thou be 
the Son of God, command that these stones be made bread."

Let me say a few words to-day about a solemn subject, namely, Temptation.  
I do not mean the temptations of the flesh--the temptations which all men 
have to yield to the low animal nature in them, and behave like brutes.  
I mean those deeper and more terrible temptations, which our Lord 
conquered in that great struggle with evil which is commonly called His 
temptation in the wilderness.  These were temptations of an evil spirit--
the temptations which entice some men, at least, to behave like devils.

Now these temptations specially beset religious men--men who are, or 
fancy themselves, superior to their fellow-men, more favoured by God, and 
with nobler powers, and grander work to do, than the common average of 
mankind.  But specially, I say, they beset those who are, or fancy 
themselves, the children of God.  And, therefore, I humbly suppose our 
Lord had to endure and to conquer these very temptations because He was 
not merely a child of God, but the Son of God--the perfect Man, made in 
the perfect likeness of His Father.  He had to endure these temptations, 
and to conquer them, that He might be able to succour us when we are 
tempted, seeing that He was tempted in like manner as we are, yet without 
sin.

Now it has been said, and, I think, well said, that what proves our 
Lord's three temptations to have been very subtle and dangerous and 
terrible, is this--that we cannot see at first sight that they were 
temptations at all.  The first two do not look to us to be wrong.  If our 
Lord could make stones into bread to satisfy His hunger, why should He 
not do so?  If He could prove to the Jews that He was the Son of God, 
their divine King and Saviour, by casting Himself down from the pinnacle 
of the temple, and being miraculously supported in the air by angels--if 
He could do that, why should He not do it?  And lastly, the third 
temptation looks at first sight so preposterous that it seems silly of 
the evil spirit to have hinted at it.  To ask any man of piety, much less 
the Son of God Himself, to fall down and worship the devil, seems 
perfectly absurd--a request not to be listened to for a moment, but put 
aside with contempt.

Well, my friends, and the very danger of these spiritual temptations is--
that they do not look like temptations.  They do not look ugly, absurd, 
wrong, they look pleasant, reasonable, right.

The devil, says the apostle, transforms himself at times into an angel of 
light.  If so, then he is certainly far more dangerous than if he came as 
an angel of darkness and horror.  If you met some venomous snake, with 
loathsome spots upon his scales, his eyes full of rage and cunning, his 
head raised to strike at you, hissing and showing his fangs, there would 
be no temptation to have to do with him.  You would know that you had to 
deal with an evil beast, and must either kill him or escape from him at 
once.  But if, again, you met, as you may meet in the tropics, a lovely 
little coral snake, braided with red and white, its mouth so small that 
it seems impossible that it can bite, and so gentle that children may 
take it up and play with it, then you might be tempted, as many a poor 
child has been ere now, to admire it, fondle it, wreathe it round the 
neck for a necklace, or round the arm for a bracelet, till the play goes 
one step too far, the snake loses its temper, gives one tiny scratch upon 
the lip or finger, and that scratch is certain death.  That would be a 
temptation indeed; one all the more dangerous because there is, I am 
told, another sort of coral snake perfectly harmless, which is so exactly 
like the deadly one, that no child, and few grown people, can know them 
apart.

Even so it is with our worst temptations.  They look sometimes so exactly 
like what is good and noble and useful and religious, that we mistake the 
evil for the good, and play with it till it stings us, and we find out 
too late that the wages of sin are death.  Thus religious people, just 
because they are religious, are apt to be specially tempted to mistake 
evil for good, to do something specially wrong, when they think they are 
doing something specially right, and so give occasion to the enemies of 
the Lord to blaspheme; till, as a hard and experienced man of the world 
once said:  "Whenever I hear a man talking of his conscience, I know that 
he is going to do something particularly foolish; whenever I hear of a 
man talking of his duty, I know that he is going to do something 
particularly cruel."

Do I say this to frighten you away from being religious?  God forbid.  
Better to be religious and to fear and love God, though you were tempted 
by all the devils out of the pit, than to be irreligious and a mere 
animal, and be tempted only by your own carnal nature, as the animals 
are.  Better to be tempted, like the hermits of old, and even to fall and 
rise again, singing, "Rejoice not against me, O mine enemy, when I fall I 
shall arise;" than to live the life of the flesh, "like a beast with 
lower pleasures, like a beast with lower pains."  It is the price a man 
must pay for hungering and thirsting after righteousness, for longing to 
be a child of God in spirit and in truth.  "The devil," says a wise man 
of old, "does not tempt bad men, because he has got them already; he 
tempts good men, because he has NOT got them, and wants to get them."

But how shall we know these temptations?  God knows, my friends, better 
than I; and I trust that He will teach you to know, according to what 
each of you needs to know.  But as far as my small experience goes, the 
root of them all is pride and self-conceit.  Whatsoever thoughts or 
feelings tempt us to pride and self-conceit are of the devil, not of God.  
The devil is specially the spirit of pride; and, therefore, whatever 
tempts you to fancy yourself something different from your fellow-men, 
superior to your fellow men, safer than them, more favoured by God than 
them, that is a temptation of the spirit of pride.  Whatever tempts you 
to think that you can do without God's help and God's providence; 
whatever tempts you to do anything extraordinary, and show yourself off, 
that you may make a figure in the world; and above all, whatever tempts 
you to antinomianism, that is, to fancy that God will overlook sins in 
you which He will not overlook in other men--all these are temptations 
from the spirit of pride.  They are temptations like our Lord's 
temptations.  These temptations came on our Lord more terribly than they 
