would become a minister of Christ. From that time Paul preached and
taught the Christian religion, and converted many people to it.

But he was persecuted in his new work as he had persecuted others, being
finally taken prisoner and threatened with scourging; he declared
himself a Roman citizen, however, and therefore safe from such
treatment, and went on openly confessing his faith and telling of his
conversion, and he appealed for protection to the Roman emperor.

He was then put on board a ship as a prisoner to be taken to Rome. While
they were at sea a violent storm came up, and Paul warned the sailors
that they were in great danger; but they would not listen to him. At
last the ship was wrecked, all on board being cast ashore upon an
island, whither they had been carried, clinging to boards and broken
pieces of the ship.

The barbarous people of the island treated them kindly, building a fire
that they might dry their clothing and get warm; for it was cold and
they were, of course, drenched.

The men were very glad to be safe once more; but a strange thing
happened after a little: Paul gathered up an armful of sticks to put
upon the fire, and as he placed them upon the flames, a viper, which is
a kind of poisonous snake, came out of the bundle and clung to his hand;
he shook it off into the fire, however, without the slightest sign of
fear.

Those who were about him thought that the hand would swell and that
Paul would die from the effects of the bite, and they watched him
closely, believing that this trouble was sent to him as a punishment for
his sins. But no evil results came from the wound, and then the
barbarians thought he was a god and looked upon him with great respect.

Paul and the men who were with him remained upon the island for three
months. At the end of that time they went away in a ship, finally
reaching Rome, where the prisoners were given up to the authorities; but
Paul was allowed to live by himself, with only a soldier to guard him,
and after a while he called the chief men of the Jews together and told
them why he was there and preached to them the Word of God. His
preaching was received by some with faith, but others did not believe.

[Illustration: THE CRUCIFIXION.]

[Illustration: "HE IS RISEN!"]

Paul went on preaching and teaching in Rome for two years, living in a
house which he hired, and he brought many to Jesus. He was a man of
excellent education and a powerful preacher. His Epistles, given in the
Bible, are full of power and the fire of conviction, and he did a
wonderful work for the great cause in which he believed with all his
heart.

Paul was physically small and deformed; but mentally he was a giant. He
had been taught the knowledge of the Romans, and was therefore well
fitted to take up this new cause in a manner which would appeal to
educated people as well as to those who had no learning.

[Illustration: THE LAST SUPPER.]

[Illustration: THE DESCENT OF THE HOLY GHOST.]

From the time of his conversion until his death he labored faithfully in
the ministry of Christ, fearing no persecution or hardship when he
could do the Master's bidding and teach His holy will. The work which he
did was a wonderful work, and his influence in the Christian world has
been a very remarkable one. Brave, untiring, devoted to the cause of
Christ, he at last lost his life in that cause, adding another to the
list of martyrs whose memory the world loves and reveres.

The story of Paul's experiences reads like those tales of adventure
which are so full of absorbing interest that when once they have been
taken up, we do not feel like laying them down again until they are
finished.

This is true also of many others of the Bible stories, and great authors
have taken their themes from them for the writing of books which have
become famous.

The more we study the Bible, the more wonderful it becomes, and the more
we learn that in that marvelous book are set forth nearly all the
experiences of which human life is capable, with the teaching which each
of these experiences should bring and the lesson to be learned by the
reading of them. In all the world there is not another collection so
wonderful as this.




DAVID.


David, the son of Jesse, was a beautiful boy, who could charm by his
wonderful music. But he was to be more than a "sweet singer," for
Samuel, the prophet of the Lord, declared that he should be King of
Israel, and poured the sacred oil upon his head.

Saul, who was then the King of Israel, had spells of insanity, and David
was sent for to try and calm him by his music. In this he was so
successful that after a time the king seemed to be entirely cured; so
David returned to his home, and staid there quietly until his father
sent him to the camp of the Israelites, with food for his brothers.

He found Saul's army in great commotion, because Goliath, a mighty
warrior of the Philistines, had come out before both armies and had
offered to fight any man who should be sent against him.

Goliath had a cap of brass on his head, and his body was well protected
with a covering of iron and brass, while he carried a monstrous spear
and sword, and a heavy shield. As he came before the two camps, he
cried out: "I defy the armies of Israel this day; give me a man, that we
may fight together!"

When David came up and heard the story, he said: "Who is this
Philistine, that he should defy the armies of the living God?" And David
offered to go forth against Goliath.

So he went out in his shepherd's dress, with only his staff and sling;
and Goliath, who was very angry at this, cried out: "Am I a dog, that
thou comest against me with a staff?" Then he began to make fun of
David. But David answered: "Thou comest against me with a sword and a
shield; but I come against thee trusting in the Lord of Hosts, the God
