any work and labour of love, which you have showed for his name's
sake, in ministering to his saints.  So found Obadiah in that sad
day, when he met Elijah.

For he was in evil case that day, as were all souls, rich and poor,
throughout that hapless land.  For three weary years, there had been
no drop of rain:  the earth beneath their feet had been like iron,
and the heavens above them brass; and Obadiah had found poverty,
want, and misery, come on him in the midst of all his riches:  he
had seen his fair gardens wither, and his olives and his vines burnt
up with drought;--his cattle had perished on the hills, and his
servants, too, perhaps, in his house.  Perhaps his children at home
were even then crying for food and water, and crying in vain, in
spite of all their father's greatness.

What was the use of wealth?  He could not eat gold, nor drink
jewels.  What was the use of his power?  He could not command the
smallest cloud to rise up off the sea, and pour down one drop of
water to quench their thirst.  Yes, Obadiah was in bitter misery
that day, no doubt; and all the more, because he felt that all was
God's judgment on the people's sins.  They had served Baalim and
Ashtaroth, the sun and moon and stars, and prayed to them for rain
and fruitful seasons, as if they were the rulers of the weather and
the soil, instead of serving the true God who made heaven and earth,
and all therein:  and now God had _judged_ them:  he had given his
sentence and verdict about that matter, and told them, by a sign
which could not be mistaken, that he, and not the sun and moon, was
master of the sky and the sea, and the rain and the soil.  They had
prayed to the sun and moon; and this was the fruit of their prayers--
that their prayers had not been heard:  but instead of rain and
plenty, was drought and barrenness;--carcasses of cattle scattered
over the pastures--every village full of living skeletons, too weak
to work (though what use in working, when the ground would yield no
crop?)--crawling about, their tongues cleaving to the roof of their
mouths, in vain searching after a drop of water.  Fearful and
sickening sights must Obadiah have seen that day, as he rode wearily
on upon his pitiful errand.  And the thought of what a pitiful
errand he was going on, and what a pitiful king he served, must have
made him all the more miserable; for, instead of turning and
repenting, and going back to the true God, which was the plain and
the only way of escaping out of that misery, that wretched King Ahab
seems to have cared for nothing but his horses.

We do not read that he tried to save one of his wretched people
alive.  All his cry was, 'Go into the land, to all fountains of
water and all brooks; perhaps we shall find grass enough to save the
horses and mules alive:  that we lose not all the beasts.'  The
horses were what he cared for more than the human beings, as many of
those bad kings of Israel did.  Moses had expressly commanded them
not to multiply horses to themselves; but they persisted always in
doing so, nevertheless.  And why?  Because they wanted horses to
mount their guards; to keep up a strong force of cavalry and
chariots, in order to oppress the poor country people, whom they had
brought down to slavery, from having been free yeomen, as they were
in the days of Moses and Joshua.  And what hope could he have for
his wretched country?  The people shewed no signs of coming to their
senses; the king still less.  His wicked Queen Jezebel was as
devoted as ever to her idols; the false prophets of Baal were four
hundred and fifty men, and the prophets of the groves (where the
stars were worshipped) four hundred; and these cheats contrived (as
such false teachers generally do) to take good care of themselves,
and to eat at Jezebel's table, while all the rest of the people were
perishing.  What could be before the country, and him, too, but
utter starvation, and hopeless ruin?  And all this while his life
was in the hands of a weak and capricious tyrant, who might murder
him any moment, and of a wicked and spiteful queen, who certainly
would murder him, if she found out that he had helped and saved the
prophets of the Lord.  Who so miserable as he?  But on that day,
Obadiah found that his alms and prayers had gone up before God, and
were safe with God, and not to be forgotten for ever.  When he fell
on his face before Elijah, in fear for his life, he found that he
was safe in God's hands; that God would not betray him or forsake
him.  Elijah promised him, with a solemn oath, that he would keep
his word with him; he kept it, and before many days were past,
Obadiah had an answer to all his prayers, and a relief from all his
fears; and the Lord sent a gracious rain on his inheritance, and
refreshed it when it was weary.  Yes, my friends, though well-doing
seems for a while not to profit you, persevere:  in due time you
shall reap, if you faint not.  Though the Lord sometimes waits to be
gracious, he only waits, he does not forget; and it is to be
_gracious_ that he waits, not ungracious.  Cast, therefore, thy
bread upon the waters, and thou shall find it after many days.  Give
a portion to seven, and also to eight, for thou knowest not what
evil shall be upon the earth.  Do thy diligence to give of what thou
hast; for so gatherest thou thyself in the day of necessity, in
which, with what measure you have measured to others, God will
measure to you again.

This is true, for the Scripture says so; this _must_ be true, for
reason and conscience--the voice of God within us--tell us that God
is just; that God must be true, though every man be a liar.  'Hear,'
says our Lord, 'what the _unjust_ judge says:  And shall not God
(the just judge), avenge his own elect, who cry day and night to
him, though he bear long with them?'  Yes, my friends, God's promise
stands sure, now and for ever.  'Trust in the Lord, and do good; so
shalt thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt be fed.'

But now comes in a doubt--and it ought to come in--What are our
works at best?  What have we which is fit to offer to God?  Full of
selfishness, vanity, self-conceit, the best of them; and not half
done either.  What have we ever done right, but what we might have
done more rightly, and done more of it, also?  Bad in quality our
good works are, and bad in quantity, too.  How shall we have courage
to carry them in our hand to that God who charges his very angels
with folly; and the very heavens are not clean in his sight?

Too true, if we had to offer our own works to God.  But, thanks be
to his holy name, we have not to offer them ourselves; for there is
one who offers them for us--Jesus Christ the Lord.  He it is who
takes these imperfect, clumsy works of ours, all soiled and stained
with our sin and selfishness, and washes them clean in his most
precious blood, which was shed to take away the sin of the world:
he it is who, in some wonderful and unspeakable way, cleanses our
works from sin, by the merit of his death and sufferings, so that
nothing may be left in them but what is the fruit of God's own
spirit; and that God may see in them only the good which he himself
put into them, and not the stains and soils which they get from our
foolish and sinful hearts.

Oh, my friends, bear this in mind.  Whensoever you do a thing which
you know to be right and good, instead of priding yourself on it, as
if the good in it came from you, offer it up to the Lord Jesus
Christ, and to your Heavenly Father, from whom all good things come,
and say, 'Oh Lord, the good in this is thine, and not mine; the bad
in it is mine, and not thine.  I thank thee for having made me do
right, for without thy help I should have done nothing but wrong;
for mine is the laziness, and the weakness, and the selfishness, and
the self-conceit; and thine is the kingdom, for thou rulest all
things; and the power, for thou doest all things; and the glory, for
thou doest all things well, for ever and ever.  Amen.'



SERMON X.  RELIGIOUS DANGERS



(Preached at the Chapel Royal, Whitehall, 1861, for the London
Diocesan Board of Education.)

St. Mark viii. 4, 5, 8.  And the disciples answered him, From whence
can a man satisfy these men with bread here in the wilderness? . . .
How many loaves have ye?  And they said, Seven. . . . so they did
eat and were filled; and they took up of the broken meat that was
left seven baskets.

I think that I can take no better text for the subject on which I am
about to preach, than that which the Gospel for this day gives me.

For is not such a great city as this London, at least in its present
amorphous, unorganised state, having grown up, and growing still,
any how and any whither, by the accidental necessities of private
commerce, private speculation, private luxury--is it not, I say,
literally a wilderness?

I do not mean a wilderness in the sense of a place of want and
misery; on the contrary, it is a place of plenty and of comfort.  I
think that we clergymen, and those good people who help our labours,
are too apt exclusively to forget London labour, in our first and
necessary attention to the London poor; to fix our eyes and minds on
London want and misery, till we almost ignore the fact of London
wealth and comfort.  We must remember, if we are to be just to God,
and just to our great nation, that there is not only more wealth in
London, but that that wealth is more equitably and generally
diffused through all classes, from the highest to the lowest, than
ever has been the case in any city in the world.  We must remember
that there is collected together here a greater number of free human
beings than were ever settled on the same space of earth, earning an
honest, independent, and sufficient livelihood, and enjoying the
fruits of their labour in health and cheapness, freedom and
security, such as the world never saw before.  There is want and
misery.  I know it too well.  There are great confusions to be
organised, great anomalies to be suppressed.  But remember, that if
want and misery, confusion and anomaly were _the rule_ of London,
and not (as they are) the exception, then London, instead of
increasing at its present extraordinary pace, would decay; London
work, instead of being better and better done, would be worse and
worse done, till it stopped short in some such fearful convulsion as
that of Paris in 1793.  No, my friends; compare London with any city
on the Continent; compare her with the old Greek and Roman cities;
with Alexandria, Antioch, Constantinople, with that Imperial Rome
itself, which was like London in nothing but its size, and then
thank God for England, for freedom, and for the Church of Christ.

And yet I have called London a wilderness.  I have.  There is a
wilderness of want; but there is a wilderness of wealth likewise.
And the latter is far more dangerous to human nature than the former
one.  It is not in the waste and howling wilderness of rock, and
sand and shingle, with its scanty acacia copses, and groups of date
trees round the lonely well, that nature shews herself too strong
for man, and crushes him down to the likeness of the ape.  There the
wild Arab, struggling to exist, and yet not finding the struggle
altogether too hard for him, can gain and keep, if not spiritual
life, virtue and godliness, yet still something of manhood;
something of--


The reason firm, the temperate will,
Endurance, foresight, thought, and skill.


No; if you would see how low man can fall, you must go to the tropic
jungle, where geniality of climate, plenty and variety of food, are
in themselves a cause of degradation to the soul, as long as the
Spirit of Christ is absent from it.  Not in the barren desert, but
in the rich forest, wanders the true savage, eating and eating all
day long, like the ape in the trees above his head; and (I had
almost said), like the ape, too, with no thoughts save what his
pampered senses can suggest.  I had almost said it.  Thank God, I
dare not say it altogether; for, after all, the savage is a man, and
not an ape.  Yes, to the lowest savage in the forests of the Amazon,
comes a hunger of the soul, and whispers from the unseen world, to
remind him of what he might have been, and still may be.  In the
dreams of the night they come; in vague terrors of the unseen, vague
feelings of guilt and shame, vague dread of the powers of nature;
driving him to unmeaning ceremonies, to superstitious panics, to
horrible and bloody rites--as they might drive, to-morrow, my
friends, an outwardly civilized population, debauched by mere peace
and plenty, entangled and imprisoned in the wilderness of a great
city.

I can imagine--imagine?--Have we not seen again and again human
souls so entangled and opprest by this vast labyrinth of brick and
mortar, as never to care to stir outside it and expand their souls
with the sight of God's works as long as their brute wants are
supplied, just as the savage never cares to leave his accustomed
forest haunt, and hew himself a path into the open air through the
tangled underwood.  I can imagine--nay, have we not seen that, too?--
and can we not see it any day in the street?--human souls so
dazzled and stupefied, instead of being quickened, by the numberless
objects of skill and beauty, which they see in their walks through
the streets, that they care no more for the wonders of man's making,
than the savage does for the wonders of God's making, which he sees
around him in every insect, bird, and flower.  The man who walks the
streets every day, is the very man who will see least in the
streets.  The man who works in a factory, repeating a thousand times
a day some one dull mechanical operation, or even casting up day
after day the accounts of it, is the man who will think least of the
real wonderfulness of that factory; of the amount of prudence,
skill, and science, which it expresses; of its real value to himself
and to his class; of its usefulness to far nations beyond the seas.
He is like a savage who looks up at some glorious tree, capable, in
the hands of civilized man, of a hundred uses, and teeming to him
with a hundred scientific facts; and thinks all the while of nothing
but his chance of finding a few grubs beneath its bark.

Think over, I beseech you, this fact of the stupefying effect of
mere material civilization; and remember that plenty and comfort do
not diminish but increase that stupefaction; that Hebrew prophets
knew it, and have told us, again and again, that, by fulness of
bread the heart waxeth gross; that Greek sages knew it, and have
told us, again and again, that need, and not satiety, was the
quickener of the human intellect.  Believe that man requires another
bread than the bread of the body; that sometimes the want of the
bodily bread will awaken the hunger for that bread of the soul.
Bear in mind that the period during which the middle and lower
classes of England were most brutalized, was that of their greatest
material prosperity, the latter half of the eighteenth century.
Remember that with the distress which came upon them, at the end of
the French war, their spiritual hunger awakened--often in forms
diseased enough:  but growing healthier, as well as keener, year by
year; and that if they are not brutalized once more by their present
unexampled prosperity, it will be mainly owing to the spiritual life
which was awakened in those sad and terrible years.  Remember that
the present carelessness of the masses about either religious or
political agitation, though it may be a very comfortable sign to
those who believe that a man's life consists in the abundance of the
things which he possesses, is a very ominous sign to some who study
history, and to some also who study their Bibles:  and ask
yourselves earnestly the question, 'From where shall a man find food
for these men in this wilderness, not of want, but of wealth?'  For,
believe me, that spiritual hunger, though stopped awhile by physical
comfort, will surely reawaken.  Any severe and sudden depression in
trade--the stoppage of the cotton crop, for instance, will awaken in
the minds of hundreds of thousands deep questions--for which we, if
we are wise, shall have an explicit answer ready.

For it is a very serious moment, my friends, when large masses have
had enough to eat and drink, and have been saying, 'Let us eat and
drink, for to-morrow we die;' and then, suddenly, by _not_ having
enough to eat and drink, and yet finding themselves still alive, are
awakened to the sense that there is more in them than the mere
capacity for eating and drinking.  Then begin once more the world-
old questions, Why are we thus?  Who put us here?  Who made us?
God?  Is there a God? and if there be, what is he like?  What is his
will toward us, good or evil?  Is it hate or love?

My friends, those are questions which have been asked often enough
in the world's history, by vast masses at once.  And they may be
answered in more ways than one.

They may be answered as the weavers of a certain country (thank God,
not England) answered them in the potato famine with their mad song,
'We looked to the earth, and the earth deceived us.  We looked to
the kings, and the kings deceived us.  We looked to God, and God
deceived us.  Let us lie down and die.'

Or they may answer them--they will be more likely to answer them in
England just now, because there are those who will teach them so to
answer--in another, but a scarcely less terrible tone.  'Yes, there
is a God; and he is angry with us.  And why?  Because there is
something, or some one, in the nation which he abhors--heretics,
papists'--what not--any man, or class of men, on whom cowardly and
terrified ignorance may happen to fix as a scapegoat, and cry,
'These are the guilty!  We have allowed these men, indulged them;
the accursed thing is among us, therefore the face of the Lord is
turned from us.  We will serve him truly henceforth--and hate those
whom he hates.  We will be orthodox henceforth--and prove our
orthodoxy by persecuting the heretic.'

Does this seem to you extravagant, impossible?  Remember, my
friends, that within the last century Lord George Gordon's riots
convulsed London.  Can you give me any reason why Lord George
Gordon's riots cannot occur again?  Believe me, the more you study
history, the more you study human nature, the more possible it will
seem to you.  It is not, I believe, infidelity, but fanaticism,
which England has to fear just now.  The infidelity of England is
one of mere doubt and denial, a scepticism; which is in itself weak
and self-destructive.  The infidelity of France in 1793 was strong
enough, but just because it was no scepticism, but a faith; a
positive creed concerning human reason, and the rights of man, which
men could formulize, and believe in, and fight for, and persecute
for, and, if need was, die for.  But no such exists in England now.
And what we have most to fear in England under the pressure of some
sudden distress, is a superstitious panic, and the wickedness which
is certain to accompany that panic; mean and unjust, cruel and
abominable things, done in the name of orthodoxy:  though meanwhile,
whether what the masses and their spiritual demagogues will mean by
orthodoxy, will be the same that we and the Church of England mean
thereby, is a question which I leave for your most solemn
consideration.  That, however, rather than any proclamation of the
abstract rights of man, or installations of a goddess of Reason, is
the form which spiritual hunger is most likely to take in England
now.  Alas! are there not tokens enough around us now, whereby we
may discern the signs of this time?

I say, the spiritual hunger will reawaken; and woe to us who really
understand and love the Church of England; woe to us who are really
true to her principles, honestly subscribe her formulas, if we
cannot appease it in that day.

But wherewith?  We may look, my friends, appalled at the danger and
the need.  We may cry to our Lord, 'From whence can a man satisfy
these men with bread in the wilderness?'  But his answer will be, as
far as I dare to predict it, the same as to his apostles of old on
another and a similar occasion, 'Give ye them to eat.  They need not
depart.'

I am not going to draw any far-fetched analogy between the miracle
recorded in the gospel, and the subject on which I am speaking.  I
am not going to put any mystical and mediaeval interpretation on the
seven loaves, or the two small fishes.  I only ask you to accept the
plain moral practical lesson which the words convey.--

Use the means which you have already, however few and weak they
seem.  If Christ be among you, as he is indeed, he will bless them,
and multiply them you know not how.

Use the means which you have; though they may seem to you
inadequate, though they may seem to the world antiquated, and
decrepit, try them.  They need not depart from us, these masses, to
seek spiritual food, they know not where, if we have but faith.  Let
us give them what we have; the organization of the Church of
England, and the teaching of the Church of England.

The organization of the Church.  Not merely its Parochial system,
but its Diocesan system.  In London, more than in any part of
England, the Diocesan system is valuable.  A London parish is not
like a country one, a self-dependent, corporate body, made up of
residents of every rank, capable of providing for the physical and
spiritual wants of its own stationary population.  In London,
population fluctuates rapidly, sometimes rolling away from one
quarter, always developing itself in fresh quarters; in London all
ranks do not dwell side by side within sight and sound of each
other:  but the rich and the poor, the employed and the unemployed,
dwell apart, work apart, and are but too often out of sight, out of
mind.  These, and many other reasons, make it impossible for the
mere parochial system to bring out the zeal and the liberality of
London Churchmen.  If they are to realize their unity and their
strength, they must do so not as members of a Parish, but of a
Diocese; their Bishop must be to them the sign that they are one
body; their good works must be organized more and more under him,
and round him.  This is no new theory of mine; it is a historic law.
The Priest for the village, the Bishop for the city, has been the
natural and necessary organization of the Church in every age; and
it was in strict accordance with this historic law, that the London
Diocesan Board of Education was founded in 1846, not to override the
parochial system, but to do for it what it cannot, in a great city,
do for itself; to establish elementary schools (and now I am happy
to say, evening schools also) in parishes which were too poor to
furnish them for themselves.  I, as the son of a London Rector, can
bear my testimony to the excellent working of that Board; and it is
with grief I hear that, in spite of the vast work which it has done
since 1846, and which it is still doing, on an income which is now
not 300 pounds a year--proving thereby how cheaply and easily your
work may be done when it is done in the right way--it is with grief,
I say, that I hear that it is more and more neglected by the
religious public.

With grief:  but not with surprise.  For the religious public, even
the Church portion of it, has of late been more and more inclined to
undervalue the organization and the teaching of the Church of
England, and to supply its place with nostrums, borrowed from those
denominations who disagree with the Church, alike in their doctrines
of what man should be, and of what God is.  How have their energies,
their zeal, their money (for zealous they are, and generous too)
been frittered away!  But I will not particularize, lest I hurt the
feelings of better people than myself, by holding up their good
works to the ridicule of those who do us no good works at all.  But
I entreat them to look at their own work; to look at the vastness of
its expense, compared with the smallness of its results; and then to
ask themselves, whether the one cause of their failure--for failures
I must call too many of the religious movements of this day, in
spite of their own loud self-laudations--whether, I say, one cause
of these failures may not be, that the religious world is throwing
itself into anything and everything novel and exciting, rather than
into the simple and unobtrusive work of teaching little children
their Catechism, that they may go home as angels of God and
missionaries of Christ, teaching their parents in turn as they have
been taught themselves, and so awakening that sacred family life,
without which there can be no sound Christianity.  I know well that
there has been much work done in the right direction; but when I
look at the ugly fact, that the population of London is increasing
far faster than its schools; that in 25 of the poorest parishes
thereof there are now nearly 60,000 children who go to no school at
all; and that the proportion of scholars to the population is lower
in Middlesex than in almost any county in England, while the
proportion of crime is highest; I cannot but sigh over the thousands
which I see squandered yearly on rash novelties by really pious and
generous souls, and cry, Ah, that one-fourth, one-tenth of it all
had been spent in the plain work of helping elementary schools; I
cannot but call on all London churchmen of the plain old school, to
stand by the organization and the doctrines of the Church to which
they belong; to rally in this matter round their bishop; and work
for him, and with him.

And now, there may be some here who will ask, scornfully enough, And
do you talk of nostrums? and then, after confessing that the masses
