inner man; that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, to the end
that ye being rooted and grounded in love may come to apprehend with
all saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height and to
know the love of Christ."

God's guidance of his life, first of all, produces in a man a great
sense of stability. "I have set the Lord always before me: because he
is at my right hand I shall not be moved." He who has found God so
careful of him, he whom God hath regarded as worth speaking to and
counseling and disciplining, will be certain that he shall endure,
provided he is sure of his own loyalty. The life so loved of God, so
provided for, and in such close communion with the Eternal is not, can
not be the creature of the day, and this assurance stands firm in face
of even death and the horrible corruption of the body. The psalmist
refuses to believe that he is to dwell in the horrible under-world
forever--either himself or any of God's believers. "Thou must not,
thou wilt not leave my soul in sheol, thou must not, thou wilt not
suffer thy loved ones to see the pit." To this man it is incredible,
and our hearts bear witness to the truth if we have had any experience
of God's blessing and guidance. To this man it is incredible that the
life God has cared for and guided and spoken to and brought into such
intimate communion with himself can find its end in death. Those whom
God has loyally loved and who have loyally loved God--for this
word badly translated "holy" in the psalms really has that actual
significance--those whom God has loyally loved and who have loyally
loved God shall never die. As He lives so shall they; they shall never
be absent from His presence. Be the future unknown and unknowable,
be we ourselves incapable of conceiving the processes by which this
mortal shall put on immortality, or where heaven is, or what eternity
can possibly be to those who have never lived outside time, yet that
future is secure and its immortal character is indubitable--where God
is there shall His servants be, and because He is there their life
shall be peace and joy, and because He is eternal it shall last
forevermore. That thought is the whole of the hope and argument. We
are assured of the future life because we have known God, and as we
have found Him to be true to us and proved ourselves true to Him.




GUNSAULUS

THE BIBLE VS. INFIDELITY

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE


Frank Wakely Gunsaulus was born at Chesterville, Ohio, in 1856. He
graduated from Ohio Wesleyan University in 1875. For some years he was
pastor of Plymouth Church, Chicago, and since 1899 pastor of Central
Church, Chicago. He is also president of the Armour Institute of
Technology. He is a fascinating speaker, having a clear, resonant
voice, and a dignified presence. His mind is a storehouse of the best
literature, and his English style is noteworthy for its purity and
richness. He is the author of several books and is in popular demand
as a lecturer.




GUNSAULUS

Born in 1856

THE BIBLE VS. INFIDELITY[1]

[Footnote 1: Preached as an impromptu reply to R.G. Ingersoll. Printed
from an unrevised stenographic report.]

_There are, it may be, so many kinds of voices in the world, and none
of them is without signification_.--I Cor. xiv., 10.


Ours is a voiceful era. Perhaps, as the ages come and go and man's
life grows richer, its questions more restless for answer, its
moral supports called upon to bear heavier interests of faith, its
enterprises more often and searchingly compelled to defend themselves,
the voices of time will be increasingly potent and worthy of his
attention. A singularly suggestive collection of messages fills the
air today, and all of these voices speak of one theme--the Bible.

Anarchy, which is always atheistic, holds its converse in the places
of evil which this book's message would close forever; the foes of
that civilization builded on its laws and stimulated by its hopes asks
us to condemn it as worthy only of caricature, vituperation, and hate.
Let us find a path of duty today, not refusing to listen to any of
these voices, but asking that other voices also may help us to the
truth.

The preacher's message is a book called the Bible. That is only the
literary form of his message--telling its history. Even that form,
which is much less divine as paper and ink are less lofty in the
scale than humanity, has worked wonders. To-day, the Bible offers the
nineteenth-century infidel as testimony of the influence it has. It
has force enough to make infidelity preach tearfully and well about
man, woman, and child. Skepticism did not do so well until the Bible
came. The Bible has furnished the eloquence of infidelity with such
a man as Shakespeare to talk about; no student of literature could
imagine Shakespeare without the Bible and the Bible's influence upon
him as he created his dreams. It furnished an Abraham Lincoln for an
orator to compare favorably with incomplete ideas of Almighty God; but
it seems to have been unable to show the critic that Christian ideas
of Almighty God made Lincoln so love the Lord's Prayer that he wanted
a church builded with this as its creed. It would seem that any
general denunciation or humorous caricature of a book which has
worked such an amazing effect in literature as has the Bible would
be tempered by some recognition of the fact that these other
minds--poets, orators, sages, and scientists--have found illumination
and help in its pages. Liberal Christianity will be intellectually
broad. Certainly the greatest of modern pagans, Goethe, will not be
accused of favoritism toward the Bible, yet he said: "I esteem the
gospels to be thoroughly genuine, for there shines forth from them the
reflected splendor of a sublimity, proceeding from the person of
Jesus Christ, of so divine a kind as only the divine could ever have
manifested upon earth." The Earl of Rochester saw that the only
liberalism which objects to the Bible, in its true uses, is the
liberalism of licentiousness; and he left this saying: "A bad heart
is the great argument against this holy book." And Faraday, weeping,
said: "Why will people go astray when they have this blest book to
guide them?"

If we turn to literature we encounter many such liberal thinkers as
Theodore Parker, who calmly informs us: "This collection of books has
taken such a hold upon the world as has no other. The literature of
Greece, which goes up like incense from that land of temples and
heroic deeds, has not half the influence of this book. It goes equally
to the cottage of the plain man and the palace of the king. It is
woven into the literature of the scholar and colors the talk of the
street." That is the voice of the liberalism which includes rather
than excludes.

These were men not of the band of evangelical Christian preachers, who
are roughly classed as a set of persons unable to tell the truth about
the Bible, for fear they may lose their means of subsistence; these
are men who know the true mission of the Bible. It is not to furnish
a picture of life in the time of Moses such as life ought to be, a
portrait of a David for the imitation of men, a statue of a warrior
in a time of barbarism who shall command my obedience to his commands
now, an idea of God wrought out in ignorance and darkness, which has
no self-development within it. The mission of the Bible is to furnish
a humanly written account of a people, just as human as we, in whom,
by divine inspiration, the soul of truth so lived and worked as to
develop, in gradual course, by laws, by hopes, by loves, by life, a
living, and, at last, perfectly authoritative ideal of righteousness,
but more than all a gradual growth of such moral power as would be
commanding in the redeeming self-sacrifice and love of Jesus Christ.
Every page of the Old Testament was only preparatory, as the thorny
bush is preparatory for the rose. Christ is the end of the long, weary
human history that leads to Him. If the laws of Sinai had been enough,
there never would have been a Calvary. No one for a moment dreams that
the God of nature could have brought forth such a fruit as the life
and ideas of Jesus without a tree of such a history, a tree rooted in
the ground, storm-twisted, gnarled, and valuable only for its fruit.
We are not asked to eat the roots and bark and branches; only the
fruit has an appeal to us. Its appeal is to our hunger, its authority
lies in the fact that it satisfies our hunger.

It has satisfied the hunger of men whose liberalism came from their
being made liberally. Large and capacious souls of mighty yearnings
are they. They stand in contrast with the puny critics who assert
that the Bible fails to feed them, because they have never tasted its
nourishment.

Liberal Christianity, separating itself from the dogmatism which would
make Christianity a book religion, worshiping a literary idol rather
than loving a human revelation of the divine, knows it is not an
ignorant lot of men and women who have received most from the Bible
and spoken most gratefully of its message. When we think of sending
the Bible to barbarism, with the hope of creating in its stead
civilization, we can look into the face of John Selden, one of the
most illustrious of English lawyers, when he says: "I have surveyed
most of the learning that is among the sons of men, yet at this moment
I can recall nothing in them on which to rest my soul, save one from
the sacred Scriptures, which rises much on my mind. It is this: 'The
grace of God, which bringeth salvation, hath appeared unto all men,
teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for
that blest hope and the glorious appearing of the great God and our
Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us that he might redeem
us unto himself, a peculiar people zealous of good works.'" Liberal
religion must include Selden. We will not be deterred from giving the
Bible to heathenism of any kind when we remember that Sir William
Jones has left these words: "The Scriptures contain more true
sublimity, more exquisite beauty, and finer strains of poetry and
eloquence than could be collected from all other books that were ever
composed in any age or in any idiom." Liberal religion must be as
broad as Sir William Jones.

This is a very needy world, and many are the institutions of evil that
need to be changed for institutions of goodness. If we are to believe
the eloquence of hopeless unbelief, we ourselves will only be the
slaves of a fatalism which says that man is but a result of forces;
that what we call crime is but a part of the necessary course of
things, and that there is no such thing as moral responsibility. This
makes all reform or efforts at staying the tide of evil useless.
Oftentimes the heart of the man who has ceased to read his Bible gets
the victory over this dreadful philosophy, and it is not remarkable
that the skeptic becomes the exponent of freedom, charging like a host
of war upon all institutions of slavery. Liberal theology puts its one
hand on the dogmatist who tells him to accept literal infallibility,
and its other on the sincere lover of men who has lost his Bible
entirely. And liberalism says: It is in just such moments that we
trust our Bible the most, and we remember that William Wilberforce,
who lifted the chains from the bondmen, has said: "I never knew
happiness until I found Christ as a Savior. Read the Bible! Bead the
Bible! Through all my perplexities and distresses I never read any
other book, I never knew the want of any other." We are certainly not
despising the science which is worthy of a name, nor are we forgetting
any proposition which has found a place in the world's thought, if we
look into the face of Sir John Herschel, who tells us that "all human
discoveries seem to be made only for the purpose of confirming more
and more strongly the truths contained in the holy Scriptures." It is
truly no part of wisdom for us to conclude that for scientific reasons
we ought to forsake our Bible when Professor Dana avers: "The grand
old book of God still stands; and this old earth, the more its leaves
are turned and pondered, the more will it sustain and illustrate the
sacred Word."

Surely it is not the hour dogmatically to withdraw this book, which
has proved the basis of civilization. Professor Lyell, the great
English geologist, tells us: "In the year 1806 the French Institute
enumerated no less than eighty geological theories which were hostile
to the Scriptures, but not one of these theories is held today."
Bacon's remark is still true: "There never was found in any age of the
world either religion or law that did so highly exalt the public good
as the Bible." And John Marshall and Prince Bismarck agree with Daniel
Webster when he says: "If we abide by the principles taught in the
Bible our country will go on prospering and to prosper; but if we and
our posterity neglect its instructions and authority no man can tell
how sudden a catastrophe may overwhelm us and bury all our glory in
profound obscurity." There is not an anarchist in America who does not
clap his hands when he hears a Bible with the Ten Commandments and the
Sermon on the Mount denounced. Indeed, the civilization in which we
stand, as compared with the barbarism out of which we have been led
by the Bible, would make William Henry Seward's assertion only a mild
statement of the truth when he says: "The whole hope of human progress
is suspended on the ever-growing influence of the Bible." I prefer
lawyers like these to lead American public opinion. Part of the
service of these men has been that they have shown theology that the
Bible is not a set of texts on a dead level of authority and equal
value, but the revealing, slow and sure, of an inspiration obeyed by a
certain people in the realm of morals like that inspiration obeyed by
another people in the realm of art, and its test is: Does the Bible's
ultimate message, its crowning commandment of Christ's life and love,
produce goodness in morals? just as the test of the long revelation
of beauty in his ancestors and the Greek is, does its ultimate
commandment produce goodness in art.

Christianity does not ask: "What think ye of the Bible?" It asks:
"What think ye of Christ?" There the throne is set, and so majestic is
His glory that the moment we come into His presence we are judged. The
Judge of the earth has taken His place in thought, history and hope.
He is not on trial, and He asks no question as to what man thinks of
the book which has enthroned Him in literature. The test is placed in
my conduct and yours; each may say with Michael Bruce, who left these
words on the fly-leaf of his Bible:

  'Tis very vain of me to boast
  How small a price this Bible cost;
  The day of judgment will make clear
  'Twas very cheap or very dear.

Shall we go forward with our Bible or backward without it? Infidelity
has always forgotten that, so far as it has an eye for liberty and
humanity, the Christianity not of sects but of the Bible has furnished
it and trained it. The liberalism which puts its Bible aside will
acknowledge that a Christless humanity culminated in Rome. Skepticism
is often eloquent when it tries to show how much "fragments of Roman
art" had to do with the making of modern civilization. Now, as Rome
marks the height to which humanity without a Bible ascended, it would
seem that this would be just the point where free and untrammeled
thought and the fullest intellectual liberty would be found. Right
there, where a Christless race was supreme, ought to be the place
where the liberty abounded which the religion of Christ is said to
destroy.

Whose program for the production of intellectual and spiritual liberty
can liberals accept? Hoarse is the cry: The Bible is to be cast out.
We look and behold men who have these opinions sitting on the throne
of the Caesars. Now, one would suppose the intellect of that whole
realm would have fair play. There was no Bible there to fetter or to
annoy. This ought to be the halcyon age for "the liberty of man, woman
and child." These rulers have the same dignified abhorrence for all
kinds of religion. The skeptic Lucretius says: "The fear of the lower
world must be sent headlong forth. It poisons life to its lowest
depths; it spreads over all things the blackness of death; it leaves
no pleasure unalloyed." I match the Roman with the phrase of a recent
orator of this school who spoke of the soldiers dead, as now "sleeping
beneath the shadows of the clouds, careless alike of sunshine or of
storm, each in the windowless palace of rest." There was no window in
the grave when more illustrious and original skeptics talked about it.
Modern infidelity has many expressions on the future after death which
sound like the old Roman distich, "I was not, and became; I was, and
am no more."

Its orator, bending over the body of his dear brother, said nothing
more touching than did Tacitus over the grave of Agricola, as he
wrote: "If there is a place for the spirits of the pious; if, as the
wise suppose, great souls do not become extinct with their bodies;
if"--oh, that age of "if" ought to have been an age when every brain
was free and no thought or sentiment were a chain. The Bible of
Christianity was not powerful enough to throttle anybody. Its pages
were not all written; its authors were hunted and outcast. Morals,
too, ought to have been all right, for we are told that they are
independent of God and Christ.

But what is the fact? Strangely enough, in that age, when nearly every
monarch, or poet, or philosopher was a humorous skeptic and they had
no Christian religion to "bind their hands," in an age when nothing
but this sort of infidelity was supreme, Seneca, to whom connoisseurs
in ethics blandly turn when they grow weary of the strenuous Paul or
the pensive John, Seneca, while he wrote a book on poverty, has a
fortune of $15,000,000, with a house full of citrus tables made of
veined wood brought from Mount Atlas. While he framed moral precepts
which we are besought to substitute for the Sermon on the Mount, he
was openly accused of constant and shameless iniquity, and was leading
his distinguished and tender pupil, Nero, into those practises and
preparing him for those atrocities which Seneca himself had upon his
own soul while he wrote his book on clemency. At that hour the Bible
Christianity offered to the world's heart and aspiration, not a book,
not a theorist of morals, but a man for the leadership of humanity,
and, of that Man the literary and calm French skeptic says: "Jesus
will never be surpassed." In the age of Rome, when people were not
burdened by churches or Bibles, Lucian says: "If any one loves wealth
and is dazed by gold; if any one measures happiness by purple and
power; if any one brought up among flatterers and slaves has never had
a conception of liberty, frankness and truth; if any one has wholly
surrendered himself to pleasure, full tables, carousals, lewdness,
sorcery, and deceit, let him go to Rome." There was no Bible either
to preach against it or to interfere with it. These things were the
product then, as they are now, of infidelity. Whenever the world
wishes a civilization so barbarous as that, the reviler of the Bible
must create it, for they have the applause of evil and the good-will
of crime. In the age of Rome, when this skepticism was the creed of
the State, Nero got tired of the goddess Astarte, and murdered his own
brother, his wife, and his mother, and the senate was so affected with
the same opinion that they heard his justification and proceeded to
heap new honors upon him. He threw the preacher Paul into jail, but
there Paul wrought out the impulse of Europe. In the age when the
great Livy said that "neglect of gods" had come, Caligula let loose
his imperial frenzy, and every stream of blood that could be sent
toward the sea carried its red tide. In that age when, like later
eloquent critics, Ennius said that he did not believe that the gods
thought of human beings, "for if the gods concerned themselves about
the human race the good would prosper and the bad suffer," the
courtesan was kept for pleasure and the wife for domestic slavery. In
that happy age of unbelief, when Menander sung "the gods do not care
for men," "the homes were," according to Juvenal, "broken up before
the nuptial garland faded"; and according to Tertullian, "they married
only to be divorced." Friends exchanged wives; infanticide and other
hellish crimes were common. This is what that spirit, in its purity,
did for the home, when there was no Bible to read at its hearthstone
and no New Testament to put into the hands of young lovers departing
to make a new rooftree.

Labor will some day be too liberal to give up its Bible. In that age,
when "God was dead"; in that age, when "the gods had abdicated";
they said, "the mechanic's occupation is degrading. A workshop is
incompatible with anything noble." The curse of slavery had blotted
the name of labor, and they agreed that "a purchased laborer is better
than a hired one," and thousands of prison-like dwellings rose to
conceal the myriads of slaves. In that age Nero, who had the same
opinion about God which the vaunting spirit which calls itself liberal
has today, had a "golden house" as large as a city, with colonnades a
mile long, and within it a statue of Nero 120 feet high. That is what
the theory of infidelity did for labor and the working man when it
was on the throne. Do you wonder that from that day to this the
"carpenter's son" of the Bible has been scoffed at by this infidelity?

In that age, when the theories of infidelity ruled, the gladiators
made wet with their blood the great enclosure of the arena. The women
and timid girls of Rome gave lightly the sign of death. The crowd
shook the building with applause as the palpitating body was dragged
by a hook into the death-chamber, and slaves turned up the bloody soil
and covered the blood-dabbled earth with sand that the awful amusement
might go on. All this was allowed by infidelity in its purity, before
it had been influenced by the Christian's Bible into believing that
such things are atrocious.

Oh, when I hear infidelity prate of the horrors of slavery and defend
a Godless theory of the State, I remember that those who had it in its
purity did not regard the slave as a man. When I read the story of
slavery and hear an exponent of free thought say, "The doctrine that
woman is a slave or serf of man--whether it comes from hell or heaven,
from God or demon, from the golden streets of the New Jerusalem, or
the very Sodom of perdition--is savagery pure and simple," I say,
"That is so, but just that was the ruling idea when infidelity was on
the throne of Rome." And only where the Bible has gone and triumphed
has woman the privileges which are thus praised.

When I hear it said: "Slavery includes all other crimes. It is the
joint product of the kidnaper, pirate, thief, murderer, and hypocrite.
It degrades labor and corrupts leisure. To lacerate the naked back, to
sell wives, to steal babes, to debauch your soul--this is slavery," I
answer: "That is so," and I add that all these and a thousand other
damnable features of slavery were seen in Rome when the whole Roman
people felt and spoke about the message of the Bible just as your type
of liberalism does today.

To all this wretched state of man what offers came from Seneca, whom
skepticism quotes as a moralist? Why, he said: "Admire only thyself";
and when he saw that a man must get out of himself, he said: "Give
thyself to philosophy." Not philosophy, but the power of the Bible's
Christ has lifted man upward to his highest life.

If ever anti-Christianity had a chance to show its beauty, it was when
it was at its supreme strength, and when Christianity was a babe in
the manger; and these are only suggestions of the hell it dug for man
at Rome. You say that it was not what skepticism is at the present
day, and I acknowledge that it is so. Why? Because nineteen centuries
have rolled like waves of light between, and Christ has improved it
in spite of itself. Never had the world so good a chance to see what
almost absolute skepticism and unbelief could and would do for the
liberty of the human soul as then. But when the thrones of Rome were
occupied with men who held the same opinion of the Bible as he does
today, what was the freedom of the race?

The scene all comes back. Here is a little, obscure set of poor people
who follow the words and life of the son of a carpenter. They are
powerful in nothing that Rome calls power. But Rome says that they
shall not think that way. Celsus, from whom our less scholarly
skepticism is ready to borrow arguments, was not enough for the new
thought in the arena of debate, and they cried for another arena. Let
us remember that unbelief, in its purity at that date, was so offended
at nothing as at the fact that the Church said: "Christian justice
makes all equal who bear the name of man," and that Paul said: "There
is neither bond nor free, but ye are all one in Christ Jesus." Nothing
so offended the representative of free thought in that period as
the fact that a rich Roman, in the time of Trajan, having become a
Christian, presented freedom to his 1,250 slaves on an Easter day.
And, in all that time, when poor Christians with the funds of the
Church were privately buying the freedom of slaves, I do not find
that a base liberalism believed in liberty. Neither did it believe in
freedom of thought. It is the blossom of egotism; it has nothing to
which it bows; it beholds no majesty to which it can look up. It is
sublime self-conceit, and it has no hesitancy in telling the whole
human race that at its grandest moments it has been wrong. This
egotism dared to become active in Rome, and it asked the Christians,
in the person of the Emperor, to worship him, and to strew incense
about him. "I will honor the Emperor," said Theophilus, "not by
worshiping him, but by praying for him." Such men as that infidelity
kindly put to death. Around their quivering limbs the infidelity of
that day made the fagots to flame, and it taught the red tongues of
cruel death to creep about their smoking bodies.

Men who believed that the Bible's influence was what infidelity says
it is, made the funeral pyre for Polycarp, the populace bringing fuel
for the fire, and while the flames made a glory of their lambent
glare, he cried out: "Six and eighty years have I served him and he
has done me nothing but good, and how could I curse him, my Lord
and Savior. If you would know what I am, I tell you frankly, I am a
Christian." He did his own thinking, and was brave enough to avow his
opinion, for which hate of Christianity duly burned him. This was the
way infidelity treated free speech. In that way it unchained the soul
of Polycarp. Infidelity's idea of Christianity sent the martyrs of
Numidia and Paulus out of the world while they were praying for their
murderers. Who believed in freedom then? Infidelity's idea of the
message of the Bible followed the Christian like a wild beast, and
in the catacomb of Calixtus drew from the pursued soul the pathetic
exclamation: "Oh, sorrowful times, when we can not even in caves
escape our foes!" And all this was true, because they said,
"Recompense to no man evil for evil"; "Pray for them that despitefully
use you and persecute you."

This spirit of hate has had at least one holiday at the expense of
Christian faith. On the night of the 18th of July, 64, Rome was swept
with fire. Six days and nights it raged. Ruined was the world's
metropolis and excited were the wo-stricken people. Nero, whose
opinions of Christianity, by the way, were wonderfully like the
orator's, was king, and the people suspected that this royal monster
did it. Men told of how he exulted over the sea of flame as he watched
it from the tower of Maecenas; and whatever the truth of this may be,
it is certain that for the rage of the people Nero must have a victim,
and Tacitus tells us that he charged the Christians with the crime.
Then opened in Rome the awful carnival of bloodshed that the orator
never mentions, in which horrible modes of torture and excruciating
methods of producing pain vied with each other in satisfying the
demands of death. Women bound to raging bulls and dragged to death
were not without the companionship of others who, in the evening, in
Nero's garden, were coated with pitch, covered with tar, bound to
stakes of pine, lighted with fire, and sent to run aflame with the
hatred of Christianity. Through the crowd of sufferers a gentleman,
who was ultra-liberal as the orator, drove about, fantastically
attired as a charioteer, and the people were wild with delight.
Domitian had the same ideas, and severe were his persecutions of the
new heresy. This was the day on which infidelity was so full of the
love of freedom that it cried: "The Christians to the lions!"

And so I might recount to you how for hundreds of years the Church
found out how early and unchristianized infidelity loved freedom of
thought. To a type of liberals, it has for years seemed a joy to go
to the places in the old world and note how intolerant the Church has
been. Now I suggest to any one that he go and visit some of the places
where men who thought of Christianity as negativism thinks showed
their faith and its fruits. Let him go to the Colosseum and ask the
winds that moan over its ruins what they know of the history
of infidelity. The winds will hush in that wreck of stupendous
magnificence, and with an eloquence gathered from seventeen centuries
they will tell him a story that will cause a flow of tears, for much
of infidelity is of noble heart. They will tell him how the marble
seats were crowded with thousands; again will sweep upward the shout
of the excited throng; before him there will lie a half-dead Christian
martyr, and near that pool of blood will stand a lion who has satiated
his horrid thirst.

They will tell him how infidelity made that splendid place a temple
of the furies, how it laughed and yelled and applauded, as it amused
itself with that spectacle of horror. They will tell him how the
underground passages served to keep and cage wild beasts, and how
those who then hated Christianity starved the fierce lion until his
eyes rolled in hot hunger and his teeth were sharpened with its agony.
They will tell him how the infidelity of that day put balls of fire
on the backs of the lions, and how the madness of their passion was
increased by scattering hated colors about, tearing the beasts with
iron hooks and beating them with cruel whips. They will tell how the
Christian was made to fight these infuriated beasts without weapons,
while infidelity was frantic with applause. It said "no" to the torn
body yonder, that was mangled and supplicating in blood for life. I
would have him stand there until, in after years, in a nobler strain
than that of Byron, he could say:

  And thou didst shine, thou rolling moon, upon
  All this, and cast a wide and tender light,
  Which softened down the hoar austerity
  Of rugged desolation.

          *       *       *       *       *

  Till the place
  Became religion, and the heart ran o'er
  With silent worship of the great of old!
  The dead but sceptered sovereigns who still rule
  Our spirits from their urns.

So long as I know what this book has been and done, so long as man's
history will not allow me to risk the interests of society with the
infidelity which has so often demoralized it, so long will I yearn to
get the Bible and its message to all men. It has been our world's best
book. With this book as inspiration and resource, William Tyndale
and Miles Coverdale were so to continue and complete the task of The
Venerable Bede and John Wyclif as to make an epoch in the history of
that language to be used by Shakespeare and Burke--an era as distinct
as that which Luther's Bible so soon should mark in the history of a
language to be such a potent instrument in the hands of Goethe and
Hegel. For this very act of heresy, Tyndale was to be called "a
full-grown Wyclif," and Luther "the redeemer of his mother-tongue."
With the Bible, Calvin was to conceive republics at Geneva, and
Holbein to paint, in spite of the iconoclasm of the Reformation, the
faces of Holy Mother and Saint, and in spite of the cruelty of the
Church, scripturally conceived satires illustrating the sale of
indulgences. With that book Gustavus Vasa was to protect and nurture
the freedom of the land of flowing splendors, while Angelo was
transcribing sacred scenes upon the Sistine vault or fixing them in
stone. Reading this book, More was to die with a smile; Latimer,
Cranmer, and Ridley to perish while illuminating with living torches,
and the Anabaptist to arouse the sympathies of Christendom by his
agonies. With this book in hand, Shakespeare was to write his plays;
Raleigh was to die, knight, discoverer, thinker, statesman, martyr;
Bacon to lay the foundation of modern scientific research--three stars
in the majestic constellation about Henry's daughter. With this Bible
open before them the English nation would behold the Spanish Armada
dashed to pieces upon the rocks, while Edmund Spenser mingled his
delicious notes with the tumult of that awful wreck.

This book was to produce the edict of Nantes, while John of Barneveld
would give new life to the command of William the Silent--"Level
the dikes; give Holland back to the ocean, if need be," thus making
preparation for the visit of the Mayflower pilgrims to Leyden or
Delfthaven. Their eyes resting upon its pages, Selden and Pym were to
go to prison, while Grotius dreamed of the rights of man in peace and
war, and Guido and Rubens were painting the joys of the manger or the
sorrows of Calvary. His hand resting upon this book, Oliver Cromwell
would consolidate the hopes and convictions of Puritanism into a sword
which should conquer at Nasby, Marston Moor and Dunbar, leave to the
