you may awake from a night-dream; just so you can awake from the dream
of sickness; but the demonstration of the Science of Mind-healing by
no means rests on the strength of human belief. This demonstration is
based on a true understanding of God and divine Science, which takes
away every human belief, and, through the illumination of spiritual
understanding, reveals the all-power and ever-presence of good, whence
emanate health, harmony, and Life eternal.

The lecturer, teacher, or healer who is indeed a Christian Scientist,
never introduces the subject of human anatomy; never depicts the muscular,
vascular, or nervous operations of the human frame. He never talks about
the structure of the material body. He never lays his hands on the patient,
nor manipulates the parts of the body supposed to be ailing. Above all, he
keeps unbroken the Ten Commandments, and practises Christ's Sermon on the
Mount.

Wrong thoughts and methods strengthen the sense of disease, instead of
cure it; or else quiet the fear of the sick on false grounds, encouraging
them in the belief of error until they hold stronger than before the belief
that they are first made sick by matter, and then restored through its
agency. This fosters infidelity, and is mental quackery, that denies the
Principle of Mind-healing. If the sick are aided in this mistaken fashion,
their ailments will return, and be more stubborn because the relief is
unchristian and unscientific.

Christian Science erases from the minds of invalids their mistaken belief
that they live in or because of matter, or that a so-called material
organism controls the health or existence of mankind, and induces rest
in God, divine Love, as caring for all the conditions requisite for the
well-being of man. As power divine is the healer, why should mortals
concern themselves with the chemistry of food? Jesus said: "Take no
thought what ye shall eat."

The practitioner should also endeavor to free the minds of the healthy
from any sense of subordination to their bodies, and teach them that the
divine Mind, not material law, maintains human health and life.

A Christian Scientist knows that, in Science, disease is unreal; that
Mind is not in matter; that Life is God, good; hence Life is not
functional, and is neither matter nor mortal mind; knows that pantheism
and theosophy are not Science. Whatever saps, with human belief, this
basis of Christian Science, renders it impossible to demonstrate the
Principle of this Science, even in the smallest degree.

A mortal and material body is not the actual individuality of man made
in the divine and spiritual image of God. The material body is not the
likeness of Spirit; hence it is not the truth of being, but the likeness
of error--the human belief which saith there is more than one God,--there
is more than one Life and one Mind.

In Deuteronomy (iv. 35) we read: "The Lord, He is God; there is none
else beside Him." In John (iv. 24) we may read: "God is Spirit." These
propositions, understood in their Science, elucidate my meaning.

When treating a patient, it is not Science to treat every organ in the
body. To aver that harmony is the real and discord is the unreal, and
then give special attention to what according to their own belief is
diseased, is scientific; and if the _healer realizes_ the truth, it
will free his patient.


_What are the means and methods of trustworthy Christian Scientists?_

These people should not be expected, more than others, to give all their
time to Christian Science work, receiving no wages in return, but left to
be fed, clothed, and sheltered by charity. Neither can they serve two
masters, giving only a portion of their time to God, and still be Christian
Scientists. They must give Him all their services, and "owe no man." To do
this, they must at present ask a suitable price for their services, and
then _conscientiously earn their wages_, strictly practising Divine
Science, and healing the sick.

The author never sought charitable support, but gave fully seven-eighths
of her time without remuneration, except the bliss of doing good. The only
pay taken for her labors was from classes, and often those were put off
for months, in order to do gratuitous work. She has never taught a Primary
class without several, and sometimes seventeen, free students in it; and
has endeavored to take the full price of tuition only from those who were
able to pay. The student who pays must of necessity do better than he
who does not pay, and yet will expect and require others to pay him. No
discount on tuition was made on higher classes, because their first classes
furnished students with the means of paying for their tuition in the higher
instruction, and of doing charity work besides. If the Primary students
are still impecunious, it is their own fault, and this ill-success of
itself leaves them unprepared to enter higher classes.

People are being healed by means of my instructions, both in and out
of class. Many students, who have passed through a regular course of
instruction from me, have been invalids and were healed in the class;
but experience has shown that this defrauds the scholar, though it heals
the sick.

