
Exercise 15.

Concentrate the mind on a paragraph in some holy book and commit
to memory. Learn by heart one paragraph daily taking care not to
forget the old ones. In time, you will improve wonderfully.

Exercise 16.

People with weak memories always lack concentrative ability.
Concentration is the key to all mind-power. You will find the above
exercises quite 'tedious' and monotonous. But you can train your
'attention' only by giving it trivial and 'dry' exercises. The strong
will can cope with the most 'monotonous' and uninteresting tasks without
experiencing fatigue. You must set yourself such tasks as might seem like
'work' to your attention. Remember, the effort required to concentrate
attention voluntarily on uninteresting, dry and monotonous works
strengthens and develops Will-Power and gives you 'mental muscle.' You
will thereby acquire firm control over mind and body and be 'Master' over
your lower impulses. Power over self will express outwardly as power over
others. If you can control yourself, you will find no difficulty in
impressing your will on others. But, mark you, this sacred power should
be used only to elevate, stimulate and strengthen others. Try your Will
upon your personality in all possible ways and be satisfied with nothing
short of perfect control. The absolute mastery of 'self' ought to be
your aim. I have given you the real secrets. You must exercise
your own ingenuity and intelligence in utilising them towards your
Self-development. I leave you to finish the fight for yourself. Get up
and start in to work at your task from to-day and not to-morrow. Back of
all efforts, always have this positive incentive and auto-suggestion:

"THIS IS TO DEVELOP MY WILL-POWER AND NO TEMPORARY PAIN CAN EQUAL THE
POWER AND HAPPINESS ARISING OUT OF SELF-CONTROL."

Get firm control over your emotions. Use this natural force but be
not used by it. Control over speech will lead to Emotion-control. Always
talk to the point. Cultivate silence. Repress volubility. Be brief
in speech and writing. Keep a cool head. Be level-headed and
concentrative.


GLEANINGS FROM PROFESSOR JAMES ON THE LAW OF HABIT.

An acquired habit, from the physiological point of view, is nothing
but a new pathway of discharge formed in the brain, by which certain
incoming currents ever often tend to escape.

The great thing is to make our nervous system our ally instead of
our enemy.--Guard against ways that are likely to be disadvantageous
to us, as we should guard against the plague.

The more of the details of our daily life we can hand over to the
effortless custody of automatism, the more our higher powers of mind
will be set free for their own proper work. There is no more miserable
human being than one in whom nothing is habitual but indecision and
for whom (every act) the time of rising and going to bed, the beginning
of every bit of work, are subjects for express volitional deliberation.

Maxim I. In the acquisition of a new thought or the leaving off of
an old one we must take care to launch ourselves with as strong and
decided initiative as possible.

Maxim II. Never suffer an exception to occur until the new habit
is securely rooted in your life.

Each lapse is like letting fall a ball of string which one is carefully
winding up; a single slip means more than a great many turns will wind
again.

Continuity of training is the great means of making the nervous
system act infallibly right. It is necessary above all things never to
lose a battle. Every gain on the wrong side undoes the effect of many
conquests on the right.

The essential precaution is to so regulate the opposing powers that
the one may have a series of uninterrupted success, until repetition has
fortified it to such a degree as to enable it to cope with the opposition
under any circumstances.

The need of securing success at the outset is imperative. To be
habitually successful is the thing.

Be careful not to give the will such a task as to insure its defeat
at the outset, but provided one can stand it, a sharp period of
suffering, and then a free time is the best to aim at, whether in giving
up the opium habit or in simply changing one's hours of rising or of
work.

It is surprising how soon a desire will die of inanition if it be never
fed.

Without unbroken advance there is no such thing as accumulation
of the ethical forces possible, and to make this possible and to exercise
and habituate us in it is the sovereign blessing of regular work.
Maxim III. Seize the very first possible opportunity to act on every
resolution you make and on every emotional prompting you may experience
in the direction of habits you aspire to gain.

It is not the moment of their forming but in the moment of their
producing motor effects, that resolves and aspirations communicate the
new 'set' to the brain.

The actual presence of the practical opportunity alone furnishes the
fulcrum upon which the lever can rest, by means of which the moral
will may multiply its strength and raise itself aloft. He who had no
solid ground to press against will never get beyond the stage of empty
gesture making.

When a resolve or a fine glow of feeling is allowed to evaporate
without bearing practical fruit, it is a waste and a chance lost; it
works so as positively to hinder future resolutions and emotions from
taking the normal path of discharge.

If we let our emotions evaporate, they get in a way of evaporating.


WORSHIP OF THE TERRIBLE.

The attitude of the soul which is not to be baffled by the lower nature
or the "Personal Self" should be to seek Death and not life, to hurl
oneself upon the sword's point and become one with the terrible. Those
who are commissioned by the Lord to bear aloft the torch of spirit are
fated to see every joy of the senses turn to ashes and crushing blows
upon their eyes to the unsubstantially of the relative life of Maya.

The lion when stricken to the heart gives out his loudest roar,
When smitten on the head the cobra lifts its hood
And the majesty of the Soul comes out only when a man is wounded to his
depths.

The Western ideal is to be doing: the Eastern to be suffering. The
perfect life would be a harmony between (selfless or non-attached) doing
and suffering. Worship the terrible. Worship Death, for its own sake;
despair for its own sake; pain for its own sake. Yet this is not the
coward's or the suicide's or the weakling's morbid love of Death, but it
is the cry of the philosopher who has sounded everything to its depths
and knows intensely the vanity of the desire for happiness on the
relative plane of limitations. Remember the triumphant cry of St. Francis
of Assisi: "WELCOME, SISTER DEATH!" "Be witness"--of all that goes on but
be not entangled. Reserve to yourself the power to remain unattached at
all times. Accept nothing however pleasant, if it conceals a fetter into
thy Soul. At a word stand ready to sever any connection that gives a hint
of soul-bondage. Keep thy mind clear. Keep thy will pure. Attain the
Impersonal Standpoint, O you man! there alone canst thou quench thy
thirst for happiness never on the plane of personal. Who and what dies
and is reborn?--Your lower self, your personality.

"Sometimes naked, sometimes mad,
Now as a scholar, again as a fool
Here a rebel, there a saint,
Thus they appear on the earth
--the Perfect Ones. Paramhamsas"--Viveka Chudamani.

If you accept the report of the senses as final, you will say "soul
for nature"--but if you can gain the spiritual point of view, you will
say "no-nature for soul." Evolution, devolution and involution are all
in nature and will go on cyclically and eternally. All this is merely due
to the wish of the soul to manifest itself. But such expression can come
only when the soul lives on its plane. Say "Money is my slave, not I."
Say "Nature is my slave, not I". Give up life, give up body, give up all
desire for enjoyment on the relative plane. So shall you transcend all
limitation. Your real nature is Infinite and Absolute. Only when you
lower your nature by limiting it to the "particular self," do you become
bound and unhappy. On the relative plane, you are a slave to the pair
of opposites--life and death, pleasure and pain, and so on. Here is
limitation. Here you are a slave to competition, and "Survival of the
Fittest" is the law. Be not blinded by the flashing light of the glare
of modern civilization. Every morsel you eat is ground out of your
brother's blood. Slave to a breath of air, slave to food, slave to
life, slave to Death, slave to a word of praise, slave to a word of
blame--"Slave--Slave--Slave"--that is your condition. The Soul cannot
stoop to any compromise. It refuses to conquer nature by obedience. It
will conquer nature by renouncing the body and by knowing itself. Find
thyself bodiless. Power felt within is soul; without, nature. "We must
crush Law (nature) and become outlaws."

"Deliver thou thyself, by thyself
Ah, do not let thyself sink
For thou art thyself thy greatest friend
And thyself (the relative 'I') thy greatest enemy."

This, student, is not the ravings of a lunatic. It is the secret of
SAT-CHIT-ANANDA--eternal existence, knowledge and bliss. Attainment
of perfection means absolute Freedom. Do you or would you know the
meaning of Life? It is the search after _Sat-chit-ananda_. But man is
trying to realise this Perfect Existence in the transitory things of
the earth-plane. Only when he knows that not attachment to the things
of the "world, the flesh and the devil" but renunciation of same and the
bringing of the Impersonal Ideal into his everyday life would lead him
to it, then Maya will have fulfilled its purpose--which is to show man
his divinity. "Kill out the desire for life. Kill out Ambition. Kill out
desire for comfort; yet work as those who love life. Respect life as
those who are ambitious. Be happy as those are who live for happiness."

So says Mabel Collins in the _Light on the Path_. Yes, you must work
constantly, train your intellect, develop your personality but do not do
all this for your own personal self but for the Higher Self, The BRAHMAN,
Eternal--to manifest through. As soon as you lose this view-point your
personal strivings end in Pain and Disappointment. Work as hard as the
ambitious man and the lover of pleasures but remember your actions are
inspired by different motives. Here Spirit is the director.

"To the work thou hast the right, O Partha, but not to the fruits
thereof"--_Gita_. All clinging to results leads to degeneration. The
soul should cling to nothing. All work and all effort must be dedicated
unto the Higher Self. When you care for the results you are only
worshipping the lower self. Hence the value of selfless labour, thus the
maya-fascinated mind is purified and de-hypnotised and we attain to the
emergence of the personal into the Impersonal. Either say "I am thou, O
Lord!" and thus out at the root of the lower "I" and destroy it for ever
or say "I am nothing, O Eternal One! thou art everything" and thereby
lose the lower into the Higher. The first is for the Gnani--the second
for the Bhakti Yogi. Both mean the same thing. Love everyone but do
not depend upon the love of any one. Give everything. Take nothing.
Serve every one. Do not care for service and gratitude in return. You
are the Heir to the Infinite. All Power is behind you. But so long as
you are a beggar, a beggar shall you remain. Renounce the lower self,
Live for the Higher. What you call Universal Love is the expression
on the lower plane of the subjective reception of ABSOLUTE UNITY
on the Buddhic plane and in SAMADHI (Final Illumination).




LESSONS III AND IV.

THE YOGI SELF-DEVELOPER


INTRODUCTION.

In lessons 1 and 2 we have initiated you into the mysteries of Will
and Mind-Force, the governing principles of the Universe and the laws
of their development. We have also taught you how to acquire absolute
control over Body and Mind. In these lessons we have striven to point
out to you the right "Mental Attitude" towards your daily life, so that
while mainly engaged in the task of Self-Culture you might also lend a
hand in the great work of strengthening the race. Moreover our
convictions, beliefs, and ideals are no mean, are insignificant factors
in the determination of our health and environmental conditions. They
react on our circumstances as well as on the WHOLE MAN. We have also
given you important points of instruction in Soul Unfoldment, Meditation,
Bramhacharya, Breathing, Fasting, Health-Culture, Body building
and shown you, as distinctly as we could, the exact process of developing
a single virtue in your self thereby you may master the process and
method of developing other virtues, the lines of action and thought being
well nigh similar in all, and foculising at certain common points of
primary importance. We have given the bare body of truth in connection
with the development, evolution and unfoldment of the body and the
soul, stripping of the metaphysical trappings and the theoretical
draperies in which they are clothed. We have had to literally rend
asunder the heavy wheel that had the divine face of truth. Hence our
lessons are brief and to the point. We have had to contend against and
overcome another serious difficulty. Expressed in the matter of fact
English language, these wondrous truths of mysticism cannot but lose the
air of profound solemnity and sanctity that pervades the subject of Yoga
in Sanskrit literature. The wise and thoughtful student and we certainly
do not write for light-headed and non-serious people, will not let their
apparent simplicity deceive him or throw him off his guard. Rather
let him realise that these lessons can be pressed into service in all
directions and in all spheres of life. Let him just put them into
practice and he will at once see their practical bearing on his daily
life. These lessons do not go into the "WHAT" but point out the "HOW" of
every thing. We leave every student to suit his individual case as to the
intellectual side of the ETERNAL PROBLEM. In conclusion we have to
say that this Course does not pretend to deal with the advanced stages
of Yoga, much less exhaust them. But they will, positively and decidedly
prepare him for those higher things by lifting the PALL OF DARKNESS
from his mind.




LESSONS III AND IV.


Quite a number of you there must be to whom the "Fearless" mind is not
only an enviable possession but something to which you are and have been
an utter stranger. You may not say it to others--confession may hurt your
pride--but secretly away deep in your heart, there resides strongly and
fiercely the desire to be a Fearless Individual. And it is a worthy
desire. To be able to wipe off all fearfulness, anxiety and worry from
your mental tablets is no easy task, but when once accomplished, it gives
you a glimpse of Heavenly Joy and Superhuman Strength. And, _You can be
Fearless_, I tell you--each one of you--you can be what you will to be. I
have seen it. I have done it. I am going to give you sound and positive
instructions in this paper so that you may forge ahead towards your goal.
These instructions are based upon good psychological grounds, have been
tested and proved by millions and proved a blessing to whoever took them
up in all earnestness and gave them a trial. If you want to be Fearless,
hesitate not to follow them to the very letter.

I shall not waste space telling you about the dire results of fear,
cowardice, worry, anxiety and the vile brood of negative thoughts
branching of FEAR. Physically, mentally and spiritually man is what he
thinks in his heart. As you think, so you are. Mind governs everything,
creates or destroys everything, on the physical as well as other planes.
Your thoughts affect your health, your circumstances, your environments;
those who come into daily contact with you, those who are separated
from you by space, those who are what you call "dead" but who are really
alive in spirit-life and bound to you more or less by mystic chords of
sympathy in thought and soul-life, affecting you and being affected by
you every minute. The range of influence exerted by a man's daily
thoughts is simply tremendous. Trees and animals, minerals and other
objects of material life absorb it. The walls of your room, the clothes
you wear, the letters you write are all being impressed by the aura of
your thought-force. If you go to a clairvoyant or a psychometerist
and put into his hands a letter, a lock of hair, a cloth-piece, or
anything else pertaining to one of your friends, he or she will
psychically trace out the personal appearance, temperament, past and
present history, and everything else in connection with that person.
Marvellous, 'Impossible' you cry in surprise. But it is done. Realise
through study and investigation the importance of your thought-life and
avoid vitiating it by fear-thoughts, hate-thoughts, sensual and sensuous
thoughts and vanity thoughts. Because, mark you, these four giant-weeds
poison the roots of the Tree of Life. All humanity suffers pain in
diverse ways, on account of these four bad thoughts and their millions of
off-springs. Now you will say this is all very well but:

HOW?

That is just what I mean to teach you all along. I don't want to feed you
on mere empty theories, but I can and I will give you that knowledge
which when assimilated shall build up strong flesh, bone, muscle, tissue,
pith and marrow which will give you superb health, strength of mind and
spirit--all of which are necessary adjuncts to Spiritual Growth and
Happiness. Let me give you in detail methods and exercises. The ideal
fearless man has many qualities. I say the Ideal Hero--no imitation patch
work vulgarian. These qualities are in rough detail: (1) Devotion to God.
(2) Knowledge. (3) Concentration. (4) Will Power. (5) Energy and
Aspiration. (6) Health. (7) Self-Esteem. (8) Self-Control. (9) Love for
Humanity. (10) Chastity. There may be other qualities but you will do
well to build up the above and others will come to you by themselves. Let
me drop a few helpful suggestions on the above. Follow each sentence
closely.

1. DEVOTION TO THE ABSOLUTE WILL.

I have always said, written, observed and felt that the most courageous
individuals are devoted to God. Such men are rare. You all understand the
meaning of "Fearlessness" in its fullest sense. It means absolute
independence--in two words, he is the FEARLESS man who "fears-nothing,"
and "faces-everything." That everything includes everyone. That nothing
excludes no one. Viewed from this standpoint is not the fearless man
rarely to be met with? You may come across degrees of fearlessness. Now
the man who possesses this quality in the "highest degree" has faith in
this God. Everyone has his conception of God. Everyone sees the absolute
from his individual plane of vision. That conception which you have of
God will do for you. I say, it will do for you and you alone. Don't force
it upon others. Keep it for yourself. If you want to improve this
conception of God pray in the Silence thus: "O, THOU, I UNDERSTAND NOT
THY NATURE. I KNOW NOT--YET I YEARN TO KNOW. DO THOU REVEAL THYSELF
UNTO MY SOUL. DO THOU OPEN MY SPIRITUAL EYES AND LEAD ME ON." Student,
don't treat this lightly. Listen not to that conceited or blinded brother
