passionate regard to GOD; to whom I find myself often attached with
greater sweetness and delight than that of an infant at the mother's
breast; so that, if I dare use the expression, I should choose to call
this state the bosom, of GOD, for the inexpressible sweetness which I
taste and experience there.

If sometimes my thoughts wander from it by necessity or infirmity, I
am presently recalled by inward motions so charming and delicious that
I am ashamed to mention them. I desire your reverence to reflect
rather upon my great wretchedness, of which you are fully informed,
than upon the great favors which GOD does me, all unworthy and
ungrateful as I am.

As for my set hours of prayer, they are only a continuation of the
same exercise. Sometimes I consider myself there as a stone before a
carver, whereof he is to make a statue; presenting myself thus before
GOD, I desire Him to form His perfect image in my soul, and make me
entirely like Himself.

At other times, when I apply myself to prayer, I feel all my spirit
and all my soul lift itself up without any care or effort of mine, and
it continues as it were suspended and firmly fixed in GOD, as in its
centre and place of rest.

I know that some charge this state with inactivity, delusion and
self-love. I confess that it is a holy inactivity, and would be a
happy self-love, if the soul in that state were capable of it;
because, in effect, while she is in this repose, she cannot be
disturbed by such acts as she was formerly accustomed to, and which
were then her support, but which would now rather hinder than assist
her.

Yet I cannot bear that this should be called delusion; because the
soul which thus enjoys GOD desires herein nothing but Him. If this be
delusion in me, it belongs to GOD to remedy it. Let Him do what He
pleases with me; I desire only Him, and to be wholly devoted to Him.
You will, however, oblige me in sending me your opinion, to which I
always pay a great deference, for I have a singular esteem for your
reverence, and am in our LORD,

Yours, &c.



THIRD LETTER.


We have a GOD who is infinitely gracious and knows all our wants. I
always thought that He would reduce you to extremity. He will come in
His own time, and when you least expect it. Hope in Him more than
ever; thank Him with me for the favors he does you, particularly for
the fortitude and patience which He gives you in your afflictions. It
is a plain mark of the care He takes of you. Comfort yourself, then,
with Him, and give thanks for all.

I admire also the fortitude and bravery of Mr. ----. God has given him
a good disposition and a good will; but there is in him still a little
of the world, and a great deal of youth. I hope the affliction which
GOD has sent him will prove a wholesome remedy to him, and make him
enter into himself. It is an accident which should engage him to put
all his trust in _Him_ who accompanies him everywhere. Let him think
of Him as often as he can, especially in the greatest dangers. A
little lifting up of the heart suffices. A little remembrance of GOD,
one act of inward worship, though upon a march, and a sword in hand,
are prayers, which, however short, are nevertheless very acceptable to
GOD; and far from lessening a soldier's courage in occasions of
danger, they best serve to fortify it.

Let him then think of GOD the most he can. Let him accustom himself,
by degrees, to this small but holy exercise. No one will notice it,
and nothing is easier than to repeat often in the day these little
internal adorations. Recommend to him, if you please, that he think of
GOD the most he can, in the manner here directed. It is very fit and
most necessary for a soldier, who is daily exposed to the dangers of
life. I hope that GOD will assist him and all the family, to whom I
present my service, being theirs and Yours, &c.



FOURTH LETTER.


I have taken this opportunity to communicate to you the sentiments of
one of our society, concerning the admirable effects and continual
assistances which he receives from _the presence of_ GOD. Let you and
me both profit by them.

You must know his continual care has been, for about forty years past
that he has spent in religion, to be _always with_ GOD, and to do
nothing, say nothing, and think nothing which may displease Him; and
this without any other view than purely for the love of Him, and
because he deserves infinitely more.

He is now so accustomed to that _Divine Presence_, that he receives
from it continual succors upon all occasions. For about thirty years,
his soul has been filled with joys so continual, and sometimes so
great, that he is forced to use means to moderate them, and to hinder
their appearing outwardly.

If sometimes he is a little too much absent from that _Divine
Presence_, GOD presently makes Himself to be felt in his soul to
recall him, which often happens when he is most engaged in his outward
business. He answers with exact fidelity to these inward drawings,
either by an elevation of his heart towards GOD, or by a meek and fond
regard to Him, or by such words as love forms upon these occasions, as
for instance, _My God, here I am all devoted to Thee_: LORD, _make me
according to Thy heart_. And then it seems to him (as in effect he
feels it) that this GOD of love, satisfied with such few words,
reposes again, and rests in the fund and centre of his soul. The
experience of these things gives him such an assurance that GOD is
always in the fund or bottom of his soul, that it renders him
incapable of doubting it upon any account whatever.

Judge by this what content and satisfaction he enjoys while he
continually finds in himself so great a treasure. He is no longer in
an anxious search after it, but has it open before him, and may take
what he pleases of it.

He complains much of our blindness, and cries often that we are to be
pitied who content ourselves with so little. GOD, saith he, _has
infinite treasure to bestow, and we take up with a little sensible
devotion, which passes in a moment. Blind as we are, we hinder GOD,
and stop the current of His graces. But when He finds a soul
penetrated with a lively faith, He pours into it His graces and favors
plentifully: there they flow like a torrent, which, after being
forcibly stopped against its ordinary course, when it has found a
passage, spreads itself with impetuosity and abundance_.

Yes, we often stop this torrent by the little value we set upon it.
But let us stop it no more; let us enter into ourselves and break down
the bank which hinders it. Let us make way for grace; let us redeem
the lost time, for perhaps we have but little left. Death follows us
close; let us be well prepared for it: for we die but once; and a
miscarriage _there_ is irretrievable.

I say again, let us enter into ourselves. The time presses, there is
no room for delay: our souls are at stake. I believe you have taken
such effectual measures that you will not be surprised. I commend you
for it; it is the one thing necessary. We must, nevertheless, always
work at it, because not to advance in the spiritual life is to go
back. But those who have the gale of the HOLY SPIRIT go forward even
in sleep. If the vessel of our soul is still tossed with winds and
storms, let us awake the LORD, who reposes in it, and He will quickly
calm the sea.

I have taken the liberty to impart to you these good sentiments, that
you may compare them with your own. It will serve again to kindle and
inflame them, if by misfortune (which GOD forbid, for it would be
indeed a great misfortune) they should be, though never so little,
cooled. Let us then _both_ recall our first fervors. Let us profit by
the example and the sentiments of this brother, who is little known of
the world, but known of GOD, and extremely caressed by Him. I will
pray for you; do you pray instantly for me, who am, in our LORD.

Yours, &c.



FIFTH LETTER.


I received this day two books and a letter from Sister ----, who is
preparing to make her profession, and upon that account desires the
prayers of your holy society, and yours in particular. I perceive that
