   in the Syriac language: "In the days of the Father of Fathers,
   Anan-Yeschouah, Patriarch _Catholicos_." To the right can be traced,
   "Adam, Priest, and Chor-Episcopus"; and at the base of the inscription:
   "In the year of the Greeks one thousand nine hundred and two (A.D.
   781), Mar Yezd-bouzid, Priest and Chor-Episcopus of the Imperial city
   of Komdam, son of Millesins, priest of happy memory, of Balkh, a town
   of Tokharistan (Turkistan), raised this tablet of stone, on which are
   described the benefits of our Saviour, and the preaching of our fathers
   in the kingdom of the Chinese. Adam, Deacon, son of Yezd-bouzid,
   Chor-Episcopus; Sabar-Jesu, Priest; Gabriel, Priest, Archdeacon, and
   Ecclesiarch of Komdam and Sarage."

       *       *       *       *       *

   The abridgment of Christian doctrine given in the Syro-Chinese
   inscription of Si-ngau-Fou shows us, also, that the propagators of the
   faith in Upper Asia in the seventh century professed the Nestorian
   errors.

   Through the vague and obscure verbiage which characterizes the Chinese
   style, we recognize the mode in which that heresiarch admitted the
   union of the Word with man, by indwelling plenitude of grace superior
   to that of all the saints. One of the persons of the Trinity
   communicated himself to the very illustrious and venerable Messiah,
   "veiling his majesty." That is certainly the doctrine of Nestorius;
   upon that point the authority of the critics is unanimous.

   History, as we have elsewhere remarked, records the rapid progress of
   the Nestorian sects in the interior of Asia, and their being able to
   hold their ground, even under the sway of the Mussulmans, by means of
   compromises and concessions of every kind.

   Setting out from the banks of the Tigris or the Euphrates, these ardent
   and courageous propagators of the Gospel probably proceeded to
   Khorassan, and then crossing the Oxus, directed their course toward the
   Lake of Lop, and entered the Chinese Empire by the province of Chen-si.
   Olopen, and his successors in the Christian mission, whether Syrians or
   Persians by birth, certainly belonged to the Nestorian church.

   Voltaire, who did not like to trouble himself with scientific
   arguments, and who was much stronger in sarcasm than in erudition,
   roundly accuses the missionaries of having fabricated the inscription
   on the monument of Si-ngau-Fou, from motives of "pious fraud." "As if,"
   says Remusat, "such a fabrication could have been practicable in the
   midst of a distrustful and suspicious nation, in a country in which
   magistrates and private people are equally ill-disposed towards
   foreigners, and especially missionaries, where all eyes are open to
   their most trivial proceedings, and where the authorities watch with
   the most jealous care over everything relating to the historical
   traditions and monuments of antiquity. It would be very difficult to
   explain how the missionaries could have been bold enough to have
   printed and published in China, and in Chinese, an inscription that had
   never existed, and how they could have imitated the Chinese style,
   counterfeited the manner of the writers of the dynasty of Thang,
   alluded to customs little known, to local circumstances, to dates
   calculated from the mysterious figures of Chinese astrology, and the
   whole without betraying themselves for a moment; and with such
   perfection as to impose on the most skilful men of letters, induced, of
   course, by the singularity of the discovery to dispute its
   authenticity. It could only have been done by one of the most erudite
   of Chinese scholars, joining with the missionaries to impose on his own
   countrymen."

   "Even that would not be all, for the borders of the inscription are
   covered with Syrian names in fine _estranghelo_ characters. The forgers
   must, then, have been not only acquainted with these characters, but
   have been able to get engraved with perfect exactness ninety lines of
   them, and in the ancient writing, known at present to very few."

   "This argument of Remusat's," says another learned Orientalist, M.
   Felix Neve, "is of irresistible force, and we have formerly heard a
   similar one maintained with the greatest confidence by M. Quatremere,
   of the Academy of Inscriptions and Belles-Lettres, and we allow
   ourselves to quote the opinion of so highly qualified a judge upon this
   point. Before the last century it would have been absolutely impossible
   to forge in Europe a series of names and titles belonging to a
   Christian nation of Western Asia; it is only since the fruits of
   Assemam's labors have been made public by his family at Rome, that
   there existed a sufficient knowledge of the Syriac for such a purpose;
   and it is only by the publication of the manuscripts of the Vatican,
   that the extent to which Nestorianism spread in the centre of Asia, and
   the influence of its hierarchy in the Persian provinces could have been
   estimated. There is no reason to suppose that missionaries who left
   Europe in the very beginning of the seventeenth century could have
   acquired a knowledge which could only be obtained from reading the
   originals and not vague accounts of them."

   The sagacity of M. Saint Martin, who was for a long time the colleague
   of M. Quatremere, has pointed out in a note worthy of his erudition,
   another special proof, which is by no means to be neglected.

   "Amongst the various arguments," he says, "that might be urged in favor
   of the legitimacy of the monument, but of which, as yet, no use has
   been made, must not be forgotten the name of the priest by whom it is
   said to have been erected. The name _Yezd-bouzid_ is Persian, and at the
   epoch when the monument was discovered it would have been impossible to
   invent it, as there existed no work where it could have been found.
   Indeed, I do not think that, even since then, there has ever been any
   one published in which it could have been met with.

   "It is a very celebrated name among the Armenians, and comes to them
   from a martyr, a Persian by birth, and of the royal race, who perished
   towards the middle of the seventh century, and rendered his name
   illustrious amongst the Christian nations of the East." Saint Martin
   adds in the same place, that the famous monument of Si-ngau-Fou, whose
   authenticity has for a long time been called in question from the
   hatred entertained against the Jesuit missionaries who discovered it,
   rather than from a candid examination of its contents, is now regarded
   as above all suspicion.




Chapter III.

Brahmanism.



  Sec. 1. Our Knowledge of Brahmanism. Sir William Jones.
  Sec. 2. Difficulty of this Study. The Complexity of the System. The Hindoos
         have no History. Their Ultra-Spiritualism.
  Sec. 3. Helps from Comparative Philology. The Aryans in Central Asia.
  Sec. 4. The Aryans in India. The Native Races. The Vedic Age. Theology of
         the Vedas.
  Sec. 5. Second Period. Laws of Manu. The Brahmanic Age.
  Sec. 6. The Three Hindoo Systems of Philosophy,--the Sankhya, Vedanta, and
         Nyasa.
  Sec. 7. Origin of the Hindoo Triad.
  Sec. 8. The Epics, the Puranas, and Modern Hindoo Worship.
  Sec. 9. Relation of Brahmanism to Christianity.



Sec. 1. Our Knowledge of Brahmanism. Sir William Jones.


It is more than forty years since the writer, then a boy, was one day
searching among the heavy works of a learned library in the country to
find some entertaining reading for a summer afternoon. It was a library
rich in theology, in Greek and Latin classics, in French and Spanish
literature, but contained little to amuse a child. Led by some happy
fortune, in turning over a pile of the "Monthly Anthology" his eye was
attracted by the title of a play, "Sacontala,[30] or the Fatal Ring; an
Indian Drama, translated from the original Sanskrit and Pracrit. Calcutta,
1789," and reprinted in the Anthology in successive numbers. Gathering
them together, the boy took them into a great chestnut-tree, amid the
limbs of which he had constructed a study, and there, in the warm,
fragrant shade, read hour after hour this bewitching story. The tale was
suited to the day and the scene,--filled with images of tender girls and
religious sages, who lived amid a tropical abundance of flowers and
fruits; so blending the beauty of nature with the charm of love. Nature
becomes in it alive, and is interpenetrated with human sentiments.
Sakuntala loves the flowers as sisters; the Kesara-tree beckons to her
with its waving blossoms, and clings to her in affection as she bends over
it. The jasmine, the wife of the mango-tree, embraces her lord, who leans
down to protect his blooming bride, "the moonlight of the grove." The holy
hermits defend the timid fawn from the hunters, and the birds, grown tame
in their peaceful solitudes, look tranquilly on the intruder. The demons
occasionally disturb the sacrificial rites, but, like well-educated
demons, retire at once, as soon as the protecting Raja enters the sacred
grove. All breathes of love, gentle and generous sentiment, and quiet joys
in the bosom of a luxuriant and beautiful summer land. Thus, in this poem,
written a hundred years before Christ, we find that romantic view of
nature, unknown to the Greeks and Romans, and first appearing in our own
time in such writers as Rousseau, Goethe, and Byron.

He who translated this poem into a European language, and communicated it
to modern readers, was Sir William Jones, one of the few first-class
scholars whom the world has produced. In him was joined a marvellous gift
of language with a love for truth and beauty, which detected by an
infallible instinct what was worth knowing, in the mighty maze of Oriental
literature. He had also the rare good fortune of being the first to
discover this domain of literature in Asia, unknown to the West till he
came to reveal it. The vast realm of Hindoo, Chinese, and Persian genius
was as much a new continent to Europe, when discovered by Sir William
Jones, as America was when made known by Columbus. Its riches had been
accumulating during thousands of years, waiting till the fortunate man
should arrive, destined to reveal to our age the barbaric pearl and gold
of the gorgeous East,--the true wealth of Ormus and of Ind.

Sir William Jones came well equipped for his task. Some men are born
philologians, loving _words_ for their own sake,--men to whom the devious
paths of language are open highways; who, as Lord Bacon says, "have come
forth from the second general curse, which was the confusion of tongues,
by the art of grammar." Sir William Jones was one of these, perhaps the
greatest of them. A paper in his own handwriting tells us that he knew
critically eight languages,--English, Latin, French, Italian, Greek,
Arabic, Persian, and Sanskrit; less perfectly eight others,--Spanish,
Portuguese, German, Runic, Hebrew, Bengali, Hindi, Turkish; and was
moderately familiar with twelve more,--Tibetian, Pali, Phalavi, Deri,
Russian, Syriac, Ethiopic, Coptic, Welsh, Swedish, Dutch, and Chinese.
There have been, perhaps, other scholars who have known as many tongues as
this. But usually they are crushed by their own accumulations, and we
never hear of their accomplishing anything. Sir William Jones was not one
of these, "deep versed in books, and shallow in himself." Language was his
instrument, but knowledge his aim. So, when he had mastered Sanskrit and
other Oriental languages, he rendered into English not only Sakuntala, but
a far more important work, "The Laws of Manu"; "almost the only work in
Sanskrit," says Max Muller, "the early date of which, assigned to it by
Sir William Jones from the first, has not been assailed." He also
translated from the Sanskrit the fables of Hitopadesa, extracts from the
Vedas, and shorter pieces. He formed a society in Calcutta for the study
of Oriental literature, was its first president, and contributed numerous
essays, all valuable, to its periodical, the "Asiatic Researches." He
wrote a grammar of the Persian language, and translated from Persian into
French the history of Nadir Shah. From the Arabic he also translated many
pieces, and among them the Seven Poems suspended in the temple at Mecca,
which, in their subjects and style, seem an Arabic anticipation of Walt
Whitman. He wrote in Latin a Book of Commentaries on Asiatic Poetry, in
English several works on the Mohammedan and Civil Law, with a translation
of the Greek Orations of Isaeus. As a lawyer, a judge, a student of
natural history, his ardor of study was equally apparent. He presented to
the Royal Society in London a large collection of valuable Oriental
manuscripts, and left a long list of studies in Sanskrit to be pursued by
those who should come after him. His generous nature showed itself in his
opposition to slavery and the slave-trade, and his open sympathy with the
American Revolution. His correspondence was large, including such names as
those of Benjamin Franklin, Sir Joseph Banks, Lord Monboddo, Gibbon,
Warren Hastings, Dr. Price, Edmund Burke, and Dr. Parr. Such a man ought
to be remembered, especially by all who take an interest in the studies to
which he has opened the way, for he was one who had a right to speak of
himself, as he has spoken in these lines:--

    "Before thy mystic altar, heavenly truth,
    I kneel in manhood, as I knelt in youth.
    Thus let me kneel, till this dull form decay,
    And life's last shade be brightened by thy ray,
    Then shall my soul, now lost in clouds below,
    Soar without bound, without consuming glow."

Since the days of Sir William Jones immense progress has been made in the
study of Sanskrit literature, especially within the last thirty or forty
years, from the time when the Schlegels led the way in this department.
Now, professors of Sanskrit are to be found in all the great European
universities, and in this country we have at least one Sanskrit scholar of
the very highest order, Professor William D. Whitney, of Yale. The system
of Brahmanism, which a short time since could only be known to Western
readers by means of the writings of Colebrooke, Wilkins, Wilson, and a few
others, has now been made accessible by the works of Lassen, Max Muller,
Burnouf, Muir, Pictet, Bopp, Weber, Windischmann, Vivien de Saint-Martin,
and a multitude of eminent writers in France, England, and Germany.[31]



Sec. 2. Difficulty of this Study. The Complexity of the System. The Hindoos
have no History. Their Ultra-Spiritualism.


But, notwithstanding these many helps, Brahmanism remains a difficult
study. Its source is not in a man, but in a caste. It is not the religion
of a Confucius, a Zoroaster, a Mohammed, but the religion of the Brahmans.
We call it Brahmanism, and it can be traced to no individual as its
founder or restorer. There is no personality about it.[32] It is a vast
world of ideas, but wanting the unity which is given by the life of a man,
its embodiment and representative.

But what a system? How large, how difficult to understand! So vast, so
complicated, so full of contradictions, so various and changeable, that
its very immensity is our refuge! We say, It is impossible to do justice
to such a system; therefore do not demand it of us.

India has been a land of mystery from the earliest times. From the most
ancient days we hear of India as the most populous nation of the world,
full of barbaric wealth and a strange wisdom. It has attracted conquerors,
and has been overrun by the armies of Semiramis, Darius, Alexander; by
Mahmud, and Tamerlane, and Nadir Shah; by Lord Clive and the Duke of
Wellington. These conquerors, from the Assyrian Queen to the British
Mercantile Company, have overrun and plundered India, but have left it the
same unintelligible, unchangeable, and marvellous country as before. It is
the same land now which the soldiers of Alexander described,--the land of
grotto temples dug out of solid porphyry; of one of the most ancient Pagan
religions of the world; of social distinctions fixed and permanent as the
earth itself; of the sacred Ganges; of the idols of Juggernaut, with its
bloody worship; the land of elephants and tigers; of fields of rice and
groves of palm; of treasuries filled with chests of gold, heaps of pearls,
diamonds, and incense. But, above all, it is the land of unintelligible
systems of belief, of puzzling incongruities, and irreconcilable
contradictions.

The Hindoos have sacred books of great antiquity, and a rich literature
extending back twenty or thirty centuries; yet no history, no chronology,
no annals. They have a philosophy as acute, profound and, spiritual as any
in the world, which is yet harmoniously associated with the coarsest
superstitions. With a belief so abstract that it almost escapes the grasp
of the most speculative intellect, is joined the notion that sin can be
atoned for by bathing in the Ganges or repeating a text of the Veda. With
an ideal pantheism resembling that of Hegel, is united the opinion that
Brahma and Siva can be driven from the throne of the universe by any one
who will sacrifice a sufficient number of wild horses. To abstract one's
self from matter, to renounce all the gratification of the senses, to
macerate the body, is thought the true road to felicity; and nowhere in
the world are luxury, licentiousness and the gratification of the
appetites carried so far. Every civil right and privilege of ruler and
subject is fixed in a code of laws, and a body of jurisprudence older far
than the Christian era, and the object of universal reverence; but the
application of these laws rests (says Rhode) on the arbitrary decisions of
the priests, and their execution on the will of the sovereign. The
constitution of India is therefore like a house without a foundation and
without a roof. It is a principle of Hindoo religion not to kill a worm,
not even to tread on a blade of grass, for fear of injuring life; but the
torments, cruelties, and bloodshed inflicted by Indian tyrants would shock
a Nero or a Borgia. Half the best informed writers on India will tell you
that the Brahmanical religion is pure monotheism; the other half as
confidently assert that they worship a million gods. Some teach us that
the Hindoos are spiritualists and pantheists; others that their idolatry
is more gross than that of any living people.

Is there any way of reconciling these inconsistencies? If we cannot find
such an explanation, there is at least one central point where we may
place ourselves; one elevated position, from which this mighty maze will
not seem wholly without a plan. In India the whole tendency of thought is
ideal, the whole religion a pure spiritualism. An ultra, one-sided
idealism is the central tendency of the Hindoo mind. The God of Brahmanism
is an intelligence, absorbed in the rest of profound contemplation. The
good man of this religion is he who withdraws from an evil world into
abstract thought.

Nothing else explains the Hindoo character as this does. An eminently
religious people, it is their one-sided spiritualism, their extreme
idealism, which gives rise to all their incongruities. They have no
history and no authentic chronology, for history belongs to this world,
and chronology belongs to time. But this world and time are to them wholly
uninteresting; God and eternity are all in all. They torture themselves
with self-inflicted torments; for the body is the great enemy of the
soul's salvation, and they must beat it down by ascetic mortifications.
But asceticism, here as everywhere else, tends to self-indulgence, since
one extreme produces another. In one part of India, therefore, devotees
are swinging on hooks in honor of Siva, hanging themselves by the feet,
head downwards, over a fire, rolling on a bed of prickly thorns, jumping
on a couch filled with sharp knives, boring holes in their tongues, and
sticking their bodies full of pins and needles, or perhaps holding the
arms over the head till they stiffen in that position. Meantime in other
places whole regions are given over to sensual indulgences, and companies
of abandoned women are connected with different temples and consecrate
their gains to the support of their worship.

As one-sided spiritualism will manifest itself in morals in the two forms
of austerity and sensuality, so in religion it shows itself in the
opposite direction of an ideal pantheism and a gross idolatry.
Spiritualism first fills the world full of God, and this is a true and
Christian view of things. But it takes another step, which is to deny all
real existence to the world, and so runs into a false pantheism. It first
says, truly, "There is nothing _without_ God." It next says, falsely,
"There is nothing _but_ God." This second step was taken in India by means
of the doctrine of _Maya_, or _Illusion. Maya_ means the delusive shows
which spirit assumes. For there is nothing but spirit; which neither
creates nor is created, neither acts nor suffers, which cannot change, and
into which all souls are absorbed when they free themselves by meditation
from the belief that they suffer or are happy, that they can experience
either pleasure or pain. The next step is to polytheism. For if God
neither creates nor destroys, but only seems to create and destroy, these
_appearances_ are not united together as being the acts of one Being, but
are separate, independent phenomena. When you remove personality from the
conception of God, as you do in removing will, you remove unity. Now if
creation be an illusion, and there be no creation, still the _appearance_
of creation is a fact. But as there is no substance but spirit, this
_appearance_ must have its cause in spirit, that is, is a _divine_
appearance, is God. So destruction, in the same way, is an appearance of
God, and reproduction is an appearance of God, and every other appearance
in nature is a manifestation of God. But the unity of will and person
being taken away, we have not one God, but a multitude of gods,--or
polytheism.

Having begun this career of thought, no course was possible for the human
mind to pursue but this. An ultra spiritualism must become pantheism, and
pantheism must go on to polytheism. In India this is not a theory, but a
history. We find, side by side, a spiritualism which denies the existence
of anything but motionless spirit or Brahm, and a polytheism which
believes and worships Brahma the Creator, Siva the Destroyer, Vischnu the
Preserver, Indra the God of the Heavens, the Sactis or energies of the
gods, Krishna the Hindoo Apollo, Doorga, and a host of others, innumerable
as the changes and appearances of things.

But such a system as this must necessarily lead also to idolatry. There is
in the human mind a tendency to worship, and men must worship something.
But they believe in one Being, the absolute Spirit, the supreme and only
God,--Para Brahm; _him_ they cannot worship, for he is literally an
unknown God. He has no qualities; no attributes, no activity. He is
neither the object of hope, fear, love, nor aversion. Since there is
nothing in the universe but spirit and illusive appearances, and they
cannot worship spirit because it is absolutely unknown, they must worship
these appearances, which are at any rate _divine_ appearances, and which
do possess some traits, qualities, character; _are_ objects of hope and
fear. But they cannot worship them as appearances, they must worship them
as persons. But if they have an inward personality or soul, they become
real beings, and also beings independent of Brahm, whose appearances they
are. They must therefore have an outward personality; in other words, a
body, a shape, emblematical and characteristic; that is to say, they
become idols.

Accordingly idol-worship is universal in India. The most horrible and
grotesque images are carved in the stone of the grottos, stand in rude,
block-like statues in the temple, or are coarsely painted on the walls.
Figures of men with heads of elephants or of other animals, or with six or
seven human heads,--sometimes growing in a pyramid, one out of the other,
sometimes with six hands coming from one shoulder,--grisly and uncouth
monsters, like nothing in nature, yet too grotesque for symbols,--such are
the objects of the Hindoo worship.



Sec. 3. Helps from Comparative Philology. The Aryans in Central Asia.


We have seen how hopeless the task has appeared of getting any definite
light on Hindoo chronology or history. To the ancient Egyptians events
were so important that the most trivial incidents of daily life were
written on stone and the imperishable records of the land, covering the
tombs and obelisks, have patiently waited during long centuries, till
their decipherer should come to read them. To the Hindoos, on the other
hand, all events were equally unimportant. The most unhistoric people on
earth, they cared more for the minutiae of grammar, or the subtilties of
metaphysics, than for the whole of their past. The only date which has
emerged from this vague antiquity is that of Chandragupta, a contemporary
of Alexander, and called by the Greek historians Sandracottus. He became
king B.C. 315, and as, at his accession, Buddha had been dead (by Hindoo
statement) one hundred and sixty-two years, Buddha may have died B.C. 477.
We can thus import a single date from Greek history into that of India.
This is the whole.

But all at once light dawns on us from an unexpected quarter. While we can
learn nothing concerning the history of India from its literature, and
nothing from its inscriptions or carved temples, _language_, comes to our
aid. The fugitive and airy sounds, which seem so fleeting and so
changeable, prove to be more durable monuments than brass or granite. The
study of the Sanskrit language has told us a long story concerning the
origin of the Hindoos. It has rectified the ethnology of Blumenbach, has
taught us who were the ancestors of the nations of Europe, and has given
us the information that one great family, the Indo-European, has done most
of the work of the world. It shows us that this family consists of seven
races,--the Hindoos, the Persians, the^ Greeks, the Romans, who all
emigrated to the south from the original ancestral home; and the Kelts,
the Teutons, and Slavi, who entered Europe on the northern side of the
Caucasus and the Caspian Sea. This has been accomplished by the new
science of Comparative Philology. A comparison of languages has made it
too plain to be questioned, that these seven races were originally one;
that they must have emigrated from a region of Central Asia, at the east
of the Caspian, and northwest of India; that they were originally a
pastoral race, and gradually changed their habits as they descended from
those great plains into the valleys of the Indus and the Euphrates. In
these seven linguistic families the roots of the most common names are the
same; the grammatical constructions are also the same; so that no scholar,
who has attended to the subject, can doubt that the seven languages are
all daughters of one common mother-tongue.

Pursuing the subject still further, it has been found possible to
conjecture with no little confidence what was the condition of family life
in this great race of Central Asia, before its dispersion. The original
stock has received the name Aryan. This designation occurs in Manu (II.
22), who says: "As far as the eastern and western oceans, between the two
mountains, lies the land which the wise have named Ar-ya-vesta, or
_inhabited by honorable men_." The people of Iran receive this same
appellation in the Zend Avesta, with the same meaning of _honorable_.
Herodotus testifies that the Medes were formerly called [Greek: Arioi]
(Herod. VII. 61). Strabo mentions that, in the time of Alexander, the
whole region about the Indus was called _Ariana_. In modern times, the
word _Iran_ for Persia and _Erin_ for Ireland are possible reminiscences
of the original family appellation.

The Ayrans, long before the age of the Vedas or the Zend Avesta, were
living as a pastoral people on the great plains east of the Caspian Sea.
What their condition was at that epoch is deduced by the following method:
If it is found that the name of any fact is the same in two or more of the
seven tribal languages of this stock, it is evident that the name was
given to it before they separated. For there is no reason to suppose that
two nations living wide apart would have independently selected the same
word for the same object. For example, since we find that _house_ is in
Sanskrit _Damn_ and _Dam_; in Zend, _Demana_; in Greek, [Greek: Domos]; in
Latin, _Domus_; in Irish, _Dahm_; in Slavonic, _Domu_,--from which root
comes also our English word _Domestic_,--we may be pretty sure that the
original Aryans lived in houses. When we learn that _boat_ was in Sanskrit
_Nau_ or _nauka_; in Persian, _Naw, nawah;_ in Greek, [Greek: Naus]; in
Latin, _Navis_; in old Irish, _Noi_ or _nai_; in old German, _Nawa_ or
_nawi_; and in Polish _Nawa_, we cannot doubt that they knew something of
what we call in English _Nau_tical affairs, or Navigation. But as the
words designating masts, sails, yards, &c. differ wholly from each other
in all these linguistic families, it is reasonable to infer that the
Aryans, before their dispersion, went only in boats, with oars, on the
rivers of their land, the Oxus and Jaxartes, and did not sail anywhere on
the sea.

Pursuing this method, we see that we can ask almost any question
concerning the condition of the Aryans, and obtain an answer by means of
Comparative Philology.

Were they a pastoral people? The very word _pastoral_ gives us the answer.
For _Pa_ in Sanskrit means to watch, to guard, as men guard cattle,--from
which a whole company of words has come in all the Aryan languages.

The results of this method of inquiry, so far as given by Pictet, are
these. Some 3000 years B.C.,[33] the Aryans, as yet undivided into
Hindoos, Persians, Kelts, Latins, Greeks, Teutons, and Slavi, were living
in Central Asia, in a region of which Bactriana was the centre. Here they
must have remained long enough to have developed their admirable language,
the mother-tongue of those which we know. They were essentially a
pastoral, but not a nomad people, having fixed homes. They had oxen,
horses, sheep, goats, hogs, and domestic fowls. Herds of cows fed in
pastures, each the property of a community, and each with a cluster of
stables in the centre. The daughters[34] of the house were the
dairy-maids; the food was chiefly the products of the dairy and the flesh
of the cattle. The cow was, however, the most important animal, and gave
its name to many plants, and even to the clouds and stars, in which men
saw heavenly herds passing over the firmament above them.

But the Aryans were not an exclusively pastoral people; they certainly had
barley, and perhaps other cereals, before their dispersion. They possessed
the plough, the mill for grinding grain; they had hatchet,[35] hammer,
auger. The Aryans were acquainted with several metals, among which were
gold, silver, copper, tin. They knew how to spin and weave to some extent;
they were acquainted with pottery. How their houses were built we do not
know, but they contained doors, windows, and fireplaces. They had cloaks
or mantles, they boiled and roasted meat, and certainly used soup. They
had lances, swords, the bow and arrow, shields, but not armor. They had
family life, some simple laws, games, the dance, and wind instruments.
They had the decimal numeration, and their year was of three hundred and
sixty days. They worshipped the heaven, earth, sun, fire, water, wind; but
there are also plain traces of an earlier monotheism, from which this
nature-worship proceeded.



Sec. 4. The Aryans in India. The Native Races. The Vedic Age. Theology of the
Vedas.


So far Comparative Philology takes us, and the next step forward brings us
to the Vedas, the oldest works in the Hindoo literature, but at least one
thousand or fifteen hundred years more recent than the times we have been
describing. The Aryans have separated, and the Hindoos are now in India.
It is eleven centuries before the time of Alexander. They occupy the
region between the Punjaub and the Ganges, and here was accomplished the
transition of the Aryans from warlike shepherds into agriculturists and
builders of cities.[36]

The last hymns of the Vedas were written (says St. Martin) when they
arrived from the Indus at the Ganges, and were building their oldest city,
at the confluence of that river with the Jumna. Their complexion was then
white, and they call the race whom they conquered, and who afterward were
made _Soudras_, or lowest caste, blacks.[37] The chief gods of the Vedic
age were Indra, Varuna, Agni, Savitri, Soma. The first was the god of the
atmosphere; the second, of the Ocean of light, or Heaven; the third, of
Fire;[38] the fourth, of the Sun; and the fifth, of the Moon. Yama was the
god of death. All the powers of nature were personified in turn,--as
earth, food, wine, months, seasons, day, night, and dawn. Among all these
divinities, Indra and Agni were the chief.[39] But behind this incipient
polytheism lurks the original monotheism,--for each of these gods, in
turn, becomes the Supreme Being. The universal Deity seems to become
apparent, first in one form of nature and then in another. Such is the
opinion of Colebrooke, who says that "the ancient Hindoo religion
recognizes but one God, not yet sufficiently discriminating the creature
from the Creator." And Max Mueller says: "The hymns celebrate Varuna,
Indra, Agni, &c., and each in turn is called supreme. The whole mythology
is fluent. The powers of nature become moral beings."

Max Mueller adds: "It would be easy to find, in the numerous hymns of the
Veda, passages in which almost every single god is represented as supreme
and absolute. Agni is called 'Ruler of the Universe'; Indra is celebrated
as the Strongest god, and in one hymn it is said, 'Indra is stronger than
all.' It is said of Soma that 'he conquers every one.'"

But clearer traces of monotheism are to be found in the Vedas. In one hymn
of the Rig-Veda it is said: "They call him Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni;
then he is the well-winged heavenly Garutmat; that which is One, the wise
call it many ways; they call it Agni, Yama, Matarisvan."

Nothing, however, will give us so good an idea of the character of these
Vedic hymns as the hymns themselves. I therefore select a few of the most
striking of those which have been translated by Colebrooke, Wilson, M.
Mueller, E. Bumont, and others.

In the following, from one of the oldest Vedas, the unity of God seems
very clearly expressed.


   RIG-VEDA, X. 121.

   "In the beginning there arose the Source of golden light. He was the
   only born Lord of all that is. He established the earth, and this sky.
   Who is the God to whom we shall offer our sacrifice?

   "He who gives life. He who gives strength; whose blessing all the
   bright gods desire; whose shadow is immortality, whose shadow is death.
   Who is the God to whom we shall offer our sacrifice?

   "He who through his power is the only king of the breathing and
   awakening world. He who governs all, man and beast. Who is the god to
   whom we shall offer our sacrifice?

   "He whose power these snowy mountains, whose power the sea proclaims,
   with the distant river. He whose these regions are, as it were his two
   arms. Who is the god to whom we shall offer our sacrifice?

   "He through whom the sky is bright and the earth firm. He through whom
   heaven was stablished; nay, the highest heaven. He who measured out the
   light in the air. Who is the god to whom we shall offer our sacrifice?

   "He to whom heaven and earth, standing firm by his will, look up,
   trembling inwardly. He over whom the rising sun shines forth. Who is
   the god to whom we shall offer our sacrifice?

   "Wherever the mighty water-clouds went, where they placed the seed and
   lit the fire, thence arose he who is the only life of the bright gods.
   Who is the god to whom we shall offer our sacrifice?

   "He who by his might looked even over the water-clouds, the clouds
   which gave strength and lit the sacrifice; _he who is God above all
   gods_. Who is the god to whom we shall offer our sacrifice?

   "May he not destroy us,--he the creator of the earth,--or he, the
   righteous, who created heaven; he who also created the bright and
   mighty waters. Who is the god to whom we shall offer our
   sacrifices?"[40]

The oldest and most striking account of creation is in the eleventh
chapter of the tenth Book of the Rig-Veda. Colebrooke, Max Muller, Muir,
and Goldstucker, all give a translation of this remarkable hymn and speak
of it with admiration. We take that of Colehrooke, modified by that of
Muir:--


   "Then there was no entity nor non-entity; no world, no sky, nor aught
   above it; nothing anywhere, involving or involved; nor water deep and
   dangerous. Death was not, and therefore no immortality, nor distinction
   of day or night. But THAT ONE breathed calmly[41] alone with Nature,
   her who is sustained within him. Other than Him, nothing existed
   [which] since [has been]. Darkness there was; [for] this universe was
   enveloped with darkness, and was indistinguishable waters; but that
   mass, which was covered by the husk, was [at length] produced by the
   power of contemplation. First desire[42] was formed in his mind; and
   that became the original productive seed; which the wise, recognizing
   it by the intellect in their hearts, distinguish as the bond of
   non-entity with entity.

   "Did the luminous ray of these [creative acts] expand in the middle, or
   above, or below? That productive energy became providence [or sentient
   souls], and matter [or the elements]; Nature, who is sustained within,
   was inferior; and he who sustains was above.

   "Who knows exactly, and who shall in this world declare, whence and why
   this creation took place? The gods are subsequent to the production of
   this world: then who can know whence it proceeded, or whence this
   varied world arose, or whether it upholds [itself] or not? He who in
   the highest heaven is the ruler of this universe,--he knows, or does
   not know."

If the following hymn, says Mueller, were addressed only to the Almighty,
omitting the word "Varuna," it would not disturb us in a Christian
Liturgy:--


   1. "Let me not yet, O Varuna, enter into the house of clay; have mercy,
   almighty, have mercy.

   2. "If I go along trembling, like a cloud driven by the wind, have
   mercy, almighty, have mercy!

   3. "Through want of strength, thou strong and bright god, have I gone
   to the wrong shore; have mercy, almighty, have mercy!

   4. "Thirst came upon the worshipper, though he stood in the midst of
   the waters; have mercy, almighty, have mercy!

   5. "Whenever we men, O Varuna, commit an offence before the heavenly
   host; whenever we break thy law through thoughtlessness; have mercy,
   almighty, have mercy!"

Out of a large number of hymns addressed to Indra, Mueller selects one that
is ascribed to Vasishtha.


   1. "Let no one, not even those who worship thee, delay thee far from
   us! Even from afar come to our feast! Or, if thou art here, listen to
   us!

   2. "For these who here make prayers for thee, sit together near the
   libation, like flies round the honey. The worshippers, anxious for
   wealth, have placed their desire upon Indra, as we put our foot upon a
   chariot.

   3. "Desirous of riches, I call him who holds the thunderbolt with his
   arm, and who is a good giver, like as a son calls his father.

   4. "These libations of Soma, mixed with milk, have been prepared for
   Indra: thou, armed with the thunderbolt, come with the steeds to drink
   of them for thy delight; come to the house!

   5. "May he hear us, for he has ears to hear. He is asked for riches;
   will he despise our prayers? He could soon give hundreds and
   thousands;--no one could check him if he wishes to give."

   13. "Make for the sacred gods a hymn that is not small, that is well
   set and beautiful! Many snares pass by him who abides with Indra
   through his sacrifice.
