

_Hymn to Ayopechcatl._

  1. Truly in whatever house there is a lying-in, Ayopechcatl takes
charge of the child.

  2. Truly in whatever house there is a lying-in, Ayopechcatl takes
charge of the child, there where it is weeping in the house.

  3. Come along and cry out, cry out, cry out, you new comer, come along
and cry out.

  4. Come along and cry out, cry out, cry out, you little jewel, cry
out.


_Notes._

The name of Ayopechcatl does not appear among the divinities named by
Sahagun, Duran or the other authorities at my command. Her name
indicates her function as the goddess of the child-bed and the neonatus,
and the above hymn establishes her claim to a place in the Aztec
pantheon.




XIII. _Ciuacoatl icuic._


  1. Quaui, quaui, quilaztla, coaeztica xayaualoc uiuiya quauiuitl
uitzalochpa chalima aueuetl ye colhoa.

  2. Huiya tonaca, acxolma centla teumilco chicauaztica, motlaquechizca.

  3. Uitztla, uitztla, nomactemi, uitztla, uitztla nomactemi, acan
teumilco chicauaztica motlaquechizca.

  4. Malinalla nomactemi, acan teumilco chicauaztica motlaquechizca.

  5. A omei quauhtli, ye tonanaya chalmecatecutli ay tziuac y mauiztla
nechyatetemilli, yeua nopiltzinaya mixcoatla.

  6. Ya tonani, yauciuatzin, aya tonan yauciuatzi aya y maca coliuacan y
yuitla y potocaya.

  7. Ahuiya ye tonaquetli, yautlatocaya, ahuiya ye tonaquetli
yautlatocaya moneuila no tlaca cenpoliuiz aya y maca coliuaca y yuitla y
potocaya.

  8. Ahuia quauiuitl amo xayaualli onauiya yecoyametl amo xayaualli.

_Var._ 1. Cohoaeztica. 2. Acxoima. 7. Maneuila, cenpoalihuiz, inmaca.


_Gloss._

  1. _Q.n._, in quauhcihuatl, ic oxaualoc in coaetztli, ioan in quauhtli
yhuitli in moteneua iquauhtzon, ipan iualuicoc yn umpa colhuacan.

  2. _Q.n._, inic motocaya centli, in mochiuaya teumilpa, ichicauaztica
inic tlatatacaya, inic tocaya.

  3. Uitztla, _q.n._, nomactemi nochicauaztica inic nitocaya, inic
nitlatatacaya.

  4. Malinalla, uictli, _q.n._, uictica in tlachpanaya, _id est_,
iceliniquia, yn uncan teumilpan auh ychicauaztica inic nitlatatacaya,
inic tocaya.

  5. _Q.n._, matlactli omei quauhtli yn notonal innamona auh ynan
nopilhoan in chalmeca xicuiti in tziuactli xinechtemilica.

  6. _Q.n._, in iyauciuatzin yn amona umpa nochan in coluaca auh in
quauiuitl nictemaca ynic oquauhtiuac.

  7. _Q.n._, ca otonac ca otlatuic momochiua yauyutl ma tlamalo
tlalpiliuiz nic temaca in quauiuitl.

  8. _Q.n._, aahuia yn otlamaloc in quauiuitl yc moxaua.


_Hymn to Cihuacoatl._

  1. Quilaztli, plumed with eagle feathers, with the crest of eagles,
painted with serpents' blood, comes with her hoe, beating her drum, from
Colhuacan.

  2. She alone, who is our flesh, goddess of the fields and shrubs, is
strong to support us.

  3. With the hoe, with the hoe, with hands full, with the hoe, with
hands full, the goddess of the fields is strong to support us.

  4. With a broom in her hands the goddess of the fields strongly
supports us.

  5. Our mother is as twelve eagles, goddess of drum-beating, filling
the fields of tzioac and maguey like our lord Mixcoatl.

  6. She is our mother, a goddess of war, our mother, a goddess of war,
an example and a companion from the home of our ancestors (Colhuacan).

  7. She comes forth, she appears when war is waged, she protects us in
war that we shall not be destroyed, an example and companion from the
home of our ancestors.

  8. She comes adorned in the ancient manner with the eagle crest, in
the ancient manner with the eagle crest.


_Notes._

Cihuacoatl was the mythical mother of the human race. Her name,
generally translated "serpent woman," should be rendered "woman of
twins" or "bearing twins," as the myth related that such was her
fertility that she always bore two children at one lying-in.
(Torquemada, _Monarquia Indiana_, Lib. VI., cap. 31.) She was also known
by the title _Tonan_ or _Tonantzin_, "our mother," as in v. 5 and 6.
Still another of her appellations was _Quilaztli_, which is given her in
v. 1. (Comp. Sahagun, _Historia_, Lib. VI., cap. 27.) She was
essentially a goddess of fertility and reproduction. The name
_cihuacoatl_ was also applied to one of the higher magistrates and war
chiefs in the Aztec army (Sahagun). Reference is made to this in v. 6.
As a goddess of venerable antiquity, she is spoken of as coming from
Colhuacan, "the place of the old men," or of the ancestors of the tribe.
This name is derived from _coloa_, to bend down, as an aged person,
_colli_, an old man. (See my _Ancient Nahuatl Poetry_, pp. 172-3).




XIV. _Izcatqui yn cuicatl chicuexiuhtica meuaya iniquac atamalqualoya._


  1. Xochitl noyollo cuepontimania ye tlacoyoalle, oaya, oouayaye.

  2. Yecoc ye tonan, yecoc ye teutl tlacolteutla, oaya, ooayaya.

  3. Otlacatqui centeutl tamiyoanichan ni xochitlicacani. Cey xochitli
yantala, yantata, ayyao, ayyaue, tilili yao, ayaue, oayyaue.

  4. Otlacatqui centeutl, atl, yayaui cani tlaca pillachiualoya
chalchimichuacan, yyao, yantala, yatanta, a yyao, ayyaue tilili yao,
ayyaue, oayyaue.

  5. Oya tlatonazqui tlauizcalleuaya inan tlachinaya nepapan quechol,
xochitlacacan y yantala, yantata, ayyao, ayyaue, tilili yao, ayyaue,
oayyayaue.

  6. Tlalpa timoquetzca, tianquiz nauaquia nitlacatla, ni quetzalcoatla,
yyao, yantala, yantata, ayyao, ayyaue, tilili yao ayyaue, oayyayue.

  7. Ma ya auiallo xochinquauitl itlani nepapan quecholli ma ya in
quecholli xicaquiya tlatoaya y toteuh, xicaquiya tlatoaya y quechol
amach yeua tonicauh tlapitza amach ychan tlacaluaz, ouao.

  8. Aye oho, yyayya, ca miquiyecauiz ca noxocha tonaca xochitli ye
izqui xochitla, xochitlicacan, yyaa.

  9. Ollama, ollama uiue xolutl nauallachic, ollama ya xolutl
chalchiuecatl xiquitta mach, oya moteca piltzintecutli yoanchan,
yoanchan.

  10. Piltzintle, piltzintle tocuitica timopotonia tlachco, timotlalli
yoanchan, yoanchan.

  11. Oztomecatla yyaue, oztomecatla xochiquetzal quimama, ontlatca
cholola, ayye, ayyo, oye maui noyol, oye maui noyol, aoya yecoc
centeutl, matiuia obispo, oztomecatl chacalhoa, xiuhnacochtla, yteamic
ximaquiztla yteamico, ayye, ayye.

  12. Cochina, cochina, cocochi ye nicmaololo, ni cani ye ciuatl ni
cochina yyeo, ouayeo, yho, yya, yya.

_Var._ 3. Centeuteutl. 4. Uillachiualoia. 5. Oya tonazqui. 6. Tlapan.
10. Timotlalia. 11. Suchiquetzal. Ontlatoa cholollan.


_This is the Hymn which they sang every eight years when they fasted on
bread and water._

  1. The flower in my heart blossoms and spreads abroad in the middle of
the night.

  2. Tonan has satisfied her passion, the goddess Tlazolteotl has
satisfied her passion.

  3. I, Cinteotl, was born in Paradise, I come from the place of
flowers. I am the only flower, the new, the glorious one.

  4. Cinteotl was born from the water; he came born as a mortal, as a
youth, from the cerulean home of the fishes, a new, a glorious god.

  5. He shone forth as the sun; his mother dwelt in the house of the
dawn, varied in hue as the quechol bird, a new, a glorious flower.

  6. I came forth on the earth, even to the market place like a mortal,
even I, Quetzalcoatl, great and glorious.

  7. Be ye happy under the flower-bush varied in hue as the quetzal
bird; listen to the quechol singing to the gods; listen to the singing
of the quechol along the river; hear its flute along the river in the
house of the reeds.

  8. Alas! would that my flowers would cease from dying; our flesh is as
flowers, even as flowers in the place of flowers.

  9. He plays at ball, he plays at ball, the servant of marvellous
skill; he plays at ball, the precious servant; look at him; even the
ruler of the nobles follows him to his house.

  10. O youths! O youths! follow the example of your ancestors; make
yourselves equal to them in the ball count; establish yourselves in your
houses.

  11. She goes to the mart, they carry Xochiquetzal to the mart; she
speaks at Cholula; she startles my heart; she startles my heart; she has
not finished, the priest knows her; where the merchants sell green jade
earrings she is to be seen, in the place of wonders she is to be seen.

  12. Sleep, sleep, sleep, I fold my hands to sleep, I, O woman, sleep.


_Notes._

In default of a Gloss to this hymn, the indispensable Sahagun again
comes to our aid. He informs us in the Appendix to the second book of
his _Historia_ that "When the Indians celebrated the festival called
_atamalqualiztli_, which took place every eight years, certain natives
called Mazateca swallowed living serpents and frogs, and received
garments as a recompense for their daring." We are not informed as to
the purpose of the festival, and its name, which signifies "eating
bread made with water," is merely that of one of the regular systems of
fasting in vogue in ancient Mexico. (See Sahagun, Lib. III., cap. 8.)
The song before us appears to be a recitation calling on a number of the
Nahua divinities.

  1. "The flower in my heart" is a metaphorical expression for song.

  2. _Tonan_, "Our Mother"; _Tlazolteotl_, the goddess of lascivious
love, _Venus impudica_. The verb _yecoa_ appears to have its early
signification, expressing carnal connection.

  3. _Centeotl_, god of maize and fertility.

  8. The flowers referred to are the youths and maidens who die young.

  9. The house of the ball player is the tomb.

  11. This verse is very obscure and is obviously corrupt. It contains
the only Spanish word in the text of these hymns--_obispo_--a word
including two letters, _b_ and _s_, not in the Nahuatl alphabet.

  12. The woman referred to is Xochiquetzal. See Hymn IX.




[Illustration: PRIEST OF XIPPE TOTEC, DRINKING AND PLAYING ON A DRUM.
HYMN XV.]




XV. _Xippe icuic, Totec, yoallauana._


  1. Yoalli tlauana, iztleican nimonenequia xiyaqui mitlatia
teocuitlaquemitl, xicmoquenti quetlauia.

  2. Noteua chalchimamatlaco, apana, y temoya ay quetzallaueuetl, ay
quetzalxiuicoatl, nechiya iqui nocauhquetl, ouiya.

  3. Maniyauia, nia nia poliuiz, ni yoatzin achalchiuhtla noyollo,
ateucuitlatl nocoyaitaz, noyolceuizqui tlacatl achtoquetl tlaquauaya,
otlacatqui yautlatoaquetl ouiya.

  4. Noteua ce in tlaco xayailiuiz conoa y yoatzin motepeyocpa
mitzualitta moteua, noyolceuizquin tlacatl achtoquetl tlaquauaya,
otlacatqui yautlatoaquetl, ouiya.

_Var._ 1. Quetloujia. 2. Noteuhoa chalchimmama tlacoapana itemoia. 3.
Achalchiuhtla. 4. Centlaco, mitzualitla.


_Gloss._

  1. _Q.n._, yn ti yoallauana, ti xipe, totec, tleica in ti monequi in
timocuma, in timotlatia, _id est_, tleica in amo quiauiteocuitlaquemitl,
xicmoquenti, _q.n._, ma quiaui, ma ualauh yn atl.

  2. _Q.n._, yn ti noteuh, otemoc in mauhoualla yn mauh; ay quetzalla
ueuetl, _id est_, ye tlaquetzalpatia ye tlaxoxouia, ye xopantla. Ay
quetzal xiuhcoatl nechia iqui no cauhquetl, _id est_, ca ye otechcauh yn
mayanaliztli.

  3. _Q.n._, ma mauh, ma nipoliui yn ni yoatzin, _id est_, in catleuatl,
yuhquin chalchiuitl noyollo. A teocuitlatl nocoyaitaz, _q.n._, in
catleuatl achtomochiuaz ninoyolceuiz.

  4. _Q.n._, yn oteuh cequi tlatlacotyan in mochiua initonacayouh,
auh in tlein tlatlacotyan achto mochiua mochi tlacatl achto mitzualmaca,
auh iniquac ye omochimochiuh occeppa nomochi tlacatl mitzualmaca yn
motonacayuh.


_Hymn of the High Priest of Xipe Totec._

  1. The nightly drinking, why should I oppose it? Go forth and array
yourselves in the golden garments, clothe yourselves in the glittering
vestments.

  2. My god descended upon the water, into the beautiful glistening
surface; he was as a lovely water cypress, as a beauteous green serpent;
now I have left behind me my suffering.

  3. I go forth, I go forth about to destroy, I, Yoatzin; my soul is in
the cerulean water; I am seen in the golden water; I shall appear unto
mortals; I shall strengthen them for the words of war!

  4. My god appears as a mortal; O Yoatzin, thou art seen upon the
mountains; I shall appear unto mortals; I shall strengthen them for the
