setteth them in speciall Thrones, to rest in glory; The Apostles in
their twelve, the rest in their order, according to their zeale. And
though hee may well reckon the best of these, unprofitable servants;
yet such congruity (not of merits, but of favour) it pleaseth him to
observe in crowning his graces, that the most zealous heere, are the
most glorious there.

Who would not now wonder, how ever this royall vertue should have lost
it grace with the world; how ever any should admit a low thought of it?
But what? Shall all the indignity which hell can cast upon it, make it
vile in our eyes? or rather, shall wee not reason from the opposition,
as _Tertullian_ did of _Nero:_ That religion which _Nero_ so persecutes,
must needs be excellent.

[Sidenote: 1 Object. Zeale is madd, and makes men mad.]

[Sidenote: Acts 26. 24 1 Cor.]

If zeale were not some admirable good, the Divell and World would not so
hate it; Yet lest silence should bee thought to baulke some unanswerable
reasons, let us see how they labour to be madd with reason: Let _Festus_
bee the Speaker for the rest, for hee speakes what all the rest thinke;
you know his madd objection, and _Pauls_ sober answer in that place, and
the like, 2 Cor. 5.13. whether hee bee madd or sober, it is for God and
you.

This text bids us bee zealous and repent; the word signifies be wise
againe, or returne to your wits. The prodigall is sayd to come to
himselfe, when he was first heat with this fire. Wee may well answer the
world as old men doe young: You thinke us Christians to bee madd that
follow heaven so eagerly; but we know you to bee madd, that run
a-madding so after vanity.

[Sidenote: Acts. 2.]

[Sidenote: Acts. 7.]

A Christian indeed is never right, till he seeme to the world to be
beside himselfe; Christs owne kindred were afrayd of him. The Apostles
are sayd to be full of new wine; besides, with these the world is madd:
they runn with _Stephan_ like madd men; _Nichodemus_ and such as he,
never offends them.

[Sidenote: 2 Object.]

[Sidenote: A makebate.]

[Sidenote: Tenterden steeple.]

You know also what _Ahab_ laid to the charge of _Eliah_; with the
Apologie hee made for himselfe. This is a stale imputation in ages.
_Haman_ accused _Mordechay_ and the Jewes of it. The Apostles are sayd
to bee troubles of the whole earth. In the Primitive Church all mutinies
and contentions were layd to the Martyrs. True it is, where zeale is,
there is opposition, and so consequently troubles: Christ sets this fire
on earth, not as an author, but by accident: The theefe is the authour
of the fray, though the true man strike never so many blowes: but the
_Ahabs_ of the world, trouble Israel; then, complaine of _Eliah:_ The
Papists will blow upp the State, then father it upon the Puritans. It is
not for any wise man, to beleeve the tythe of the tales and slanders,
which flie abroad of the zealous: Lewd men would fain strike at all
goodnes through their sides.

[Sidenote: 3 Object. Proud.]

You may remember also _Eliabs_ uncharitable censure of _David_, I know
the pride of thine heart. So doe all worldlings measure others by their
owne length; if they see any forwardnesse in the peaceablest spirit,
they ascribe it either to vaine-glory, or covetousnesse; the onely
springs that set their wheeles on going: but of this the knower of the
hearts must judge betweene us.

[Sidenote: 4 Object. They keep no meane.]

When slaundering will not serve, then fall they to glavering, cunningly
glancing at zeale, whiles they commend the golden meane wherein vertue
consists. But Christians, take heede none spoyle you through such
Philosophy; or rather Sopistry: for true Philosophy will tell you that
the meane wherein vertue is placed, is the middle betwixt two kindes,
and not degrees: And it is but meane vertue that loves the meane in
their sense.

[Sidenote: 5 Object. Undiscreet.]

Oh say they, but some discretion would doe well; It is true, but take
withall _Calvins_ caveat to _Melancthon_: That he affect not so the name
of a moderate man, and listen to such Syrens songs, till he lose his
zeale.

I have observed, that which the world miscalls discretion, to eat upp
zeale, as that which they call policy, doth wisdome. As _Joab_ stabbed
_Abner_ under a colour of friendship: Antichrist undermineth Christ, by
pretending to be his Vicar. The feare of overdoing makes most come too
short; of the two extreamities, wee should most feare lukewarmnesse:
rather let your milke boyle over then be raw.

From glavering, they fall to scoffing; yong Saints, will prove but olde
Divels; these hot-spurrs will soone runne themselves out of breath. But
wee say, such were never right bred; such as proove falling starres,
never were ought but meteors; the other never lose light or motion:
spirituall motions may be violent and perpetuall.

When none of these will take, they fal to right downe rayling; these
Puritans, these singular fellowes, &c. unfit for all honest company. I
hope the states Puritan, and the common Puritan bee two creatures. For
with that staffe the multitude beats all that are better then
themselves, & lets fly at all that have any shew of goodnes. But with
that which most call Puritanisme, I desire to worship God. For
singularity, Christs calls for it, and presseth & urgeth it; What
singular thing doe you, or what odde thing doe you? Shall Gods peculiar
people, doe nothing peculiar? The world thinkes it strange, wee runne
not with them into excesses, and doe not as most doe, that wee might
escape derision: Judge you which of these men shall please: I beleeve
none shall ever please Christ, till they appeare odde, strange and
precise men, to the common sort; and yet neede not bee over just neither
Let them that have tender eares stop them against the charmes of the
world, and scornes of _Michol_, unlesse they were wiser: Let him that
hath a right eare, heare what Christ saith to the Churches, _Be
zealous_.


_The fourth part._

[Sidenote: Incentives.]

Yea, but by what meanes shall a Christian attaine this fire, and
maintaine it when he hath gotten it.

Say not in thine heart, What _Prometheus_ shall ascend into heaven and
fetch it thence; thou mayest fetch it thence by thine owne prayer: as
did _Elias_ and the Apostles, men of infirmities as well as thy selfe;
pray continually, and instantly: the Lord that breathed first thy soule
into thee, will also breath on thy soule: I speake not of miraculous
(which was but a type) but of ordinarie inspiration. Prayer and zeale
are as water and ice: mutually producing each other; when it is once
come downe upon thine altar; though no water can quench it, yet must it
bee preserved fresh, by ordinarie fuell; especially the Priests lipps
must keepe it alive.

Sermons are bellowes ordained for this purpose. The word read is of
divine use, but doth not with that motion stirre these coales.

Experience sheweth, the best oration will not so much moove as the
meanest Orator.

After the sparkles once by these meanes kindled, cherish and feede them
by reading the word: Let it dwell richly in thine heart, excite thy
dulnesse by spirituall Hymnes. Love-songs enflame not lust, more, then
the Song of Songs doth zeale: Reade or sing the 119. Psalme; and if thou
beest not zealous, every verse will checke thee in thy throat:
Meditation is another helpe, approoved by _Isaacks_ and _Davids_
practice: An Art lately so taught, as I shall neede onely to poynt at
the choyce theames, suiting and furthering this argument. I need not goe
far to fetch this fire: I may strike it out of every word of this
Epistle to _Laodicea_. Behold the Lord God, especially thy Lord Christ
in his glorious titles and Majesty; for so hee beginnes his visions to
_John_; and his Epistles to the Churches, exciting their dull hearts. By
such apparitions did hee set on fire the heart of _Moses_ in the burning
bush; and enflamed _Stephan_, his first Martyr: answerable and
proportionable to which, are our serious contemplations. Behold him as
one that seeth thee, and knoweth thy workes; the rouzing preface of all
these Letters. _Casars_ eye made his souldiers prodigall of their blood.
The Atheist thinks God takes as much notice of him and his prayers, as
hee doth of the humming of Flyes and Bees; and therefore, no marvell if
his service bee formall and fashionable. The faithfull Christian by
faiths prospective sees him at home, and heares him saying, Well done
thou good servant; which maketh him to worke out his heart. Behold him
as the beginning of creatures, especially of the new creature. Oh! what
love hath hee shewed thee in thy redemption? out of what misery, into
what happinesse, by what a price, to what end; but that thou shouldest
bee zealous of good workes? Behold him as the faithfull witnesse, that
witnessed himselfe for thee a good witnesse, and heere faithfully
counsels thee to follow his patterne. Behold him as a speedie and royall
rewarder of his followers. Take thy selfe into paradise, represent to
thy selfe thy crowne, thy throne, thy white robes; looke not on the
things that are seene, but on the farre most excellent wait of glory;
looke upon these, and faint if thou canst. Behold also hee is a
consuming fire, a zealous God, hating lukewarmnesse not onely destroying
_Sodome_ with fire and brimstone, and providing _Tophet_ for his
enemies; but awaking also his drowzie servants, by judgements (as
_Absolon Joab_ by firing his corne) his Israelites by fiery serpents:
whom hee loveth, hee chasteneth, and keepeth them in the fornace of
fiery trialls, till they come to their right temper. Hee standeth and
knocketh: if nothing will arouze us, a time will come, when heaven and
earth shall burne with fire, and Christ shall come in flaming fire, to
render vengeance with fire unquenchable. Wee therefore that know the
terrour of that day, What manner of persons ought we to bee?

From God turne thine eyes unto man: set before thee the pillar, and
clowde of fiery examples, that have led us the way into Canaan. Hee is
but a dull lade that will not follow: The stories of the Scriptures, the
lives of the Fathers, the acts and monuments of the Church, have a
