daily prepareth himself to die.  If thou hast ever seen one die,
consider that thou also shalt pass away by the same road.

3. When it is morning reflect that it may be thou shalt not see
the evening, and at eventide dare not to boast thyself of the
morrow.  Always be thou prepared, and so live that death may
never find thee unprepared.  Many die suddenly and unexpectedly.
For at such an hour as ye think not, the Son of Man cometh.(1)
When that last hour shall come, thou wilt begin to think very
differently of thy whole life past, and wilt mourn bitterly that
thou hast been so negligent and slothful.

4. Happy and wise is he who now striveth to be such in life as he
would fain be found in death!  For a perfect contempt of the
world, a fervent desire to excel in virtue, the love of
discipline, the painfulness of repentance, readiness to obey,
denial of self, submission to any adversity for love of Christ;
these are the things which shall give great confidence of a happy
death.  Whilst thou art in health thou hast many opportunities of
good works; but when thou art in sickness I know not how much
thou wilt be able to do.  Few are made better by infirmity: even
as they who wander much abroad seldom become holy.

5. Trust not thy friends and kinsfolk, nor put off the work of
thy salvation to the future, for men will forget thee sooner than
thou thinkest.  It is better for thee now to provide in time, and
to send some good before thee, than to trust to the help of
others.  If thou art not anxious for thyself now, who, thinkest
thou, will be anxious for thee afterwards?  Now the time is most
precious.  Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation.
But alas!  that thou spendest not well this time, wherein thou
mightest lay up treasure which should profit thee everlastingly.
The hour will come when thou shalt desire one day, yea, one hour,
for amendment of life, and I know not whether thou shalt obtain.

6. Oh, dearly beloved, from what danger thou mightest free
thyself, from what great fear, if only thou wouldst always live
in fear, and in expectation of death!  Strive now to live in such
wise that in the hour of death thou mayest rather rejoice than
fear.  Learn now to die to the world, so shalt thou begin to live
with Christ.  Learn now to contemn all earthly things, and then
mayest thou freely go unto Christ.  Keep under thy body by
penitence, and then shalt thou be able to have a sure confidence.

7. Ah, foolish one!  why thinkest thou that thou shalt live long,
when thou art not sure of a single day?  How many have been
deceived, and suddenly have been snatched away from the body!
How many times hast thou heard how one was slain by the sword,
another was drowned, another falling from on high broke his neck,
another died at the table, another whilst at play! One died by
fire, another by the sword, another by the pestilence, another by
the robber.  Thus cometh death to all, and the life of men
swiftly passeth away like a shadow.

8. Who will remember thee after thy death?  And who will entreat
for thee?  Work, work now, oh dearly beloved, work all that thou
canst.  For thou knowest not when thou shalt die, nor what shall
happen unto thee after death.  While thou hast time, lay up for
thyself undying riches.  Think of nought but of thy salvation;
care only for the things of God.  Make to thyself friends, by
venerating the saints of God and walking in their steps, that
when thou failest, thou mayest be received into everlasting
habitations.(2)

9. Keep thyself as a stranger and a pilgrim upon the earth, to
whom the things of the world appertain not.  Keep thine heart
free, and lifted up towards God, for here have we no continuing
city.(3)  To Him direct thy daily prayers with crying and tears,
that thy spirit may be found worthy to pass happily after death
unto its Lord.  Amen.

(1) Matthew xxiv. 44.   (2) Luke xvi. 9.   (3) Hebrews xiii. 14.


CHAPTER XXIV

Of the judgment and punishment of the wicked

In all that thou doest, remember the end, and how thou wilt stand
before a strict judge, from whom nothing is hid, who is not
bribed with gifts, nor accepteth excuses, but will judge
righteous judgment.  O most miserable and foolish sinner, who art
sometimes in fear of the countenance of an angry man, what wilt
thou answer to God, who knoweth all thy misdeeds?  Why dost thou
not provide for thyself against the day of judgment, when no man
shall be able to be excused or defended by means of another, but
each one shall bear his burden himself alone?  Now doth thy
labour bring forth fruit, now is thy weeping acceptable, thy
groaning heard, thy sorrow well pleasing to God, and cleansing to
thy soul.

2. Even here on earth the patient man findeth great occasion of
purifying his soul.  When suffering injuries he grieveth more for
the other's malice than for his own wrong; when he prayeth
heartily for those that despitefully use him, and forgiveth them
from his heart; when he is not slow to ask pardon from others;
when he is swifter to pity than to anger; when he frequently
denieth himself and striveth altogether to subdue the flesh to
the spirit.  Better is it now to purify the soul from sin, than
to cling to sins from which we must be purged hereafter.  Truly
we deceive ourselves by the inordinate love which we bear towards
the flesh.

3. What is it which that fire shall devour, save thy sins?  The
more thou sparest thyself and followest the flesh, the more heavy
shall thy punishment be, and the more fuel art thou heaping up
for the burning.  For wherein a man hath sinned, therein shall he
be the more heavily punished.  There shall the slothful be
pricked forward with burning goads, and the gluttons be tormented
with intolerable hunger and thirst.  There shall the luxurious
and the lovers of pleasure be plunged into burning pitch and
stinking brimstone, and the envious shall howl like mad dogs for
very grief.

4. No sin will there be which shall not be visited with its own
proper punishment. The proud shall be filled with utter
confusion, and the covetous shall be pinched with miserable
poverty.  An hour's pain there shall be more grievous than a
hundred years here of the bitterest penitence.  No quiet shall be
there, no comfort for the lost, though here sometimes there is
respite from pain, and enjoyment of the solace of friends.  Be
thou anxious now and sorrowful for thy sins, that in the day of
judgment thou mayest have boldness with the blessed.  For then
shall the righteous man stand in great boldness before the face
of such as have afflicted him and made no account of his
labours.(1)  Then shall he stand up to judge, he who now
submitteth himself in humility to the judgments of men.  Then
shall the poor and humble man have great confidence, while the
proud is taken with fear on every side.

5. Then shall it be seen that he was the wise man in this world
who learned to be a fool and despised for Christ.  Then shall all
tribulation patiently borne delight us, while the mouth of the
ungodly shall be stopped.  Then shall every godly man rejoice,
and every profane man shall mourn.  Then the afflicted flesh
shall more rejoice than if it had been alway nourished in
delights.  Then the humble garment shall put on beauty, and the
precious robe shall hide itself as vile.  Then the little poor
cottage shall be more commended than the gilded palace.  Then
enduring patience shall have more might than all the power of the
world.  Then simple obedience shall be more highly exalted than
all worldly wisdom.

6. Then a pure and good conscience shall more rejoice than
learned philosophy.  Then contempt of riches shall have more
weight than all the treasure of the children of this world.  Then
shalt thou find more comfort in having prayed devoutly than in
having fared sumptuously.  Then thou wilt rather rejoice in
having kept silence than in having made long speech.  Then holy
deeds shall be far stronger than many fine words.  Then a strict
life and sincere penitence shall bring deeper pleasure than all
earthly delight.  Learn now to suffer a little, that then thou
mayest be enabled to escape heavier sufferings.  Prove first
here, what thou art able to endure hereafter.  If now thou art
able to bear so little, how wilt thou be able to endure eternal
torments?  If now a little suffering maketh thee so impatient,
what shall hell-fire do then? Behold of a surety thou art not
able to have two Paradises, to take thy fill or delight here in
this world, and to reign with Christ hereafter.

7. If even unto this day thou hadst ever lived in honours and
pleasures, what would the whole profit thee if now death came to
thee in an instant?  All therefore is vanity, save to love God
and to serve Him only.  For he who loveth God with all his heart
feareth not death, nor punishment, nor judgment, nor hell,
because perfect love giveth sure access to God.  But he who still
delighteth in sin, no marvel if he is afraid of death and
judgment.  Nevertheless it is a good thing, if love as yet cannot
restrain thee from evil, that at least the fear of hell should
hold thee back.  But he who putteth aside the fear of God cannot
long continue in good, but shall quickly fall into the snares of
the devil.

(1) Wisd. v. 1.


CHAPTER XXV

Of the zealous amendment of our whole life

Be thou watchful and diligent in God's service, and bethink thee
often why thou hast renounced the world.  Was it not that thou
mightest live to God and become a spiritual man?  Be zealous,
therefore, for thy spiritual profit, for thou shalt receive
shortly the reward of thy labours, and neither fear nor sorrow
shall come any more into thy borders.  Now shalt thou labour a
little, and thou shalt find great rest, yea everlasting joy.  If
thou shalt remain faithful and zealous in labour, doubt not that
God shall be faithful and bountiful in rewarding thee.  It is thy
duty to have a good hope that thou wilt attain the victory, but
thou must not fall into security lest thou become slothful or
lifted up.

2. A certain man being in anxiety of mind, continually tossed
about between hope and fear, and being on a certain day
overwhelmed with grief, cast himself down in prayer before the
altar in a church, and meditated within himself, saying, "Oh! if
I but knew that I should still persevere," and presently heard
within him a voice from God, "And if thou didst know it, what
wouldst thou do?  Do now what thou wouldst do then, and thou
shalt be very secure."  And straightway being comforted and
strengthened, he committed himself to the will of God and the
perturbation of spirit ceased, neither had he a mind any more to
search curiously to know what should befall him hereafter, but
studied rather to inquire what was the good and acceptable will
of God, for the beginning and perfecting of every good work.

3. Hope in the Lord and be doing good, saith the Prophet; dwell
in the land and thou shalt be fed(1) with its riches.  One thing
there is which holdeth back many from progress and fervent
amendment, even the dread of difficulty, or the labour of the
conflict.  Nevertheless they advance above all others in virtue
who strive manfully to conquer those things which are most
grievous and contrary to them, for there a man profiteth most and
meriteth greater grace where he most overcometh himself and
mortifieth himself in spirit.

4. But all men have not the same passions to conquer and to
mortify, yet he who is diligent shall attain more profit,
although he have stronger passions, than another who is more
temperate of disposition, but is withal less fervent in the
pursuit of virtue.  Two things specially avail unto improvement
in holiness, namely firmness to withdraw ourselves from the sin
to which by nature we are most inclined, and earnest zeal for
that good in which we are most lacking.  And strive also very
earnestly to guard against and subdue those faults which
displease thee most frequently in others.

5. Gather some profit to thy soul wherever thou art, and wherever
thou seest or hearest good examples, stir thyself to follow them,
but where thou seest anything which is blameworthy, take heed
that thou do not the same; or if at any time thou hast done it,
strive quickly to amend thyself.  As thine eye observeth others,
so again are the eyes of others upon thee.  How sweet and
pleasant is it to see zealous and godly brethren temperate and of
good discipline; and how sad is it and grievous to see them
walking disorderly, not practising the duties to which they are
called. How hurtful a thing it is to neglect the purpose of their
calling, and turn their inclinations to things which are none of
their business.

6. Be mindful of the duties which thou hast undertaken, and set
always before thee the remembrance of the Crucified.  Truly
oughtest thou to be ashamed as thou lookest upon the life of
Jesus Christ, because thou hast not yet endeavoured to conform
thyself more unto Him, though thou hast been a long time in the
way of God.  A religious man who exercises himself seriously and
devoutly in the most holy life and passion of our Lord shall find
there abundantly all things that are profitable and necessary for
him, neither is there need that he shall seek anything better
beyond Jesus.  Oh! if Jesus crucified would come into our hearts,
how quickly, and completely should we have learned all that we
need to know!

7. He who is earnest receiveth and beareth well all things that
are laid upon him.  He who is careless and lukewarm hath trouble
upon trouble, and suffereth anguish upon every side, because he
is without inward consolation, and is forbidden to seek that
which is outward.  He who is living without discipline is exposed
to grievous ruin.  He who seeketh easier and lighter discipline
shall always be in distress, because one thing or another will
give him displeasure.

8. O! if no other duty lay upon us but to praise the Lord our God
with our whole heart and voice!  Oh! if thou never hadst need to
eat or drink, or sleep, but wert always able to praise God, and
to give thyself to spiritual exercises alone; then shouldst thou
be far happier than now, when for so many necessities thou must
serve the flesh.  O! that these necessities were not, but only
the spiritual refreshments of the soul, which alas we taste too
seldom.

9. When a man hath come to this, that he seeketh comfort from no
created thing, then doth he perfectly begin to enjoy God, then
also will he be well contented with whatsoever shall happen unto
him.  Then will he neither rejoice for much nor be sorrowful for
little, but he committeth himself altogether and with full trust
unto God, who is all in all to him, to whom nothing perisheth nor
dieth, but all things live to Him and obey His every word
without delay.

10. Remember always thine end, and how the time which is lost
returneth not.  Without care and diligence thou shalt never get
virtue.  If thou beginnest to grow cold, it shall begin to go ill
with thee, but if thou givest thyself unto zeal thou shalt find
much peace, and shalt find thy labour the lighter because of the
grace of God and the love of virtue.  A zealous and diligent
man is ready for all things.  It is greater labour to resist sins
and passions than to toil in bodily labours.  He who shunneth not
small faults falleth little by little into greater.  At eventide
thou shalt always be glad if thou spend the day profitably.
Watch over thyself, stir thyself up, admonish thyself, and
howsoever it be with others, neglect not thyself. The more
violence thou dost unto thyself, the more thou shall profit.
Amen.

(1) Psalm xxxvii. 3.




THE SECOND BOOK



ADMONITIONS CONCERNING THE INNER LIFE

CHAPTER I

Of the inward life

The kingdom of God is within you,(1) saith the Lord.  Turn thee
with all thine heart to the Lord and forsake this miserable
world, and thou shalt find rest unto thy soul.  Learn to despise
outward things and to give thyself to things inward, and thou
shalt see the kingdom of God come within thee.  For the kingdom
of God is peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, and it is not given to
the wicked.  Christ will come to thee, and show thee His
consolation, if thou prepare a worthy mansion for Him within
thee.  All His glory and beauty is from within, and there it
pleaseth Him to dwell.  He often visiteth the inward man and
holdeth with him sweet discourse, giving him soothing
consolation, much peace, friendship exceeding wonderful.

2. Go to, faithful soul, prepare thy heart for this bridegroom
that he may vouchsafe to come to thee and dwell within thee, for
so He saith, if any man loveth me he will keep my words: and my
Father will love him, and we will come unto him and make our
abode with him.(2)  Give, therefore, place to Christ and refuse
entrance to all others.  When thou hast Christ, thou art rich,
and hast sufficient.  He shall be thy provider and faithful
watchman in all things, so that thou hast no need to trust in
men, for men soon change and swiftly pass away, but Christ
remaineth for ever and standeth by us firmly even to the end.

3. There is no great trust to be placed in a frail and mortal
man, even though he be useful and dear to us, neither should
much sorrow arise within us if sometimes he oppose and contradict
us.  They who are on thy side to-day, may to-morrow be against
thee, and often are they turned round like the wind. Put thy
whole trust in God and let Him be thy fear and thy love, He will
answer for thee Himself, and will do for thee what is best.  Here
hast thou no continuing city,(3)  and wheresoever thou art, thou
art a stranger and a pilgrim, and thou shalt never have rest
unless thou art closely united to Christ within thee.

4. Why dost thou cast thine eyes hither and thither, since this
is not the place of thy rest?  In heaven ought thy habitation to
be, and all earthly things should be looked upon as it were in
the passing by.  All things pass away and thou equally with them.
Look that thou cleave not to them lest thou be taken with them
and perish.  Let thy contemplation be on the Most High, and let
thy supplication be directed unto Christ without ceasing.  If
thou canst not behold high and heavenly things, rest thou in the
passion of Christ and dwell willingly in His sacred wounds.  For
if thou devoutly fly to the wounds of Jesus, and the precious
