but possess absolute sameness (samata). From this totality of things
nothing can be excluded and to it nothing can be added. Yet it is also
sunyata, negation or the void, because it cannot be said to possess
any of the attributes of the world we live in: neither existence nor
non-existence, nor unity nor plurality can be predicted of it.
According to the celebrated formula of Nagarjuna known as the eight
Nos there is in it "neither production (_utpada_) nor destruction
(_uccheda_) nor annihilation (_nirodha_) nor persistence (_sasvata_)
nor unity (_ekartha_) nor plurality (_nanartha_) nor coming in
(_agamana_) nor going out (_nirgama_)." But when we perceive that both
subject and object are unreal we also see that suchness is the one
reality and from that point of view it may be regarded as the
Dharma-kaya of all Buddhas. It is also called Tathagatagarbha, the
womb or store-house of the Buddha, from which all individual
existences are evolved under the law of causation, but this aspect of
it is already affected by ignorance, for in Bhuta-tathata as known in
the light of the highest truth there is neither causation nor
production. The Yogacara employs the word _sunyata_ (void), though not
so much as its sister school, but it makes special use of the term
_alaya-vijnana_, the receptacle or store of consciousness. This in so
far as it is superindividual is an aspect of suchness, but when it
affirms and particularises itself it becomes _citta_, that is the
human mind, or to be more accurate the substratum of the human mind
from which is developed _manas_, or the principle of will,
self-consciousness and self-affirmation. Similarly the Vedanta
philosophy, though it has no term corresponding to _alaya-vijnana_, is
familiar with the idea that Brahman is in one aspect immeasurable and
all-embracing but in another is infinitesimal and dwells in the human
heart: or that Brahman after creating the world entered into it. Again
another aspect of suchness is enlightenment (_bodhi_), that is
absolute knowledge free from the limitations of subject and object.
This "is the universal Dharma-kaya of the Tathagatas" and on account
of this all Tathagatas are spoken of as abiding in enlightenment _a
priori_. This enlightenment may be negative (as _sunyata_) in the
sense that it transcends all relations but it may also be affirmative
and then "it transforms and unfolds itself, whenever conditions are
favourable, in the form of a Tathagata or some other form in order
that all beings may be induced to bring their store of merit to
maturity."[113]

It will be seen from the above that the absolute truth of the
Mahayanists varies from a severely metaphysical conception, the
indescribable thing in itself, to something very like an all-pervading
benevolent essence which from time to time takes shape in a Buddha.
And here we see how easy is the transition from the old Buddhism to a
form of pantheism. For if we admit that the Buddha is a superhuman
intelligence appearing from time to time according to a certain law,
we add little to this statement by saying that the essence or spirit
of the cosmos manifests itself from time to time as a Buddha. Only,
such words as essence or spirit are not really correct. The world of
individuals is the same as the highest truth, the same as the
Dharma-kaya, the same as Nirvana. It is only through ignorance that it
appears to be different and particularized. Ignorance, the essence of
which consists in believing in the distinction between subject and
object, is also called defilement and the highest truth passes through
various stages of defilement ending with that where under the
influence of egoism and passion the external world of particulars is
believed to be everything. But the various stages may influence one
another[114] so that under a higher influence the mind which is
involved in subjectivity begins to long for Nirvana. Yet Nirvana is
not something different from or beyond the world of experience; it
does not really involve annihilation of the skandhas. Just as in the
Advaita he who has the true knowledge sees that he himself and
everything else is Brahman, so for the Mahayanist all things are seen
_to be_ Nirvana, _to be_ the Dharma-kaya. It is sometimes[115] said
that there are four kinds of Nirvana (_a_) absolute Nirvana, which is
a synonym of the Dharma-kaya and in that sense universally present in
all beings, (_b_) upadhisesha-nirvana, the state of enlightenment
which can be attained during life, while the body with its limitations
still remains, (_c_) anupadhisesha-nirvana, a higher degree of the
same state attained after death when the hindrances of the body are
removed, (_d_) Nirvana without abode or apratishthita-nirvana. Those
who attain to this understand that there is no real antithesis between
Samsara and Nirvana:[116] they do not seek for rest or emancipation
but devote themselves to beneficent activity and to leading their
fellows to salvation. Although these statements that Nirvana and
Samsara are the same are not at all in the manner of the older
Buddhism, yet this ideal of disinterested activity combined with
Nirvana is not inconsistent with the portrait of Gotama preserved in
the Pali Canon.

The Mahayanist Buddhism of the Far East makes free use of such phrases
as the Buddha in the heart, the Buddha mind and the Buddha nature.
These seem to represent such Sanskrit terms as Buddhatva and
Bodhicitta which can receive either an ethical or a metaphysical
emphasis. The former line of thought is well shown in Santideva[117]
who treats Bodhicitta as the initial impulse and motive power of the
religious life, combining intellectual illumination and unselfish
devotion to the good of others. Thus regarded it is a guiding and
stimulating principle somewhat analogous to the Holy Spirit in
Christianity. But the Bodhicitta is also the essential quality of a
Buddha (and the Holy Spirit too is a member of the Trinity) and in so
far as a man has the Bodhicitta he is one with all Buddhas.

This conception is perhaps secondary in Buddhism but it is also as old
as the Upanishads and only another form of the doctrine that the
spirit in every man (antaryamin) is identical with the Supreme Spirit.
It is developed in many works still popular in the Far East[118] and
was the fundamental thesis of Bodhidharma, the founder of the Zen
school. But the practical character of the Chinese and Japanese has
led them to attach more importance to the moral and intellectual side
of this doctrine than to the metaphysical and pantheistic side.


FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 100: _E.g._ in Mahaparinib. Sut. IV. 57, the Buddha says
"There has been laid up by Cunda the smith (who had given him his last
meal) a karma, redounding to length of life, to good fortune, to good
fame, _to the inheritance of heaven_, and of sovereign power."]

[Footnote 101: Strictly speaking Madhyamaka is the name of the school
Madhyamika of its adherents. Both forms are used, _e.g._
Madhyamakakarikas and Madhyamikasutra.]

[Footnote 102: Nagarjuna says Sunyam iti na vaktavyam asunyam iti va
bhavet Ubhayam nobhayam ceti prajnaptyartham tu kathyate, "It cannot
be called void or not void or both or neither but in order to somehow
indicate it, it is called Sunyata."]

[Footnote 103: Sam. Nik. XXII. 90. 16.]

[Footnote 104: Gotama, the founder of the Nyaya philosophy, also
admitted the force of the arguments against the existence of present
time but regarded them as a _reductio ad absurdum_. Shadworth Hodgson
in his _Philosophy of Reflection_, vol. I. p. 253 also treats of the
question.]

[Footnote 105: The Sankhya philosophy makes a similar statement,
though for different reasons.]

[Footnote 106: Vajracchedika. See _S.B.E._ vol. XLIX. It was
translated into Chinese by Kumarajiva (384-417 A.D.).]

[Footnote 107: Or in other repetitions of the same formula, beings,
ideas, good things, signs, etc., etc.]

[Footnote 108: Soyen Shaku, _Sermons of a Buddhist Abbot_, p. 47.]

[Footnote 109: See for a simple and persuasive statement of these
abstruse doctrines a charming little book called _Wu-Wei_ by H.
Borel.]

[Footnote 110: Translated from the Chinese by Teitaro Suzuki, 1900.
The translation must be used with care, as its frequent use of the
word _soul_ may lead to misunderstanding.]

[Footnote 111: Asanga's work _Mahayana-sutralankara_ (edited and
translated by S. Levi) which covers much of the same ground is extant
in Sanskrit as well as in Chinese and Tibetan translations. It is a
lucid and authoritative treatise but does not appear to have ever been
popular, or to be read now in the Far East. For Yogacara see also
_Museon_, 1904, p. 370.]

[Footnote 112: The discussion of _tathata_ in Kathavatthu, XIX. 5
seems to record an early phase of these speculations.]

[Footnote 113: _Awakening of Faith_, Teitaro Suzuki, pp. 62 and 70.]

[Footnote 114: The process is generally called Vasana or perfuming.]

[Footnote 115: Vijnanamatra Sastra. Chinese version quoted by Teitaro
Suzuki, _Outlines of Mahayana Buddhism_, p. 343. Apparently both
upadhi and upadhi are used in Buddhist Sanskrit. Upadi is the Pali
form.]

[Footnote 116: So the Madhyamika Sastra (XXV. 19) states that there is
no difference between Samsara and Nirvana. Cf. Rabindranath Tagore,
_Sadhana_, pp. 160-164.]

[Footnote 117: _E.g._ Bodhicaryavatara, chap. I, called praise of the
Bodhicitta.]

[Footnote 118: _E.g._ the Pu-ti-hsin-li-hsiang-lun (Nanjio, 1304),
translated from Nagarjuna, and the Ta-Ch'eng-fa-chieh-wu-cha-pieh-lun,
translated from Sthiramati (Nanjio, 1258).]




CHAPTER XX

MAHAYANIST SCRIPTURES


In a previous chapter I have discussed the Pali Canon and I shall
subsequently have something to say about the Chinese and Tibetan
Canons, which are libraries of religious and edifying works rather
than sacred books similar to the Vedas or the Bible. My present object
is to speak of the Sanskrit literature, chiefly sutras, which appeared
contemporaneously with the rise of Mahayanism in India.

The Mahayanist scriptures are the largest body of sacred writings
extant in the world, but it is not easy either to define the limits of
the Canon or to say when it was put together. According to a common
tradition Kanishka played for the Church of the Great Vehicle much the
same part as Asoka for the Theravadins and summoned a Council which
wrote commentaries on the Tripitaka. This may be reasonably held to
include a recension of the text commented on but we do not know what
that text was, and the brief and perplexing accounts of the Council
which we possess indicate not that it gave its imprimatur to
Mahayanist sutras but that it was specially concerned with the
Abhidharma works of the Sarvastivadin school.

In any case no Canon formed in the time of Kanishka can have been
equivalent to the collections of writings accepted to-day in China and
Tibet, for they contain works later than any date which can be
assigned to his reign, as do also the nine sacred books revered in
Nepal. It was agreed among Indian Buddhists that the scriptures were
divided among the three Pitakas or baskets, but we may surmise that
there was no unanimity as to the precise contents of each basket. In
India the need for unanimity in such matters is not felt. The Brahmans
always recognized that the most holy and most jealously preserved
scriptures could exist in various recensions and the Mahabharata shows
how generations of respectful and uncritical hearers may allow
adventitious matter of all sorts to be incorporated in a work.
Something of the same kind happened with the Pitakas. We know that the
Pali recension which we possess was not the only one, for fragments of
a Sanskrit version have been discovered.

There was probably a large floating literature of sutras, often
presenting several recensions of the same document worked up in
different ways. Just as additions were made to the list of Upanishads
up to the middle ages, although the character of the later works was
different from that of the earlier, so new sutras, modern in date and
in tone, were received in the capacious basket. And just as the
Puranas were accepted as sacred books without undermining the
authority of the Vedas, so new Buddhist scriptures superseded without
condemning the old ones. Various Mahayanist schools had their own
versions of the Vinaya which apparently contain the same rules as the
Pali text but also much additional narrative, and Asanga quotes from
works corresponding to the Pali Nikayas, though his doctrine belongs
to another age.[119] The Abhidharma section of the Pali Canon seems
however to have been peculiar to the Theravada school. The
Sarvastivadin Pitaka of the same name was entirely different and,
judging from the Chinese Canon, the Mahayanists gave the title to
philosophic works by such authors as Asanga and Vasubandhu, some of
which were described as revelations from Maitreya.

Specially characteristic of Mahayanist Buddhism are the Vaipulya[120]
sutras, that is sutras of great extension or development. These works,
of which the Lotus is an example, follow the same scheme as the older
sutras but are of wider scope and on a much larger scale, for they
often consist of twenty or more chapters. They usually attempt to give
a general exposition of the whole Dharma, or at least of some aspect
of it which is extolled as sufficient for the right conduct of life.
The chief speaker is usually the Buddha, who is introduced as teaching
on the Vulture Peak, or some other well-known locality, and surrounded
by a great assemblage many of whom are superhuman beings. The occasion
of the discourse is commonly signalized by his sending forth rays of
light which illuminate the universe until the scene includes other
worlds. As early as the Anguttara Nikaya[121] we find references to
the danger of a taste for ornate and poetic sutras and these
compositions seem to be the outcome of that taste. The literary ideas
and methods which produced them are illustrated by the Sutralankara of
Asvaghosha, a collection of edifying tales, many of which use the
materials supplied by the Pali Nikayas and Vinaya but present them in
a more effective and artistic form. It was thought a pious task to
amplify and embellish the simple narratives handed down by tradition.

The Mahayanist scriptures are composed in Sanskrit not in Pali, but it
is only rarely--for instance in the works of Asvaghosha--that Buddhist
Sanskrit conforms to the rules of the classical language. Usually the
words deviate from this standard both in form and meaning and often
suggest that the text as we have it is a Sanskritized version of an
older work in some popular dialect, brought into partial conformity
with literary usage. In the poetical portions, this process of
sanskritization encountered greater difficulties than in prose,
because metre and prosody often refused to admit the changes required
by grammar, so that this poetical dialect cannot be called either
Sanskrit, Pali or Magadhi but remains a mixture of learned and popular
speech. But Sanskrit did not become a sacred language for the
Mahayanists like Latin for Roman Catholics. It is rather Pali which
has assumed this position among the Hinayanists, for Burmese and
Sinhalese translations of the Pitakas acquired no authority. But in
the north the principle[122] that every man might read the Buddha's
word in his own vernacular was usually respected: and the populations
of Central Asia, the Chinese, the Tibetans, and the Mongols translated
the scriptures into their own languages without attaching any
superstitious importance to the original words, unless they were
Dharanis or spells.

About the time of the Christian era or perhaps rather earlier, greater
use began to be made of writing for religious purposes. The old
practice of reciting the scriptures was not discontinued but no
objection was made to preserving and reading them in written copies.
According to tradition, the Pali scriptures were committed to writing
in Ceylon during the reign of Vattagamani, that is according to the
most recent chronology about 20 B.C., and Kanishka caused to be
engraved on copper plates the commentaries composed by the council
which he summoned. In Asvaghosha[123] we find the story of a Brahman
who casually taking up a book to pass the time lights on a copy of the
Sutra of the Twelve Causes and is converted. But though the Buddhists
remained on the whole true to the old view that the important thing
was to understand and disseminate the substance of the Master's
teaching and not merely to preserve the text as if it were a sacred
formula, still we see growing up in Mahayanist works ideas about the
sanctity and efficacy of scripture which are foreign to the Pali
Canon. Many sutras (for instance the Diamond Cutter) extol themselves
as all-sufficient for salvation: the Prajna-paramita commences with a
salutation addressed not as usual to the Buddha but to the work
itself, as if it were a deity, and Hodgson states that the Buddhists
of Nepal worship their nine sacred books. Nor was the idea excluded
that certain words, especially formulae or spells called Dharani, have
in themselves a mysterious efficacy and potency.[124] Some of these
are cited and recommended in the Lotus.[125] In so far as the
repetition of sacred words or spells is regarded as an integral part
of the religious life, the doctrine has no warrant in the earlier
teaching. It obviously becomes more and more prominent in later works.
But the idea itself is old, for it is clearly the same that produced a
belief in the Brahmanic mantras, particularly the mantras of the
Atharva Veda, and early Buddhism did not reject mantras in their
proper place. Thus[126] the deities present themselves to the Buddha
and offer to teach him a formula which will protect his disciples from
the attacks of evil spirits. Hsuean Chuang even states that the council
which sat at Rajagriha after the Buddha's death compiled five
Pitakas, one of which consisted of Dharanis,[127] and it may be that
the collection of such texts was begun as early as the collection of
discourses and rules. But for many centuries there is no evidence that
they were in any way confounded with the Dharma.

The Mahayanist scriptures are so voluminous that not even the clergy
were expected to master any considerable part of them.[128] Indeed
they make no claim to be a connected whole. The theory was rather that
there were many vehicles plying on the road to salvation and many
guide books. No traveller thought of taking the whole library but only
a few volumes which suited him. Most of the Chinese and Japanese sects
avowedly base themselves upon three sutras, selected according to the
taste of each school from the hundreds quoted in catalogues. Thus the
T'ien-t'ai sect has for its scriptures the Lotus, the Nirvana-sutra
and the Prajna-paramita, while the Shin-shu sect admits only the three
Amidist sutras.

The following are the names of some of the principal Mahayanist
scriptures. Comparatively few of them have been published in Europe
and some exist only in Chinese or Japanese translations.

1. Prajna-paramita or transcendental knowledge[129] is a generic name
given to a whole literature consisting of treatises on the doctrine of
sunyata, which vary greatly in length. They are classed as sutras,
being described as discourses delivered by the Buddha on the Vulture
Peak. At least ten are known, besides excerpts which are sometimes
described as substantive works. The great collection translated into
Chinese by Hsuean Chuang is said to consist of 200,000 verses and to
comprise sixteen different sutras.[130] The earliest translation of
one of these treatises into Chinese (Nanjio, 5) was made about 170
A.D. and everything indicates that portions of the Prajna-paramita are
among the earliest Mahayanist works and date from about the first
century of our era. Prajna not only means knowledge of the absolute
truth, that is to say of sunyata or the void, but is regarded as an
ontological principle synonymous with Bodhi and Dharma-kaya. Thus
Buddhas not only possess this knowledge in the ordinary sense but they
_are_ the knowledge manifest in human form, and Prajna is often
personified as a goddess. All these works lay great stress on the
doctrine of sunyata, and the non-existence of the world of experience.
The longest recension is said to contain a polemic against the
Hinayana.

The Diamond Cutter is one of the best known of these transcendental
treatises and the two short works called Heart of the Prajna-paramita,
which are widely read in Japan, appear to be brief abstracts of the
essence of this teaching.

2. The Saddharma-Pundarika, or Lotus of the Good Law,[131] is one of
the best known Mahayanist sutras and is highly esteemed in China and
Japan. It purports to be a discourse delivered by Sakyamuni on the
Vulture Peak to an assemblage of Bodhisattvas. The Lotus clearly
affirms the multiplicity of vehicles, or various ways of teaching the
law, and also the eternity of the Buddha, but it does not emphasize,
although it mentions, the doctrine of sunyata. The work consists of
two parts of which the second (chaps. XXI-XXVI) is a later addition.
This second part contains spells and many mythological narratives,
including one of an ancient Bodhisattva who burnt himself alive in
honour of a former Buddha. Portions of the Lotus were translated into
Chinese under the Western Tsin Dynasty 265-316 A.D. and it is quoted
in the Maha-prajna-paramita-sastra ascribed to Nagarjuna.[132] The
first part is probably not later than the first century A.D. The Lotus
is unfortunately accessible to English readers only in a most unpoetic
translation by the late Professor Kern, but it is a great religious
poem which starting from humanity regards religion as cosmic and
universal, rather than something mainly concerned with our earth. The
discourses of Sakyamuni are accompanied in it by stupendous miracles
culminating in a grand cosmic phantasmagoria in which is evoked the
stupa containing the body of a departed Buddha, that is a shrine
containing the eternal truth.

3. The Lalita-vistara[133] is a life of Sakyamuni up to the
commencement of his mission. Though the setting of the story is
miraculous and Buddhas and Bodhisattvas innumerable are freely spoken
of, yet the work does not enunciate the characteristic Mahayanist
doctrines so definitely as the other treatises here enumerated. It is
said to have originally belonged to the school of the Sarvastivadins
and to have been subsequently accepted by the Mahayanists, and though
it is not an epic but a collection of ballads and legends, yet it
often reads as if it were a preliminary study for Asvaghosha's
Buddhacarita. It contains Sanskrit versions of old legends, which are
almost verbal renderings of the Pali text, but also new material and
seems to be conscious of relating novelties which may arouse
scepticism for it interrupts the narrative to anathematize those who
do not believe in the miracles of the Nativity and to extol the merits
of faith (_sraddha_ not _bhakti_). It is probably coeval with the
earlier Gandharan art but there are no facts to fix its date.[134]

4. The Lankavatara[135] gives an account of the revelation of the good
Law by Sakyamuni when visiting Lanka. It is presumably subsequent to
the period when Ceylon had become a centre of Buddhism, but the story
is pure fancy and unconnected with history or with older legends. It
relates how the Buddha alighted on Mt. Malaya in Lanka. Ravana came to
pay his respects and asked for definitions of virtue and vice which
were given. The Bodhisattva Mahamati (apparently Manjusri) proceeded
to propound a series of more abstruse questions which are answered at
considerable length. The Lankavatara represents a mature phase of
speculation and not only criticizes the Sankhya, Pasupata and other
Hindu schools, but is conscious of the growing resemblance of
Mahayanism to Brahmanic philosophy and tries to explain it. It
contains a prophecy about Nagarjuna and another which mentions the
Guptas, and it appears to allude to the domination of the Huns. This
allusion would make its date as late as the sixth century but a
translation into Chinese which is said to correspond with the Sanskrit
text was made in 513. If so the barbarians referred to cannot be the
Huns. An earlier translation made in 443 does not agree with our
Sanskrit text and perhaps the work existed in several recensions.

5. The Suvarna-prabhasa or Glitter of Gold[136] is a Vaipulya sutra
in many ways resembling the Lotus. It insists on the supernatural
character of the Buddha. He was never really born nor entered into
Nirvana but is the Dharma-kaya. The scene is laid at Rajagriha and
many Brahmanic deities are among the interlocutors. It was translated
into Chinese about 420 A.D. and fragments of a translation into Uigur
have been discovered in Turkestan.[137] The contents comprise
philosophy, legends and spells.

6. Ganda-vyuha[138] or the Structure of the World, which is compared
to a bubble. The name is not found in the catalogue of the Chinese
Tripitaka but the work is said to be the same as the Avatamsaka sutra
which is popular in the Far East under the name of Hua-yen in China or
Ke-gon in Japan. The identity of the two books could not have been
guessed from the extracts and analyses which have been published but
is guaranteed by high authorities.[139] It is possible however that
the Ganda-vyuha is only a portion of the larger work called
Avatamsaka. So far as can be judged from the extracts, this text
preaches in a fully developed form, the doctrines of Sunyata,
Dharma-kaya, the omnipresence of the Buddha and the redemption of the
world by the exertions of Bodhisattvas. Yet it seems to be early, for
a portion of it was translated into Chinese about 170 A.D. (Nanjio,
102) and about 405 Kumarajiva translated a commentary on it ascribed
to Nagarjuna (Nanjio, 1180).

7. Tathagata-guhyaka. This work is known by the analysis of
Rajendralala Mitra from which it appears to be a Tantra of the worst
class and probably late. Its proper title is said to be
Sriguhyasamaja. Watanabe states that the work catalogued by Nanjio
under No. 1027 and translated into Chinese about 1000 A.D. is an
expurgated version of it. The Sikshasamuccaya cites the
Tathagata-guhya-sutra several times. The relations of these works to
one another are not quite clear.

8. Samadhiraja[140] is a Vyakarana or narrative describing different
forms of meditation of which the Samadhiraja is the greatest and best.
The scene is laid on the Vulture's Peak and the principal
interlocutors are Sakyamuni and Candraprabha, a rich man of
Rajagriha. It appears to be the same as the Candrapradipa-sutra and
is a complete and copious treatise, which not only expounds the topic
from which it takes its name but incidentally enumerates the chief
principles of Mahayanism. Watanabe[141] states that it is the
Yueeh-teng-san-mei-ching (Nanjio, 191) translated about 450 and again
in 557 A.D.

9. Dasabhumisvara.[142] An account of the ten stages in the career of
a Bodhisattva before he can attain to Buddhahood. The scene is laid in
the paradise of Indra where Sakyamuni was temporarily sojourning and
the principal interlocutor is a Bodhisattva named Vajragarbha. It is
said to be the same as the Dasabhumika-sutra first translated into
Chinese about 300 A.D. (Nanjio, 105 and 110) but this work appears to
be merely a portion of the Ganda-vyuha or Avatamsaka mentioned
above.

These nine works are all extant in Sanskrit and are known in Nepal as
the nine Dharmas, the word Dharma being an abbreviation for
_Dharmaparyaya_, revolution or exposition of the law, a term
frequently used in the works themselves to describe a comprehensive
