ably on Scriptural topics that clergymen of other denominations listened to
him with deep interest. He was remarkably successful in Mind-healing, and
untiring in his chosen work. In 1882 he passed away, with a smile of peace
and love resting on his serene countenance. "Mark the perfect _man_, and
behold the upright: for the end of _that_ man _is_ peace." (Psalms xxxvii.
37.)




COLLEGE AND CHURCH


In 1867 I introduced the first purely metaphysical system of healing since
the apostolic days. I began by teaching one student Christian Science
Mind-healing. From this seed grew the Massachusetts Metaphysical College in
Boston, chartered in 1881. No charter was granted for similar purposes
after 1883. It is the only College, hitherto, for teaching the pathology of
spiritual power, _alias_ the Science of Mind-healing.

My husband, Asa G. Eddy, taught two terms in my College. After I gave up
teaching, my adopted son, Ebenezer J. Foster-Eddy, a graduate of the
Hahneman Medical College of Philadelphia, and who also received a
certificate from Dr. W.W. Keen's (allopathic) Philadelphia School of
Anatomy and Surgery,--having renounced his material method of practice and
embraced the teachings of Christian Science, taught the Primary, Normal,
and Obstetric class one term. Gen. Erastus N. Bates taught one Primary
class, in 1889, after which I judged it best to close the institution.
These students of mine were the only assistant teachers in the College.

The first Christian Scientist Association was organized by myself and six
of my students in 1876, on the Centennial Day of our nation's freedom. At a
meeting of the Christian Scientist Association, on April 12, 1879, it was
voted to organize a church to commemorate the words and works of our
Master, a Mind-healing church, without a creed, to be called the Church of
Christ, Scientist, the first such church ever organized. The charter for
this church was obtained in June, 1879,[D] and during the same month the
members, twenty-six in number, extended a call to me to become their
pastor. I accepted the call, and was ordained in 1881, though I had
preached five years before being ordained.

When I was its pastor, and in the pulpit every Sunday, my church increased
in members, and its spiritual growth kept pace with its increasing
popularity; but when obliged, because of accumulating work in the College,
to preach only occasionally, no student, at that time, was found able to
maintain the church in its previous harmony and prosperity.

Examining the situation prayerfully and carefully, noting the church's
need, and the predisposing and exciting cause of its condition, I saw that
the crisis had come when much time and attention must be given to defend
this church from the envy and molestation of other churches, and from the
danger to its members which must always lie in Christian warfare. At this
juncture I recommended that the church be dissolved. No sooner were my
views made known, than the proper measures were adopted to carry them out,
the votes passing without a dissenting voice.

This measure was immediately followed by a great revival of mutual love,
prosperity, and spiritual power.

The history of that hour holds this true record. Adding to its ranks and
influence, this spiritually organized Church of Christ, Scientist, in
Boston, still goes on. A new light broke in upon it, and more beautiful
became the garments of her who "bringeth good tidings, that publisheth
peace."

Despite the prosperity of my church, it was learned that material
organization has its value and peril, and that organization is requisite
only in the earliest periods in Christian history. After this material form
of cohesion and fellowship has accomplished its end, continued organization
retards spiritual growth, and should be laid off,--even as the corporeal
organization deemed requisite in the first stages of mortal existence is
finally laid off, in order to gain spiritual freedom and supremacy.

From careful observation and experience came my clue to the uses and abuses
of organization. Therefore, in accord with my special request, followed
that noble, unprecedented action of the Christian Scientist Association
connected with my College when dissolving that organization,--in forgiving
enemies, returning good for evil, in following Jesus' command, "Whosoever
shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also." I saw
these fruits of Spirit, long-suffering and temperance, fulfil the law of
Christ in righteousness. I also saw that Christianity has withstood less
the temptation of popularity than of persecution.




"FEED MY SHEEP"

Lines penned when I was pastor of the Church of Christ, Scientist, in
Boston.


    Shepherd, show me how to go
      O'er the hillside steep,
    How to gather, how to sow,--
      How to feed Thy sheep;
    I will listen for Thy voice,
      Lest my footsteps stray;
    I will follow and rejoice
      All the rugged way.

    Thou wilt bind the stubborn will,
      Wound the callous breast,
    Make self-righteousness be still,
      Break earth's stupid rest.
    Strangers on a barren shore,
      Lab'ring long and lone,
    We would enter by the door,
      And Thou know'st Thine own.

    So, when day grows dark and cold,
      Tear or triumph harms,
    Lead Thy lambkins to the fold,
      Take them in Thine arms;
    Feed the hungry, heal the heart,
      Till the morning's beam;
    White as wool, ere they depart,
      Shepherd, wash them clean.




COLLEGE CLOSED


The apprehension of what has been, and must be, the final outcome of
material organization, which wars with Love's spiritual compact, caused me
to dread the unprecedented popularity of my College. Students from all over
our continent, and from Europe, were flooding the school. At this time
there were over three hundred applications from persons desiring to enter
the College, and applicants were rapidly increasing. Example had shown the
dangers arising from being placed on earthly pinnacles, and Christian
Science shuns whatever involves material means for the promotion of
spiritual ends.

In view of all this, a meeting was called of the Board of Directors of my
College, who, being informed of my intentions, unanimously voted that the
school be discontinued.

A Primary class student, richly imbued with the spirit of Christ, is a
better healer and teacher than a Normal class student who partakes less of
God's love. After having received instructions in a Primary class from me,
or a loyal student, and afterwards studied thoroughly Science and Health, a
student can enter upon the gospel work of teaching Christian Science, and
so fulfil the command of Christ. But before entering this field of labor he
must have studied the latest editions of my works, be a good Bible scholar
and a consecrated Christian.

The Massachusetts Metaphysical College drew its breath from me, but I was
yearning for retirement. The question was, Who else could sustain this
institute, under all that was aimed at its vital purpose, the establishment
of _genuine_ Christian Science healing? My conscientious scruples about
diplomas, the recent experience of the church fresh in my thoughts, and the
growing conviction that every one should build on his own foundation,
subject to the one builder and maker, God,--all these considerations moved
me to close my flourishing school, and the following resolutions were
passed:--

    At a special meeting of the Board of the Metaphysical College
    Corporation, Oct. 29, 1889, the following are some of the
    resolutions which were presented and passed unanimously:--

    WHEREAS, The Massachusetts Metaphysical College,
    chartered in January, 1881, for medical purposes, to give
    instruction in scientific methods of mental healing on a purely
    practical basis, to impart a thorough understanding of
    metaphysics, to restore health, hope, and harmony to man,--has
    fulfilled its high and noble destiny, and sent to all parts of our
    country, and into foreign lands, students instructed in Christian
    Science Mind-healing, to meet the demand of the age for something
    higher than physic or drugging; and

    WHEREAS, The material organization was, in the beginning
    in this institution, like the baptism of Jesus, of which he said,
    "Suffer it to be so now," though the teaching was a purely
    spiritual and scientific impartation of Truth, whose Christly
    spirit has led to higher ways, means, and understanding,--the
    President, the Rev. Mary B.G. Eddy, at the height of prosperity
    in the institution, which yields a large income, is willing to
    sacrifice all for the advancement of the world in Truth and Love;
    and

    WHEREAS, Other institutions for instruction in Christian
    Science, which are working out their periods of organization, will
    doubtless follow the example of the _Alma Mater_ after having
    accomplished the worthy purpose for which they were organized, and
    the hour has come wherein the great need is for more of the spirit
    instead of the letter, and Science and Health is adapted to work
    this result; and

    WHEREAS, The fundamental principle for growth in
    Christian Science is spiritual formation first, last, and always,
    while in human growth material organization is first; and

    WHEREAS, Mortals must learn to lose their estimate of the
    powers that are not ordained of God, and attain the bliss of
    loving unselfishly, working patiently, and conquering all that is
    unlike Christ and the example he gave; therefore

    _Resolved_, That we thank the State for its charter, which is the
    only one ever granted to a _legal college_ for teaching the
    Science of Mind-healing; that we thank the public for its liberal
    patronage. And everlasting gratitude is due to the President, for
    her great and noble work, which we believe will prove a healing
    for the nations, and bring all men to a knowledge of the true God,
    uniting them in one common brotherhood.

    After due deliberation and earnest discussion it was unanimously
    voted: That as all debts of the corporation have been paid, it is
    deemed best to dissolve this corporation, and the same is hereby
    dissolved.

    C.A. FRYE, _Clerk_.

When God impelled me to set a price on my instruction in Christian Science
Mind-healing, I could think of no financial equivalent for an impartation
of a knowledge of that divine power which heals; but I was led to name
three hundred dollars as the price for each pupil in one course of lessons
at my College,--a startling sum for tuition lasting barely three weeks.
This amount greatly troubled me. I shrank from asking it, but was finally
led, by a strange providence, to accept this fee.

God has since shown me, in multitudinous ways, the wisdom of this decision;
and I beg disinterested people to ask my loyal students if they consider
three hundred dollars any real equivalent for my instruction during twelve
half-days, or even in half as many lessons. Nevertheless, my list of
indigent charity scholars is very large, and I have had as many as
seventeen in one class.

Loyal students speak with delight of their pupilage, and of what it has
done for them, and for others through them. By loyalty in students I mean
this,--allegiance to God, subordination of the human to the divine,
steadfast justice, and strict adherence to divine Truth and Love.

I see clearly that students in Christian Science should, at present,
continue to organize churches, schools, and associations for the
furtherance and unfolding of Truth, and that my necessity is not
necessarily theirs; but it was the Father's opportunity for furnishing a
new rule of order in divine Science, and the blessings which arose
therefrom. Students are not environed with such obstacles as were
encountered in the beginning of pioneer work.

In December, 1889, I gave a lot of land in Boston to my student, Mr. Ira O.
Knapp of Roslindale,--valued in 1892 at about twenty thousand dollars, and
rising in value,--to be appropriated for the erection, and building on the
premises thereby conveyed, of a church edifice to be used as a temple for
Christian Science worship.




GENERAL ASSOCIATIONS, AND OUR MAGAZINE


For many successive years I have endeavored to find new ways and means for
the promotion and expansion of scientific Mind-healing, seeking to broaden
its channels and, if possible, to build a hedge round about it that should
shelter its perfections from the contaminating influences of those who have
a small portion of its letter and less of its spirit. At the same time I
have worked to provide a home for every true seeker and honest worker in
this vineyard of Truth.

To meet the broader wants of humanity, and provide folds for the sheep that
were without shepherds, I suggested to my students, in 1886, the propriety
of forming a National Christian Scientist Association. This was immediately
done, and delegations from the Christian Scientist Association of the
Massachusetts Metaphysical College, and from branch associations in other
States, met in general convention at New York City, February 11, 1886.

The first official organ of the Christian Scientist Association was called
_Journal of Christian Science_. I started it, April, 1883, as editor and
publisher.

To the National Christian Scientist Association, at its meeting in
Cleveland, Ohio, June, 1889, I sent a letter, presenting to its loyal
members _The Christian Science Journal_, as it was now called, and the
funds belonging thereto. This monthly magazine had been made successful and
prosperous under difficult circumstances and was designed to bear aloft the
standard of genuine Christian Science.

