himself to the Consideration of the most simple sensible Bodies he could
find, which were those four, about which he had been exercis'd. And
first of all he consider'd the _Water_, which he found, if let alone in
that Condition which its Form requir'd, had these two things in it,
_viz_. Sensible Cold, and a Propension to move downwards; But if heated
by the Fire or the Sun, its Coldness was remov'd, but its Propension to
move downwards still remain'd: But afterwards, when it came to be more
vehemently heated, it lost its tendency downwards, and mounted upwards;
and so it was wholly depriv'd of both those Properties which us'd
constantly to proceed from it, and from its Form: Nor did he know any
thing more of its Form, but only that these two Actions proceeded from
thence; and when these two ceas'd, the Nature of the Form was alter'd,
and the watry Form was remov'd from that Body, since there appear'd in
it Actions, which must needs owe their Origin to another Form. Therefore
it must have receiv'd another Form which had not been there before,from
which arose those Actions, which never us'd to appear in it whilst it
had the other Form.

Sec. 49. Now he knew that every thing that was produc'd anew, must needs
have some Producer. And from this Contemplation, there arose in his Mind
a sort of Impression of the Maker of that Form, tho' his Notion of him
as yet was general and indistinct. Then he paus'd on the examining of
these Forms which he knew before, one by one, and found that they were
produc'd anew, and that they must of necessity be beholden to some
efficient Cause. Then he consider'd the Essences of Forms, and found
that they were nothing else, but only a Disposition of _Body_ to produce
such or such Actions. For instance, Water, when very much heated, is
dispos'd to rise upwards, and that Disposition is its Form. For there is
nothing present in this Motion, but _Body_, and some things which are
observ'd to arise from it, which were not in it before (such as
Qualities and Motions) and the Efficients which produce them. Now the
fitness of Body for one Motion rather than another, is its _Disposition_
and _Form_. The same he concluded of all other Forms, and it appear'd to
him, that those Actions which arose from them, were not in reality owing
to them, but to the efficient Cause, who made use of these Forms to
produce those Actions which are attributed to them, [_i.e_, the Forms].
Which Notion of his is exactly the same with what God's Apostle
[_Mahomet_] says; _I am his Hearing by which he hears, and his Seeing by
which he sees._ And in the _Alcoran; You did not kill them, but God
kill'd them; when thou threwest the Darts, it was not thou that threwest
them, but God_.

Sec. 50. Now, when he had attain'd thus far, so as to have a general and
indistinct Motion of this _Agent_, he had a most earnest Desire to know
him distinctly. And because he had not as yet withdrawn himself from the
sensible World, he began to look for this _voluntary Agent_ among
sensible Things; nor did he as yet know, whether it was one Agent or
many. Therefore he enquir'd strictly into all such Bodies as he had
about him, _viz_. those which he had been employ'd about all along, and
he found that they were all liable to _Generation_ and _Corruption_: And
if there were any which did not suffer a total Corruption, yet they were
liable to a partial one, as _Water_ and _Earth_, the parts of which are
consum'd by Fire. Likewise he perceiv'd, that the _Air_ was by extremity
of Cold chang'd into Snow, and then again into Water; and among all the
rest of the Bodies which he was conversant with, he could find none
which had not its Existence anew, and required some _voluntary Agent_ to
give it a Being. Upon which account he laid them all aside, and
transferr'd his Thoughts to the Consideration of the Heavenly Bodies.
And thus far he reach'd in his Contemplations, about the end of the
fourth Septenary of his Age, _viz_. when he now eight and twenty Years
old.

Sec. 51. Now he knew very well, that the Heavens, and all the Luminaries in
them, were Bodies, because they were all extended according to the three
Dimensions Length, Breadth and Thickness, without any exception; and
that every thing that was so extended, was Body; _ergo_, they were all
Bodies. Then, he consider'd next, whether they were extended infinitely,
as to stretch themselves to an endless Length, Breadth and Thickness;
or, whether they were circumscrib'd by any Limits, and terminated by
some certain Bounds, beyond which there could be no Extension. But here
he stopp'd a while, as in a kind of Amazement.

Sec. 52. At last, by the strength of his Apprehension, and Sagacity of his
Understanding, he perceiv'd that the Notion of infinite Body was absurd
and impossible, and a Notion wholly intelligible. He confirm'd himself
in this Judgment of his, by a great many Arguments which occurr'd to
him, when he thus argued with himself. _That this heavenly Body is
terminated on this side which is next to me, is evident to my sight: And
that it cannot be infinitely extended on that opposite side, which
rais'd this Scruple in me; I prove thus: Suppose two Lines drawn from
the Extremity of this Heavenly Body, on that terminated Side which is
next to me, which Lines should be produc'd quite through this Body_, in
infinitum, _according to the Extension of the Body; then suppose a long
part of one of these Lines, cut off at this End which is next to me;
then take the Remainder of what was cut off, and draw down that end of
it where it was cut off; And lay it even with the end of the other Line
from which there was nothing cut off; and let that Line which was
shortned, lye parallel with the other; then suppose them through this
Body, till you come to that side which we suppos'd to be infinite:
Either you will find both these Lines infinitely extended, and then one
of them cannot be shorter than the other, but that which had a part of
it cut off, will be as long as that which was not, which is absurd: Or
else the Line which was cut will not be so long as that other, and
consequently finite: Therefore if you add that part to it which was cut
off from it at first, which was finite, the whole will be finite; and
then it will be no longer or shorter than that Line which had nothing
cut off from it, therefore equal to it; But this is finite, therefore
the other is finite. Therefore the Body in which such Lines are drawn is
finite; And all Bodies in which such Lines may be drawn, are finite: But
such Lines may be drawn in all Bodies. Therefore if we suppose an
infinite Body, we suppose an Absurdity and Impossibility._

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration 6]

       *       *       *       *       *

Sec. 52b. When by the singular strength of his Genius, (which he exerted in
the finding out such a Demonstration) he had satisfied himself that the
Body of Heaven was finite; he desired, in the next place, to know what
Figure it was of, and how it was limited by the circumambient
Superficies. And first he observ'd the Sun, Moon and Stars, and saw that
they all rose in the East, and set in the West; and those which went
right over his Head describ'd a great Circle, but those at at greater
distance from the Vertical Point, either Northward or Southward,
describ'd a lesser Circle. So that the least Circles which were
describ'd by any of the Stars, were those two which went round the two
Poles, the one North, the other South; the last of which is the Circle
of _Sohail_ or _Canopus_; the first, the Circle of those two Stars which
are called in _Arabick Alpherkadani_. Now because he liv'd under the
Equinoctial Line, (as we shew'd before) all those Circles did cut the
Horizon at right Angles, and both North and South were alike to him, and
he could see both the Pole-Stars: He observ'd, that if a Star arose at
any time in a great Circle, and another Star at the same in a lesser
Circle, yet nevertheless, as they rose together, so they set together:
and he observ'd it of all the Stars, and at all times. From whence he
concluded, that the Heaven was of a Spherical Figure; in which Opinion
he was confirm'd, by observing the Return of the Sun, Moon and Stars to
the East, after their Setting; and also, because they always appear'd to
him of the same bigness, both when they rose, and when they were in the
midst of Heaven, and at the time of their Setting; whereas, if their
Motions had not been Circular, they must have been nearer to sight, at
some times than others; and consequently their Dimensions would have
appear'd proportionably greater or lesser; but since there was no such
Appearance, he concluded that their Motions were Circular. Then he
consider'd the Motion of the Moon and the Planets from West to East,
till at last he understood a great part of Astronomy. Besides, he
apprehended that their Motions were in different Spheres, all which were
comprehended in another which was above them all, and which turn'd about
all the rest in the space of a Day and a Night. But it were too tedious
to explain particularly how he advanc'd in this Science; besides, 'tis
taught in other Books; and what we have already said, is as much as is
requisite for our present purpose.

Sec. 53. When he had attain'd to this degree of Knowledge, he found that
the whole Orb of the Heavens, and whatsoever was contained in it, was as
one Thing compacted and join'd together; and that all those Bodies which
he us'd to consider before as Earth, Water, Air, Plants, Animals and the
like, were all of them so contain'd in it, as never to go out of its
Bounds: And that the whole was like One Animal, in which the Luminaries
represented the Senses; The Spheres so join'd and compacted together,
answer'd to the Limbs; and the Sublunary World, to the Belly, in which
the Excrements and Humors are contain'd, and which oftentimes breeds
Animals, as the Greater World.

Sec. 54. Now when it appear'd to him, that the whole World was only One
Substance, depending upon a Voluntary Agent, and he had united all the
Parts of it, by the same way of thinking which he had before made use of
in considering the Sublunary World; he proposed to his Consideration the
World in General, and debated with himself, whether it did exist in
_Time_,after it had been; and came to _Be_, out of nothing; or whether
it had been from Eternity, without any Privation preceeding it.
Concerning this Matter, he had very many and great Doubts; so that
neither of these two Opinions did prevail over the other. For when he
propos'd to himself the Belief of its Eternity, there arose a great many
Objections in his Mind; because he thought that the Notion of Infinite
Existence was press'd with no less Difficulties, than that of Infinite
Extension: And that such a Being as was not free from Accidents produc'd
anew, must also it self be produc'd anew, because it cannot be said to
be more ancient than those Accidents: And that which cannot exist before
Accidents produc'd in Time, must needs itself be produc'd in Time. Then
on the other hand, when he propos'd to himself the Belief of its being
produc'd a-new, other Objections occur'd to him; for he perceiv'd that
it was impossible to conceive any Notion of its being produc'd a-new,
unless it was suppos'd that there was Time before it; whereas Time was
one of those things which belong'd to the World, and was inseparable
from it; and therefore the World could not be suppos'd to be later than
Time. Then he consider'd, that a Thing Created must needs have a
Creator: And if so, Why did this Creator make the World now, and not as
well before? Was it because of any new Chance which happen'd to him?
That could not be; for there was nothing existent besides himself. Was
it then upon the Account of any Change in his own Nature? But what
should cause that Change? Thus he continued for several Years, arguing
_pro_ and _con_ about this Matter; and a great many Arguments offer'd
themselves on both sides, so that neither of these two Opinions in his
Judgment over-balanc'd the other.

Sec. 55. This put him to a great deal of trouble, which made him begin to
consider with himself, what were the Consequences which did follow from
each of these Opinions, and that perhaps they might be both alike. And
he perceiv'd, that if he held that the World was created in Time, and
existed after a total Privation, it would necessarily follow from
thence, that it could not exist of it self, without the help of some
Agent to produce it. And that this Agent must needs be such an one as
cannot be apprehended by our Senses; for if he should be the Object of
Sense, he must: be _Body_, and if _Body_, then a Part of the World, and
consequently a Created Being; such an one, as would have stood in need
of some other Cause to create him: and if that second Creator was
_Body_, he would depend upon a, third, and that third upon upon a
fourth, and so _ad infinitum_, which is absurd. Since therefore the
World stands in need of an incorporeal Creator: And since the Creator
thereof is really incorporeal, 'tis impossible for us to apprehend him
by any of our Senses; for we perceive nothing by the help of them, but
_Body_, or such Accidents as adhere to _Bodies_: And because he cannot
be perceiv'd by the Senses, it is impossible he should be apprehended by
the Imagination; for the Imagination does only represent to us the Forms
of things in their absence, which we have before learn'd by our Senses.
And since he is not _Body_, we must not attribute to him any of the
Properties of _Body_; the first of which is Extension, from which he is
free, as also from all those Properties of Bodies which flow from it.
And seeing that he is the Maker of the World, doubtless he has the
Sovereign Command over it. _Shall not he know it, that created it? He is
wise, Omniscient!_

Sec. 56. On the other side, he saw that if he held the Eternity of the
World, and that it always was as it now is, without any Privation before
it; then it would follow, that its Motion must be Eternal too; because
there could be no Rest before it, from whence it might commence its
Motion. Now all Motion necessarily requires a Mover; and this Mover must
be either a Power diffus'd through the Body mov'd, or else through some
other Body without it, or else a certain Power, not diffus'd or
dispers'd through any Body at all. Now every Power which passeth, or is
diffus'd, through any Body, is divided or doubled. For Instance; The
_Gravity_ in a Stone, by which it tends downwards, if you divide the
Stone into two parts, is divided into two parts also; and if you add to
it another like it, the Gravity is doubled. And if it were possible to
add Stones _in infinitum,_ the Gravity would increase _in infinitum_
too. And if it were possible, that that Stone should grow still bigger,
till it reach'd to an infinite Extension, the Weight would increase also
in the same proportion; and if on the other side, a Stone should grow to
a certain size, and stop there, the Gravity would also increase to such
a pitch, and no farther. Now it is demonstrated, that all Body must
necessarily be finite; and consequently, that Power which is in Body is
finite too. If therefore we can find any Power, which produces an
Infinite Effect, 'tis plain that it is not in Body. Now we find, that
the Heav'n is mov'd about with a Perpetual Motion, without any
Cessation. Therefore if we affirm the Eternity of the World, it
necessarily follows that the Power which moves it, is not in its own
Body, nor in the other Exterior Body; but proceeds from something
altogether abstracted from Body, and which cannot be describ'd by
Corporeal Adjuncts or Properties. Now he had learn'd from his first
Contemplation of the Sublunary World, that the true Essence of Body
consisted in its _Form,_ which is its Disposition to several sorts of
Motion; but that Part of its Essence which consisted in _Matter_ was
very mean, and scarce possible to be conceiv'd; therefore the Existence
of the whole World consists in its Disposition to be mov'd by this
Mover, who is free from Matter, and the Properties of Body; abstracted
from every thing which we can either perceive by our Senses, or reach by
our Imagination. And since he is the Efficient Cause of the Motions of
the Heavens, in which (notwithstanding their several kinds) there is no
difference, no Confusion, no Cessation; without doubt he has a Power
over it, and a perfect Knowledge of it.

Sec. 57. Thus his Contemplation this Way, brought him to the same
Conclusion it did the other Way. So that doubting concerning the
Eternity of the World, and its Existence _de novo_, did him no harm at
all. For it was plain to him both ways, that there was a Being, which
was not Body, nor join'd to Body, nor separated from it; nor within it,
nor without it; because Conjunction and Separation, and being within any
thing, or without it, are all properties of Body, from which that Being
is altogether abstracted. And because all Bodies stand in need of a Form
to be added to their Matter, as not being able to subsist without it,
nor exist really; and the Form it self cannot exist, but by this
Voluntary Agent, it appear'd to him that all things ow'd their Existence
to this Agent; and that none of them could subsist, but through him: and
consequently, that he was the Cause, and they the Effects, (whether they
were newly created after a Privation, or whether they had no Beginning,
in respect of him, 'twas all one) and Creatures whose Existence depended
upon that Being; and that without his Continuance they could not
continue, nor exist without his Existing, nor have been eternal without
his being Eternal; but that he was essentially independent of them, and
free from them. And how should it be otherwise, when it is demonstrated,
that his Power and Might are infinite, and that all Bodies, and
whatsoever belongs to them are finite? Consequently, that the whole
World, and whatsoever was in it, the Heavens, the Earth, the Stars, and
whatsoever was between them above them, or beneath them, was all his
Work and Creation, and posterior to him in Nature, if not in Time. As,
if you take any Body whatsoever in your Hand, and then move your Hand,
the Body will without doubt follow the Motion of your Hand, with such a
Motion as shall be posterior to it in Nature, tho' not in Time, because
they both began together: So all this World is caus'd and created by
this Agent out of Time, _Whose Command is, when he would have any thing
done, BE, and it is_.

Sec. 58. And when he perceiv'd that all things which did exist were his
Workmanship, he look'd them over again, considering attentively the
Power of the Efficient, and admiring the Wonderfulness of the
Workmanship, and such accurate Wisdom, and subtil Knowledge. And there
appear'd to him in the most minute Creatures (much more in the greater)
such Footsteps of Wisdom, and Wonders of the Work of Creation, that he
was swallow'd up with Admiration, and fully assur'd that these things
could not proceed from any other, than a Voluntary Agent of infinite
Perfection, nay, that was above all Perfection; such an one, to whom the
Weight of the least Atom was not unknown, whether in Heaven or Earth;
no, nor any other thing, whether lesser or greater than it.

Sec.. 59. Then he consider'd all the kinds of Animals, and how this Agent
had given such a Fabrick of Body to every one of them, and then taught
them how to use it. For if he had not directed them to apply those Limbs
which he had given them, to those respective Uses for which they were
design'd, they would have been so far from being of any Service that
they would rather have been a Burden. From whence he knew, that the
Creator of the World was supereminently Bountiful, and exceedingly
Gracious. And then when he perceiv'd among the Creatures, any that had
Beauty, Perfection, Strength, or Excellency of any kind whatever, he
consider'd with himself, and knew that it all flow'd from that Voluntary
Agent, (whose Name be praised) and from his Essence and Operation. And
he knew, that what the Agent had in his own Nature, was greater than
that, [which he saw in the Creatures,] more perfect and compleat, more
beautiful and glorious, and more lasting; and that there was no
proportion between the one and the other. Neither did he cease to
prosecute this Search, till he had run through all the Attributes of
Perfection, and found that they were all in this Agent, and all flow'd
from him; and that he was most worthy to have them all ascrib'd to him,
above all the Creatures which were describ'd by them.

Sec. 60. In like manner he enquir'd into all the Attributes of
Imperfection, and perceiv'd that the Maker of the World was free from
them all: And how was it possible for him to be otherwise, since the
Notion of _Imperfection_ is nothing but _mere Privation,_ or what
depends upon it? And how can he any way partake of _Privation_, who is
_very Essence_, and cannot but exist; who gives Being to every thing
that exists, and besides whom there is no Existence? But HE is the
Being, HE is the Absoluteness, HE the Beauty, HE the Glory, HE the
Power, HE the Knowledge, _HE is HE, and besides Him all things are
subject to perishing_[19].

Sec. 61. Thus far his Knowledge had brought him towards the end of the
fifth Septenary from his Birth, _viz._ when he was 35 Years old. And the
Consideration of this Supream Agent was then so rooted in his Heart,
that it diverted him from thinking upon any thing else: and he so far
forgot the Consideration of the Creatures, and the Enquiring into their
Natures, that as soon as e'er he cast his Eyes upon any thing of what
kind soever, he immediately perceiv'd in it the Footsteps of this Agent;
and in an instant his Thoughts were taken off from the Creature, and and
transferred to the Creator. So that he was inflam'd with the desire of
him, and his Heart was altogether withdrawn from thinking upon this
inferior World, which contains the Objects of Sense, and wholly taken up
with the Contemplation of the upper, Intellectual World.

Sec. 62. Having now attain'd to the Knowledge of this Supream Being, of
Permanent Existence, which has no Cause of his own Existence, but is the
Cause why all things else exist; he was desirous to know by what Means
he had attain'd this Knowledge, and by which of his Faculties he had
apprehended this Being. And first he examin'd all his Senses, _viz_. his
Hearing, Sight, Smelling, Tasting and Feeling, and perceiv'd that all
these apprehended nothing but Body, or what was in Body. For the Hearing
apprehended nothing but Sounds, and these came from the Undulation of
the Air, when Bodies are struck one against another. The Sight,
apprehends Colours. The Smelling, Odours. The Taste, Savours. And the
Touch, the Temperatures and Dispositions of Bodies, such as Hardness
Softness, Roughness ad Smoothness. Nor does the Imagination apprehend
any thing, but as it has Length, Breadth and Thickness. Now all these
things which are thus apprehended, are the Adjuncts of Bodies; nor can
these Senses apprehend any thing else, because they are Faculties
diffus'd through Bodies, and divided according to the division of
Bodies, and for that reason cannot apprehend any thing else but
divisible Body. For since this Faculty is diffus'd through the visible
Body, 'tis impossible, but that when it apprehends any thing whatsoever,
that thing so apprehended, must be divided as the Faculty is divided.
For which Reason, no Faculty which is seated in Body, can apprehend any
thing but what is Body, or in it. Now we have already demonstrated, that
this necessarily Existent Being is free in every respect from all
Properties of Body; and consequently not to be apprehended, but by
something which is neither Body, nor any Faculty inherent in Body, nor
has any manner of dependance upon it, nor is either within it, or
without it, nor join'd to it, nor separated from it. From whence it
appear'd to him, that he had apprehended this Being by that which was
his Essence, and gain'd a certain Knowledge of him. And from hence he
concluded, that this Essence was Incorporeal, and free from all the
Properties of Body. And that all his External Part which he saw, was not
in reality his Essence; by that his true Essence was _That_, by which he
apprehended that Absolute Being of necessary Existence.

Sec. 63. Having thus learn'd, that this Essence was not that Corporeal Mass
which he perceiv'd with his Senses, and was cloath'd with his Skin, he
began to entertain mean Thoughts of his Body, and set himself to
contemplate that Noble Being, by which he had reach'd the Knowledge of
that Superexcellent, and Necessarily existent Being; and began to
consider with himself, by means of that Noble Essence of his, whether
this Noble Essence of his could possibly be dissolv'd, or dye, or be
annihilated; or whether it were of perpetual duration. Now he knew that
Corruption and Dissolution were Properties of Body, and consisted in the
putting off one Form, and putting on another. As for Instance: when
Water is chang'd into Air, and Air into Water; or when Plants are turn'd
into Earth or Ashes, and Earth again into Plants; (for this is the true
Notion of Corruption.) But an Incorporeal Being, which has no dependance
upon Body, but is altogether free from the Accidents proper to Body,
cannot be suppos'd to be liable to Corruption.

Sec. 64. Having thus secur'd himself in this Belief, that his _Real
Essence_ could not be dissolv'd, he had a mind to know what Condition it
should be in, when he had laid aside the Body, and was separated from
it; which he persuaded himself would not be, till the Body ceas'd to
continue a fit Instrument for its use. Therefore he consider'd all his
Apprehensive Faculties, and perceiv'd that every one of them did
sometimes apprehend _Potentially_, and sometimes _Actually_; as the Eye
when it is shut, or turn'd away from the Object, sees _Potentially_.(For
the meaning of apprehending _Potentially_ is, when it does not apprehend
_now_, yet can do it for _the time to come_.) And when the Eye is open,
and turn'd toward the Object, it sees _Actually_ (for that is call'd
Actual, which, is present,) and so every one of these Faculties is some
times in _Power_, and sometimes in _Act_: And if any of them did never
actually apprehend its Proper Object, so long as it remains in Power, it
has no desire to any Particular Object; because it knows nothing of any,
(as a Man that is born blind.) But if it did ever actually Apprehend,
and then be reduc'd to the Power only: so long as it remains in that
condition, it will desire to apprehend in Act; because it has been
acquainted with the Object, and is intent upon it, and lingers after it;
as a Man who could once see, and after is blind, continually desires
Visible Objects: And according as the Object which he has seen, is more
perfect, and glorious, and beautiful, his Desire towards it is
proportionably increased, and his Grief for the Loss of it so much the
greater. Hence it is that the Grief of him who is depriv'd of that Sight
he once had, is greater than his who is depriv'd of Smelling; because
she Objects of Sight are more perfect and beautiful than those of
Smelling. And if there be any thing of boundless Perfection, infinite
Beauty, Glory and Splendor, that is above all Splendor and Beauty; so
that there is no Perfection, Beauty, Brightness, or Comliness, but flows
from it. Then certainly he that shall be depriv'd of the Sight and
Knowledge of that Thing, after he has once been acquainted with it, must
necessarily, so long as he continues in that State, suffer inexpressible
Anguish; as on the contrary, he that continually has it present to him,
must needs enjoy uninterrupted Delight, perpetual Felicity, and infinite
Joy and Gladness.

Sec. 65. Now it had been already made plain to him, that all the Attributes
of Perfection belonged to that Being which did necessarily self-exist,
and that he was far from all manner of Imperfection. He was certain
withal, that the Faculty by which he attain'd to the Apprehension of
this Being, was not like to Bodies, nor subject to Corruption, as they
are. And from hence it appear'd to him, that whosoever had such an
Essence as was capable of apprehending this _Noble Being,_ must, when he
put off the Body at the time of his Death, have been formerly, during
his Conversation in the Body, first, either one who was not acquainted
with this necessarily self-existent Essence, nor ever was join'd to him,
nor ever heard any thing of him; and so would, at the separating with
the Body, never to be join'd to him, nor to be concern'd at the want of
him. Because all the Corporeal Faculties cease when the Body dies, nor
do they any longer desire or linger after their proper Objects; nor are
in any trouble or pain for their absence; (which is the Condition of all
Brutes, of what shape soever they are.) Or else, secondly, such an one,
who while he continu'd in the Body, did converse with this Being, and
had a sense of his Perfection, Greatness, Dominion, and Power; but
afterwards declin'd from him, and follow'd his vicious Inclinations,
till at length Death overtook him whilst in this State; he shall be
depriv'd of that Vision, and yet be afflicted with the Desire of
Enjoying it, and so remain in lasting Punishment and inexpressible
Torture; whether he be to be delivered from his Misery after a long
time, and enjoy that Vision which he so earnestly desires; or,
everlastingly to abide in the same Torments, according as he was fitted
and dispos'd for either of these two, during his continuance in the
Body. Or lastly, were such an one, who convers'd with this necessarily
self-existent Being, and apply'd himself to it, with the utmost of his
Ability, and has all his Thoughts continually intent upon his Glory,
Beauty, and Splendor, and never turns from him, nor forsakes him, till
Death seizes him in the Act of Contemplation and Intuition: Such a Man
as this shall, when separated from Body, remain in everlasting Pleasure,
