Egypt is its stronghold, but it is powerful too in Arabia and further
East. With it a first article of faith is that the House of Othman has
been and is the curse of Islam, and that its end is at hand.

In spite of Abd el Hamid's pious appeals to the Sheriat they look upon
him as one who troubleth Islam. He is the representative of the party
most bitterly opposed to all of good. They know that as long as there is
an Ottoman Caliph, whether his name be Abd el Aziz or Abd el Hamid,
moral progress is impossible, that the ijtahad cannot be re-opened, and
that no such reformation of doctrine and practice can be attempted as
would alone enable their faith to cope with modern infidelity. They see
moreover that, notwithstanding his affected legality, Abd el Hamid's
rule is neither juster nor more in accordance with the Mussulman law
than that of his predecessors. The same vices of administration are
found in it, and the same recklessness for his Mussulman subjects'
welfare. Of all the lands of Islam his own are probably those where Abd
el Hamid has now the most scanty following. Constantinople is after all
his weak point, for the Young Turkish school is far from dead, the
vicissitudes of life and death follow each other closely on the
Bosphorus, and the liberal party can better afford than the reactionary
to wait. The death or fall of Abd el Hamid, whenever it may happen,
would immediately decide a movement counter to the Ottoman Caliphate.

FOOTNOTES:

[10] I do not vouch for the entire accuracy of these dates. Turkish
historians place Selim's death in 926 A.H., which should correspond with
our 1520. It would seem doubtful too whether Selim himself took any
higher title with regard to the Holy Places than Khadam el Harameyn,
Servant of the two shrines, though his successors are certainly called
Hami. It was not till five years after Selim's death that Mecca
acknowledged the Ottoman Caliphate.

[11] The original diary of Lascaris, Napoleon's agent with the Arabs,
has, I understand, within the last two years been discovered at Aleppo
and purchased by the French Government. Its publication, whenever that
may be decided on, will, if I am not quite mistaken, throw new and
important light on Napoleon's Egyptian career.

[12] The _Jawaib_ was first started about the year 1860.

[13] In the recent trial of the murderers of Abd el Aziz, Abd el Hamid
has departed from his usual adherence to the Sheriat. It is a lapsus
which may one day be taken hold of against him, should the Ulema need to
depose him. He is said to have yielded to the advice of an European
confidant who directs the details of his diplomacy with Europe.




CHAPTER III.

THE TRUE METROPOLIS--MECCA.


In the last chapter the position of the Ottoman Sultans towards the mass
of Orthodox Islam was sketched, and the foundations were shown on which
their tenure of the Caliphal title rested. These I explained to be
neither very ancient nor very securely laid in the faith and affections
of the faithful; and, though at the present moment a certain reaction in
favour of Constantinople had set in, it was due to accidental
circumstances, which are unlikely to become permanent, and was very far
indeed from being universal. It may be as well to recapitulate the
position.

The Sunite or Orthodox Mohammedan world holds it as a dogma of faith
that there must be a Khalifeh, the ex-officio head of their religious
polity, and the successor of their prophet. In temporal matters, whoever
holds this office is theoretically king of all Islam; and in spiritual
matters he is their supreme religious authority. But, practically, the
Caliph's temporal jurisdiction has for many centuries been limited to
such lands as he could hold by arms; while in spiritual matters he has
exercised no direct authority whatever. Nevertheless, he represents to
Mussulmans something of which they are in need, and which they are bound
to respect; and it cannot be doubted that in proper hands, and at the
proper moment, the Caliphate might once more become an instrument for
good or evil of almost universal power in Islam. Even now, were there to
be an apprehension of general and overwhelming danger for religion, it
is to the Caliph that the faithful would look to defend their interests;
and, as we have seen, a moderate show of piety and respect for the
sacred law has been sufficient, in spite of a violent political
opposition, to secure for the actual holder of the title a degree of
sympathy which no other Mussulman prince could at any cost of good
government have obtained.

On the other hand, it has been shown that the loyalty, such as there is,
which Abd el Hamid inspires is due to him solely as incumbent of the
Caliphal office, and not as the representative of any race or dynasty.
The House of Othman, as such, represents nothing sacred to Mussulmans;
and the Turkish race is very far from being respected in Islam. The
present Caliphal house is unconnected in blood with the old traditional
line of "successors;" and even with the Turks themselves inspires little
modern reverence. Moreover, the actual incumbent of the office is
thought to be not even a true Ottoman, being the offspring of the
Seraglio rather than of known parents; Abd el Hamid's sole title to
spiritual consideration is his official name. This he has had the sense
to set prominently forward. Reduced to a syllogism, Mussulman loyalty
may be read thus: There must be a Caliph, and the Caliphate deserves
respect; there is no other Caliph but Abd el Hamid; ergo, Abd el Hamid
deserves respect.

It has been pointed out, however, that, if the Sultan's recent revival
of spiritual pretensions is his present strength, it may also in the
immediate future become his weakness. The challenge which the
Constantinople school of Hanefism threw down ten years ago to the world
has been taken up; and all the learned world now knows the frailty of
the House of Othman's spiritual position. The true history of the
Caliphate has been published and set side by side with that Turkish
history which the ignorance of a previous generation had come to
confound with it. At the present day nobody with any instruction doubts
that Abd el Hamid and his house might be legally displaced by the first
successful rival, and that the only right of Constantinople to lead
Islam is the right of the sword. As long as the Ottoman Empire is
maintained and no counter Caliph appears, so long will the Sultan be the
acknowledged head of religion; but not a day longer. The Caliphate, for
one alien as Abd el Hamid is to the Koreysh, must be constantly
maintained in arms, and on the first substantial success of a new
pretender his present following would fall off from him without
compunction, transferring to this last their loyalty on precisely the
same ground on which Abd el Hamid now receives it. Abd el Hamid would
then be legitimately deposed and disappear, for it is unlikely that he
would find any such protector in his adversity as the legitimate Caliphs
found in theirs six hundred years ago. So fully is this state of things
recognized by the Ulema, that I found the opinion last year to be nearly
universal that Abd el Hamid was destined to be the last Caliph of the
House of Othman.

It becomes, therefore, a question of extreme interest to consider who
among Mussulman princes could, with any chance of being generally
accepted by orthodox Islam, put in a claim to replace the Ottoman
dynasty as Caliph when the day of its doom shall have been reached. It
is a question which ought certainly to interest Englishmen, for on its
solution the whole problem of Mussulman loyalty or revolt in India most
probably depends, and though it would certainly be unwise, at the
present moment, for an English Government to obtrude itself violently in
a religious quarrel not yet ripe, much might be done in a perfectly
legitimate way to influence the natural course of events and direct it
to a channel favourable to British interests.

Is there then in Islam, east, or west, or south, a man of sufficient
eminence and courage to proclaim himself Caliph, in the event of Abd el
Hamid's political collapse or death? What would be his line of action to
secure Mahommedan acceptance? Where should he fix his capital, and on
what arms should he rely? Whose flag should he display? Above all--for
this is the question that interests us most--could such a change of
rulers affect favourably the future thought and life of Islam, and lead
to an honest Moslem reformation? These questions, which are being
cautiously asked of each other by thoughtful Mussulmans in every corner
of the east, I now propose to consider and, as far as it is in my power,
to answer.

I have said that Islam is already well prepared for change. Whatever
Europeans may think of a future for the Ottoman Empire, Mussulmans are
profoundly convinced that on its present basis it will not long survive.
Even in Turkey, the thought of its political regeneration as an European
Empire has been at last abandoned, and no one now contemplates more than
a few years further tenure of the Bosphorus. Twenty years ago it was not
so, nor perhaps five, but to-day all are resigned to this.

Ancient prophecy and modern superstition alike point to a return of the
Crescent into Asia as an event at hand, and to the doom of the Turks as
a race which has corrupted Islam. A well-known prediction to this
effect, which has for ages exercised its influence on the vulgar and
even the learned Mohammedan mind, gives the year 1883 of our era as the
term within which these things are to be accomplished, and places the
scene of the last struggle in Northern Syria, at Homs, on the Orontes.
Islam is then finally to retire from the north, and the Turkish rule to
cease. Such prophecies often work their own fulfilment, and the feeling
of a coming catastrophe is so deeply rooted and so universal that I
question whether the proclamation of a Jehad by the Sultan would now
induce a thousand Moslems to fight voluntarily against the Cross in
Europe.

The Sultan himself and the old Turkish party which supports him, while
clinging obstinately in appearance to all their ground, really have
their eyes turned elsewhere than on Adrianople and Salonica and the city
of the Roman Emperors. It is unlikely that a new advance of the
Christian Powers from the Balkan would meet again with more than formal
opposition; and Constantinople itself, unsupported by European aid,
would be abandoned without a blow, or with only such show of resistance
as the Sheriat requires for a cession of territory.[14] The Sultan
would, in such an event, pass into Asia, and I have been credibly
informed that his own plan is to make not Broussa, but Bagdad or
Damascus his capital. This he considers would be more in conformity with
Caliphal traditions, and the Caliphate would gain strength by a return
to its old centres. Damascus is surnamed by theologians _Bab el Kaaba_,
Gate of the Caaba; and there or at Bagdad, the traditional city of the
Caliphs, he would build up once more a purely theocratic empire.

Such, they say, is his thought; and such doubtless would be the empire
of the future that Mussulmans would choose. Only it is improbable that
it would continue to be in any sense Ottoman, or that Abd el Hamid would
have the opportunity of himself establishing it. The loss of
Constantinople would be a blow to his prestige he could not well recover
from, and no new empire ever yet was founded on defeat. What is far more
likely to happen is that, in such an event, Abd el Hamid and his house
would disappear, and an entirely new order of Caliphal succession take
their place. Even without supposing any such convulsion to the empire as
a loss of the Bosphorus, his reign will hardly be a long one. The Ulema
of Constantinople are by no means all on his side, and the party of
"Young Turkey," cowed for the moment by the terrorism which there
prevails, is his bitter enemy, and will not let him rest. It will
infallibly on the next danger from Europe, show its head again and take
its revenge.

It is said to be the programme of this party, when it next comes to
power, to separate the spiritual functions of the Caliphate from those
of the head of the State, copying, in so far, the modern practice of
Europe towards the Papacy. I suppose that it would be attempted to
restore that state of things, which as we have already seen, existed at
Cairo in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries; and it is just
conceivable that, as far as Turkey itself was concerned, such an
arrangement might, for a time, succeed. There would then be two powers
at Constantinople, a Maire du Palais who would reign, and a Caliph who
would be head of religion;--a separation of offices which would
certainly facilitate the sort of reform that Midhat and his friends
desire. But to the world at large the event would only signify that
Constantinople had formally abdicated her claim to leadership, and Islam
would never acknowledge as Caliph the mere puppet of an irreligious
clique of officials, because he happened to be a member of the Beni
Othman. His political power is the only thing that reconciles Islam with
an Ottoman Caliph, and without sovereignty he would be discarded. In
whatever way, therefore, that we look at it, there seems justification
in probability for the conviction already cited that after Abd el Hamid
a new order of Caliphal succession will be seen.

It seems to be an universal opinion at the present day among those who
think at all upon the matter, that whatever change may be impending for
Islam, it will be in the direction of concentration rather than of
extension. All parties see that the day of outside conquest is at an
end, and that the utmost that Islam can look forward to politically is
the maintenance of its present positions, and as an extreme possibility
the emancipation of its lost provinces in India and North Africa from
Christian rule. There is, therefore, a conviction that the removal of
the seat of supreme authority, when made, will be towards the centre,
not to any new extremity of Islam. Constantinople, even if all Islam
were combined for its defence, is felt to be too near the infidel
frontier to be safe, and cosmopolitan city as it has become, it is by
many looked upon itself as infidel. A position further removed from
danger and more purely Mohammedan is the necessity of the day; and it
can hardly be doubted that, when the time comes, the possession of some
such vantage ground will be recognized as a first qualification with
whoever shall assume the leadership of Islam.

We have seen that Abd el Hamid dreams of Damascus or Bagdad. But others
dream of Cairo as the new seat of the Caliphate; and to the majority of
far-sighted Mussulmans it is rapidly becoming apparent that the retreat,
once begun, must be conducted further still, and that the only true
resting-place for theocracy is in Arabia, its birthplace and the
fountain head of its inspiration. There, alone in the world, all the
conditions for the independent exercise of religious sovereignty are to
be found. In Arabia there are neither Christians nor Jews nor infidels
of any sort for Islam to count with, nor is it so rich a possession that
it should ever excite the cupidity of the Western Powers. A Caliph there
need fear no admonition from Frank ambassadors in virtue of any
capitulations; he would be free to act as the Successor of the Apostle
should, and would breathe the pure air of an unadulterated Islam. A
return, therefore, to Medina or Mecca is the probable future of the
Caliphate.

The importance of Arabia has of late years been fully recognized both at
Constantinople and elsewhere. It has been the sustained policy of Abd
el Hamid at all cost and by whatsoever means to maintain his influence
there; and he knows that without it his spiritual pretensions could have
no secure foundations. Arabia, he perceives, is the main point of the
Caliphal problem; and whether or not the future holder of the office
reside in Hejaz, it is certain that by its tenure alone the Mohammedan
world will judge of his right to be their leader. It will, therefore,
before we go further, be interesting to examine the relations existing
in the past and present between Mecca and the Caliphate, and to
ascertain the position now held by Abd el Hamid in Arabia. On this point
I believe that I can offer information which will be both valuable and
new.

The political constitution of the Moslem Holy Land is one of the most
anomalous in the world. Like every district of Arabia proper, Hejaz has
a town and a nomad population, but almost no intermediate agricultural
class. The townsmen I have already described--a multitude of mixed
origin, descended from such pilgrims as from every quarter of the globe
have visited the Holy Places, and have remained to marry and die in
them. The Nomads, on the contrary, are a pure race of a peculiarly noble
type, and unchanged in any essential feature of their life from what
they were in the days of Mohammed. They are warlike, unquiet, Bedouins,
camel-riders (for they have no horses), and armed with matchlocks; and
they are proud of their independence, and tenacious of their rights. No
serious attempt has ever been made, except by Mehemet Ali, to subdue
them, and none at all has succeeded. Unlike the generality of Peninsular
Bedouins, however, they are professed Sunite Mohammedans, if not of a
very pious type; and they acknowledge as their chief the head of their
most noble tribe, the Grand Sherif of the Koreysh, who is also Prince of
Mecca.

The Koreysh is still a distinct nomadic tribe, inhabiting the immediate
neighbourhood of Mecca; not numerous, but not in decay. They are divided
into several sections, each governed by its Sheykh, the chief of which,
the Abadleh, has for several centuries supplied the reigning family of
Hejaz. This last traces its descent from Ali ibn Abutaleb, the fourth
Caliph, through his son Hassan, and through Ali's wife, Fatmeh, from
Mohammed himself. It is probably the oldest authentic male descent in
the world, and certainly the most sacred. All the members of this
Abadleh family enjoy the title of Sherif, the head of it only being
distinguished as the Sherif el Kebir, the Great or Grand Sherif. The
rest of the Koreysh, not being descended from Fatmeh, do not receive the
title. All alike wear the Bedouin dress of abba and kefiyeh, even the
Prince himself, standing in this strikingly in contrast with the Hejazi
citizens, who affect the turban and gombaz.

The district of Medina is occupied by the Harb Bedouins, a larger and
more powerful tribe than the Koreysh, who also recognize the Sherif, but
their allegiance is precarious; while to the east and south of Mecca the
Ateybeh and Assir, more powerful still, are wholly independent. It has
always been a difficult matter to keep these unruly elements at peace
with each other and with the citizens, nor could the Sherif hope to
effect it were he not himself of Bedouin and noble blood.

The early history of the Sherifate is exceedingly obscure. When the
Caliphs definitely abandoned Medina as their capital in the fortieth
year of Islam (A.D. 662), they for a time left deputies of the Sherifal
family behind them to govern in their name, and, as long as the Ommiad
and Abbaside dynasties continued at Damascus and Bagdad, their
sovereignty was acknowledged in Hejaz. But on the destruction of the
Arabian Caliphate in 1259, the Sherifal family seems to have set itself
up independently, relying only on the casual help of the Egyptian
Sultans and the Imams of Sana to protect them against the Bedouins of
Nejd and Assir, now hardly any longer, even in name, Mohammedans. The
Egyptian Sultan, however, was the titular protector of the Holy Places,
and it was he who transmitted the Surrah, or religious contributions
made by the Faithful, and provided escort for the yearly pilgrimage made
to the shrines. Thus we read of Kaid Beg having rebuilt the Mosque of
Medina in 1476, and having sent a yearly subsidy of 7500 ardebs of corn
for the townspeople. Other princes, however, contributed their offerings
too, and received titles of honour connected with the Holy Land, the
Shahs of Persia, the Moguls, and the Ottomans. The first connection of
the latter with Mecca that I can find was in 1413, when the Padishah
Mohammed Khan I., having sent a surrah, or bag of gold, to the Sherif to
be distributed in alms, received from him the title of Khaddam el
Harameyn, servant of the two shrines; and the gift being continued
annually by the Ottoman Padishahs may very likely have paved the way to
their recognition later as Caliphs.

It would seem singular at first sight that the Sherifs, being
themselves of the sacred family whose special inheritance the Caliphate
was, should ever thus have recognized a stranger as its legal heir. But
the political weakness of the Meccan Government in the sixteenth century
must be taken into account as the all-sufficient reason. The Grand
Sherif could hardly have stood alone as an independent sovereign, for he
was continually menaced on the one side by the dissenting Omani, and on
the other by the unbelieving tribes of Nejd, against whom his frontier
was defenceless. He could not, with his own resources, protect the
pilgrim routes from plunder--and on the pilgrimage all the prosperity of
Hejaz depended. It therefore was a necessity with the Meccans to have a
protector of some sort; and Sultan Kansaw having fallen, they accepted
Sultan Selim.

The Ottoman Sultans then became protectors of the Holy Places, and were
acknowledged Caliphs without any appeal to arms at Mecca and Medina.
Their weapons were, in fact, the gold and silver pieces with which they
subsidized the Sherifs. Sultan Selim at once, on being acknowledged,
ordered an additional annuity of 5000 ardebs to be paid to Mecca, and he
and his immediate successors carried out at their own expense such
public works as the shrines required in the way of repairs or
improvements. Subsequently the seaport of Jeddah, formerly occupied by
the Egyptians, received a Turkish contingent, but the interior of Hejaz
was never subjugated, nor was any tax at any time levied. Only once a
year an Ottoman army appeared before the walls of Medina, conducting the
pilgrims from Damascus and convoying the surrah. The state of things at
Mecca in the last century has been clearly sketched by Niebuhr. The
Sherifs were in reality independent princes, but they "gratified the
vanity of the Grand Signior" by calling him their suzerain, he on his
side occasionally exercising the right of power by deposing the reigning
Sherif and appointing another of the same family. No kind of
administration had then been attempted by the Turks in Hejaz.

Mehemet Ali's occupation of Hejaz in 1812 first brought foreign troops
inland. He established himself at Taif, the summer residence of the
Meccans; deposed the Grand Sherif Ghaleb, and appointed in his stead
another member of the Sherifal family; declaring the Sultan sovereign of
the country--acts which the Meccans acquiesced in through dread of the
Wahhabis, from whom Mehemet Ali promised to deliver them. The Egyptian
and Turkish Governments have thus, during the present century, exercised
some of the functions of sovereignty in Hejaz.

At the present moment Sultan Abd el Hamid's position in the country is
this. His troops occupy Jeddah and Yembo, the two seaports, and the
towns of Medina and Taif in the interior. He is acknowledged by the
Sherifs as sovereign, except in Mecca; and he appoints to all the
principal offices of State, including the supreme office of the Grand
Sherifate itself. He is represented by a Pasha who resides alternately
at Jeddah and Taif according to the season, but who has not the right of
entering Mecca without the Grand Sherif's leave, or of sending troops
there. The total garrison of the Turks in Hejaz last winter was from
8000 to 10,000 men, of whom 4000 only were regulars (Nizams), and
efficient. While I was at Jeddah, the Medina garrison of 2000 regulars,
having been long unpaid and unrationed, was said to be living on public
charity. On the other hand the Hejazi Bedouins do not acknowledge any
sovereignty but that of the Sherif, nor could the Sultan pretend to keep
order outside the towns except through the Sherif's interposition. The
Sultan levies no tax in the interior or impost of any kind, and the sole
revenue he receives in Hejaz comes from Customs duties of Jeddah and
Yembo, which may amount to L40,000.

In return for this he also is bound to transmit every year at the time
of the pilgrimage sums of money collected by him from the revenues of
the Wakaf within his dominions, lands settled by pious persons on the
Sherifal family. These are said to amount to nearly half a million
sterling, and are distributed amongst all the principal personages of
Hejaz. The transmission of the Wakaf income, in which the Sultan
constitutes himself, so to say, the Sherif's agent, is in fact the real
bond which unites Hejaz with the Caliphate, and its distribution gives
the Sultan patronage, and with it power in the country. The bond,
however, is one of interest only. The Sherifs, proud of their sacred
ancestry, look upon the Turkish Caliphs as barbarians and impostors,
while the Sultans find the Hejaz a heavy charge upon their revenue.
Either hates and despises the other, the patron and the patronized; and,
save that their union is a necessity, it would long ago have, by mutual
consent, been dissolved. The Sherif depends upon the Sultan because he
needs a protector, and needs his Wakaf. The Sultan depends upon the
Sherif, because recognition by Hejaz as the protector is a chief title
to his Caliphate. Mecca, in fact, is a necessity to Islam even more than
a Caliph; and whoever is sovereign there is naturally sovereign of the
Mussulman world.

Outside Hejaz the Sultan holds what he holds of Arabia merely by force.
I have described already the growing power of Ibn Rashid, the Prince of
Nejd; and since that time, two years ago, he has sensibly extended and
confirmed his influence there. He has now brought into his alliance all
the important tribes of northern Arabia, including the powerful Ateybeh,
who, a few months ago, were threatening Mecca; and in Hejaz his name is
already as potent as the Sultan's. He offered, while I was at Jeddah, to
undertake the whole convoy of the Damascus pilgrimage with his own
troops, as already he convoys that from Persia; while I have quite
recent information of a campaign against his own rivals, the Ibn Saouds,
which he has just brought to a successful conclusion. In Yemen, the
other neighbour of the Meccans, 20,000 Turkish troops are required to
garrison the few towns the Sultan calls his own, and were it not for
the facility given him by the possession of the sea-coast, these could
not long hope to hold their ground. Every day I am expecting news from
there of a revolt, and the first sign of weakness at Constantinople will
certainly precipitate a war of independence in that part of Arabia.

We may expect, therefore, in the event of such a break-up as I have
suggested to be likely of the Ottoman power--either through loss of
territory or by the growing impoverishment of the empire, which needs
must, in a few decades, end in atrophy--to see among Mussulman princes a
competition for the right of protecting the Holy Places, and with it of
inheriting the Caliphal title. The Sultan reduced to Asia Minor, even if
he retain Armenia and Kurdistan (which is extremely improbable), would
be quite unable to afford himself the expensive luxury of holding his
Arabian conquests and buying the patronage of Mecca. He would be unable
any longer to overawe the Red Sea, or secure the pilgrim routes. The
Princes of Nejd would certainly not tolerate the presence of Turkish
soldiers at Medina, and the Sherifs of Mecca would have to make terms
with them and with the restored Imams of Yemen till such time as they
should find a new protector elsewhere. Above all, the half million of
Wakaf income would no longer be forthcoming, and a Turkish Emir el Haj
arriving empty-handed at Mecca would bring his master to a climax of
derision. Hejaz then would infallibly look out for a new potentate whom
she could dignify with the title of Hami el Harameyn and Emir el
Mumenin; and if there were none forthcoming would herself proclaim a
Caliphate. Let us look, therefore, at the lands of Islam to see in which
of them a competent Prince of the Faithful is likely to appear.

It is possible, though to European eyes it will seem far from probable,
that out of the ferment which we are now witnessing in the Barbary
States, some leader of real power and religious distinction may arise
who shall possess the talent of banding together into an instrument of
power the immense but scattered forces of Islam in Northern Africa, and
after achieving some signal success against the new French policy,
establish himself in Tripoli or Tunis in independent sovereignty. Were
such another man as Abd el Kader to arise, a saint, a preacher, and a
soldier, indifferent to the petty aims of local power and gifted with
military genius, true piety, and an eloquent tongue, I believe at the
present day he might achieve at least a partial success.

The French army is weak in discipline and confidence compared to what
it was in Abd el Kader's day, and it has a far more difficult frontier
to defend; while the Government at home is but half resolute, and the
Arabs command much floating sympathy in Europe and elsewhere. I do not
say the thing is likely, but it is conceivable; and Africa contains the
elements of a possible new sovereignty for some Mussulman prince which
might eventually lead him on the road to Mecca. It is undoubted that
with the prestige of success against a Christian Power, and backed by
the vast populations of Soudan and the fierce military fervour of the
Malekite Arabs, an Abd el Kader or an Abd-el-Wahhab would attract the
sympathy of Islam, and might aspire to its highest dignity. But enormous
