Emperor Frederick's neck under his feet, and, as though that were not
sufficient, added further this text out of the Psalms, "Thou shalt go
upon the adder and cockatrice, and shalt tread the lion and dragon under
thy feet"?  Such an example of scorning and contemning a prince's
majesty, as never before that was heard tell of in any remembrance;
except, I ween, either of Tamerlane's, the king of Scythia, a wild and
barbarous creature, or else of Sapor king of the Persians.

All these notwithstanding were Popes, all Peter's successors, all most
holy fathers, whose several words we must take to be as good as several
Gospels.  If we be counted traitors which do honour our princes, which
give them all obedience, as much as is due to them by God's word, and
which do pray for them, what kind of men then be these, which have not
only done all the things before said, but also allow the same for
specially well done?  Do they then either this way instruct the people,
as we do, to reverence their magistrate?  Or can they with honesty
appeach us as seditious persons, breakers of the common quiet, and
despisers of princes' majesty?

Truly, we neither put off the yoke of obedience from us; neither do we
disorder realms; neither do we set up or pull down kings; nor translate
governments; nor give our kings poison to drink; nor yet hold to them our
feet to be kissed; nor, opprobriously triumphing over them, leap into
their necks with our feet.  This rather is our profession; this is our
doctrine: that every soul, of what calling soever he be--be he monk, be
he preacher, be he prophet, be he Apostle--ought to be subject to kings
and magistrates; yea, and that the Bishop of Rome himself--unless he will
seem greater than Evangelists, than the Prophets, or the Apostles--ought
both to acknowledge and to call the emperor his lord and master, which
the old Bishops of Rome, who lived in times of more grace, ever did.  Our
common teaching also is, that we ought so to obey princes as men sent of
God; and that whoso withstandeth them, withstandeth God's ordinance.  This
is our showing, and this is well to be seen, both in our books and in our
preachings, and also in the manners and modest behaviour of our people.

But where they say we have gone away from the unity of the Catholic
Church, this is not only a matter of malice, but, besides, though, it be
most untrue, yet hath it some show and appearance of truth.  For the
common people and ignorant multitude give not credit alone to things true
and of certainty, but even to such things also, if any chance, which may
seem to have but a resemblance of truth.  Therefore, we see that subtle
and crafty persons, when they had no truth on their side, have ever
contended and hotly argued with things likely to be true, to the intent
they which were not able to espy the very ground of the matter, might be
carried away at least with some pretence and probability thereof.  In
times past, where the first Christians, our forefathers, in making their
prayers to God, did turn themselves towards the east, there were that
said, "they worshipped the sun, and reckoned it as God."  Again, where
our forefathers said, that as touching immortal and everlasting life,
they lived by no other means, but by the "flesh and blood of that Lamb
who was without spot," that is to say, of our Saviour Jesus Christ, the
envious creatures and foes of Christ's Cross, whose only care was to
bring Christian religion into slander by all manner of ways, made people
believe that they were wicked persons, that they "sacrificed men's flesh,
and drunk men's blood."  Also, where our forefathers said that before God
"there is neither man nor woman," nor, for attaining to the true
righteousness, there is no distinction at all of persons, and that they
did call one another indifferently by the name of sisters and brothers:
there wanted not men which forged false tales upon the same, saying that
the Christians made no difference among themselves either of age or of
kind, but like brute beasts without regard had to do one with another.
And where, for to pray and hear the Gospel, they met often together in
secret and bye places, because rebels sometime were wont to do the like,
rumours were everywhere spread abroad, how they made privy confederacies,
and counselled together either to kill the magistrates or to subvert the
commonwealth.  And where, in celebrating the holy mysteries after
Christ's institution, they took bread and wine, they were thought of many
not to worship Christ, but Bacchus and Ceres; forsomuch as those vain
gods were worshipped of the heathens in like sort, after a profane
superstition, with bread and wine.

These things were believed of many, not because they were true, indeed
(for what could be more untrue?), but because they were like to be true,
and through a certain shadow of truth might the more easily deceive the
simple.  On this fashion likewise do these men slander us as heretics,
and say that we have left the Church and fellowship of Christ: not
because they think it is true--for they do not much force of that, but
because to ignorant folk it might, perhaps, some way appear true.  We
have, indeed, put ourselves apart not as heretics are wont, from the
Church of Christ, but as all good men ought to do, from the infection of
naughty persons and hypocrites.

Nevertheless, in this point they triumph marvellously--"that they be the
Church, that their Church is Christ's spouse, the pillar of truth, the
ark of Noah;" and that without it there is no hope of salvation.
Contrariwise they say, "that we be renegades; that we have torn Christ's
seat;" that we are plucked quite off from the body of Christ, and have
forsaken the Catholic faith.  And when they leave nothing unspoken that
may never so falsely and maliciously be said against us, yet this one
thing are they never able truly to say, that we have swerved either from
the Word of God, or from the Apostles of Christ, or from the primitive
Church.  Surely we have ever judged the primitive Church of Christ's
time, of the Apostles and of the holy fathers, to be the Catholic Church;
neither make we doubt to name it, "Noah's ark, Christ's spouse, the
pillar and upholder of all truth;" nor yet to fix therein the whole mean
of our salvation.  It is doubtless an odious matter for one to leave the
fellowship whereunto he hath been accustomed, and specially of those men,
who, though they be not, yet at least seem and be called Christians.  And,
to say truly, we do not despise the Church of these men (howsoever it be
ordered by them now-a-days), partly for the name's sake itself, and
partly for that the Gospel of Jesus Christ hath once been therein truly
and purely set forth.  Neither had we departed therefrom, but of very
necessity, and much against our wills.  But I put case, an idol be set up
in the Church of God, and the same desolation, which Christ prophesied to
come, stood openly in the holy place.  What if some thief or pirate
invade and possess "Noah's ark?"  These folks, as often as they tell us
of the Church, mean thereby themselves alone, and attribute all these
titles to their own selves, boasting, as they did in times past which
cried, "The temple of the Lord, the temple of the Lord;" or as the
Pharisees and Scribes did, which craked they were "Abraham's children."

Thus with a gay and jolly show deceive they the simple, and seek to choke
us with the very name of the Church.  Much like as if a thief, when he
had gotten into another man's house, and by violence either hath thrust
out or slain the owner, should afterward assign the same house to
himself, casting forth of possession the right inheritor; or if
Anti-Christ, when he had once entered into "the temple of God," should
afterward say, "This house is mine own, and Christ hath nothing to do
withal."  For these men now, after they have left nothing remaining in
the Church of God that hath any likeness of this Church, yet will they
seem the patrons and valiant maintainers of the Church, very like as
Gracchus amongst the Romans stood in defence of the treasury,
notwithstanding with his prodigality and fond expenses he had utterly
wasted the whole stock of the treasury.  And yet was there never anything
so wicked, or so far out of reason, but lightly it might be covered and
defended by the name of the Church.  For the wasps also make honey-combs
as well as bees, and wicked men have companies like to the Church of God:
yet, for all that, "they be not straightway the people of God which are
called the people of God; neither be they all Israelites as many as are
come of Israel the father."  The Arians, notwithstanding they were
heretics, yet bragged they that they alone were Catholics, calling all
the rest now Ambrosians, now Athanasians, now Johannites.  And Nestorius,
as saith Theodoret, for all that he was an heretic, yet covered he
himself [Greek text]: that is, to wit, with a certain cloak and colour of
the true and right faith.  Ebion, though he agreed in opinion with the
Samaritans, yet, as saith Epiphanius, he would needs be called a
Christian.  The Mahometists at this day, for all that all histories make
plain mention, and themselves also cannot deny, but they took their first
beginning of "Agar the bond-woman," yet for the very name and stock's
sake, chose they rather to be called Saracens, as though they came of
"Sarah the free woman, and Abraham's wife."

So likewise the false prophets of all ages, which stood up against the
prophets of God, which resisted Esaias, Jeremy, Christ, and the Apostles,
at no time craked of anything so much as they did of the name of the
Church.  And for no other cause did they so fiercely vex them, and call
them runaways and apostates, than for that they forsook their fellowship,
and kept not the ordinances of the elders.  Wherefore, if we would follow
the judgments of those men only who then governed the Church, and would
respect nothing else, neither God nor His word, it must needs be
confessed, that the Apostles were rightly and by just law condemned of
them to death, because they fell from the bishops and priests, that is,
you must think, from the "Catholic Church:" and because they made many
new alterations in religion, contrary to the bishops' and priests' wills,
yea, and for all their spurning so earnestly against it.  Wherefore, like
as it is written that Hercules in old time was forced in striving with
Antaeus, that huge giant, to lift him quite up from the earth that was
his mother, ere he could conquer him, even so must our adversaries be
heaved from their mother, that is, from this vain colour and shadow of
the Church, wherewith they so disguise and defend themselves: otherwise
they cannot be brought to yield unto the word of God.  "And therefore,"
saith Jeremy the prophet, "make not such great boast that the temple of
the Lord is with you.  This is but a vain confidence: these are lies."
The angel also saith in the Apocalypse, "They say they be Jews; but they
be the synagogue of Satan."  And Christ said to the Pharisees when they
vaunted themselves of the kindred and blood of Abraham, "Ye are of your
father, the devil;" for you resemble not your father Abraham; as much to
say as ye are not the men ye would so fain be called: ye beguile the
people with vain titles, and abuse the name of the Church to the
overthrowing of the Church.

So that these men's part had been, first to have clearly and truly proved
that the Romish Church is the true and right instructed Church of God,
and that the same as they do order it at this day doth agree with the
primitive Church of Christ, of the Apostles, and of the holy fathers,
which we doubt not but was indeed the true Catholic Church.  For our
parts, if we could have judged ignorance, error, superstition, idolatry,
men's inventions, and the same commonly disagreeing with the Holy
Scriptures, either to please God or to be sufficient for the obtaining
everlasting salvation; or if we could ascertain ourselves, that the word
of God was written but for a time only, and afterward again ought to be
abrogated and put away: or else that the sayings and commandments of God
ought to be subject to man's will, that whatsoever God saith and
commandeth, except the Bishop of Rome willeth and commandeth the same, it
must be taken as void and unspoken: if we could have brought ourselves to
believe these things, we grant there had been no cause at all why we
should have left these men's company.  As touching that we have now done
to depart from that Church, whose errors were proved and made manifest to
the world, which Church also had already evidently departed from God's
word: and yet not to depart so much from itself, as from the errors
thereof; and not to do this disorderly or wickedly, but quietly and
soberly; we have done nothing herein against the doctrine either of
Christ or of His Apostles.  For neither is the Church of God such as it
may not be dusked with some spot, or asketh not sometime reparation.  Else
what needeth there so many assemblies and councils, without the which, as
saith AEgidius, the Christian faith is not able to stand?  "For look,"
saith he: "how often councils are discontinued, so often is the Church
destitute of Christ."  Or if there be no peril that harm may come to the
Church, what need is there to retain to no purpose the names of bishops,
as is now commonly used among them?  For if there be no sheep that may
stray, why be they called shepherds?  If there be no city that may be
betrayed, why be they called watchmen?  If there be nothing that may run
to ruin, why be they called pillars?  Anon after the first creation of
the world the Church of God began to spread abroad, and the same was
instructed with the heavenly word which God Himself pronounced with His
own mouth.  It was also furnished with Divine ceremonies.  It was taught
by the Spirit of God, by the patriarchs and prophets, and continued so
even till the time that Christ showed Himself to us in the flesh.

This notwithstanding, how often, O good God, in the meanwhile, and how
horribly was the same Church darkened and decayed!  Where was that Church
then, when "all flesh upon earth had denied their own way?"  Where was
it, when amongst the number of the whole world there were only eight
persons (and they neither all chaste and good) whom God's will was should
be saved alive from that universal destruction and mortality? when Elie
the prophet so lamentably and bitterly made moan, that "only himself was
left" of all the whole world which did truly and duly worship God? and
when Esay said, "The silver of God's people (that is, of the Church) was
become dross: and that the same city, which aforetime had been faithful,
was now become a harlot: and that in the same there was no part sound
throughout the whole body, from the head to the foot?" or else, when
Christ Himself said, "that the house of God was made by the Pharisees and
priests a den of thieves?"  Of a truth, the Church, even as a corn-field,
except it be eared, manured, tilled, and trimmed, instead of wheat it
will bring forth thistles, darnel, and nettles.  For this cause did God
send ever among both Prophets and Apostles, and last of all His "own
Son," who might bring home the people into the right way, and repair anew
the tottering Church after she had erred.

But lest some man should say, that the aforesaid things happened in the
time of the law only, of shadows, and of infancy, when truth lay hid
under figures and ceremonies, when nothing as yet was brought to
perfection, when the law was not graven in men's hearts, but in stone:
and yet is that but a foolish saying, for even at those days was there
the very same God that is now, the same Spirit, the same Christ, the same
faith, the same doctrine, the same hope, the same inheritance, the same
league, and the same efficacy and virtue of God's word: Eusebius also
saith: "All the faithful, even from Adam until Christ, were in very deed
Christians" (though they were not so termed), but, as I said, lest men
should thus speak still, Paul the Apostle found the like faults and falls
even then in the prime and chief of the Gospel in chief perfection, and
in the light; so that he was compelled to write in this sort to the
Galatians, whom he had well before that instructed: "I fear me," quoth
he, "lest I have laboured among you in vain, and lest ye have heard the
Gospel in vain."  "O my little children, of whom I travail anew till
Christ be fashioned again in you."  And as for the Church of the
Corinthians, how foully it was denied, is nothing needful to rehearse.
Now tell me, might the Churches of the Galatians and Corinthians go
amiss, and the Church of Rome alone may not fail, nor go amiss?  Surely
Christ prophesied long before of His Church, that the time should come
when desolation should stand in the holy place.  And Paul saith, that
Antichrist should once set up his own tabernacle and stately seat in the
temple of God: and that the time should be, "when men should not away
with wholesome doctrine, but be turned back unto fables and lies," and
that within the very Church.  Peter likewise telleth, how there should be
teachers of lies in the Church of Christ.  Daniel the Prophet, speaking
of the latter times of Antichrist: "Truth," saith he, "in that season
shall be thrown under foot, and trodden upon in the world."  And Christ
saith, how the calamity and confusion of things shall be so exceeding
great, "that even the chosen, if it were possible, shall be brought into
error;" and how all these things shall come to pass, not amongst Gentiles
and Turks, but that they should be in the holy place, in the temple of
God, in the Church, and in the company and fellowship of those which
profess the name of Christ.

Albeit these same warnings alone may suffice a wise man to take heed he
do not suffer himself rashly to be deceived with the name of the Church,
and not to stay to make further inquisition thereof by God's word; yet
beside all this, many fathers also, many learned and godly men, have
often and carefully complained how all these things have chanced in their
lifetime.  For even in the midst of that thick mist of darkness, God
would yet there should be some, who, though they gave not a clear and
bright light, yet should they kindle, were it but some spark, which men
might espy, being in the darkness.

Hilarius, when things as yet were almost uncorrupt, and in good ease too:
"Ye are ill deceived," saith he, "with the love of walls: ye do ill
worship the Church, in that ye worship it in houses and buildings: ye do
ill bring in the name of peace under roofs.  Is there any doubt but
Antichrist will have his seat under the same?  I rather reckon hills,
woods, pools, marshes, prisons, and quagmires, to be places of more
safety: for in these the prophets, either abiding of their accord or
forced thither by violence, did prophesy by the Spirit of God."

Gregory, as one which perceived and foresaw in his mind the wrack of all
things, wrote thus to "John, Bishop of Constantinople," the first of all
others that commanded himself to be called by this new name, the
"universal bishop of whole Christ's Church:" "If the Church," saith he,
"shall depend upon one man, it will at once fall down to the ground."  Who
is he, that seeth not how this is come to pass long since?  For long
agone hath the Bishop of Rome willed to have the "whole Church depend
upon" himself alone.  Wherefore it is no marvel though it be clean fallen
down long agone.

Bernard the abbot, above four hundred years past, writeth thus: "Nothing
is now of sincerity and pureness amongst the clergy: wherefore it
resteth, that the man of sin should be revealed."  The same Bernard, in
his work of the conversion of Paul; "It seemeth now," saith he, "that
persecution hath ceased: no, no; persecution seemeth but now to begin,
even from them which have chief pre-eminence in the Church.  Thy friends
and neighbours have drawn near, and stood up against thee: from the sole
of thy foot to the crown of thy head there is no part whole.  Iniquity is
proceeded from the elders, the judges, and deputies, which pretend to
rule thy people.  We cannot say now, Look how the people be, so is the
priest.  For the people is not so ill as the priest is.  Alas, alas, O
Lord God, the selfsame persons be the chief in persecuting thee, which
seem to love the highest place, and bear most rule in Thy Church!"  The
same Bernard again, upon the Canticles, writeth thus: "All they are thy
friends, yet are they all thy foes: all thy kinsfolk, yet are they all
thy adversaries.  Being Christ's servants, they serve Antichrist.  Behold,
in my rest, my bitterness is most bitter."  Roger Bacon, also a man of
great fame, after he had in a vehement oration touched to the quick the
woeful state of his own time: "These so many errors," saith he, "require
and look for Antichrist."  Gerson complaineth, that in his days all the
substance and efficacy of sacred divinity was brought unto a glorious
contention and ostentation of wits, and to very sophistry.  The friars of
Lyons, men, as touching the manner of their life, not to be misliked,
were wont boldly to affirm, that the Romish Church (from whence alone all
counsel and order was then sought) was the very same "harlot of Babylon
and rout of devils," whereof is prophesied so plainly in the Apocalypse.

I know well enough the authority of these foresaid persons is but lightly
regarded among these men.  How then if I call forth those for witness,
whom they themselves have used to honour?  What if I say that Adrian, the
Bishop of Rome, did frankly confess that all these mischiefs brast out
first from the high throne of the Pope?  Pighius acknowledgeth herein to
be a fault, that many abuses are brought in, even into the very mass,
which mass otherwise he would have seem to be a reverend matter.  Gerson
saith, that through the number of most fond ceremonies, all the virtue of
the Holy Ghost, which ought to have operation in us, and all true
godliness, is utterly quenched and dead.  Whole Greece and Asia complain,
how the bishops of Rome, with the marts of their purgatories and pardons,
have both tormented men's consciences and picked their purses.

As touching the tyranny of the bishops of Rome, and their barbarous
Persian-like pride, to leave out others, whom perchance they reckon for
enemies, because they freely and liberally find fault with their vices,
the same men which have led their life at Rome in the holy city, in the
face of the most holy father, who also were able to see all their secrets
and at no time departed from the Catholic faith: as, for example,
Laurentius Valla, Marsilius Patavinus, Francis Petrarch, Hierom
Savonarola, Abbot Joachim, Baptist of Mantua, and, before all these,
Bernard the abbot, have many a time and much complained of it, giving the
world also sometime to understand that the Bishop of Rome himself (by
your leave) is very Antichrist.  Whether they spake it truly or falsely,
let that go.  Sure I am they spake it plainly.  Neither can any man
allege that those authors were Luther's or Zuinglius' scholars: for they
were not only certain years, but also certain ages ere ever Luther's or
Zuinglius' names were heard of.  They well saw that even in their days
errors had crept into the Church, and wished earnestly they might be
amended.

And what marvel if the Church were then carried away with errors in that
time, specially when neither the Bishop of Rome, who then only ruled the
roost, nor almost any other, either did his duty, or once understood what
was his duty? for it is hard to be believed, while they were idle and
fast asleep, that the devil also all that while either fell asleep or
else continually lay idle.  For how they were occupied in the meantime,
and with what faithfulness they took care of God's house, though we hold
our peace, yet I pray you, let them hear Bernard their own friend.  "The
bishops," saith he, "who now have the charge of God's Church, are not
teachers, but deceivers: they are not feeders, but beguilers: they are
not prelates, but Pilates."  These words spake Bernard of that bishop who
named himself the highest bishop of all, and of the other bishops
likewise which then had the place of government.  Bernard was no
Lutheran: Bernard was no heretic.  He had not forsaken the Catholic
Church: yet nevertheless he did not let to call the bishops that then
were, deceivers, beguilers, and Pilates.  Now when the people was openly
deceived, and Christian men's eyes were craftily bleared, and when Pilate
sat in judgment-place, and condemned Christ and Christ's members to sword
and fire, O good Lord, in what case was Christ's Church then?  But yet
tell me, of so many and so gross errors, what one have these men at any
time reformed? or what fault have they once acknowledged and confessed?

But, forsomuch as these men avouch the universal possession of the
Catholic Church to be their own, and call us heretics, because we agree
not in judgment with them, let us know, I beseech you, what proper mark
and badge hath that Church of theirs, whereby it may be known to be the
Church of God.  I wiss it is not so hard a matter to find out God's
Church, if a man will seek it earnestly and diligently.  For the Church
of God is set upon a high and glittering place, in the top of a hill, and
built upon the "foundation of the Apostles and Prophets:" "There," saith
Augustine, "let us seek the Church; there let us try our matters."  "And,"
as he saith again in another place, "the Church must be showed out of the
holy and canonical Scriptures: and that which cannot be showed out of
them is not the Church."  Yet, for all this, I wot not how, whether it be
for fear, or for conscience, or despair of victory, these men alway abhor
and fly the Word of God, even as the thief flieth the gallows.  And no
wonder truly.  For, like as men say, the cantharus by-and-bye perisheth
and dieth as soon as it is laid in balm: notwithstanding balm be
otherwise a most sweet-smelling ointment; even so these men well see
their own matter is damned and destroyed in the Word of God, as if it
were in poison.

Therefore the Holy Scriptures, which our Saviour Jesus Christ did not
only use for authority in all His speech, but did also at last seal up
the same with His own blood, these men, to the intent they might with
less business drive the people from the same, as from a thing dangerous
and deadly, have used to call them a bare letter, uncertain,
unprofitable, dumb, killing, and dead: which seemeth to us all one as if
they should say, "The Scriptures are to no purpose, or as good as none."
Hereunto they add a similitude not very agreeable, how the Scriptures be
like to a nose of wax, or a shipman's hose: how they may be fashioned and
plied all manner of ways, and serve all men's turns.  Woteth not the
