
Thus masterfully does Sir Edwin Arnold depict the sentiment which
provoked this Great Renunciator. The testimony of thousands of
millions who, during the last twenty-five centuries, have professed
the Buddhistic religion, proves that the secret of human misery
was at last solved by this divine self-sacrifice, and the true path to
Nirvana opened.

The joy that he brought to the hearts of others, Buddha first
tasted himself. He found that the pleasures of the eye, the ear, the
taste, touch and smell are fleeting and deceptive: he who gives value
to them brings only disappointment and bitter sorrow upon himself. The
social differences between men he found were equally arbitrary and
illusive; caste bred hatred and selfishness; riches strife, envy and
malice. So in founding his Faith he laid the bottom of its
foundation-stones upon all this worldly dirt, and its dome in the
clear serene of the world of Spirit. He who can mount to a clear
conception of Nirvana will find his thought far away above the
common joys and sorrows of petty men. As to one who ascends to the
top of Chimborazo or the Himalayan crags, and sees men on the
earth's surface crawling to and fro like ants, so equally small do
bigots and sectarians appear to him. The mountain climber has under
his feet the very clouds from whose sun-painted shapes the poet has
figured to himself the golden streets and glittering domes of the
materialistic Heaven of a personal God. Below him are all the various
objects out of which the world's pantheons have been manufactured:
around, above--Immensity. And so also, far down the ascending plane of
thought that leads from the earth towards the Infinite, the
philosophic Buddhist describes, at different plateaux, the
heavens and hells, the gods and demons, of the materialistic
creed-builders.

What are the lessons to be derived from the life and teachings of this
heroic prince of Kapilavastu? Lessons of gratitude and benevolence.
Lessons of tolerance for the clashing opinions of men who live, move
and have their being, think and aspire, only in the material world.
The lesson of a common tie of brotherhood among all men. Lessons of
manly self-reliance, of equanimity in breasting whatsoever of good or
ill may happen. Lessons of the meanness of the rewards, the pettiness
of the misfortunes of a shifting world of illusions. Lessons of the
necessity for avoiding every species of evil thought and word, and for
doing, speaking and thinking everything that is good, and for the
bringing of the mind into subjection so that these may be accomplished
without selfish motive or vanity. Lessons of self-purification and
communion, by which the illusiveness of externals and the value of
internals are understood.

Well might St. Hilaire burst into the panegyric that Buddha "is
the perfect model of all the virtues he preaches ... his life has not
a stain upon it". Well might the sober critic Max Mueller pronounce his
moral code "one of the most perfect which the world has ever known".
No wonder that in contemplating that gentle life Edwin Arnold should
have found his personality "the highest, gentlest, holiest and most
beneficent ... in the history of thought," and been moved to write his
splendid verses. It is twenty-five hundred years since humanity put
forth such a flower: who knows when it did before?

Gautama Buddha, Sakya Muni, has ennobled the whole human
race. His fame is our common inheritance. His Law is the law of
Justice, providing for every good thought, word and deed its fair
reward, for every evil one its proper punishment. His law is in
harmony with the voices of Nature, and the evident equilibrium of the
universe. It yields nothing to importunities or threats, can be
neither coaxed nor bribed by offerings to abate or alter one jot or
tittle of its inexorable course. Am I told that Buddhist laymen
display vanity in their worship and ostentation in their almsgiving;
that they are fostering sects as bitterly as Hindus? So much the
worse for the laymen: there is the example of Buddha and his
Law. Am I told that Buddhist priests are ignorant, idle
fosterers of superstitions grafted on their religion by foreign kings?
So much the worse for the priests: the life of their Divine Master
shames them and shows their unworthiness to wear his yellow robe or
carry his beggar's bowl. There is the Law--immutable--menacing; it
will find them out and punish.

And what shall we say to those of another caste of character--the
humble-minded, charitable, tolerant, religiously aspiring hearts among
the laity, and the unselfish, pure and learned of the priests who know
the Precepts and keep them? The Law will find them out also; and when
the book of each life is written up and the balance struck, every good
thought or deed will be found entered in its proper place. Not one
blessing that ever followed them from grateful lips throughout their
