is displeasing to yourselves never do to another.--Bstanhgyur.

Then declared he unto them (the rule of doing to others what we
ourselves like).--San-kiao-yuen-lieu.

From henceforth ... put away evil and do good.--Jataka.

At morning, noon, and night successively, store up good
works.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Always doing good to those around you.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

In order to terminate all suffering, be earnest in performing good
deeds.--Buddhaghosa's parables.

Compassion alone sanctifies the good.--Kshemendra's Avadana Kalpalata.

Religion means self-sacrifice.--Rukemavati.

O Buddha, the worship of thee consists in doing good to the
world.--Bhakti Sataka.

Persist not in calling attention to a matter calculated to cause
division.--Patimokkha.

Dwell together in mutual love.--Brahmanadhammika-sutta.

Let us now unite in the practice of what is good, cherishing a gentle
and sympathizing heart, and carefully cultivating good faith and
righteousness.--Travels of Fa-hien.

May I obtain wealth, and ... may the wealth ... obtained by me be for
the benefit of others.--Jinalankara.

Feeling deep compassion for the poor, grudging nothing which he
possessed.--Phu-yau-king.

Humble in mind, but large in gracious deeds, abundant in charity to
the poor and helpless.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Full of modesty and pity, ... kind and compassionate to all creatures
that have life.--Tevijja-sutta.

He who ... is tender to all that lives ... is protected by heaven and
loved by men.--Fa-kheu-pi-u.

Day and night the mind of Buddha's disciples always delights in
compassion.--Dhammapada.

Let him not think detractingly of others.--Sariputta-sutta.

But offer loving thoughts and acts to all.--Sir Edwin Arnold.

Never should he speak a disparaging word of
anybody.--Saddharma-pundarika.

Whatever I understand (to be right) ... I desire to practice.--Rock
Inscriptions of Asoka.

Lightly to laugh at and ridicule another is wrong.--Fa-kheu-pi-us.

Virtuous deeds should be practiced today; for who can say but we may
die tomorrow?--Temee Jatu.

May I be thoroughly imbued with benevolence, and show always a
charitable disposition, till such time as this heart shall cease to
beat.--Inscription in Temple of Nakhon Vat.

Born to give joy and bring peace to the world.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

The whole world of sentient creatures enjoyed ... universal
tranquility.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Enmity and envy gave way to peace; contentment and rest prevailed
everywhere; ... discord and variance were entirely
appeased.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Creatures of every variety were moved one toward another lovingly;
fear and terror altogether put away, none entertained a hateful
thought; the Angels, foregoing their heavenly joys, sought rather to
alleviate the sinner's sufferings.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

The virtuous retain in their mind the good done to them, whereas the
evil they experience drops from their mind, like water from a
lotus-petal.--Jatakamala.

Vice, O king, is a mean thing, virtue is great and grand.--Questions
of King Milinda.

I deem ... unrighteous actions contemptible.--Mahavagga.

Like food besmeared with poison, I abhor such happiness as is tainted
with unrighteousness.--Jatakamala.

As men sow, thus shall they reap.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Actions have their reward, and our deeds have their
result.--Mahavagga.

Our deeds are not lost, they will surely come (back
again).--Kokaliya-sutta.

Reaping the fruit of right or evil doing, and sharing happiness or
misery in consequence.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Your evil thoughts and evil words but hurt
yourself.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Hell was not created by any one.... The fire of the angry mind
produces the fire of hell, and consumes its possessor. When a person
does evil, he lights the fire of hell, and burns with his own
fire.--Mulamuli.

People grieve from selfishness.--Jara-sutta.

Doing good we reap good, just as a man who sows that which is sweet
(enjoys the same).--Fa-kheu-pi-us.

He who does wrong, O king, comes to feel remorse.... But he who does
well feels no remorse, and feeling no remorse, gladness will spring up
within him.--Questions of King Milinda.

Morality brings happiness: ... at night one's rest is peaceful, and on
waking one is still happy.--Udanavarga.

If, then, you would please me, show pity to that poor
wretch.--Nagananda.

Oppressed with others' sufferings.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

A loving heart is the great requirement! ... not to oppress, not to
destroy; ... not to exalt oneself by treading down others; but to
comfort and befriend those in suffering.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He cares for and cherishes his people more than one would a naked and
perishing child.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

The acts and the practice of religion, to wit, sympathy, charity,
truthfulness, purity, gentleness, kindness.--Pillar Inscriptions of
Asoka.

Go ye, O Brethren, and wander forth, for the gain of the many, the
welfare of the many, in compassion for the world, for the good, for
the gain, for the welfare of ... men.... Publish, O, Brethren, the
doctrine glorious.... Preach ye a life of holiness ... perfect and
pure.--Mahavagga.

Go, then, through every country, convert those not converted.... Go,
therefore, each one travelling alone; filled with compassion, go!
rescue and receive.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Have you not heard what Buddha says in the Sutra (where he bids his
followers), not to despise the little child?--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

In this mode of salvation there are no distinctions of rich and poor,
male and female, people and priests: all are equally able to arrive at
the blissful state.--From a Chinese Buddhist Tract.

Even the most unworthy who seeks for salvation is not to be
forbidden.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

Look with friendship ... on the evil and on the good.--Introduction to
Jataka Book.

Should those who are not with us, O Brethren, speak in dispraise of
me,[1] or of my doctrine, or of the church, that is no reason why you
should give way to anger.--Brahma-jala-sutta.

[Footnote 1: Buddha.]

Why should there be such sorrowful contention? You honor what we honor,
both alike: then we are brothers as concerns
religion.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

No decrying of other sects, ... no depreciation (of others) without
cause, but on the contrary, rendering of honor to other sects for
whatever cause honor is due. By so doing, both one's sect will be
helped forward, and other sects benefited; by acting otherwise, one's
own sect will be destroyed in injuring others.--Rock Inscriptions of
Asoka.

But if others walk not righteously, we ought by righteous dealing to
appease them: in this way, ... we cause religion everywhere to take
deep hold and abide.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Who is a (true) spiritual teacher?
He who, having grasped the essence of things, ever seeks to be of use
to other beings.

--Prasnottaramalika.

Tell him ... I look for no recompense--not even to be born in
heaven--but seek ... the benefit of men, to bring back those who have
gone astray, to enlighten those living in dismal error, to put away
all sources of sorrow and pain from the world.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

I consider the welfare of all people as something for which I must
work.--Rock Inscriptions of Asoka.

Then the man ... said to himself: "I will not keep all this treasure to
myself; I will share it with others." Upon this he went to king
Brahmadatta, and said: ... "Be it known to you I have discovered a
treasure, and I wish it to be used for the good of the
country."--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

The sorrow of others enters into the hearts of good men as water into
the soil.--Story of Haritika.

With no selfish or partial joy ... they
rejoiced.--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

If thou see others lamenting, join in their lamentations: if thou hear
others rejoicing, join in their joy.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

My son, tell me thy sorrow, that it may become more endurable by
participation.--Nagananda.

Every variety of living creature I must ever defend from
harm.--Ta-chwang-yan-king-lun.

To think no evil and do none: on the contrary, to benefit all
creatures.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

Let the wise man guard his thoughts, for they are ... very artful and
rush wheresoever they list.--Dhammapada.

When thou seest righteousness, quickly follow it: when thou seest
iniquity, instantly flee.--Jitsu-go-kiyo.

Like as the lotus is untarnished by the water, so is Nirvana by any
evil dispositions.--Questions of King Milinda.

May I never, even in a dream, be guilty of theft, adultery,
drunkenness, life-slaughter, and untruthfulness.--Attanagalu-vansa.

Spotless even as the moon, pure, serene, and
undisturbed.--Vasettha-sutta.

Practice the most perfect virtue.--Udanavarga.

To attain perfection that he may profit
others.--Fo-pen-hing-tsih-king.

The present is an imperfect existence: ... I pray for greater
perfection in the next.--Inscription in Temple of Nakhon Vat.

Fulfil the perfection of long-suffering; be thou patient under ...
reproach.--Introduction to Jataka Book.

My duty is to bear all the insults which the heretics launch against
me.--Buddhaghosa's Parables.

Silently shall I endure abuse, as the elephant in battle endures the
arrow sent from the bow.--Dhammapada.

Let not the member of Buddha's order tremble at blame, neither let him
puff himself up when praised.--Tuvataka-sutta.

The end of the pleasures of sense is as the lightning flash: ... what
profit, then, in doing iniquity?--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

Cultivate equanimity.--Nalaka-sutta.

Abhor dissimulation!--Fo-sho-hing-tsan-king.

He speaks truth unmixed with falsehood.--Samanna-phala-sutta.

There is guilt (calling for repentance) in prevarication.--Patimokkha.

He that praises him who should be blamed, or blames him who should be
