And then, I may say, ye have the prayers of all the reformed kirks in
Europe for you, who have ever heard of the perturbations that has been,
and yet are, into this land. And, moreover, beloved, whom have ye
against you in this course? All the atheists, all the papists, and all
the profane rogues in the country; they draw to that side, and it is
only they who hate this cause. And should not all these make you willing
to swear to it, and to hazard for it? And I may say, if ye be but
willing to hazard all that ye have, that may be the heaviest distress
that ever ye shall be put to. And if so be that ye had been willing at
first, the Lord would have touched the king's heart, and made him
willing also; but because he is informed by some that the most part are
not willing, that is a great part of the cause why he is not willing.

The second property of God's people is holiness. "In the beauties of
holiness;" a speech that is borrowed from the priest's garments under
the law. Sometimes they were broidered with gold, sometimes they were
all white, especially in the day of expiation. Not that ministers under
the New Testament should have such garments as these, for these were
representations to them, both of their inward holiness and of their
outward holiness, by (beyond) others; but now all believers are priests
as well as ministers are, and therefore such garments as these are not
necessar. Indeed, if such garments as these had been necessar, then
Christ and His apostles had done great wrong to themselves, who never
used the like; and they had done great wrong to the kirk also in not
appointing such garments to be worn by ministers. There be garments of
glory in heaven, and garments of grace in the earth; that party-coloured
garment spoken of in the Colossians, and this holiness whilk is spoken
of here. Concerning whilk we will mark two things:--First, as people are
a people of willingness in a good cause, so they must also be a people
of holiness, or otherwise their willingness is only but for some worldly
respects: therefore, I would have you with willingness to put on
holiness. And, indeed, if we saw what holiness were, we needed not to be
persuaded to put it on, we would do it willingly. For it has three parts
in it--1. A purgation from former filthiness. 2. A separation from the
world. If thou will be holy, then thou must be separate from the world;
thou must strive to keep thyself from those whose garments are spotted
with the flesh. 3. Holiness requires devotion or dedication to the Lord.
When there is purgation from filthiness, separation from the world, and
dedication to the Lord, there there is holiness and nowhere else.

Now, is there any of you but ye are obleist (obliged) to be holy? Ye say
that ye are the people of the Lord. If so be, then ye must have your
inward man purged of sin, and ye must stand at the stave's end against
the corruptions of the time, and ye must devote yourselves only to serve
and honour God. And your Covenant, that ye are to swear to this day,
oblishes you to this; and it requires nothing of you but that whilk ye
are bound to perform. And, therefore, seeing this is required of you,
purge yourselves within, flee the corruptions of the time, eschew the
society of those whom ye see to be corrupt, and devote yourselves only
to the Lord. Yet this is not that we would obleish you to perform
everything punctually that the Lord requires of you; there is none who
can do that, but promise to the Lord to do so, tell Him that ye have a
desire to do so, and join a resolution and a purpose, and say to Him,
Lord, I sall prease (earnestly endeavour) to do als far as I can. And,
indeed, there is no more in our covenant but this, that we sall
endeavour to keep ourselves within the bounds of our Christian liberty;
and, albeit, none of you would swear to this, ye are bound to it by your
baptism. And, therefore, think not that we are precisians, (or these who
has set down this covenant), seeing all of you are bound to do it.

Secondly, "The _beauties_ of holiness." Consider here that as holiness
is necessar for the saints of God, so all God's courtiers they are full
of beauty. God Himself is full of beauty, and we have no power, beauty
nor holiness but in His power, beauty, and holiness. Holiness, it is the
beauty of the Son of God, Jesus Christ; and to Him it is said in Esay,
"Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty": and the Holy Ghost has this style
to be called Holy. And the angels in heaven, they are clothed with
holiness; and the saints who are in heaven, this is the long white
robes wherewith they are clothed. And they who are begun to be
sanctified here, they strive to be more and more clad with holiness.
Beloved, I would have you to count this to be your beauty, even
holiness; for if ye have not this beauty, then all your other beauty
will degenerate in a bastard beauty.

Now follows the marvellous _multiplication_ of thir people. "From the
womb of the morning thou hast the dew of thy youth." The words are
somewhat obscure even to the learned ear, but look to the 133d Psalm,
and there ye will see a place to help to clear them. Always (however)
observe here, "from the womb of the morning thou hast the dew of thy
youth," that as in a May morning, when there is no extremity of heat,
the dew falls so thick that all the fields are covered with it, and it
falls in such a secret manner that none sees it fall, so the Lord, in
the day of His power, He sall multiply His people, and He sall multiply
them in a secret manner; so that it is marvellous to the world, that
once there should seem to be so few or none of them, and then
incontinent He should make them to be through all estates.

We have first to learn here, that the Kirk of God, she has a morning;
and in the morning the dew falls, and not in the night, nor in the heat
of the day. So it is not in the night of defection, nor in the heat of
the day of persecution, when the Lord's people are multiplied, but it is
in the morning of the day. Beloved, I wish you may be a discerning
people, to know the Lord's seasons. Sall we be as those, of whom our
Saviour complains, who can discern the face of the sky, but cannot
discern the day of the Lord's merciful and gracious visitation towards
them? Men indeed may be very learned and know things very well, and yet
in the meantime be but ignorant of this; for there are sundry gifts
bestowed upon men, and ilk are has not this gift, to discern the Lord's
merciful visitation. And therefore happy are ye, albeit ye be not great
in other gifts, if so be that ye know this; for the Lord, He has some
gifts of His own bestowing allanerly (only), whilk He will bestow upon
the meanest, and yet He will deny them to the proudest; even as the tops
of the mountains, they will be dry and have no dew, while as the valleys
will be wet with it. So those who exalts themselves high, and boasts
themselves of their other gifts, of their knowledge, learning,
experience, &c., the Lord will, for all that, ofttimes leave them void
of saving and sanctifying grace.

"From the womb of the morning thou hast the dew of thy youth." That is,
as the dew is multiplied upon the earth, so sall thy people be. This is
are ordinar phrase in Scripture. Hushai says to Absalom, "Convene the
people from Dan to Beersheba, and then we sall light upon David as the
dew lighteth upon the ground; and then there sall not be left of him and
of all the men that are with him so much as one." And this phrase is
well set down, Is. liv., "Rejoice, O barren, and thou that didst not
bear, break forth into singing and cry aloud, thou that didst not
travail with child; for more are the children of the desolate than the
married wife." And therefore He uses this form of speech, v. 2, "Enlarge
thy tents, and let them stretch the curtains of thy habitations;
lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes." And all these things are
requisite to be done when the people of God are multiplied thus.

Let us observe here, if the Word of God continue in this land, in the
purity thereof, and the sacraments be rightly administrate, the people
of God will then multiply exceedingly here. The chiefest city in this
land, they are forced to marvel where the people has been in former
times that are in it now, so that they cannot get kirks to contain them.
And they think, if the gospel continue in the purity thereof, all the
kirks that they are building, with the rest, sall have enough ado to
contain them. And it is a marvel to consider how the Lord has
multiplied His people, at this time. This is not that we are to glory in
multitudes, but to let you see the great work of God, Who has multiplied
His people thus. And as it was at the beginning of the plantation of the
Christian religion, there was three thousand converted at one preaching
of the apostle, I will not say that there has been three thousand
converted at a preaching here, but I may say this, that at one preaching
there has been some thousands wakened up, who had not been so for a long
time before. And will it not be a hard matter, seeing that it is so,
that Saint Andrews sall be as Gideon's fleece; that all the kingdom
about it sall be wet with the dew of heaven, and it sall only be dry?
Even so, will it not be a shame, that all others sall be stirred up, and
ye not a whit stirred up in this day more than if there were not such a
thing? And, therefore, beloved, I would have you to join yourselves with
the rest of the people of God in this cause.

"Thy youth." That is, _thy young men_. Those that are renewed by grace
they are called young, albeit they were never so old, because their age
is not reckoned by their first, but by their second birth. Ay, moreover,
still the older that the children of God grow in years, and the weaker
in the world, they grow younger and stronger in grace. Secondly, they
are called young, because of the strength that they have to resist
temptations. Before they be renewed by grace and born again that way,
they are like bairns, that every temptation prevails with them; but then
they are as young men, who are able to resist temptations to sin, so
that sin gets not liberty to exercise dominion over them. Thirdly, they
are called young, because they will contend with all their power and
might for the faith. I would have all of you to be young in these
respects, and labour to get ane evidence of your new birth by these,
that ye are growing in grace, gaining still more strength to resist
temptations, and by contending earnestly for the faith; even be bold in
this, especially in contending for the truth. Strive for the truth, for,
if ye anes lose it, ye will not get it so easily again. And this same is
the covenant of truth whilk ye are to swear to; for as our Covenant is
renewed, so also it is exponed (explained) according as the exigencies
of the time requires, and it is applied to the present purpose.

Beloved, I told you already that ye have no cause of fear, for I avow
and attest here before God, that what ye do is not against authority,
but for authority, let some men who are wickedly disposed say what they
will; but what ye do is for authority. And I told you of the obligations
whereby authority are bound to this. And for the words of it, because
they are conceived in a terrible manner, ye need not to stand in awe for
this; and it were good that ye should read them over again, and think
upon this wrath of God whilk we pray for to come upon us, if we do
intend anything against authority.

_Objection._ We have oblished ourselves by our subscription already;
what then needs us to obleish ourselves over again by our oath? _Ans._
It's true, I grant, many of you has subscribed it already, and so ye are
bound; but now ye are to swear also, that so through abundance of bands
to God ye may know yourselves to be the more bound to Him. David says, I
have purposed, I have promised, I have sworn, and I sall perform Thy
righteous statutes. There be also here sundry Acts of Parliament, that
are all of them made within this same kingdom for the maintainance of
the true religion; and for thir, they speak for themselves. And I would
have these who say we do anything against law and against our superiors,
to see and try if there be anything against them, and not all directly
for them.

Beloved, I hope that it will not be necessar for us to spend mickle time
with you in removing of scruples. Good things I know has over many
objections against them from the devil, the world, and our own ill
hearts. And I know some of them who are accounted the learnedst in the
land, have assayed their wits and used their pens to object against
this. But truly these who are judicious, they have confessed that they
have been greatly confirmed by that whilk they have objected; and the
reason of it was, because they who were the most learned assayed
themselves to see what they could say, and yet when all was done, they
had nothing to say that was worth the hearing.

For the first part of this Confession of faith, there is not a word
changed in it; and if so be that men had keeped that part of it free of
sinistrous glosses, and had applied it according to the meaning of those
who were the penners thereof, there needed not to have such a thing ado
as there is now; but because they have put sinistrous glosses upon it
now and misapplied it, therefore it behoved to be explained and applied
to the present time.

The first thing that ye swear to is, That with your whole hearts ye
agree and resolve, all the days of your life, constantly to adhere unto
and defend the true religion. There is no scruple here. 2. That ye
suspend and forbear the practice of all novations already introduced in
the matters of the worship of God, or approbation of the corruptions of
the public government of the kirk, or civil places and power of kirkmen,
till they be tried and allowed in free assemblies and in parliaments.
Now, I know there be some who make scruples here. How can we, say they,
bind ourselves to forbear the practice of that whilk Acts of Assembly
allows, and Acts of Parliament commands? _Ans._ We do not herein condemn
the Act as altogether unlawful, whatever our judgment be of it, but this
is all what we do. Because such ills has followed upon these novations,
therefore we think it meet now to forbear the practice of them till they
be tried by Assembly and Parliament.

And this is not a breach of the Act, when all is done. Because the Act
is not set down in the manner of a command, but only as a counsel; for
so the Act of the pretended Assembly bears. The words is, "The Assemblie
thinks good," &c., "because all memory of superstition is now past,
therefore we may kneel at the communion." Then, if there be any danger
of superstition, by the very words of the Act we may gather this, that
we should not kneel: and so they who practice now keep the letter of the
Act, but they who forbear keep the meaning thereof more nearly than the
practisers. 3. We promise and swear against the Service-book, Book of
Canons, and High Commission, with all other innovations and ills
contained in our Supplications, Complaints, and Protestations. Now for
the Service-book, I find every one almost to be so inclined willingly to
quite (be done with) it. But let me attest your own consciences, if it
had gone on for a while, and been read among you, as it was begun to be,
if it had not been as hard for you to have quat it as to quit the
Articles of Perth; and therefore, do not deceive yourselves, to let such
things be practised any more. It is a pitiful thing, that those who are
wise otherways should deceive themselves in the matters of God's service
and worship, and suffer others to deceive them also. 4. Ye promise and
swear, to the uttermost of your power to stand to the defence of the
king's majesty, in the defence and preservation of true religion: as
also, every one of you to the mutual defence of another in the same
cause. Now there be a number who says, that in this we come under
rebellion against the king, and we join in a combination against him,
when we join ourselves thus, every one for the defence of another. I say
no more of it but this. It is not disputed here, ye see, whether it be
lawful for subjects to take up arms against their prince or not, whether
in offence or defence; but that we will maintain the true religion, and
resist all contrary corruptions, according to our vocation. And every
one of us oblishes ourselves for the defence of another, only in
maintaining the cause of true religion, according to the laws and
liberties of this kingdom. And indeed, this is very reasonable to be
done, albeit not asked of; for when your neighbour's house is burning,
ye will not run to the king to speir (ask) if ye should help him or not,
before it come to your own; but ye will incontinent put to your hand,
both to help him, and to save your own house. Ye may not say, neither,
that because we may not oppose against authority, that we may not oppose
against Papists or against Prelates; for that were to make ourselves
slaves to men. And the very law of nature binds every one of us to help
another, in a lawful manner, for a good cause. 5. Ye swear, because ye
cannot look for a blessing from God upon your proceedings, except that
with your confession and subscription ye join such a life as becomes
Christians who has renewed their covenant with God,--therefore ye
promise to endeavour at least, for yourselves and all that are under
you, to keep yourselves within the bounds of your Christian liberty, and
to be good ensamples to others in all godliness, soberness, and
righteousness, and of every duty we owe both to God and man. And there
is none who needs to skarre (be frightened) at this; for we are not
hereby to tie any to the obedience of the law, but to the obedience of
the Gospel: and I am sure all are bound at least to please to (strive
after) this. And therefore I would have you to labour to it; and when ye
find that ye cannot get it done, then run to Christ, and beseech Him to
teach you to do it; and to give you strength, according to His promise
made in His new covenant; and so ye sail give glory to God and get good
to your own souls. And, indeed, all of you are obleist to amend your
lives, and to live otherwise than ye have done. And last of all, there
is the _Attestation_.

Now, I hope all these things be so clear to you, that there is not any
scruple in any of your minds. And therefore, that this work may be done
aright, and may be accompanied by the power of God, I would have all of
you to bow your knees before that great and dreadful Lord, and beseech
Him that He would send down the Holy Ghost, and the power of His Spirit,
to accompany the work, that so ye may do it with all your hearts, to His
glory and honour, and to your comfort in Jesus Christ.




THE NATIONAL COVENANT:

EXHORTATION AT INVERNESS.

_BY ANDREW CANT._[3]


Long ago our gracious God was pleased to visit this nation with the
light of His glorious Gospel, by planting a vineyard in, and making His
glory to arise upon Scotland. A wonder! that so great a God should shine
on so base a soil! Nature hath been a stepmother to us in comparison of
those who live under a hotter climate, as in a land like Goshen, or a
garden like Eden. But the Lord looks not as man: His grace is most free,
whereby it often pleaseth Him to compense what is wanting in nature:
whence upon Scotland (a dark obscure island, inferior to many) the Lord
did arise, and discovered the tops of the mountains with such a clear
light, that in God's gracious dispensation, it is inferior to none. How
far other nations outstripped her in naturals, as far did she out-go
them in spirituals. Her pomp less, her purity more: they had more of
antichrist than she, she more of Christ than they: in their reformation
something of the beast was reserved; in ours, not so much as a hoof.
When the Lord's ark was set up among them, Dagon fell, and his neck
brake, yet his stump was left; but with us, stump and all was cast into
the brook Kidron. Hence king James his doxology in face of parliament,
thanking God who made him king in such a kirk that was far beyond
England (they having but an ill-said mass in English) yea, beyond Geneva
itself; for holy-days (one of the beast's marks) are in part there
retained, which (said he) to day are with us quite abolished. Thus to a
people sitting in darkness, and in the shadow of death, light is sprung
up. Thus, in a manner, the stone that the builders refused is become the
head of the corner. The Lord's Anointed (to whom the ends of the earth
were given for a possession and inheritance) came and took up house
amongst us, strongly established on two pillars, Jachin and Boaz, and
well ordered with the staves of beauty and bands, and borrowing nothing
from the border of Rome. Her foundation, walls, doors, and windows were
all adorned with carbuncles, sapphires, emeralds, chrysolites, and
precious stones out of the Lord's own treasure. God Himself sat with His
beauty and ornaments therein, so that it was the praise and admiration
of the whole earth. Strangers and home-bred persons wondered. Such was
the glory, perfection, order, and unity of this house, that the altar of
Damascus could have no peace, the Canaanite no rest, heresy no hatching,
schism no footing, Diotrephes no incoming, the papists no couching, and
Jezebel no fairding. Our church looked forth as the morning, fair as the
moon, clear as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners. Then God's
tabernacle was amiable, His glory filled the sanctuary, the clear fresh
streams watered the city of our God; the stoutest humbled themselves,
and were afraid. If an idiot entered the Lord's courts, so great power
sounded from Barnabas and Boanerges, the sons of consolation and
thunder, that they were forced to fall down on their face, and cry,
"This is Bethel, God is here."

But alas! Satan envied our happiness, brake our ranks, poisoned our
fountains, mudded and defiled our streams; and while the watchmen slept,
the wicked one sowed his tares: whence these divers years bygone, for
ministerial authority, we had lordly supremacy and pomp; for beauty,
fairding; for simplicity, whorish buskings; for sincerity, mixtures; for
zeal, a Laodicean temper; for doctrines, men's precepts; for wholesome
fruits, a medley of rites; for feeders we had fleecers; for pastors,
wolves and impostors; for builders of Jerusalem, rebuilders of Jericho;
for unity, rents; for progress, defection. Truth is fallen in the
streets, our dignity is gone, our credit lost, our crown is fallen from
our heads; our reputation is turned to imputation: before God and man we
justly deserve the censure of the degenerate vine; a backsliding people,
an apostate perjured nation, by our breaking a blessed covenant so
solemnly sworn.

Yet, behold! when this should have been our doom, when all was almost
gone, when we were down the hill, when the pit's mouth was opened, and
we were at the falling in, and at the very shaking hands with Rome; the
Lord, strong and gracious, pitied us, looked on us, and cried, saying,
"Return, return, ye backsliding people; come, and I will heal your
backslidings." The Lord hath been so saving, and the cry so quickening,
that almost all of all ranks, from all quarters and corners, are
awakened and on foot, meeting and answering the Lord, saying, "Behold we
come unto Thee, for Thou art the Lord our God, other lords besides Thee
have had dominion over us, but by Thee only will we make mention of Thy
name." All are wondering at the turn, and looking like them that dream,
and are singing and saying, "Blessed be the Lord who hath not given us
for a prey to their teeth; our souls are escaped as a bird out of the
snare of the fowler, the snare is broken, and we are escaped: our help
is in the name of the Lord who made the heaven and the earth." Who
thought to have seen such a sudden change in Scotland, when all second
causes were posting a contrary course? when proud men were boasting and
saying, "Bow down that we may go over;" and we laid our "bodies as the
ground, and as the streets to them that went over." But now, behold one
of God's wonders! So many of all ranks taking the honour and cause of
Christ to heart; all unanimously, harmoniously and legally conjoined as
one man in supplications, protestations and declarations against
innovations and innovators, corruptions and corrupters. Behold and
wonder! That old covenant (once and again solemnly sworn and
perfidiously violated) is now again happily renewed, with such
solemnity, harmony, oaths and subscriptions, that I dare say, this hath
been more real and true in thee, O Scotland, these few weeks bygone,
than for the space of thirty years before. I know Pashurs that went to
smite Jeremiahs, are become at this work Magor-missabib, terror round
about; Zedekiahs that went to smite Micaiahs, seek now an inner chamber
to hide themselves. Tobiah and Sanballat gnaw their tongues, laugh and
despise us, saying, "What is this ye do? Will ye rebel against the king?
Will ye fortify yourselves? Will ye make an end in a day? Will ye remove
the stones out of the heaps of rubbish that is burnt?" Rehum the
chancellor, Shimshai the scribe, and the rest of their companions, cease
not to fill the ears of a gracious prince with prejudice, saying, "Be it
known to thee, O king, if this city be built, and the walls thereof set
up again, that they will not pay toll, tribute or custom." But to these
we answer, "Let the king live, and let all his enemies be confounded,
let all that seek his damnation be put to shame here and henceforth: but
as for you, ye are strangers, meddle not with the joy of God's people;
ye have no portion, right, nor memorial in God's Jerusalem." If the
begun work vex them, it is no wonder; it does prognosticate the ruin of
their kingdom, and that Haman, who hath begun to fall before the seed
of the Jews, shall fall totally: the Lord is about to prune His
vineyard, and to drive out the foxes that eat the tender grapes; to
pluck up bastard plants, and to whip buyers and sellers out of the
temple. The Lord is about to strike the Gehazis with leprosy, and to
bring low the Simon Maguses who were so high lifted up by Satan's
ministry. The Lord is calling the great ones to put too their shoulder,
and help His work; He hath been in the south, saying, "Keep not back,"
and blessed be God, they have not. He hath now sent to the north,
saying, "Give up, bring My sons from afar, and My daughters from the
ends of the earth:" contend for the faith once delivered to Scotland.

There is one Lord, one faith, one cause that concerns all. Though this
north climate be cold, I hope your hearts are not, at least they should
not be. The earth is the Lord's and its fulness, the world and they that
dwell therein; the uttermost parts of the earth are given to Christ for
a possession; His dominion is from sea to sea, and from the river to the
ends of the earth. Come then, and kiss the Son; count it your greatest
honour to honour Christ, and to lend His fallen truths a lift; come and
help to build the old wastes, that ye may be called the repairers of the
breach; and then shall all generations call you blessed; then shall God
build up your houses, as He did to the Egyptian midwives, for their
fearing God, and for their friendship to His people Israel. Be not like
the nobles of Tekoa, of whom Nehemiah complained, that they would not
put their necks to the work of the Lord. Be not like Meroz, whom the
angel of the Lord cursed bitterly, for not coming to the help of the
Lord against the mighty. Neither be ye like these mockers and scorners,
at the renewing of the Lord's covenant in Hezekiah's days, but rather
like those whose hearts the Lord humbled and moved. Be not like those
invited to the king's supper, who refused to come, and had miserable
excuses, and therefore should not taste of it. We hope better things of
you; God hath reserved and advanced you for a better time and use: but
if ye draw back, keep silence, and hold your peace, God shall bring
deliverance and enlargement to His church another way; but God save you
from the sequel. Nothing is craved of you but what is for God and the
king; for Christ's honour, and the kirk's good, and the kingdom's peace.
God give to your hearts courage, wisdom and resolution for God and the
king, and for Christ and His truths. _Amen._




THE NATIONAL COVENANT

SERMON AT GLASGOW.[4]

_By ANDREW CANT._

"The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, who made a marriage
for his son: and he sent forth his servants to call them that were
bidden to the wedding; and they would not come," etc.--_Matt._ xxii. 2,
3, 4, 5, 6.

