    "Lord of men, restrain thine anger--I will give thee matchless fame;
    Indrasena's wrathful mother--laid on me her fatal curse,[126]
    When by thee she was deserted--since that time, O king of men,
    I have dwelt in thee in anguish--in the ecstacy of pain.
    By the King of Serpents' poison--I have burned by night, by day;
    To thy mercy now for refuge--flee I, hear my speech, O king:
    Wheresoe'er men, unforgetful--through the world shall laud thy name,
    Shall the awful dread of Kali[126]--never in their soul abide.
    If thou wilt not curse me, trembling--and to thee for refuge fled."
    Thus addressed, the royal Nala--all his rising wrath suppressed,
    And the fearful Kali entered--in the cloven Vibhitak tree:[127]
    To no eyes but those of Nala--visible, had Kali spoken.
    Then the monarch of Nishadha--from his inward fever freed,
    When away had vanished Kali--when the fruits he had numbered all,
    Triumphing in joy unwonted--blazing in his splendour forth,
    Proudly mounting on the chariot--onward urged the rapid steeds.
    But that tree by Kali entered--since that time stands aye accursed.
    Those fleet horses, forward flying--like to birds, again, again,
    All his soul elate with transport--Nala swifter, swifter drove;
    With his face towards Vidarbha--rode the raja in his pride:
    And when forward Nala journeyed--Kali to his home returned.
    So released from all his sufferings--Nala went, the king of men,
    Dispossessed by Kali, wanting--only now his proper form.




BOOK XXI.


    With the evening in Vidarbha--men at watch, as they drew near,
    Mighty Rituparna's coming--to king Bhima did proclaim.
    Then that king, by Bhima's mandate--entered in Kundina's walls,
    All the region round him echoing[128]--with the thunders of his car.
    But the echoing of that chariot--when king Nala's horses heard,
    In their joy they pawed and trampled[129]--even as Nala's self were there.
    Damayanti, too, the rushing--of king Nala's chariot heard.
    As a cloud that hoarsely thunders--at the coming of the rains.
    All her heart was thrilled with wonder--at that old familiar sound.
    On they seemed to come, as Nala--drove of yore his trampling steeds:
    Like it seemed to Bhima's daughter--and e'en so to Nala's steeds.
    On the palace roofs the peacocks--th' elephants within their stalls,
    And the horses heard the rolling--of the mighty monarch's car.
    Elephants and peacocks hearing--the fleet chariot rattling on,
    Up they raised their necks and clamoured--as at sound of coming rain.[130]

    DAMAYANTI _spake_.

    "How the rolling of yon chariot--filling, as it seems, th' earth,
    Thrills my soul with unknown transport--it is Nala, king of men.
    If this day I see not Nala--with his glowing moonlike face,
    Him, the king with countless virtues--I shall perish without doubt.
    If this day within th' embraces--of that hero's clasping arms,
    I the gentle pressure feel not--without doubt I shall not live.
    If 'tis not, like cloud of thunder--he that comes, Nishadha's king,
    I this day the fire will enter--burning like the hue of gold.
    In his might like the strong lion--like the raging elephant,
    Comes he not, the prince of princes--I shall perish without doubt.
    Not a falsehood I remember--I remember no offence;
    Not an idle word remember--in his noble converse free.
    Lofty, patient, like a hero--liberal beyond all kings,
    Nought ignoble, as the eunuch--even in private, may he do.
    As I think upon his virtues--as I think by day, by night,
    All my heart is rent with anguish--widowed of in own beloved."
      Thus lamenting, she ascended--as with frenzied mind possessed,
    To the palace roof's high terrace--to behold the king of men.
    In the middle court high seated--in the car, the lord of earth,
    Rituparna with Varshneya--and with Vahuca she saw,
    When Varshneya from that chariot--and when Vahuca came down,
    He let loose those noble coursers--and he stopped the glowing car.
    From that chariot-seat descended--Rituparna, king of men,
    To the noble monarch Bhima--he drew near, for strength renowned.
    Him received with highest honour--Bhima, for without due cause,
    Deemed not he, the mighty raja--with such urgent speed had come.
    "Wherefore com'st thou! hail and welcome"--thus that gracious king enquires;
    For his daughter's sake he knew not--that the lord of men had come.
    But the raja Rituparna--great in wisdom as in might,
    When nor king within the palace--nor king's son he could behold,
    Nor of Swayembara heard he--nor assembled Brahmins saw.
    Thus within his mind deep pondering--spoke of Kosala the lord.
    "Hither, O majestic Bhima--to salute thee am I come."
    But king Bhima smiled in secret--as he thought within his mind,
    "What the cause of this far journey--of a hundred Yojanas.
    Passing through so many cities--for this cause he set not forth;
    For this cause of little moment--to our court he hath not come:
    What the real cause, hereafter--haply I may chance to know."
    After royal entertainment--then the king his guest dismissed:
    "Take then thy repose," thus said he--"weary of thy journey, rest."
    He refreshed, with courteous homage--of that courteous king took leave,
    Ushered by the royal servants--to th' appointed chamber went:
    There retired king Rituparna--with Varshneya in his suite.
    Vahuca, meantime, the chariot--to the chariot-house had led,
    There the coursers he unharnessed--skilfully he dressed them there,
    And with gentle words caressed them--on the chariot seat sate down.
      But the woeful Damayanti--when Bhangasuri she'd seen,
    And the charioteer Varshneya--and the seeming Vahuca,
    Thought within Vidarbha's princess--"Whose was that fleet chariot's sound?
    Such it seems as noble Nala's--yet no Nala do I see.
    Hath the charioteer Varshneya--Nala's noble science learned?
    Therefore did the thundering chariot--sound as driven by Nala's self?
    Or may royal Rituparna--like the skilful Nala drive,
    Therefore did the rolling chariot--seem as of Nishadha's king?"
    Thus when Damayanti pondered--in the silence of her soul,
    Sent she then her beauteous handmaid--to that king her messenger.




BOOK XXII.


    DAMAYANTI _spake_.

    "Go, Kesinia, go, enquire thou--who is yonder charioteer,
    On the chariot seat reposing--all deformed, with arms so short?
    Blessed maid, approach, and courteous--open thou thy bland discourse:
    Undespis'd, ask thou thy question--and the truth let him reply.
    Much and sorely do I doubt me--whether Nala it may be,
    As my bosom's rapture augurs--as the gladness of my heart.
    Speak thou, ere thou close the converse--even as good Parnada spake
    And his answer, slender-waisted--undespis'd, remember thou."
    Then to Vahuca departing--went that zealous messenger,
    On the palace' loftiest terrace--Damayanti sate and gazed.

    KESINIA _spake_.

    "Happy omen mark thy coming--I salute thee, king of men:
    Of the princess Damayanti--hear, O lord of men, the speech:
    'From what region came ye hither--with what purpose are ye come?'
    Answer thou, as may beseem you--so Vidarbha's princess wills."

    VAHUCA _spake_.

    "Soon a second Swayembara, heard the king of Kosala,
    Damayanti holds: to-morrow--will it be, the Brahmin said:
    Hearing this, with fleetest coursers--that a hundred yojanas' speed,
    Set he forth, the wind less rapid,--and his charioteer am I."

    KESINIA _spake_.

    "Who the third that journeys with you--who is he, and what his race?
    Of what race art thou? this office--wherefore dost thou undertake!"

    VAHUCA _spake_.

    "'Tis the far-renowned Varshneya--Punyasloka's charioteer:
    He, when Nala fled an exile--to Bhangasuri retired.
    Skilful I in taming horses--and a famous charioteer.
    Rituparna's chosen driver--dresser of his food am I."

    KESINIA _spake_.

    "Knows the charioteer Varshneya--whither royal Nala went?
    Of his fortune hath he told thee--Vahuca, what hath he said?"

    VAHUCA _spake_.

    "He of the unhappy Nala--safe the children borne away,
    Wheresoe'er he would, departed--of king Nala knows he nought:
    Nothing of Nishadha's raja--fair one! living man doth know.
    Through the world, concealed, he wanders--having lost his proper form.
    Only Nala's self of Nala--knows, and his own inward soul,
    Of himself to living mortal--Nala will no sign betray."

    KESINIA _spake_.

    "He that to Ayodhya's city--went, the holy Brahmin first,
    Of his faithful wife these sayings--uttered once and once again;
    'Whither went'st thou then, O gamester--half my garment severing off;
    Leaving her within the forest--all forsaken, thy belov'd?
    Even as thou commanded'st, sits she--sadly waiting thy return,
    Day and night, consumed with sorrow--in her scant half garment clad.
    O to her for ever weeping--in the extreme of her distress,
    Grant thy pity, noble hero--answer to her earnest prayer.'
    Speak again the words thou uttered'st--words of comfort to her soul,
    The renowned Vidarbha's princess--fain that speech would hear again,
    When the Brahmin thus had spoken--what thou answered'st back to him,
    That again Vidarbha's princess--in the self-same words would hear."

    VRIHADASVA _spake_.

    Of king Nala, by the handmaid--fair Kesinia thus addressed,
    All the heart was wrung with sorrow--and the eyes o'erflowed with tears.
    But his anguish still suppressing--inly though consumed, the king,
    With a voice half choked with weeping--thus repeated his reply.
    "Even in the extreme of misery--noble women still preserve
    Over their own selves the mastery--by their virtues winning heaven;
    By their faithless lords abandoned--anger feel they not, e'en then;
    In the breastplate of their virtue--noble women live unharmed.
    By the wretched, by the senseless--by the lost to every joy,
    She by such a lord forsaken--to resentment will not yield.
    Against him, by hunger wasted--of his robe by birds despoiled,
    Him consumed with utmost misery--still no wrath, the dark-hued feels;
    Treated well, or ill-entreated--when her husband 'tis she sees,
    Spoiled of bliss, bereft of kingdom--famine wasted, worn with woe."
    In these words as spake king Nala--in the anguish of his heart,
    Could he not refrain from weeping--his unwilling tears burst forth.
    Then departing, fair Kesinia--told to Damayanti all,
    All that Vahuca had spoken--all th' emotion he betrayed.




BOOK XXIII.


    Hearing this, fair Damayanti--all abandoned to her grief.
    Thinking still that he was Nala--to Kesinia spake again.
    "Go, Kesinia, go, examine--Vahuca, and all his acts,
    Silent take thy stand beside him--and observe whate'er he does;
    Nor, Kesinia, be there given him--fire his labours to assist:
    Neither be there given him water--in thy haste, at his demand:
    All, when thou hast well observed him--every act to me repeat,
    Every act that more than mortal--seems in Vahuca, relate."
    Thus addressed by Damayanti--straight Kesinia went again,
    Of the tamer of the horses--every act observed, came back;
    Every act as she had seen it--she to Damayanti told:
    Every more than mortal wonder--that in Vahuca appeared.

    KESINIA _spake_.

    "Very holy is he, never--mortal man, in all my life,
    Have I seen, or have I heard of--Damayanti, like to him.
    He drew near the lowly entrance--bowed not down his stately head;
    On the instant, as it saw him--up th' expanding portal rose.
    For the use of Rituparna--much and various viands came;[131]
    Sent, as meet, by royal Bhima--and abundant animal food.
    These to cleanse, with meet ablution--were capacious vessels brought;
    As he looked on them, the vessels--stood, upon the instant, full.
    Then, the meet ablutions over--Vahuca went forth, and took,
    Of the withered grass a handful--held it upward to the sun:
    On the instant, brightly blazing--shone the all-consuming fire.
    Much I marvelled at the wonder--and in mute amazement stood;
    Lo, a second greater marvel--sudden burst upon my sight!
    He that blazing fire stood handling--yet unharmed, unburned, remained.
    At his will flows forth the water--at his will it sinks again.
    And another greater wonder--lady, did I there behold:
    He the flowers which he had taken--gently moulded in his hands,
    In his hands the flowers, so moulded--as with freshening life endued,
    Blossomed out with richer fragrance--stood erect upon their stems:
    All these marvels having noted--swiftly came I back to thee."

    DAMAYANTI _spake_.

    Damayanti when these wonders--of the king of men she heard,
    Thought yet more king Nala present--thought her utmost wish achieved.
    Deeming still her royal consort--in the form of Vahuca,
    With a gentle voice and weeping--to Kesinia spake again:
    "Go, again, Kesinia, secret--and by Vahuca unseen,
    Of those viands bring a portion--by his skilful hand prepared:"
    She to Vahuca approaching--unperceived stole soft away
    Of the well-cooked meat a morsel--warm she bore it in her haste,
    And to Damayanti gave it--fair Kesinia, undelayed.
    Of the food prepared by Nala--well the flavour did she know;
    Tasting it she shrieked in transport--"Nala is yon charioteer."
    Trying then a new emotion--of her mouth ablution made:[132]
    She her pair of infant children--with Kesinia sent to him.
    Soon as he young Indrasena--and her little brother saw,
    Up he sprang, his arms wound round them--to his bosom folding both;
    When he gazed upon the children--like the children of the gods,
    All his heart o'erflowed with pity--and unwilling tears broke forth.
    Yet Nishadha's lord perceiving--she his strong emotion marked,
    From his hold released the children--to Kesinia speaking thus:
    "Oh! so like mine own twin children--was yon lovely infant pair,
    Seeing them thus unexpected--have I broken out in tears:
    If so oft thou comest hither--men some evil will suspect,
    We within this land are strangers--beauteous maiden, part in peace."




BOOK XXIV.


    Seeing the profound emotion--of that wisest king of men,
    Passing back in haste, Kesinia--told to Damayanti all:
    Then again did Damayanti--mission to Kesinia give,
    To approach her royal mother--in her haste her lord to see.
    "Vahuca we've watched most closely--Nala we suspect him still;
    Only from his form we doubt him--this myself would fain behold.
    Cause him enter here, my mother--to my wishes condescend;
    Known or unknown to my father--let it be decided now."
    By that handmaid thus accosted--then the queen to Bhima told
    All his daughter's secret counsel--and the raja gave assent.
    Instant from her sire the princess--from her mother leave obtained,
    Bade them make king Nala enter--in the chamber where she dwelt.
    Sudden as he gazed upon her--upon Damayanti gazed,
    Nala, he was seized with anguish--and with tears his eyes o'erflowed.
    And when Damayanti gazed on--Nala, thus approaching near,
    With an agonizing sorrow--was the noble lady seized.
    Clad, then, in a scarlet mantle--hair dishevelled, mire-defiled,[133]
    Unto Vahuca this language--Damayanti thus addressed:
    "Vahuca beheld'st thou ever--an upright and noble man,
    Who departed and abandoned--in the wood, his sleeping wife?
    The beloved wife, and blameless--in the wild wood, worn with grief?
    Who was he who thus forsook her?--who but Nala, king of men?
    To the lord of earth, from folly--what offence can I have given?
    That he fled, within the forest--leaving me, by sleep oppressed?
    Openly, the gods rejected--was he chosen by me, my lord:
    Could he leave the true, the loving--her that hath his children borne!
    By the nuptial fire, in presence--of the gods, he clasped my hand,
    'I will be,'[134] this truth he plighted--whither did he then depart?"
      While all this in broken accents--sadly Damayanti spoke,
    From her eyes the drops of sorrow--flowed in copious torrents down.
    Those dark eyes, with vermeil corners--thus with trembling moisture dewed,
    When king Nala saw, and gazed on--to the sorrowful he spake.
    "Gaming that I lost my kingdom--'twas not mine own guilty deed,
    It was Kali wrought within me--hence it was I fled from thee;
    Therefore he, in th' hour of trial--smitten by thy scathing curse,
    In the wild wood as thou wanderest--grieving night and day for me,
    Kali dwelt within my body--burning with thy powerful curse,
    Ever burning, fiercer, hotter--as when fire is heaped on fire.
    He, by my religious patience--my devotion, now subdued,
    Lo! the end of all our sorrows--beautiful! is now at hand.
    I, the evil one departed, hither have made haste to come;
    For thy sake, O round-limbed! only;--other business have I none.
    Yet, O how may high-born woman--from her vowed, her plighted lord,
    Swerving, choose another husband--even as thou, O trembler, would'st?
    Over all the earth the heralds--travel by the kings command,
    'Now the daughter of king Bhima--will a second husband choose,
    'Free from every tie, as wills she--as her fancy may beseem,'
    Hearing this, came hither speeding--king Bhangasuri in haste."
    Damayanti, when from Nala--heard she this his grievous charge,
    With her folded hands, and trembling--thus to Nala made reply:
    "Do not me, O noble-minded--of such shameless guilt suspect,
    Thou, when I the gods rejected--Nala, wert my chosen lord.
    Only thee to find, the Brahmins--went to the ten regions forth,
    Chaunting to their holy measures--but the words that I had taught.
    Then that Brahmin wise, Parnada--such the name he bears, O king,
    Thee in Kosala, the palace--of king Rituparna saw.
    There to thee, my words addressed he--answer there from thee received.
    I this subtle wile imagined--king of men, to bring thee here.
    Since, beside thyself, no mortal--in the world, within the day,
    Could drive on the fleetest coursers--for a hundred Yojanas.
    To attest this truth, O monarch!--thus I touch thy sacred feet;
    Even in heart have I committed--never evil thought 'gainst thee.
    He through all the world that wanders--witness the all-seeing wind,[135]
    Let him now of life bereave me--if in this 'gainst thee I've sinned:
    And the sun that moveth ever--over all the world, on high,
    Let him now of life bereave me--if in this 'gainst thee I've sinned.
    Witness, too, the moon that permeates--every being's inmost thought;
    Let her too of life bereave me--if in this 'gainst thee I've sinned.
    These three gods are they that govern--these three worlds, so let them
        speak;
    This my sacred truth attest they--or this day abandon me."
      Thus adjured, a solemn witness--spake the wind from out the air;
    "She hath done or thought no evil--Nala, 'tis the truth we speak:
    King, the treasure of her virtue--well hath Damayanti kept,
    We ourselves have seen and watched her--closely for three livelong years.
    This her subtle wile she plotted--only for thy absent sake,
    For beside thyself no mortal--might a hundred Yojanas drive.
    Thou hast met with Bhima's daughter--Bhima's daughter meets with thee,
    Cast away all jealous scruple--to thy bosom take thy wife."
      Even as thus the wind was speaking--flowers fell showering all
          around:[136]
    And the gods sweet music sounded--on the zephyr floating light.
    As on this surpassing wonder--royal Nala stood and gazed,
    Of the blameless Damayanti--melted all his jealous doubts.
    Then by dust all undefiled--he the heavenly vest put on,
    Thought upon the King of Serpents--and his proper form resumed.
    In his own proud form her husband--Bhima's royal daughter saw,
    Loud she shrieked, the undespised--and embraced the king of men.
    Bhima's daughter, too, king Nala--shining glorious as of old,
    Clasped unto his heart, and fondled--gently that sweet infant pair.
    Then her face upon his bosom--as the lovely princess laid,
    In her calm and gentle sorrow--softly sighed the long-eyed queen:
    He, that form still mire-defiled--as he clasped with smile serene,
    Long the king of men stood silent--in the ecstacy of woe.
    All the tale of Damayanti--and of Nala all the tale,
    To king Bhima in her transport--told Vidarbha's mother-queen.
    Then replied that mighty monarch--"Nala, his ablutions done,
    Thus rejoined to Damayanti--I to-morrow will behold."

    VRIHADASVA _spake_.

    They the livelong night together--slow related, each to each,
    All their wanderings in the forest--and each wild adventure strange.
    In king Bhima's royal palace--studying each the other's bliss,
    With glad hearts, Vidarbha's princess--and the kingly Nala dwelt.
    In their fourth year of divorcement--reunited to his wife,
    Richly fraught with every blessing--at the height of joy he stood.
    Damayanti too re-wedded--still increasing in her bliss,
    Like as the glad earth to water--opens its half-budding fruits,
    She of weariness unconscious,--soothed each grief, and full each joy,
    Every wish fulfilled, shone brightly--as the night, when high the moon.




BOOK XXV.


    When that night was passed and over--Nala, that high-gifted king,
    Wedded to Vidarbha's daughter--in fit hour her sire beheld.
    Humbly Nala paid his homage--to the father of his queen,
    Reverently did Damayanti--pay her homage to her sire.
    Him received the royal Bhima--as his son, with highest joy,
    Honoured, as became him, nobly:--then consoled that monarch wise
    Damayanti, to king Nala--reconciled, the faithful wife.
    Royal Nala, all these honours--as his homage meet, received;
    And in fitting terms, devotion--to his royal sire declared.
    Mighty then, through all the city--ran the wakening sound of joy;
    All in every street exulting--at king Nala's safe return.
    All the city with their banners--and with garlands decked they forth.
    All the royal streets, well watered--and with stainless flowers were strewn;
    And from door to door the garlands--of festooning flowers were hung;
    And of all the gods the altars--were with fitting rites adorned.
    Rituparna heard of Nala--in the form of Vahuca,
    Now re-wed, to Damayanti--and the king of men rejoiced.
    To the king, before his presence--Nala courteous made excuse.
    In his turn Ayodhya's monarch--in like courteous language spake.
    He, received thus hospitably--wondering to Nishadha's king,
    "Bliss be with thee, reunited--to thy queen:" 'twas thus he said.
    "Have I aught offensive ever--done to thee, or said, O king
    Whilst unknown, within my palace--thou wert dwelling, king of men?
    If designed or undesigning--any single act I've done
    I might wish undone, thy pardon--grant me, I beseech thee, king."

    NALA _spake_.

    "Not or deed or word discourteous--not the slightest hast thou done;
    Hadst thou, I might not resent it--freely would I pardon all.
    Thou of old, my friend, my kinsman--wert, O sovereign of men,
    From this time henceforth thy friendship--be my glory and my joy.
    Every wish anticipated--pleasantly I dwelt with thee,
    As in mine own royal palace--dwelt I ever, king, in thine.
    My surpassing skill in horses--all is thine that I possess;
    That on thee bestow I gladly--if, O king, it seem thee good."
      Nala thus to Rituparna--gave his subtle skill in steeds,
    Gladly he received the present--with each regulation meet.
    Gifted with that precious knowledge--then Bhangasuri the king,
    Home returned to his own city--with another charioteer.
    Rituparna thus departed--Nala, then the king of men,
    In the city of Kundina--sojourned for no length of time.




BOOK XXVI.


    There a month when he had sojourned--of king Bhima taking leave,
    Guarded but by few attendants--to Nishadha took his way.
    With a single splendid chariot--and with elephants sixteen,
    And with fifty armed horsemen--and six hundred men on foot;
    Making, as 'twere, earth to tremble--hastening onward, did the king,
    Enter awful in his anger--and terrific in his speed.
    Then the son of Virasena--to king Pushkara drew near;
    "Play we once again," then said he--"much the wealth I have acquired:
    All I have, even Damayanti--every treasure I possess,
    Set I now upon the hazard--Pushkara, thy kingdom thou:
    In the game once more contend we--'tis my settled purpose this,
    Brother, at a single hazard--play we boldly for our lives.
    From another he who treasures--he who mighty realm hath won,
    'Tis esteemed a bounden duty--to play back the counter game.
    If thou shrinkest from the hazard--be our game the strife of swords,
    Meet we in the single combat--all our difference to decide.
    An hereditary kingdom--may by any means be sought,
    Be re-won by any venture--this the maxim of the wise.
    Of two courses set before thee--Pushkara, the option make,
    Or in play to stand the hazard--or in battle stretch the bow."
    By Nishadha's lord thus challenged--Pushkara, with smile suppressed,
    As secure of easy victory--answered to the lord of earth;
    "Oh what joy! abundant treasures--thou hast won, again to play;
    Oh what joy! of Damayanti--now the hard-won prize is mine:
    Oh what joy! again thou livest--with thy consort, mighty armed!
    With the wealth I win bedecked--soon shall Bhima's daughter stand,
    By my side, as by great Indra--stands the Apsara in heaven.[137]
    Still on thee hath dwelt my memory--still I've waited, king, for thee;
    In the play I find no rapture--but 'gainst kinsmen like thyself.
    When this day the round-limbed princess--Damayanti, undespised,
    I shall win, I rest contented--still within mine heart she dwells."
      Hearing his contemptuous language--franticly thus pouring forth,
    With his sword th' indignant Nala--fain had severed off his head.
    But with haughty smile, with anger--glaring in his blood-red eyes,
    "Play we now, nor talk we longer--conquered, thou'lt no longer talk."
    Then of Pushkara the gaming--and of Nala straight began:
    In a single throw by Nala--was the perilous venture gained;
    Pushkara, his gold, his jewels--at one hazard all was won!
    Pushkara, in play thus conquered--with a smile the king rejoined:
    "Mine again is all this kingdom--undisturbed, its foes o'ercome.
    Fallen king! Vidarbha's daughter--by thine eyes may ne'er be seen.
    Thou art now, with all thy household--unto abject slavery sunk.
    Not thyself achieved the conquest--that subdued me heretofore!
    'Twas achieved by mightier Kali--that thou didst not, fool, perceive.
    Yet my wrath, by him enkindled--will I not 'gainst thee direct;
    Live thou henceforth at thy pleasure--freely I thy life bestow,
    And of thine estate and substance--give I thee thy fitting share.
    Such my pleasure, in thy welfare--hero, do I take delight,
    And mine unabated friendship--never shall from thee depart.
    Pushkara, thou art my brother--may'st thou live an hundred years!"
      Nala thus consoled his brother--in his conscious power and strength,
    Sent him home to his own city--once embracing, once again.
    Pushkara, thus finding comfort--answered to Nishadha's lord,
    Answered he to Punyasloka--bowing low with folded hands:
    "Everlasting be thy glory! may'st thou live ten thousand years!
