suitable price for their services, and then _conscientiously_
_earn their wages_, strictly practising Divine Science, and     6
healing the sick.

The author never sought charitable support, but gave
fully seven-eighths of her time without remuneration, ex-       9
cept the bliss of doing good. The only pay taken for her
labors was from classes, and often those were put off for
months, in order to do gratuitous work.  She has never          12
taught a Primary class without several, and sometimes
seventeen, free students in it; and has endeavored to take
the full price of tuition only from those who were able to      15
pay.  The student who pays must of necessity do better
than he who does not pay, and yet will expect and require
others to pay him.  No discount on tuition was made on          18
higher classes, because their first classes furnished students
with the means of paying for their tuition in the higher
instruction, and of doing charity work besides.  If the         21
Primary students are still impecunious, it is their own
fault, and this ill-success of itself leaves them unprepared
to enter higher classes.                                        24

People are being healed by means of my instructions,
both in and out of class.  Many students, who have
passed through a regular course of instruction from me,         27
have been invalids and were healed in the class; but ex-
perience has shown that this defrauds the scholar, though       1
it heals the sick.

It is seldom that a student, if healed hi a class, has left     3
it understanding sufficiently the Science of healing to im-
mediately enter upon its practice.  Why?  Because the
glad surprise of suddenly regained health is a shock to         6
the mind; and this holds and satisfies the thought with
exuberant joy.

This renders the mind less inquisitive, plastic, and tract-     9
able; and deep systematic thinking is impracticable until
this impulse subsides.

This was the principal reason for advising diseased             12
people not to enter a class.  Few were taken besides inva-
lids for students, until there were enough practitioners to
fill in the best possible manner the department of healing.     15
Teaching and healing should have separate departments,
and these should be fortified on all sides with suitable and
thorough guardianship and grace.                                18

Only a very limited number of students can advanta-
geously enter a class, grapple with this subject, and well
assimilate what has been taught them.  It is impossible         21
to teach thorough Christian Science to promiscuous and
large assemblies, or to persons who cannot be addressed
individually, so that the mind of the pupil may be dissected    24
more critically than the body of a subject laid bare for
anatomical examination.  Public lectures cannot be such
lessons in Christian Science as are required to empty and       27
to fill anew the individual mind.

If publicity and material control are the motives for           1
teaching, then public lectures can take the place of private
lessons; but the former can never give a thorough knowledge     3
of Christian Science, and a Christian Scientist will never
undertake to fit students for practice by such means. Lec-
tures in public are needed, but they must be subordinate        6
to thorough class instruction in any branch of education.

None with an imperfect sense of the spiritual significa-
tion of the Bible, and its scientific relation to Mind-         9
healing, should attempt overmuch in their translation of
the Scriptures into the "new tongue;" but I see that
some novices, in the truth of Science, and some impostors are   12
committing this error.

_Is there more than one school of scientific healing?_

In reality there is, and can be, but one school of the          15
Science of Mind-healing.  Any departure from Science is
an irreparable loss of Science.  Whatever is said and
written correctly on this Science originates from the Princi-   18
ple and practice laid down in Science and Health, a work
which I published in 1875.  This was the first book, re-
corded in history, which elucidates a pathological Science      21
purely mental.

Minor shades of difference in Mind-healing have origi-
nated with certain opposing factions, springing up among        24
unchristian students, who, fusing with a class of aspirants
which snatch at whatever is progressive, call it their first-
fruits, or else _post mortem_ evidence.                         27

A slight divergence is fatal in Science.  Like certain          1
Jews whom St. Paul had hoped to convert from mere
motives of self-aggrandizement to the love of Christ, these     3
so-called schools are clogging the wheels of progress by
blinding the people to the true character of Christian
Science, -- its moral power, and its divine efficacy to         6
heal.

The true understanding of Christian Science Mind-
healing never originated in pride, rivalry, or the deification  9
of self.  The Discoverer of this Science could tell you of
timidity, of self-distrust, of friendlessness, toil, agonies, and
victories under which she needed miraculous vision to           12
sustain her, when taking the first footsteps in this
Science.

The ways of Christianity have not changed.  Meek-               15
ness, selflessness, and love are the paths of His testimony
and the footsteps of His flock.






WORKS ON CHRISTIAN SCIENCE
WRITTEN BY MARY BAKER EDDY
Published by the
Trustees under the Will of Mary Baker Eddy

---
---

SCIENCE AND HEALTH WITH KEY TO THE SCRIPTURES

In one volume, 700 pages. The original, standard, and only textbook on
