
193. A supernatural person (a Buddha) is not easily found, he is not
born everywhere. Wherever such a sage is born, that race prospers.

194. Happy is the arising of the awakened, happy is the teaching of the
True Law, happy is peace in the church, happy is the devotion of those
who are at peace.

195, 196. He who pays homage to those who deserve homage, whether the
awakened (Buddha) or their disciples, those who have overcome the host
(of evils), and crossed the flood of sorrow, he who pays homage to
such as have found deliverance and know no fear, his merit can never be
measured by anybody.




Chapter XV. Happiness

197. Let us live happily then, not hating those who hate us! among men
who hate us let us dwell free from hatred!

198. Let us live happily then, free from ailments among the ailing!
among men who are ailing let us dwell free from ailments!

199. Let us live happily then, free from greed among the greedy! among
men who are greedy let us dwell free from greed!

200. Let us live happily then, though we call nothing our own! We shall
be like the bright gods, feeding on happiness!

201. Victory breeds hatred, for the conquered is unhappy. He who has
given up both victory and defeat, he, the contented, is happy.

202. There is no fire like passion; there is no losing throw like
hatred; there is no pain like this body; there is no happiness higher
than rest.

203. Hunger is the worst of diseases, the body the greatest of pains; if
one knows this truly, that is Nirvana, the highest happiness.

204. Health is the greatest of gifts, contentedness the best riches;
trust is the best of relationships, Nirvana the highest happiness.

205. He who has tasted the sweetness of solitude and tranquillity,
is free from fear and free from sin, while he tastes the sweetness of
drinking in the law.

206. The sight of the elect (Arya) is good, to live with them is always
happiness; if a man does not see fools, he will be truly happy.

207. He who walks in the company of fools suffers a long way; company
with fools, as with an enemy, is always painful; company with the wise
is pleasure, like meeting with kinsfolk.

208. Therefore, one ought to follow the wise, the intelligent, the
learned, the much enduring, the dutiful, the elect; one ought to follow
a good and wise man, as the moon follows the path of the stars.




Chapter XVI. Pleasure

209. He who gives himself to vanity, and does not give himself to
meditation, forgetting the real aim (of life) and grasping at pleasure,
will in time envy him who has exerted himself in meditation.

210. Let no man ever look for what is pleasant, or what is unpleasant.
Not to see what is pleasant is pain, and it is pain to see what is
unpleasant.

211. Let, therefore, no man love anything; loss of the beloved is evil.
Those who love nothing and hate nothing, have no fetters.

212. From pleasure comes grief, from pleasure comes fear; he who is free
from pleasure knows neither grief nor fear.

213. From affection comes grief, from affection comes fear; he who is
free from affection knows neither grief nor fear.

214. From lust comes grief, from lust comes fear; he who is free from
lust knows neither grief nor fear.

215. From love comes grief, from love comes fear; he who is free from
love knows neither grief nor fear.

216. From greed comes grief, from greed comes fear; he who is free from
greed knows neither grief nor fear.

217. He who possesses virtue and intelligence, who is just, speaks the
truth, and does what is his own business, him the world will hold dear.

218. He in whom a desire for the Ineffable (Nirvana) has sprung up, who
is satisfied in his mind, and whose thoughts are not bewildered by love,
he is called urdhvamsrotas (carried upwards by the stream).

219. Kinsmen, friends, and lovers salute a man who has been long away,
and returns safe from afar.

220. In like manner his good works receive him who has done good, and
has gone from this world to the other;--as kinsmen receive a friend on
his return.




Chapter XVII. Anger

221. Let a man leave anger, let him forsake pride, let him overcome all
bondage! No sufferings befall the man who is not attached to name and
form, and who calls nothing his own.

222. He who holds back rising anger like a rolling chariot, him I call a
real driver; other people are but holding the reins.

223. Let a man overcome anger by love, let him overcome evil by good;
let him overcome the greedy by liberality, the liar by truth!

224. Speak the truth, do not yield to anger; give, if thou art asked for
little; by these three steps thou wilt go near the gods.

225. The sages who injure nobody, and who always control their body,
they will go to the unchangeable place (Nirvana), where, if they have
gone, they will suffer no more.

226. Those who are ever watchful, who study day and night, and who
strive after Nirvana, their passions will come to an end.

227. This is an old saying, O Atula, this is not only of to-day: `They
blame him who sits silent, they blame him who speaks much, they also
blame him who says little; there is no one on earth who is not blamed.'

228. There never was, there never will be, nor is there now, a man who
is always blamed, or a man who is always praised.

229, 230. But he whom those who discriminate praise continually day
after day, as without blemish, wise, rich in knowledge and virtue, who
would dare to blame him, like a coin made of gold from the Gambu river?
Even the gods praise him, he is praised even by Brahman.

231. Beware of bodily anger, and control thy body! Leave the sins of the
body, and with thy body practise virtue!

232. Beware of the anger of the tongue, and control thy tongue! Leave
the sins of the tongue, and practise virtue with thy tongue!

233. Beware of the anger of the mind, and control thy mind! Leave the
sins of the mind, and practise virtue with thy mind!

234. The wise who control their body, who control their tongue, the wise
who control their mind, are indeed well controlled.




Chapter XVIII. Impurity

235. Thou art now like a sear leaf, the messengers of death (Yama) have
come near to thee; thou standest at the door of thy departure, and thou
hast no provision for thy journey.

236. Make thyself an island, work hard, be wise! When thy impurities
are blown away, and thou art free from guilt, thou wilt enter into the
heavenly world of the elect (Ariya).

237. Thy life has come to an end, thou art come near to death (Yama),
there is no resting-place for thee on the road, and thou hast no
provision for thy journey.

238. Make thyself an island, work hard, be wise! When thy impurities are
blown away, and thou art free from guilt, thou wilt not enter again into
birth and decay.

239. Let a wise man blow off the impurities of his self, as a smith
blows off the impurities of silver one by one, little by little, and
from time to time.

240. As the impurity which springs from the iron, when it springs from
it, destroys it; thus do a transgressor's own works lead him to the evil
path.

241. The taint of prayers is non-repetition; the taint of houses,
non-repair; the taint of the body is sloth; the taint of a watchman,
thoughtlessness.

242. Bad conduct is the taint of woman, greediness the taint of a
benefactor; tainted are all evil ways in this world and in the next.

243. But there is a taint worse than all taints,--ignorance is
the greatest taint. O mendicants! throw off that taint, and become
taintless!

244. Life is easy to live for a man who is without shame, a crow hero, a
mischief-maker, an insulting, bold, and wretched fellow.

245. But life is hard to live for a modest man, who always looks for
what is pure, who is disinterested, quiet, spotless, and intelligent.

246. He who destroys life, who speaks untruth, who in this world takes
what is not given him, who goes to another man's wife;

247. And the man who gives himself to drinking intoxicating liquors, he,
even in this world, digs up his own root.

248. O man, know this, that the unrestrained are in a bad state; take
care that greediness and vice do not bring thee to grief for a long
time!
