this point he is assured that this work is read in most schools and
taught to small children. However, our guest is again disillusioned; for
no sooner does he arrive at Genesis, XII, 11-20, than he finds that
Abraham, good Abraham, the pure, the father of all Hebrews, makes of the
sacred relationship of marriage a means of personal gain and safety by
betraying his own wife. Now it is the Martian's turn to inquire of the
Hebrew whether the latter had ever read this story to his own daughter?
Or, the story of Abraham's affair with Hagar, his handmaiden? Was the
Hebrew's young daughter aware that Isaac, son of Abraham, was as ready
and willing to prostitute his wife for protection for himself as was his
father Abraham?

The Martian is puzzled by the word "sporting" in Genesis, XXVI, 8-11,
and is informed of its meaning. A few moments after reading Genesis XIX,
1-7, he informs his would-be converter that if Lot had lived in Mars and
had offered his daughters to appease the mob, the account of that
incident would never have found its way into any work on morals.
Moreover, he failed utterly to see how the account of Lot's daughters
getting him into a drunken state, followed by a statement such as, "Thus
were both the daughters of Lot with child by their father," could ever
have any moral value.

The story of Jacob, Leah, and Rachel does not appeal to this infidel
Martian, since he still believes that integrity and faithfulness are
virtues. Yet, in his endeavor to respect the courtesy due to his host,
he reaches for pencil and pad, and notes the various moral lessons he
had derived thus far from the Old Testament. He wrote lust, incest,
infidelity, and prostitution; arriving at the story of Dinah, Genesis
XXXIV, 1-2, he wrote that in addition to those vices already listed,
rape should be given a prominent place. The stories of Joseph and
Potiphar's wife, Judah and Tamar, King David and his wives, the rape of
Tamar by her brother Ammon, did not impress the Martian as stories for
the delectation of children, since he was crude enough to hold that
anything which would shock the mind of a child, could not have any moral
value and would thus be automatically excluded from any religion. He,
therefore, returned the volume to the Hebrew with the remark that as an
adult he found the stories of De Maupassant and Balzac more interesting,
even though they belonged to the same genre.

Our guest now repaired to one of our golf courses where, during the
interval of a few hours, the fresh air, the sunshine, and exercise
dispelled the mental nausea which the reading of the Old Testament had
occasioned in him. Returning to his quarters, he is approached by one of
the Christian Brethren and the New Testament is placed in his hands with
these remarks, "The Christian recognizes that in the Old Testament the
Jews have given to the Christian world its greatest heritage." The fact
that in exchange for this priceless heritage, the Christians have given
to the Jews a series of persecutions unequaled in the annals of human
warfare is explained by the quality of the Brotherhood of Man that
naturally manifests itself after a complete conversion to the Bible's
precepts. The Old Testament contains the first revelations of God; the
New Testament, the last revelations. Our Christian Brother "forgets" to
remind the visitor that the difference of opinion regarding these two
Testaments of God has caused more sorrow, bloodshed, harm, devilment,
misery, and devastation than any other single item in the life and
history of the human race.

The Martian is hard pressed to reconcile the fact that Mohammedanism six
hundred years after the appearance of Christianity triumphed over
Christianity in a great portion of the earth's surface; yet he is
informed that Christianity is _the_ religion of God, that Allah made the
Mohammedans, Jehovah the Jews, the Trinity the Christians, and the rest
of the believers were illegitimate children of the above gods, was the
only conclusion he could reach. In a few moments the myth of Christ
begins to unfold itself before his eyes in the Gospels of Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and John, the Acts of the Apostles, and the Apocalypse. He finds,
"The so-called Messianic texts which are supposed to prefigure Jesus in
the Old Testament have all been either misunderstood or deliberately
misinterpreted. The most celebrated is that in Isaiah VII, 14, which
predicts that a virgin shall bear a son, Emmanuel, but the word, Al-mah,
which the Septuagint rendered "virgin" means in Hebrew a young woman,
and this passage merely deals with the approaching birth of a son to the
king or the prophet himself. This error of the Septuagint is one of the
sources of the legend relating to the virginal birth of Jesus. As early
as the second century A.D. the Jews perceived it and pointed it out to
the Greeks, but the Church knowingly persisted in the false reading, and
for over fifteen centuries she has clung to her error."

His attentive reading convinces him that not one of the Gospels is the
work of an eyewitness to the scenes recorded; a little side
investigation reveals that there were a great many writings called
Gospels, from which the Church finally adopted four, guaranteeing their
inspiration and absolute veracity, no doubt because they were in favor
in four very influential churches, Matthew at Jerusalem, Mark at Rome or
at Alexandria, Luke at Antioch, and John at Ephesus. Moreover, what the
Gospels tell him, he perceives is what different Christian communities
believed concerning Jesus between the years 70 and 100 A.D. In Matthew
XXVI, 39, Mark XIV, 35, and Luke XXII, 42, there are words such as those
Jesus is supposed to have uttered during the slumber of these very same
Apostles. This occurrence enlightens him as to what St. Augustine meant
when he wrote, "I should not believe in the Gospel if I had not the
authority of the Church for so doing." If the documents are stuffed with
the authority of the Church, these Gospels cannot be utilized for a
history of the real life of Jesus.

A study of the Epistles of St. Paul reveals that St. Paul taught that
sin and death came into the world by Adam's fall. In spite of a diligent
search the Martian found no mention of this in the words ascribed to
Jesus. From St. Paul's utterances he learns that Christ came to redeem
mankind by his voluntary oblation of himself. He was the Son of God!
Paul, not knowing that in the future a special form of conception would
be superimposed on Jesus, states that he was of human birth. The Martian
determined to ascertain what effect the teachings of St. Paul have had
on Christianity. He learns that, "Ever since St. Paul, the ruling idea
of Christianity has been that of the redemption of man, guilty of a
prehistoric fault, by the voluntary sacrifice of a superman. This
doctrine is founded upon that of expiation; a guilty person must suffer
to atone for his fault; and that of the substitution of victims, the
efficacious suffering of an innocent person for a guilty one. Both are
at once pagan and Jewish ideas; they belong to the old fundamental
errors of humanity. Yet, Plato knew that the punishment inflicted on a
guilty person is not, nor should it be, a vengeance; it is a painful
remedy imposed on him for his own benefit and that of society. At about
the same period Athenian law laid down the principle that punishment
should be as personal as the fault, thus St. Paul founded Christian
Theology on two archaic ideas which had already been condemned by
enlightened Athenians of the fourth century before our era, _ideas which
no one would dream of upholding in these days, though the structure
built upon them still subsists_."

In chapter V of the first Epistle of St. John, these words strike the
visitor, "There are three that bear witness in heaven, the Father, and
the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are One." If these two
verses are authentic, they would be an affirmation of the doctrine of
the Trinity, dating from the first century, at a time when the Gospels,
the Acts, and St. Paul ignore it. It was first pointed out in 1806 that
these verses were an interpolation, for they do not appear in the best
manuscripts, notably all the Greek manuscripts down to the fifteenth
century. The Roman Church refused to bow to evidence. The Congregation
of the Index, on January 13, 1897, with the approbation of Leo XIII,
forbade any question as to the authenticity of the text relating to the
"three heavenly witnesses." It appeared strange to the Martian that a
god should need the lies of his disciples to be incorporated in a divine
revelation. But his confusion was even greater when he read, "We worship
one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither confounding the
Persons nor dividing the substance--and yet, they are not three
Eternals, but One Eternal, not three Almighties, but One Almighty. So,
the Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, and yet they are
not three Gods, but One God.... The Father is made of none, neither
created nor begotten. The Son is of the Father alone, not made, nor
created, but begotten. The Holy Ghost is of the Father and of the Son,
neither made nor created, nor begotten, but proceeding.... And in this
Trinity, none is afore or after the other; none is greater or less than
another; but the whole three Persons are coeternal together and
coequal."

He thought this would make a great puzzle, truly an insoluble conundrum,
to take back to bewilder his Martian friends. However, he was able to
comprehend the remarks of Vigilantius, "who returned from a journey in
Italy and the Holy Land disgusted with official Christianity. He
protested vehemently against the idolatrous worship of images, the
legacy of Paganism to the Church, a practice directly opposed to that
of the Mosaic law which Jesus came, not to destroy, but to fulfill. It
was idle to reply that these images were the Scriptures of the
illiterate, that they were not the object of, but the stimulus to,
worship. Experience showed that the majority of the faithful confounded
(as indeed they still do) the sign with the thing signified." (_Salomon
Reinach, "Orpheus."_)

The result of the critical examination of the New Testament by the
Martian is that just as most of the Old Testament books are not only
anonymous but highly composite productions, that as certain writings
traditionally ascribed to Moses, David, Solomon, Daniel, and others are
utterly lacking in the necessary evidences in support of authorship, but
bear unmistakable evidence of having gone through a long compilatory
process; so does each gospel, despite its seeming unity, give evidence
of being a composite literary product. Scholars have agreed that Mark
first set forth the doings of Jesus and "it was out of Mark that both
Matthew and Luke took the framework of their own writings, cleverly
fitting into its arrangement their own distinctive material and coloring
the whole by their own individual treatment." (_Trattner, "Unravelling
the Book of Books."_) It is estimated that Mark was written shortly
before the Romans destroyed Jerusalem in 70 A.D. "This means that a
chasm of 30 or 40 years separates Mark's written document from the
ministry of Jesus--a long enough time to create a plastic body of oral
teachings and a highly colored tradition embellished with fanciful
stories."

Luke was a Greek physician living somewhere on the shores of the AEgean
Sea. He had been a friend of Paul, just as Mark had been with Peter.
Luke had no personal acquaintance with Jesus and had to get his
information from what others said, or from what the friends of
"eye-witnesses" had seen.

The Gospel of "Matthew" is an anonymous composition which, on analysis,
has been found to incorporate nearly fifty per cent of what is found in
Mark. It is now believed by many scholars to have been written between
the years 75 and 80 A.D. at Antioch not, of course, by the Apostle
Matthew, but by some unknown editor.

The Fourth Gospel, the Gospel of John, is vastly different in style,
arrangement, and in the description of the words, actions, and general
spiritual character of Jesus. Many scholars believe that it was written
in the city of Ephesus, somewhere around the year 100 A.D. "Church
tradition ascribed it to the Apostle John, the son of Zebedee, one of
the fishermen whom Jesus called to be a disciple. Years ago this view
was easily entertained, but there now exists too much refractory
evidence against assigning this Greek Gospel to an Aramaic-speaking
Galilean. That an untutored fisherman could have written so elaborate
and so highly philosophical an account of Jesus has always presented a
thorny problem. And so to most scholars John's authorship of the Fourth
Gospel is unthinkable."

Not one of the Gospels is the work of an eyewitness, and the four
Gospels do not complete each other; they contradict each other; and when
they do not contradict, they repeat each other. The Christ of John is a
totally different person from the Christ of Mark, Matthew, and Luke.
Loisy, in his "_Quelques Lettres_," states, "If there is one thing above
others that is obvious, but as to which the most powerful of theological
interests have caused a deliberate or unconscious blindness, it is the
profound, the irreducible incompatibility of the Synoptical Gospels, and
the Fourth Gospel. If Jesus spoke and acted as he is said to have
spoken and acted in the first three Gospels, he did not speak and act as
he is reported to have done in the fourth."

The Martian is forced to the conclusion that the New Testament, with its
version of the Virgin Birth, Elizabeth, the cousin of Mary, Zacharias
and the Angel Gabriel, Jesus and the Sinner, are on par with the
eroticism of the Old Testament. The interpolations, the myth, and fable
also compare with the first revelation, and, in his opinion, he prefers
Andersen's Fairy Tales, or AEsop's Fables.

Meanwhile, a Protestant Brother mentions the name of Luther, and the
conclusions he draws are that the exciting cause of the Reformation was
an extravagant sale of indulgences conceded to the German Dominicans.
The Augustinians grew jealous of the Dominicans, and an Augustinian
Monk, Martin Luther, affixed to the door of Wittenberg Cathedral
ninety-five articles against the abuse of indulgences. This started the
fray in Germany with Luther at the head of this heresy. The gravest
difference of opinion had to do with the Communion. "Luther retained
one-half of the mystery, and rejected the other half. He confesses that
the body of Jesus Christ is in the consecrated element, but it is, he
says, as fire is in the red-hot iron. The fire and the iron subsist
together. This is what they called impanation, invination,
consubstantiation. Thus, while those they called Papists ate God without
bread, the Lutherans ate God and bread; soon afterwards came the
Calvinists, who ate bread and did not eat God." In short, Luther was in
harmony with the Roman Church in nothing but the doctrines of the
Trinity, Baptism, the Incarnation, and the Resurrection. Luther thought
it was time to abolish private mass. He pretended the devil had appeared
to him and reproached him for saying mass and consecrating the
elements. The devil had proved to him, he said, that it was idolatry.
Luther declared that the devil was right and must be believed. The mass
was abolished in Wittenberg, and soon afterwards throughout Saxony; the
images were thrown down, monks and nuns left their cloisters, and, a few
years later, Luther married a nun called Catharine von Bora. This tale
did not greatly impress our guest.

A Catholic Brother, not to be outdone, extols the glories of his
Universal Church, and the Martian again sets out to investigate. This
time he finds:

The quotations in the New Testament which the Catholic creed interprets
as giving divine authority to its representatives on earth is a late
interpolation; the Trinity as stated above is a paradox which no
rational being can understand, and its dogmas and idolatry are
consistent with a civilization of 4000 years ago.

A study of the lives of its popes put to shame the statement that they
could possibly be the earthly representatives of a Benevolent Being. "In
the ninth and tenth centuries the papacy passed through a period of
shameful disorder. The Rome of John X was a cloaca in which the Popes
set the example of the worst misconduct." (For a good short account of
the lives of the popes, see Draper's, "History of the Intellectual
Development of Europe.")

During the complete control by the Church of civilization in Europe, it
has retarded the progress of humanity for at least 2000 years, and its
precepts and fundamental principles are today detrimental to the advance
of mankind. It has to its credit a long series of judicial murders for
differences of opinion. The Crusades, instigated by the popes and
seconded by the monks, cost millions of lives and exhausted the
resources of Christian Europe; they aggravated fanaticism, exaggerated
the worship of saints and relics to the point of mania, and encouraged
the abuse of and traffic in indulgences. There had never been a single
opinion persecuted by the Church in the Middle Ages the adoption of
which would not have brought about a diminution of her revenues; the
Church has always primarily considered her finances. The papacy was
responsible for the Inquisition, and it actively encouraged and excited
its ferocity. It gave birth to the Witchcraft Mania. The first Grand
Inquisitor, Torquemada, received the congratulations of the Pope. It
diabolically applauded the St. Bartholomew Massacre, and instigated the
numerous religious wars that tore Europe asunder, and was the cause of
the loss of hundreds of thousands of lives and incalculable suffering.
With such savage alacrity did it carry out its object of protecting the
interests of religion that between 1481 and 1808 it had punished three
hundred and forty thousand persons, and of these, nearly 32,000 had been
burnt.

"It is perfectly certain that the Catholic Church has taught, and still
teaches that intellectual liberty is dangerous, that it should be
forbidden. It was driven to take this position because it had taken
another. It taught, and still teaches, that a certain belief is
necessary to salvation. It has always known that investigation and
inquiry led, or might lead, to doubt; that doubt leads, or may lead, to
heresy, and that heresy leads to Hell. In other words, the Catholic
Church has something more important than this world, more important than
the well-being of man here. It regards this life as an opportunity for
joining that Church, for accepting that creed, and for the saving of
your soul. If the history of the world proves anything, if proves that
the Catholic Church was for many centuries the most merciless
institution that ever existed among men. We, too, know that the
Catholic Church was, during all the years of its power, the enemy of
every science. It preferred magic to medicine, relics to remedies,
priests to physicians. It hated geologists, persecuted the chemists, and
imprisoned the naturalists, and opposed every discovery of science
calculated to improve the condition of mankind. There is no crime that
the Catholic Church did not commit, no cruelty that it did not reward,
and no virtue that it did not persecute. It was the greatest and most
powerful enemy of human rights. In one hand, it carried an alms dish,
and in the other, a dagger. It argued with the sword, persecuted with
poison, and convicted with faggot." R. G. Ingersoll, "_Rome or Reason_."

"From the time of Newton to our own day, the divergence of science from
the dogmas of the Church has steadily increased. The Church declared
that the earth is the central and most important body in the Universe,
that the sun and moon and stars are tributary to it. On these points she
was worsted by astronomy. She affirmed that a universal deluge had
covered the earth; that the only surviving animals were such as had been
saved in the Ark. In this, her error was established by geology. She
taught that there was a first man who, some 6000 or 8000 years ago, was
suddenly created or called into existence in a condition of physical and
moral perfection, and from that condition he fell. But anthropology has
shown that human beings existed far back in geological time, and in a
savage state but little better than that of the brute.... Convicted of
so many errors, the papacy makes no attempt at explanation. It ignores
