fair presentation of the old manner. Nothing is less like a fine work of
art than its incompetent imitation. And this practically exhausts, as far
as I am aware, the material which this period provides.

The next class will be made up of our Restoration hymns, by Jeremy Clark,
Croft, and others who added to the succeeding editions of the metrical
Psalms. If there are not many in this class, yet the few are good; and
Clark must be regarded as the inventor of the modern English hymn-tune,
regarded, that is, as a pure melody in the scale with harmonic
interpretation of instrumental rather than true vocal suggestion. His
tunes are pathetic, melodious, and of truly national and popular
character, the best of them almost unaccountably free from the
indefinable secular taint that such qualities are apt to introduce, and
which the bad following of his example did very quickly introduce in the
hands of less sensitive artists. They are suitable for evening services.

After this time there followed in England, in the wake of Handel, a
degradation of style which is now completely discredited. Diatonic flow,
with tediously orthodox modulation, overburdened with conventional
graces, describe these innumerable and indistinguishable productions. And
just as the old tunes were related to the motets and madrigals, so are
these to the verse-anthems and glees of their time. These weak ditties,
in the admired manner of Lord Mornington, were typically performed by the
genteel pupils of the local musician, who, gathered round him beneath the
laughing cherubs of the organ case, warbled by abundant candlelight to
their respectful audience with a graceful execution that rivalled the
weekday performances of _Celia's Arbour_ and the _Spotted Snakes_. Good
tunes may be written at any time, for style is independent of fashion;
but there are very few exceptions to the complete and unregretted
disappearance of all the tunes of this date.

We have then nothing left for us to do but to review the material which
the revival of music in the last fifty years has given us in the way of
hymns.

This last group divides naturally into two main heads; first the
restoration of old hymns of all kinds, with their plain, severer manner,
in reaction against the abused graces; and secondly the appearance of a
vast quantity of new hymns.

Concerning the restoration of the old hymns, we cannot be too grateful to
those who pointed the right way, and, according to their knowledge and
the opportunities of the taste of their day, did the best that they
could. But, as our remarks under the heads of Plain-song and Reformation
hymns will show, this knowledge, taste, and opportunity were
insufficient, and all their work requires to be done afresh.

We are therefore left to the examination of the modern hymns. In place of
this somewhat invidious task, I propose to make a few remarks on the
general question of the introduction of modern harmony into
ecclesiastical music, with reference of course to hymns only. It cannot
escape the attention of any one that the modern church music has for one
chief differentiation the profuse employment of pathetic chords, the
effect of which is often disastrous to the feelings.

Comparing a modern hymn-tune in this style with some fine setting of an
old tune in the diatonic ecclesiastical manner, one might attribute the
superiority of the old music entirely to its harmonic system; but I think
this would be wrong.

It is a characteristic of all early art to be _impersonal_[19]. As long
as an art is growing, artists are engaged in rivalry to develop the new
inventions in a scientific manner, and individual personality is not
called out. With the exhaustion of the means in the attainment of
perfection a new stage is reached, in which individual expression is
prominent, and seems to take the place of the scientific impersonal
interest which aimed at nothing but beauty: so that the chief distinction
between early and late art is that the former is impersonal, the latter
personal.

Turning now to the subject of ecclesiastical music, and comparing thus
Palestrina with Beethoven or Mozart, is it not at once apparent that
Palestrina has this distinct advantage, namely, that he seems not to
interfere at all with, or add anything to, the sacred words? His early
musical art is impersonal, what the musicians call 'pure music'; and if
he is setting the phrases of the Liturgy or Holy Scriptures, we are not
aware of any adjunct; it seems rather as if the sacred words had suddenly
become musical. Not so with Mozart or Beethoven; we may prefer their
music, but it has interfered with the sacred words, it has, in fact,
added a personality.

It must of course be conceded that this gives a very strong if not
logically an almost unassailable position to those who would confine
sacred music to the ecclesiastical style. But it seems to me ridiculous
to suppose that genius cannot use all good means with reserve and
dignity; and if the modern church music will not stand comparison in
respect of dignity and solemnity with the old, the fault must rather lie
in the manner in which the new means are used, than in the means
themselves; nor would I myself concede that there is no place in church
for music which is tinged with a human personality; I should be rather
inclined to reckon the great musicians among the prophets, and to
sympathize with any one who might prefer the personality of Beethoven (as
revealed in his works) to that of a good many canonized seers. What is
logical is that we should be careful as to what personality we admit, and
see that the modern means are used with reserve.

Now if we examine our modern hymn-tunes, do we find any sign of that
reserve of means which we should expect of genius, or any style which we
could attribute to the personality of a genius? Let any one in doubt try
the following experiment: copy out some 'favourite tune' in the 'admired
manner' of the present day, and show it to some musician who may happen
not to know it, and ask him if it is not by Brahms; then see how he will
receive any further remarks that you may make to him on the subject of
music.

These new tunes are in fact, for the most part, the indistinguishable
products of a school given over to certain mannerisms, and might be
produced _ad libitum_, as indeed they are; just as were the tunes of the
Lord Mornington school before described: and though the composers and
compilers of these modern tunes would be the first to deride the exploded
fashion, their own fashion is more foolish, and promises to be as
fugitive[20].

I have said very little in this essay on the words of hymns. I will
venture to add one or two judgements here. _First_, that in the
Plain-song period, words and music seem pretty equal and well matched.
_Secondly_, that in the Reformation period, and for some time onwards,
the musicians did far better than the sacred poets, and have left us a
remainder of admirable music, for which it is our duty to find words.
_Thirdly_, that the excuse which some musicians have offered for the
sentimentality of their modern tunes, namely, that the words are so
sentimental, is not without point as a criticism of modern hymn-words,
but is of no value whatever as a defence of their practice. The
interpretative power of music is exceedingly great, and can force almost
any words (as far as their sentiment is concerned) into a good channel.

And if music be introduced at all into public worship it must be most
jealously and scrupulously guarded. It is a confusion of thought to
suppose that because--as St. Augustin would tell us--it is not a vital
matter to religion whether it employ music or not, therefore it can be of
little consequence what sort of music is used: and the attitude of
indifference towards it, which has seemed to me to be almost a point of
correct ecclesiastical manners, must be the expression of a convinced
despair, which, in the present state of things, need not surprise. Devout
persons are naturally afraid of secular ideals, and shrink from the
notion of art intruding into the sanctuary; and, especially if they have
never learned music, they will share St. Augustin's jealousy of it; and
it is the more difficult to remove their objections, when what they are
innocently suffering in the name of art curdles the artist's blood with
horror, and keeps him away from church. The artist too, to whom we might
look for help, is the _rara avis in terris_, and, in regard to his
sympathy with the clergy, would often be thought by them to deserve the
rest of the hexameter; but it is really to his credit that he is loth to
meddle with church music. Its social vexations, its eye to the market,
its truckling to vulgar taste and ready subservience to a dominant
fashion, which can never (except under the rarest combination of
circumstances) be good;--all this is more than enough to hold him off.
Where then is the appeal? _Quis custodiet_?

The unwillingness of the clergy[21] to know anything about music might be
got over if the music could be set on a proper basis; and in the present
lack of authority and avowed principles, it would be well if such of our
cathedral precentors and organists as have the matter at heart would
consult and work together with the purpose of instructing pastors and
people by the exhibition of what is good. This is what we might expect of
our religious musical foundations, which are justifying the standing
condemnation of utilitarian economists so long as the stipendiaries are
content indolently to follow the fortuitous traditions of the books that
lie in the choir, supplemented by the penny-a-sheet music of the common
shops. In the Universities, too, it should be impossible for an
undergraduate not to gain acquaintance with good ecclesiastical music,
and this is not ensured by an occasional rare performance of half a dozen
old masterpieces which are preserved in heartless compliment to
antiquity. It is to such bodies that we must first look for help and
guidance to give our church music artistic importance: for let no one
think that the church can put the artistic question on one side. There is
no escape from art; art is only the best that man can do, and his second,
third, fourth or fifth best are only worse efforts in the same direction,
and in proportion as they fall short of the best the more plainly betray
their artificiality. To refuse the best for the sake of something
inferior of the same kind can never be a policy; it is rather an
uncorrected bad habit, that can only be excused by ignorance; and
ignorance on the question of music is every day becoming less excusable;
and the growing interest and intelligence which all classes are now
