
            Viking Tales of the North (R. B. Anderson).


The first toast at every festival here was drunk in his honour, and,
besides the first of May, one day in every week was held sacred to
him, and, from his Saxon name, Woden, was called Woden's day, whence
the English word "Wednesday" has been derived. It was customary for
the people to assemble at his shrine on festive occasions, to hear
the songs of the scalds, who were rewarded for their minstrelsy by
the gift of golden bracelets or armlets, which curled up at the ends
and were called "Odin's serpents."

There are but few remains of ancient Northern art now extant, and
although rude statues of Odin were once quite common they have all
disappeared, as they were made of wood--a perishable substance, which
in the hands of the missionaries, and especially of Olaf the Saint,
the Northern iconoclast, was soon reduced to ashes.


    "There in the Temple, carved in wood,
    The image of great Odin stood."

            Saga of King Olaf (Longfellow).


Odin himself is supposed to have given his people a code of laws
whereby to govern their conduct, in a poem called Havamal, or the
High Song, which forms part of the Edda. In this lay he taught
the fallibility of man, the necessity for courage, temperance,
independence, and truthfulness, respect for old age, hospitality,
charity, and contentment, and gave instructions for the burial of
the dead.


    "At home let a man be cheerful,
    And toward a guest liberal;
    Of wise conduct he should be,
    Of good memory and ready speech;
    If much knowledge he desires,
    He must often talk on what is good."

            Havamal (Thorpe's tr.).






CHAPTER III: FRIGGA


The Queen of the Gods

Frigga, or Frigg, daughter of Fiorgyn and sister of Joerd, according to
some mythologists, is considered by others as a daughter of Joerd and
Odin, whom she eventually married. This wedding caused such general
rejoicing in Asgard, where the goddess was greatly beloved, that ever
after it was customary to celebrate its anniversary with feast and
song, and the goddess being declared patroness of marriage, her health
was always proposed with that of Odin and Thor at wedding feasts.

Frigga was goddess of the atmosphere, or rather of the clouds, and as
such was represented as wearing either snow-white or dark garments,
according to her somewhat variable moods. She was queen of the gods,
and she alone had the privilege of sitting on the throne Hlidskialf,
beside her august husband. From thence she too could look over all
the world and see what was happening, and, according to the belief
of our ancestors, she possessed the knowledge of the future, which,
however, no one could ever prevail upon her to reveal, thus proving
that Northern women could keep a secret inviolate.


    "Of me the gods are sprung;
    And all that is to come I know, but lock
    In my own breast, and have to none reveal'd."

            Balder Dead (Matthew Arnold).


She was generally represented as a tall, beautiful, and stately woman,
crowned with heron plumes, the symbol of silence or forgetfulness, and
clothed in pure white robes, secured at the waist by a golden girdle,
from which hung a bunch of keys, the distinctive sign of the Northern
housewife, whose special patroness she was said to be. Although she
often appeared beside her husband, Frigga preferred to remain in her
own palace, called Fensalir, the hall of mists or of the sea, where
she diligently plied her wheel or distaff, spinning golden thread or
weaving long webs of bright-coloured clouds.

In order to perform this work she made use of a marvellous jewelled
spinning wheel or distaff, which at night shone brightly in the sky as
a constellation, known in the North as Frigga's Spinning Wheel, while
the inhabitants of the South called the same stars Orion's Girdle.

To her hall Fensalir the gracious goddess invited husbands and wives
who had led virtuous lives on earth, so that they might enjoy each
other's companionship even after death, and never be called upon to
part again.


    "There in the glen, Fensalir stands, the house
    Of Frea, honour'd mother of the gods,
    And shows its lighted windows and the open doors."

            Balder Dead (Matthew Arnold).


Frigga was therefore considered the goddess of conjugal and
motherly love, and was specially worshipped by married lovers and
tender parents. This exalted office did not entirely absorb her
thoughts however, for we are told that she was very fond of dress,
and whenever she appeared before the assembled gods her attire was
rich and becoming, and her jewels chosen with much taste.



The Stolen Gold

Frigga's love of adornment once led her sadly astray, for, in her
longing to possess some new ornament, she secretly purloined a piece
of gold from a statue representing her husband, which had just been
placed in his temple. The stolen metal was entrusted to the dwarfs,
with instructions to fashion a marvellous necklace for her use. This,
when finished, was so resplendent that it greatly enhanced her charms,
and even increased Odin's love for her. But when he discovered the
theft of the gold he angrily summoned the dwarfs and bade them reveal
who had dared to touch his statue. Unwilling to betray the queen of
the gods, the dwarfs remained obstinately silent, and, seeing that
no information could be elicited from them, Odin commanded that the
statue should be placed above the temple gate, and set to work to
devise runes which should endow it with the power of speech and enable
it to denounce the thief. When Frigga heard these tidings she trembled
with fear, and implored her favourite attendant, Fulla, to invent some
means of protecting her from Allfather's wrath. Fulla, who was always
ready to serve her mistress, immediately departed, and soon returned,
accompanied by a hideous dwarf, who promised to prevent the statue
from speaking if Frigga would only deign to smile graciously upon
him. This boon having been granted, the dwarf hastened off to the
temple, caused a deep sleep to fall upon the guards, and while they
were thus unconscious, pulled the statue down from its pedestal and
broke it to pieces, so that it could never betray Frigga's theft,
in spite of all Odin's efforts to give it the power of speech.

Odin, discovering this sacrilege on the morrow, was very angry indeed;
so angry that he left Asgard and utterly disappeared, carrying away
with him all the blessings which he had been wont to shower upon gods
and men. According to some authorities, his brothers, as we have
already seen, took advantage of his absence to assume his form and
secure possession of his throne and wife; but although they looked
exactly like him they could not restore the lost blessings, and allowed
the ice-giants, or Jotuns, to invade the earth and bind it fast in
their cold fetters. These wicked giants pinched the leaves and buds
till they all shrivelled up, stripped the trees bare, shrouded the
earth in a great white coverlet, and veiled it in impenetrable mists.

But at the end of seven weary months the true Odin relented and
returned, and when he saw all the evil that had been done he drove
the usurpers away, forced the frost-giants to relax their grip of the
earth and to release her from her icy bonds, and again showered all
his blessings down upon her, cheering her with the light of his smile.



Odin Outwitted

As has already been seen, Odin, although god of wit and wisdom, was
sometimes no match for his wife Frigga, who, womanlike, was sure to
obtain her way by some means. On one occasion the august pair were
seated upon Hlidskialf, gazing with interest upon the Winilers and
Vandals, who were preparing for a battle which was to decide which
people should henceforth have supremacy. Odin gazed with satisfaction
upon the Vandals, who were loudly praying to him for victory; but
Frigga watched the movements of the Winilers with more attention,
because they had entreated her aid. She therefore turned to Odin
and coaxingly inquired whom he meant to favour on the morrow; he,
wishing to evade her question, declared he would not decide, as it
was time for bed, but would give the victory to those upon whom his
eyes first rested in the morning.

This answer was shrewdly calculated, for Odin knew that his couch
was so turned that upon waking he would face the Vandals, and he
intended looking out from thence, instead of waiting until he had
mounted his throne. But, although so cunningly contrived, this plan
was frustrated by Frigga, who, divining his purpose, waited until he
was sound asleep, and then noiselessly turned his couch so that he
should face her favourites. Then she sent word to the Winilers to dress
their women in armour and send them out in battle array at dawn, with
their long hair carefully combed down over their cheeks and breasts.


    "Take thou thy women-folk,
    Maidens and wives:
    Over your ankles
    Lace on the white war-hose;
    Over your bosoms
    Link up the hard mail-nets;
    Over your lips
    Plait long tresses with cunning;--
    So war beasts full-bearded
    King Odin shall deem you,
    When off the grey sea-beach
    At sunrise ye greet him."

            The Longbeards' Saga (Charles Kingsley).


These instructions were carried out with scrupulous exactness, and
when Odin awoke the next morning his first conscious glance fell upon
their armed host, and he exclaimed in surprise, "What Longbeards are
those?" (In German the ancient word for long beards was Langobarden,
which was the name used to designate the Lombards.) Frigga, upon
hearing this exclamation, which she had foreseen, immediately cried
out in triumph that Allfather had given them a new name, and was
in honour bound to follow the usual Northern custom and give also a
baptismal gift.


    "'A name thou hast given them,
    Shames neither thee nor them,
    Well can they wear it.
    Give them the victory,
    First have they greeted thee;
    Give them the victory,
    Yoke-fellow mine!'"

            The Longbeards' Saga (Charles Kingsley).


Odin, seeing he had been so cleverly outwitted, made no demur, and in
memory of the victory which his favour vouchsafed to them the Winilers
retained the name given by the king of the gods, who ever after watched
over them with special care, giving them many blessings, among others
a home in the sunny South, on the fruitful plains of Lombardy.



Fulla

Frigga had, as her own special attendants, a number of beautiful
maidens, among whom were Fulla (Volla), her sister, according to
some authorities, to whom she entrusted her jewel casket. Fulla
always presided over her mistress's toilet, was privileged to put
on her golden shoes, attended her everywhere, was her confidante,
and often advised her how best to help the mortals who implored
her aid. Fulla was very beautiful indeed, and had long golden hair,
which she wore flowing loose over her shoulders, restrained only by
a golden circlet or snood. As her hair was emblematic of the golden
grain, this circlet represented the binding of the sheaf. Fulla
was also known as Abundia, or Abundantia, in some parts of Germany,
where she was considered the symbol of the fulness of the earth.

Hlin, Frigga's second attendant, was the goddess of consolation,
sent out to kiss away the tears of mourners and pour balm into hearts
wrung by grief. She also listened with ever-open ears to the prayers
of mortals, carrying them to her mistress, and advising her at times
how best to answer them and give the desired relief.



Gna

Gna was Frigga's swift messenger. Mounted upon her fleet steed
Hofvarpnir (hoof-thrower), she would travel with marvellous rapidity
through fire and air, over land and sea, and was therefore considered
the personification of the refreshing breeze. Darting thus to and fro,
Gna saw all that was happening upon earth, and told her mistress
all she knew. On one occasion, as she was passing over Hunaland,
she saw King Rerir, a lineal descendant of Odin, sitting mournfully
by the shore, bewailing his childlessness. The queen of heaven,
who was also goddess of childbirth, upon hearing this took an apple
(the emblem of fruitfulness) from her private store, gave it to Gna,
and bade her carry it to the king. With the rapidity of the element
she personified, Gna darted away, and as she passed over Rerir's head,
she dropped her apple into his lap with a radiant smile.


    "'What flies up there, so quickly driving past?'
    Her answer from the clouds, as rushing by:
    'I fly not, nor do drive, but hurry fast,
    Hoof-flinger swift through cloud and mist and sky.'"

            Asgard and the Gods (Wagner-Macdowall).


The king pondered for a moment upon the meaning of this sudden
apparition and gift, and then hurried home, his heart beating high
with hope, and gave the apple to his wife to eat. In due season,
to his intense joy, she bore him a son, Volsung, the great Northern
hero, who became so famous that he gave his name to all his race.



Lofn, Vjofn, and Syn

Besides the three above mentioned, Frigga had other attendants in her
train. There was the mild and gracious maiden Lofn (praise or love),
whose duty it was to remove all obstacles from the path of lovers.


    "My lily tall, from her saddle bearing,
    I led then forth through the temple, faring
    To th' altar-circle where, priests among,
    Lofn's vows she took with unfalt'ring tongue."

            Viking Tales of the North (R. B. Anderson).


Vjofn's duty was to incline obdurate hearts to love, to maintain peace
and concord among mankind, and to reconcile quarrelling husbands and
wives. Syn (truth) guarded the door of Frigga's palace, refusing to
open it to those who were not allowed to come in. When she had once
shut the door upon a would-be intruder no appeal would avail to change
her decision. She therefore presided over all tribunals and trials,
and whenever a thing was to be vetoed the usual formula was to declare
that Syn was against it.



Gefjon

Gefjon was also one of the maidens in Frigga's palace, and to her
were entrusted all those who died unwedded, whom she received and
made happy for ever.

According to some authorities, Gefjon did not remain a virgin herself,
but married one of the giants, by whom she had four sons. This same
tradition goes on to declare that Odin sent her before him to visit
Gylfi, King of Sweden, and to beg for some land which she might call
her own. The king, amused at her request, promised her as much land as
she could plough around in one day and night. Gefjon, nothing daunted,
changed her four sons into oxen, harnessed them to a plough, and began
to cut a furrow so wide and deep that the king and his courtiers were
amazed. But Gefjon continued her work without showing any signs of
fatigue, and when she had ploughed all around a large piece of land
forcibly wrenched it away, and made her oxen drag it down into the sea,
where she made it fast and called it Seeland.


    "Gefjon drew from Gylfi,
    Rich in stored up treasure,
    The land she joined to Denmark.
    Four heads and eight eyes bearing,
    While hot sweat trickled down them,
    The oxen dragged the reft mass
    That formed this winsome island."

            Norse Mythology (R. B. Anderson).


As for the hollow she left behind her, it was quickly filled with water
and formed a lake, at first called Logrum (the sea), but now known
as Maelar, whose every indentation corresponds with the headlands of
Seeland. Gefjon then married Skiold, one of Odin's sons, and became
the ancestress of the royal Danish race of Skioldungs, dwelling in
the city of Hleidra or Lethra, which she founded, and which became
the principal place of sacrifice for the heathen Danes.



Eira, Vara, Voer and Snotra

Eira, also Frigga's attendant, was considered a most skilful
physician. She gathered simples all over the earth to cure both wounds
and diseases, and it was her province to teach the science to women,
who were the only ones to practise medicine among the ancient nations
of the North.


    "Gaping wounds are bound by Eyra."

            Valhalla (J. C. Jones).


Vara heard all oaths and punished perjurers, while she rewarded those
who faithfully kept their word. Then there were also Voer (faith),
who knew all that was to occur throughout the world, and Snotra,
goddess of virtue, who had mastered all knowledge.

With such a galaxy of attendants it is little wonder that Frigga was
considered a powerful deity; but in spite of the prominent place she
occupied in Northern religion, she had no special temple nor shrine,
and was but little worshipped except in company with Odin.



Holda

While Frigga was not known by this name in Southern Germany, there
were other goddesses worshipped there, whose attributes were so exactly
like hers, that they were evidently the same, although they bore very
different names in the various provinces. Among them was the fair
goddess Holda (Hulda or Frau Holle), who graciously dispensed many
rich gifts. As she presided over the weather, the people were wont to
declare when the snowflakes fell that Frau Holle was shaking her bed,
and when it rained, that she was washing her clothes, often pointing
to the white clouds as her linen which she had put out to bleach. When
long grey strips of clouds drifted across the sky they said she was
weaving, for she was supposed to be also a very diligent weaver,
spinner, and housekeeper. It is said she gave flax to mankind and
taught them how to use it, and in the Tyrol the following story is
told about the way in which she bestowed this invaluable gift:



The Discovery of Flax

There was once a peasant who daily left his wife and children in the
valley to take his sheep up the mountain to pasture; and as he watched
his flock grazing on the mountain-side, he often had opportunity to
use his cross-bow and bring down a chamois, whose flesh would furnish
his larder with food for many a day.

While pursuing a fine animal one day he saw it disappear behind a
boulder, and when he came to the spot, he was amazed to see a doorway
in the neighbouring glacier, for in the excitement of the pursuit he
had climbed higher and higher, until he was now on top of the mountain,
where glittered the everlasting snow.

The shepherd boldly passed through the open door, and soon found
himself in a wonderful jewelled cave hung with stalactites, in the
centre of which stood a beautiful woman, clad in silvery robes, and
attended by a host of lovely maidens crowned with Alpine roses. In his
surprise, the shepherd sank to his knees, and as in a dream heard the
queenly central figure bid him choose anything he saw to carry away
with him. Although dazzled by the glow of the precious stones around
him, the shepherd's eyes constantly reverted to a little nosegay of
blue flowers which the gracious apparition held in her hand, and he
now timidly proffered a request that it might become his. Smiling with
pleasure, Holda, for it was she, gave it to him, telling him he had
chosen wisely and would live as long as the flowers did not droop and
fade. Then, giving the shepherd a measure of seed which she told him
to sow in his field, the goddess bade him begone; and as the thunder
pealed and the earth shook, the poor man found himself out upon the
mountain-side once more, and slowly wended his way home to his wife,
to whom he told his adventure and showed the lovely blue flowers and
the measure of seed.

The woman reproached her husband bitterly for not having brought some
of the precious stones which he so glowingly described, instead of the
blossoms and seed; nevertheless the man proceeded to sow the latter,
and he found to his surprise that the measure supplied seed enough
for several acres.

Soon the little green shoots began to appear, and one moonlight
night, while the peasant was gazing upon them, as was his wont,
for he felt a curious attraction to the field which he had sown, and
often lingered there wondering what kind of grain would be produced,
he saw a misty form hover above the field, with hands outstretched
as if in blessing. At last the field blossomed, and countless little
blue flowers opened their calyxes to the golden sun. When the flowers
had withered and the seed was ripe, Holda came once more to teach the
peasant and his wife how to harvest the flax--for such it was--and from
it to spin, weave, and bleach linen. As the people of the neighbourhood
willingly purchased both linen and flax-seed, the peasant and his
wife soon grew very rich indeed, and while he ploughed, sowed, and
harvested, she spun, wove, and bleached the linen. The man lived to
a good old age, and saw his grandchildren and great-grandchildren
grow up around him. All this time his carefully treasured bouquet
had remained fresh as when he first brought it home, but one day he
saw that during the night the flowers had drooped and were dying.

Knowing what this portended, and that he too must die, the peasant
