75:24   they died, - but not otherwise.

                           Vision of the dying

        There is one possible moment, when those living on the
        earth and those called dead, can commune together, and
75:27   that is the moment previous to the transition,
        - the moment when the link between their op-
        posite beliefs is being sundered. In the vestibule through
75:30   which we pass from one dream to another dream, or
        when we awake from earth's sleep to the grand verities
        of Life, the departing may hear the glad welcome of those
76:1    who have gone before. The ones departing may whisper
        this vision, name the face that smiles on them and the
76:3    hand which beckons them, as one at Niagara, with eyes
        open only to that wonder, forgets all else and breathes
        aloud his rapture.

                            Real Life is God

76:6    When being is understood, Life will be recognized as
        neither material nor finite, but as infinite, - as God,
        universal good; and the belief that life, or
76:9    mind, was ever in a finite form, or good in
        evil, will be destroyed. Then it will be understood that
        Spirit never entered matter and was therefore never
76:12   raised from matter. When advanced to spiritual being
        and the understanding of God, man can no longer com-
        mune with matter; neither can he return to it, any more
76:15   than a tree can return to its seed. Neither will man seem
        to be corporeal, but he will be an individual conscious-
        ness, characterized by the divine Spirit as idea, not matter.

76:18   Suffering, sinning, dying beliefs are unreal. When
        divine Science is universally understood, they will have
        no power over man, for man is immortal and lives by
76:21   divine authority.

                           Immaterial pleasure

        The sinless joy, - the perfect harmony and immortality
        of Life, possessing unlimited divine beauty and goodness
76:24   without a single bodily pleasure or pain, -
        constitutes the only veritable, indestructible
        man, whose being is spiritual. This state of existence
76:27   is scientific and intact, - a perfection discernible only
        by those who have the final understanding of Christ in
        divine Science. Death can never hasten this state of
76:30   existence, for death must be overcome, not submitted to,
        before immortality appears.

        The recognition of Spirit and of infinity comes not
77:1    suddenly here or hereafter. The pious Polycarp said:
        "I cannot turn at once from good to evil." Neither do
77:3    other mortals accomplish the change from error to truth
        at a single bound.

                              Second death

        Existence continues to be a belief of corporeal sense
77:6    until the Science of being is reached. Error brings its
        own self-destruction both here and hereafter,
        for mortal mind creates its own physical con-
77:9    ditions. Death will occur on the next plane of existence
        as on this, until the spiritual understanding of Life is
        reached. Then, and not until then, will it be demon-
77:12   strated that "the second death hath no power."

                            A dream vanishing

        The period required for this dream of material life,
        embracing its so-called pleasures and pains, to vanish
77:15   from consciousness, "knoweth no man . . .
        neither the Son, but the Father." This period
        will be of longer or shorter duration according to the
77:18   tenacity of error. Of what advantage, then, would it be
        to us, or to the departed, to prolong the material state and
        so prolong the illusion either of a soul inert or of a sinning,
77:21   suffering sense, - a so-called mind fettered to matter.

                         Progress and purgatory

        Even if communications from spirits to mortal con-
        sciousness were possible, such communications would
77:24   grow beautifully less with every advanced stage
        of existence. The departed would gradually
        rise above ignorance and materiality, and Spiritualists
77:27   would outgrow their beliefs in material spiritualism.
        Spiritism consigns the so-called dead to a state resembling
        that of blighted buds, - to a wretched purgatory, where
77:30   the chances of the departed for improvement narrow
        into nothing and they return to their old standpoints of
        matter.

                          Unnatural deflections

78:1    The decaying flower, the blighted bud, the gnarled oak,
        the ferocious beast, - like the discords of disease, sin,
78:3    and death, - are unnatural. They are the fal-
        sities of sense, the changing deflections of mor-
        tal mind; they are not the eternal realities of Mind.

                             Absurd oracles

78:6    How unreasonable is the belief that we are wearing
        out life and hastening to death, and that at the same
        time we are communing with immortality!
78:9    If the departed are in rapport with mor-
        tality, or matter, they are not spiritual, but must still
        be mortal, sinning, suffering, and dying. Then why
78:12   look to them - even were communication possible - for
        proofs of immortality, and accept them as oracles? Com-
        munications gathered from ignorance are pernicious in
78:15   tendency.

        Spiritualism with its material accompaniments would
        destroy the supremacy of Spirit. If Spirit pervades all
78:18   space, it needs no material method for the transmission
        of messages. Spirit needs no wires nor electricity in order
        to be omnipresent.

                            Spirit intangible

78:21   Spirit is not materially tangible. How then can it
        communicate with man through electric, material effects?
        How can the majesty and omnipotence of
78:24   Spirit be lost? God is not in the medley
        where matter cares for matter, where spiritism makes
        many gods, and hypnotism and electricity are claimed
78:27   to be the agents of God's government.

        Spirit blesses man, but man cannot "tell whence
        it cometh." By it the sick are healed, the sorrowing are
78:30   comforted, and the sinning are reformed. These are the
        effects of one universal God, the invisible good dwelling
        in eternal Science.

                         Thought regarding death

79:1    The act of describing disease - its symptoms, locality,
        and fatality - is not scientific. Warning people against
79:3    death is an error that tends to frighten into
        death those who are ignorant of Life as God.
        Thousands of instances could be cited of health restored
79:6    by changing the patient's thoughts regarding death.

                          Fallacious hypotheses

        A scientific mental method is more sanitary than the
        use of drugs, and such a mental method produces perma-
79:9    nent health. Science must go over the whole
        ground, and dig up every seed of error's sow-
        ing. Spiritualism relies upon human beliefs and hy-
79:12   potheses. Christian Science removes these beliefs and
        hypotheses through the higher understanding of God, for
        Christian Science, resting on divine Principle, not on ma-
79:15   terial personalities, in its revelation of immortality, intro-
        duces the harmony of being.

        Jesus cast out evil spirits, or false beliefs. The Apostle
79:18   Paul bade men have the Mind that was in the Christ.
        Jesus did his own work by the one Spirit. He said: "My
        Father worketh hitherto, and I work." He never de-
79:21   scribed disease, so far as can be learned from the Gospels,
        but he healed disease.

                            Mistaken methods

        The unscientific practitioner says: "You are ill. Your
79:24   brain is overtaxed, and you must rest. Your body is
        weak, and it must be strengthened. You have
        nervous prostration, and must be treated for it."
79:27   Science objects to all this, contending for the rights of in-
        telligence and asserting that Mind controls body and brain.

                             Divine strength

        Mind-science teaches that mortals need "not be weary
79:30   in well doing." It dissipates fatigue in doing
        good. Giving does not impoverish us in the
        service of our Maker, neither does withholding enrich us.
80:1    We have strength in proportion to our apprehension of
        the truth, and our strength is not lessened by giving
80:3    utterance to truth. A cup of coffee or tea is not the equal
        of truth, whether for the inspiration of a sermon or for
        the support of bodily endurance.

                         A denial of immortality

80:6    A communication purporting to come from the late
        Theodore Parker reads as follows: "There never was,
        and there never will be, an immortal spirit."
80:9    Yet the very periodical containing this sen-
        tence repeats weekly the assertion that spirit-communica-
        tions are our only proofs of immortality.

                         Mysticism unscientific

80:12   I entertain no doubt of the humanity and philanthropy
        of many Spiritualists, but I cannot coincide with their
        views. It is mysticism which gives spiritual-
80:15   ism its force. Science dispels mystery and
        explains extraordinary phenomena; but Science never
        removes phenomena from the domain of reason into the
80:18   realm of mysticism.

                           Physical falsities

        It should not seem mysterious that mind, without the
        aid of hands, can move a table, when we already know
80:21   that it is mind-power which moves both table
        and hand. Even planchette - the French toy
        which years ago pleased so many people - attested the con-
80:24   trol of mortal mind over its substratum, called matter.

        It is mortal mind which convulses its substratum, matter.
        These movements arise from the volition of human belief,
80:27   but they are neither scientific nor rational. Mortal mind
        produces table-tipping as certainly as table-setting, and
        believes that this wonder emanates from spirits and elec-
80:30   tricity. This belief rests on the common conviction that
        mind and matter cooperate both visibly and invisibly,
        hence that matter is intelligent.

                        Poor post-mortem evidence

81:1    There is not so much evidence to prove intercommuni-
        cation between the so-called dead and the living, as there
81:3    is to show the sick that matter suffers and has
        sensation; yet this latter evidence is destroyed by
        the Mind-science. If Spiritualists understood the
81:6    Science of being, their belief in mediumship would vanish.

                         No proof of immortality

        At the very best and on its own theories, spiritualism
        can only prove that certain individuals have a continued
81:9    existence after death and maintain their affili-
        ation with mortal flesh; but this fact affords
        no certainty of everlasting life. A man's assertion that
81:12   he is immortal no more proves him to be so, than the op-
        posite assertion, that he is mortal, would prove immor-
        tality a lie. Nor is the case improved when alleged spirits
81:15   teach immortality. Life, Love, Truth, is the only proof
        of immortality.

                     Mind's manifestations immortal

        Man in the likeness of God as revealed in Science can-
81:18   not help being immortal. Though the grass seemeth to
        wither and the flower to fade, they reappear.
        Erase the figures which express number, silence
81:21   the tones of music, give to the worms the body
        called man, and yet the producing, governing, divine
        Principle lives on, - in the case of man as truly as in
81:24   the case of numbers and of music, - despite the so-called
        laws of matter, which define man as mortal. Though
        the inharmony resulting from material sense hides the
81:27   harmony of Science, inharmony cannot destroy the divine
        Principle of Science. In Science, man's immortality de-
        pends upon that of God, good, and follows as a necessary
81:30   consequence of the immortality of good.

                            Reading thoughts

        That somebody, somewhere, must have known the
        deceased person, supposed to be the communicator, is
82:1    evident, and it is as easy to read distant thoughts as near.
        We think of an absent friend as easily as we do of one
82:3    present. It is no more difficult to read the
        absent mind than it is to read the present.
        Chaucer wrote centuries ago, yet we still read his thought
82:6    in his verse. What is classic study, but discernment of
        the minds of Homer and Virgil, of whose personal exist-
        ence we may be in doubt?

                        Impossible intercommunion

82:9    If spiritual life has been won by the departed, they
        cannot return to material existence, because different
        states of consciousness are involved, and one
82:12   person cannot exist in two different states of
        consciousness at the same time. In sleep we
        do not communicate with the dreamer by our side despite
82:15   his physical proximity, because both of us are either un-
        conscious or are wandering in our dreams through differ-
        ent mazes of consciousness.

82:18   In like manner it would follow, even if our departed
        friends were near us and were in as conscious a state of
        existence as before the change we call death, that their
82:21   state of consciousness must be different from ours. We
        are not in their state, nor are they in the mental realm
        in which we dwell. Communion between them and
82:24   ourselves would be prevented by this difference. The
        mental states are so unlike, that intercommunion is as
        impossible as it would be between a mole and a human
82:27   being. Different dreams and different awakenings be-
        token a differing consciousness. When wandering in
        Australia, do we look for help to the Esquimaux in their
82:30   snow huts?

        In a world of sin and sensuality hastening to a
        greater development of power, it is wise earnestly to
83:1    consider whether it is the human mind or the divine
        Mind which is influencing one. What the prophets of
83:3    Jehovah did, the worshippers of Baal failed to do; yet
        artifice and delusion claimed that they could equal the
        work of wisdom.

83:6    Science only can explain the incredible good and evil
        elements now coming to the surface. Mortals must find
        refuge in Truth in order to escape the error of these latter
83:9    days. Nothing is more antagonistic to Christian Science
        than a blind belief without understanding, for such a
        belief hides Truth and builds on error.

                             Natural wonders

83:12   Miracles are impossible in Science, and here Science
        takes issue with popular religions. The scientific mani-
        festation of power is from the divine nature
83:15   and is not supernatural, since Science is an
        explication of nature. The belief that the universe, in-
        cluding man, is governed in general by material laws, but
83:18   that occasionally Spirit sets aside these laws, - this be-
        lief belittles omnipotent wisdom, and gives to matter the
        precedence over Spirit.

                         Conflicting standpoints

83:21   It is contrary to Christian Science to suppose that life
        is either material or organically spiritual. Between
        Christian Science and all forms of superstition
83:24   a great gulf is fixed, as impassable as that be-
        tween Dives and Lazarus. There is mortal mind-reading
        and immortal Mind-reading. The latter is a revelation
83:27   of divine purpose through spiritual understanding, by
        which man gains the divine Principle and explanation of
        all things. Mortal mind-reading and immortal Mind-
83:30   reading are distinctly opposite standpoints, from which
        cause and effect are interpreted. The act of reading
        mortal mind investigates and touches only human beliefs.
84:1    Science is immortal and coordinate neither with the
        premises nor with the conclusions of mortal beliefs.

                          Scientific foreseeing

84:3    The ancient prophets gained their foresight from a
        spiritual, incorporeal standpoint, not by foreshadowing
        evil and mistaking fact for fiction, - predict-
84:6    ing the future from a groundwork of corpo-
        reality and human belief. When sufficiently advanced
        in Science to be in harmony with the truth of being, men
84:9    become seers and prophets involuntarily, controlled not
        by demons, spirits, or demigods, but by the one Spirit.
        It is the prerogative of the ever-present, divine Mind, and
84:12   of thought which is in rapport with this Mind, to know
        the past, the present, and the future.

        Acquaintance with the Science of being enables us to
84:15   commune more largely with the divine Mind, to foresee
        and foretell events which concern the universal welfare,
        to be divinely inspired, - yea, to reach the range of fetter-
84:18   less Mind.

                           The Mind unbounded

        To understand that Mind is infinite, not bounded by
        corporeality, not dependent upon the ear and eye for
84:21   sound or sight nor upon muscles and bones
        for locomotion, is a step towards the Mind-
        science by which we discern man's nature and existence.
84:24   This true conception of being destroys the belief of spirit-
        ualism at its very inception, for without the concession of
        material personalities called spirits, spiritualism has no
84:27   basis upon which to build.

                         Scientific foreknowing

        All we correctly know of Spirit comes from God, divine
        Principle, and is learned through Christ and Christian
84:30   Science. If this Science has been thoroughly
        learned and properly digested, we can know
        the truth more accurately than the astronomer can read
85:1    the stars or calculate an eclipse. This Mind-reading
        is the opposite of clairvoyance. It is the illumination of
85:3    the spiritual understanding which demonstrates the ca-
        pacity of Soul, not of material sense. This Soul-sense
        comes to the human mind when the latter yields to the
85:6    divine Mind.

                           Value of intuition

        Such intuitions reveal whatever constitutes and per-
        petuates harmony, enabling one to do good, but not
85:9    evil. You will reach the perfect Science of
        healing when you are able to read the human
        mind after this manner and discern the error you would
85:12   destroy. The Samaritan woman said: "Come, see a
        man, which told me all things that ever I did: is not this
        the Christ?"

85:15   It is recorded that Jesus, as he once journeyed with his
        students, "knew their thoughts," - read them scientifi-
        cally. In like manner he discerned disease and healed
85:18   the sick. After the same method, events of great mo-
        ment were foretold by the Hebrew prophets. Our
        Master rebuked the lack of this power when he said:
85:21   "O ye hypocrites! ye can discern the face of the sky;
        but can ye not discern the signs of the times?"

                          Hypocrisy condemned

        Both Jew and Gentile may have had acute corporeal
85:24   senses, but mortals need spiritual sense. Jesus knew the
        generation to be wicked and adulterous, seek-
        ing the material more than the spiritual. His
85:27   thrusts at materialism were sharp, but needed. He never
        spared hypocrisy the sternest condemnation.. He said:
        "These ought ye to have done, and not to leave the other
85:30   undone." The great Teacher knew both cause and
        effect, knew that truth communicates itself but never
        imparts error.

                             Mental contact

86:1    Jesus once asked, "Who touched me?" Supposing
        this inquiry to be occasioned by physical contact alone,
86:3    his disciples answered, "The multitude throng
        thee." Jesus knew, as others did not, that
        it was not matter, but mortal mind, whose touch called
86:6    for aid. Repeating his inquiry, he was answered by the
        faith of a sick woman. His quick apprehension of this
        mental call illustrated his spirituality. The disciples'
86:9    misconception of it uncovered their materiality. Jesus
        possessed more spiritual susceptibility than the disciples.
        Opposites come from contrary directions, and produce
86:12   unlike results.

                            Images of thought

        Mortals evolve images of thought. These may appear
        to the ignorant to be apparitions; but they are myste-
86:15   rious only because it is unusual to see
        thoughts, though we can always feel their
        influence. Haunted houses, ghostly voices, unusual
86:18   noises, and apparitions brought out in dark seances
        either involve feats by tricksters, or they are images and
        sounds evolved involuntarily by mortal mind. Seeing
86:21   is no less a quality of physical sense than feeling. Then
        why is it more difficult to see a thought than to feel one?
        Education alone determines the difference. In reality
86:24   there is none.

                           Phenomena explained

        Portraits, landscape-paintings, fac-similes of penman-
        ship, peculiarities of expression, recollected sentences,
86:27   can all be taken from pictorial thought and
        memory as readily as from objects cognizable
        by the senses. Mortal mind sees what it believes as
86:30   certainly as it believes what it sees. It feels, hears, and
        sees its own thoughts. Pictures are mentally formed
        before the artist can convey them to canvas. So is it
87:1    with all material conceptions. Mind-readers perceive
        these pictures of thought. They copy or reproduce
87:3    them, even when they are lost to the memory of the mind
        in which they are discoverable.

                           Mental environment

        It is needless for the thought or for the person hold-
87:6    ing the transferred picture to be individually and con-
        sciously present. Though individuals have
        passed away, their mental environment re-
87:9    mains to be discerned, described, and transmitted. Though
        bodies are leagues apart and their associations forgotten,
        their associations float in the general atmosphere of human
87:12   mind.

                              Second sight

        The Scotch call such vision "second sight", when
        really it is first sight instead of second, for it presents
87:15   primal facts to mortal mind. Science enables
        one to read the human mind, but not as a
        clairvoyant. It enables one to heal through Mind, but
87:18   not as a mesmerist.

                             Buried secrets

        The mine knows naught of the emeralds within its
        rocks; the sea is ignorant of the gems within its caverns,
87:21   of the corals, of its sharp reefs, of the tall ships
        that float on its bosom, or of the bodies which
        lie buried in its sands: yet these are all there. Do not
87:24   suppose that any mental concept is gone because you do
        not think of it. The true concept is never lost. The
        strong impressions produced on mortal mind by friend-
87:27   ship or by any intense feeling are lasting, and mind-
        readers can perceive and reproduce these impressions.

                           Recollected friends

        Memory may reproduce voices long ago silent. We
87:30   have but to close the eyes, and forms rise
        before us, which are thousands of miles away
        or altogether gone from physical sight and sense, and
88:1    this not in dreamy sleep. In our day-dreams we can
        recall that for which the poet Tennyson expressed the
88:3    heart's desire, -
             the touch of a vanished hand,
           And the sound of a voice that is still.

88:6    The mind may even be cognizant of a present flavor and
        odor, when no viand touches the palate and no scent
        salutes the nostrils.

                           Illusions not ideas

88:9    How are veritable ideas to be distinguished from il-
        lusions? By learning the origin of each. Ideas are
        emanations from the divine Mind. Thoughts,
88:12   proceeding from the brain or from matter, are
        offshoots of mortal mind; they are mortal material be-
        liefs. Ideas are spiritual, harmonious, and eternal. Beliefs
88:15   proceed from the so-called material senses, which at one
        time are supposed to be substance-matter and at another
        are called spirits.

88:18   To love one's neighbor as one's self, is a divine idea;
        but this idea can never be seen, felt, nor understood
        through the physical senses. Excite the organ of ven-
88:21   eration or religious faith, and the individual manifests
        profound adoration. Excite the opposite development,
        and he blasphemes. These effects, however, do not pro-
88:24   ceed from Christianity, nor are they spiritual phenomena,
        for both arise from mortal belief.

                        Trance speaking illusion

        Eloquence re-echoes the strains of Truth and Love.
88:27   It is due to inspiration rather than to erudition. It shows
        the possibilities derived from divine Mind,
        though it is said to be a gift whose endowment
88:30   is obtained from books or received from the
        impulsion of departed spirits. When eloquence proceeds
        from the belief that a departed spirit is speaking, who
89:1    can tell what the unaided medium is incapable of know-
        ing or uttering? This phenomenon only shows that the
89:3    beliefs of mortal mind are loosed. Forgetting her igno-
        rance in the belief that another mind is speaking through
        her, the devotee may become unwontedly eloquent. Hav-
89:6    ing more faith in others than in herself, and believing
        that somebody else possesses her tongue and mind, she
        talks freely.

89:9    Destroy her belief in outside aid, and her eloquence
        disappears. The former limits of her belief return. She
        says, " I am incapable of words that glow, for I am un-
89:12   educated." This familiar instance reaffirms the Scrip-
        tural word concerning a man, "As he thinketh in his heart,
        so is he." If one believes that he cannot be an orator with-
89:15   out study or a superinduced condition, the body responds
        to this belief, and the tongue grows mute which before
        was eloquent.

                        Scientific improvisation

89:18   Mind is not necessarily dependent upon educational
        processes. It possesses of itself all beauty and poetry,
        and the power of expressing them. Spirit,
89:21   God, is heard when the senses are silent. We
        are all capable of more than we do. The influence or
        action of Soul confers a freedom, which explains the phe-
89:24   nomena of improvisation and the fervor of untutored lips.

                           Divine origination

        Matter is neither intelligent nor creative. The tree is
        not the author of itself. Sound is not the originator of
89:27   music, and man is not the father of man. Cain
        very naturally concluded that if life was in the
        body, and man gave it, man had the right to take it away.
89:30   This incident shows that the belief of life in matter was
        "a murderer from the beginning."

        If seed is necessary to produce wheat, and wheat to
90:1    produce flour, or if one animal can originate another,
        how then can we account for their primal origin? How
90:3    were the loaves and fishes multiplied on the shores of
        Galilee, - and that, too, without meal or monad from
        which loaf or fish could come?

                            Mind is substance

90:6    The earth's orbit and the imaginary line called the
        equator are not substance. The earth's motion and
        position are sustained by Mind alone. Divest
90:9    yourself of the thought that there can be sub-
        stance in matter, and the movements and transitions now
        possible for mortal mind will be found to be equally
90:12   possible for the body. Then being will be recognized
        as spiritual, and death will be obsolete, though now
        some insist that death is the necessary prelude to
90:15   immortality.

                            Mortal delusions

        In dreams we fly to Europe and meet a far-off friend.
        The looker-on sees the body in bed, but the supposed
90:18   inhabitant of that body carries it through
        the air and over the ocean. This shows the
        possibilities of thought. Opium and hashish eaters men-
90:21   tally travel far and work wonders, yet their bodies stay
        in one place. This shows what mortal mentality and
        knowledge are.

                          Scientific finalities

90:24   The admission to one's self that man is God's own like-
        ness sets man free to master the infinite idea. This con-
        viction shuts the door on death, and opens it
90:27   wide towards immortality. The understanding
        and recognition of Spirit must finally come, and we may
        as well improve our time in solving the mysteries of being
90:30   through an apprehension of divine Principle. At present
        we know not what man is, but we certainly shall know
        this when man reflects God.

91:1    The Revelator tells us of "a new heaven and a
        new earth." Have you ever pictured this heaven and
91:3    earth, inhabited by beings under the control of supreme
        wisdom?

        Let us rid ourselves of the belief that man is separated
91:6    from God, and obey only the divine principle, Life and
        Love. Here is the great point of departure for all true
        spiritual growth.

                           Man's genuine being

91:9    It is difficult for the sinner to accept divine Science,
        because Science exposes his nothingness; but the sooner
        error is reduced to its native nothingness, the
91:12   sooner man's great reality will appear and his
        genuine being will be understood. The destruction of
        error is by no means the destruction of Truth or Life, but
91:15   is the acknowledgment of them.

        Absorbed in material selfhood we discern and reflect
        but faintly the substance of Life or Mind. The denial of
91:18   material selfhood aids the discernment of man's spirit-
        ual and eternal individuality, and destroys the erroneous
        knowledge gained from matter or through what are termed
91:21   the material senses.

                          Erroneous postulates

        Certain erroneous postulates should be here considered
        in order that the spiritual facts may be better
91:24   apprehended.

        The first erroneous postulate of belief is, that substance,
        life, and intelligence are something apart from God.
91:27   The second erroneous postulate is, that man is both
        mental and material.

        The third erroneous postulate is, that mind is both evil
91:30   and good; whereas the real Mind cannot be evil nor the
        medium of evil, for Mind is God.

        The fourth erroneous postulate is, that matter is in-
92:1    telligent, and that man has a material body which is part
        of himself.

92:3    The fifth erroneous postulate is, that matter holds in
        itself the issues of life and death, - that matter is not
        only capable of experiencing pleasure and pain, but also
92:6    capable of imparting these sensations. From the illusion
        implied in this last postulate arises the decomposition of
        mortal bodies in what is termed death.
92:9    Mind is not an entity within the cranium with the power
        of sinning now and forever.

                       Knowledge of good and evil

        In old Scriptural pictures we see a serpent coiled around
92:12   the tree of knowledge and speaking to Adam and Eve.
        This represents the serpent in the act of
        commending to our first parents the knowl-
92:15   edge of good and evil, a knowledge gained from matter,
        or evil, instead of from Spirit. The portrayal is still
        graphically accurate, for the common conception of mor-
92:18   tal man - a burlesque of God's man - is an outgrowth
        of human knowledge or sensuality, a mere offshoot of
        material sense.

                             Opposing power

92:21   Uncover error, and it turns the lie upon you. Until
        the fact concerning error - namely, its nothingness -
        appears, the moral demand will not be met,
92:24   and the ability to make nothing of error will
        be wanting. We should blush to call that real which is
        only a mistake. The foundation of evil is laid on a belief
92:27   in something besides God. This belief tends to support
        two opposite powers, instead of urging the claims of Truth
        alone. The mistake of thinking that error can be real,
92:30   when it is merely the absence of truth, leads to belief in
        the superiority of error.

                           The age's privilege

        Do you say the time has not yet come in which to
93:1    recognize Soul as substantial and able to control the
        body? Remember Jesus, who nearly nineteen centuries
93:3    ago demonstrated the power of Spirit and said,
        "He that believeth on me, the works that I
        do shall he do also," and who also said, "But the hour
93:6    cometh, and /now is/, when the true worshippers shall
        worship the Father in spirit and in truth." "Behold,
        /now/ is the accepted time; behold, /now/ is the day of sal-
93:9    vation," said Paul.

                          Logic and revelation

        Divine logic and revelation coincide. If we believe
        otherwise, we may be sure that either our
93:12   logic is at fault or that we have misinterpreted
        revelation. Good never causes evil, nor creates aught
        that can cause evil.

93:15   Good does not create a mind susceptible of causing
        evil, for evil is the opposing error and not the truth of
        creation. Destructive electricity is not the offspring of in-
93:18   finite good. Whatever contradicts the real nature of the
        divine /Esse/, though human faith may clothe it with angelic
        vestments, is without foundation.

                          Derivatives of spirit

93:21   The belief that Spirit is finite as well as infinite has
        darkened all history. In Christian Science, Spirit, as a
        proper noun, is the name of the Supreme Being.
93:24   It means quantity and quality, and applies ex-
        clusively to God. The modifying derivatives of the word
        /spirit/ refer only to quality, not to God. Man is spiritual.
93:27   He is not God, Spirit. If man were Spirit, then men
        would be spirits, gods. Finite spirit would be mortal,
        and this is the error embodied in the belief that the infi-
93:30   nite can be contained in the finite. This belief tends to
        becloud our apprehension of the kingdom of heaven and
        of the reign of harmony in the Science of being.

                             Scientific man

94:1    Jesus taught but one God, one Spirit, who makes man
        in the image and likeness of Himself, - of Spirit, not of
94:3    matter. Man reflects infinite Truth, Life, and
        Love. The nature of man, thus understood,
        includes all that is implied by the terms "image" and
94:6    "likeness" as used in Scripture. The truly Christian
        and scientific statement of personality and of the relation
        of man to God, with the demonstration which accompa-
94:9    nied it, incensed the rabbis, and they said: "Crucify him,
        crucify him . . . by our law he ought to die, because he
        made himself the Son of God."

94:12   The eastern empires and nations owe their false gov-
        ernment to the misconceptions of Deity there prevalent.
        Tyranny, intolerance, and bloodshed, wherever found,
94:15   arise from the belief that the infinite is formed after the
        pattern of mortal personality, passion, and impulse.

                         Ingratitude and denial

        The progress of truth confirms its claims, and our
94:18   Master confirmed his words by his works. His healing-
        power evoked denial, ingratitude, and be-
        trayal, arising from sensuality. Of the ten
94:21   lepers whom Jesus healed, but one returned to give God
        thanks, - that is, to acknowledge the divine Principle
        which had healed him.

                            Spiritual insight

94:24   Our Master easily read the thoughts of mankind, and
        this insight better enabled him to direct those thoughts
        aright; but what would be said at this period of an in-
94:27   fidel blasphemer who should hint that Jesus used his in-
        cisive power injuriously? Our Master read mortal mind
        on a scientific basis, that of the omnipresence of Mind.
94:30   An approximation of this discernment indicates spiritual
        growth and union with the infinite capacities of the one
        Mind. Jesus could injure no one by his Mind-reading.
95:1    The effect of his Mind was always to heal and to save,
        and this is the only genuine Science of reading mortal
95:3    mind. His holy motives and aims were tra-
        duced by the sinners of that period, as they
        would be to-day if Jesus were personally present. Paul
95:6    said, "To be spiritually minded is life." We approach
        God, or Life, in proportion to our spirituality, our fidel-
        ity to Truth and Love; and in that ratio we know all
95:9    human need and are able to discern the thought of the
        sick and the sinning for the purpose of healing them.
        Error of any kind cannot hide from the law of God.

95:12   Whoever reaches this point of moral culture and good-
        ness cannot injure others, and must do them good. The
        greater or lesser ability of a Christian Scientist to discern
95:15   thought scientifically, depends upon his genuine spirit-
        uality. This kind of mind-reading is not clairvoyance,
        but it is important to success in healing, and is one of the
95:18   special characteristics thereof.

                          Christ's reappearance

        We welcome the increase of knowledge and the end
        of error, because even human invention must have its
95:21   day, and we want that day to be succeeded
        by Christian Science, by divine reality. Mid-
        night foretells the dawn. Led by a solitary star amid
95:24   the darkness, the Magi of old foretold the Messiahship
        of Truth. Is the wise man of to-day believed, when he
        beholds the light which heralds Christ's eternal dawn
95:27   and describes its effulgence?

                           Spiritual awakening

        Lulled by stupefying illusions, the world is asleep
        in the cradle of infancy, dreaming away the hours.
95:30   Material sense does not unfold the facts of
        existence; but spiritual sense lifts human
        consciousness into eternal Truth. Humanity advances
96:1    slowly out of sinning sense into spiritual understanding;
        unwillingness to learn all things rightly, binds Christen-
96:3    dom with chains.

                        The darkest hours of all

        Love will finally mark the hour of harmony, and spir-
        itualization will follow, for Love is Spirit. Before error
96:6    is wholly destroyed, there will be interrup-
        tions of the general material routine. Earth
        will become dreary and desolate, but summer and winter,
96:9    seedtime and harvest (though in changed forms), will
        continue unto the end, - until the final spiritualization of
        all things. "The darkest hour precedes the dawn."

                            Arena of contest

96:12   This material world is even now becoming the arena
        for conflicting forces. On one side there will be discord
        and dismay; on the other side there will be
96:15   Science and peace. The breaking up of mate-
        rial beliefs may seem to be famine and pestilence, want
        and woe, sin, sickness, and death, which assume new
96:18   phases until their nothingness appears. These disturb-
        ances will continue until the end of error, when all
        discord will be swallowed up in spiritual Truth.
96:21   Mortal error will vanish in a moral chemicalization.
        This mental fermentation has begun, and will continue
        until all errors of belief yield to understanding. Belief is
96:24   changeable, but spiritual understanding is changeless.

                            Millennial glory

        As this consummation draws nearer, he who has
        shaped his course in accordance with divine Science
96:27   will endure to the end. As material knowl-
        edge diminishes and spiritual understanding
        increases, real objects will be apprehended mentally
96:30   instead of materially.

        During this final conflict, wicked minds will endeavor
        to find means by which to accomplish more evil; but
97:1    those who discern Christian Science will hold crime in
        check. They will aid in the ejection of error. They
97:3    will maintain law and order, and cheerfully await the
        certainty of ultimate perfection.

                         Dangerous resemblances

        In reality, the more closely error simulates truth and
97:6    so-called matter resembles its essence, mortal mind, the
        more impotent error becomes as a belief. Ac-
        cording to human belief, the lightning is fierce
97:9    and the electric current swift, yet in Christian Science
        the flight of one and the blow of the other will become
        harmless. The more destructive matter becomes, the
97:12   more its nothingness will appear, until matter reaches
        its mortal zenith in illusion and forever disappears. The
        nearer a false belief approaches truth without passing
97:15   the boundary where, having been destroyed by divine
        Love, it ceases to be even an illusion, the riper it becomes
        for destruction. The more material the belief, the more
97:18   obvious its error, until divine Spirit, supreme in its do-
        main, dominates all matter, and man is found in the like-
        ness of Spirit, his original being.

97:21   The broadest facts array the most falsities against
        themselves, for they bring error from under cover. It
        requires courage to utter truth; for the higher Truth
97:24   lifts her voice, the louder will error scream, until its in-
        articulate sound is forever silenced in oblivion.

        "He uttered His voice, the earth melted." This Scrip-
97:27   ture indicates that all matter will disappear before the
