and forgotten; and though there are many who make a boast of this wisdom,
yet the gem conceals itself from all who do not desire to apply it in
their practice. If, therefore, thou desirest to be possessed of it, O man!
lay aside all that human wisdom which "puffeth up" (1 Cor. 8:1), together
with thy self-love and self-applause, and then shalt thou exchange thy
earthly wisdom, which the world admires, for that which is heavenly and
divine. Then, instead of the wisdom of this world, which in its nature is
elevated and seeks the applause of men, thou shalt be put in possession of
a wisdom which, far from attracting the notice of the world, is despised
and rejected by it, but which is, nevertheless, of a divine origin, and of
everlasting continuance.

5. It is impossible to love God, until thou abhorrest thyself; that is,
until thou art heartily displeased with thyself and with thy sins; until
thy own carnal nature is crucified, together with the evil propensities of
thy self-will. For the more a man strives to love God, the more he labors
to subdue the lusts of the flesh and his sensual appetites; and the more
he departs from self and from self-love, by the power of the Spirit of
God, the more nearly he approaches, by faith, unto God, and to his divine
love. For as inward peace depends on a freedom from desires after the
things of this world; so when this peace is once settled in the soul, and
the heart has disengaged itself from the ties which bound it to the
creature, it returns freely into God, and rests in him alone.

6. Now he who is sincerely disposed to deny himself, must follow, not his
own will, but the will of Christ, who has declared, "I am the way, and the
truth, and the life." John 14:6. As though he had said: "Without the way,
no man walketh; without the truth, nothing is known; and without life, no
man liveth: therefore, look upon me, who am the way in which it is thy
duty to walk, the truth in which thou art called to believe, and the life
in which thou art bound to live. I am the unerring way, the infallible
truth, and the everlasting life: the way to immortality is through my
merit; the truth itself is in my word; and life is through the efficacy of
my death; and, therefore, if thou continuest in the _way_, the _truth_
will guide thee unto eternal _life_. If thou desirest not to go astray,
follow me; if thou wilt know the truth, believe in me; and if thou wouldst
possess life everlasting, put thy whole trust in me, who for thy sake have
endured the death of the cross."

7. What, indeed, is the safe way, the infallible truth, and the endless
life? What, the way, truth, and life, that are more excellent than every
other? Surely there is no way, but the holy and precious merits of Christ;
no truth, but his eternal word; no life, but a blissful immortality in
heaven. If, therefore, O Christian! thou desirest to be raised up into
heaven with Christ Jesus, believe in him here, and tread in the footsteps
of his humility; this is the safe Way to everlasting glory. If thou
wouldst escape the snares of the world, take hold of his Word by faith,
and follow the example which he has left for thy imitation; because this
is the infallible Truth. And if it be thy wish to live with Christ, then
die thou with him and in him unto sin, and become a new creature; for this
is Life. Thus Christ is the way, the truth, and the life; and he is so,
both by his example and by his merit.

8. "Be ye followers of God as dear children." Eph. 5:1. Let us labor and
strive after this one thing; that our lives may resemble the life of
Christ. Were there nothing else to confound the false Christian, the
example of Christ might effectually and abundantly do it. When we consider
that Christ our Lord passed his life in grief and pain, we ought to be
ashamed to spend our lives in ease and pleasures. If the soldier forgets
his own ease and comfort when he beholds his captain fighting unto death,
shalt thou pursue after worldly pleasures and honors, when thy Prince was
so ignominiously treated, and, for thy sake, nailed to the cross? Is it
not a sign that then thou dost not, in fact, fight under his banner?

9. It is true that, in our day, every one desires to be considered a
Christian; but how few are they who imitate the life and deportment of
Christ! Had it been the character of a follower of Christ, to aim at the
acquisition of honors and possessions, our Lord would never have taught
that these are not worthy to be compared with heavenly treasures.
Contemplate the life and doctrine of the blessed Jesus, and thou shalt own
that nothing can be more opposed than he and the world. Behold that manger
and that stable! do they not forcibly evidence a contempt of worldly
things? And will the example of Christ lead thee to err from the right
way? No! he is the way, and he is the truth; and his life, compared with
his doctrine, is the only means to preserve thee from mistake, and to
guard thee from the delusions and errors of the world. Since then the Lord
hath chosen to enter into his glory by the way of suffering and reproach,
why shouldst thou labor to make thy way to hell, through the pomps and
vanities of the world? Return, then, O deluded soul! escape from the broad
way that leadeth unto death, and in which thy only enjoyment is "the
pleasures of sin for a season" (Heb. 11:25); enter into this safe Way, in
which the wayfaring man shall not stray: cordially embrace that Truth
which never can deceive: and live in Him who is Life itself. This way is
the truth, and this truth is the way. Awful blindness! a worm of the earth
would make himself great in the world, when the Lord of glory abased
himself to the very dust. O faithful soul! when thy bridegroom moves to
meet thee, clothed with humility, come down from the elevation of thy
pride and ambition, and descend into the vale of humiliation to meet him,
and he will embrace and receive thee with joy.

10. As Abraham quitted his father's house, to go into a land which the
Lord was to show him (Gen. 12:1), so quit thou, as a true child of
Abraham, the pleasure-house of self-will and self-love, that thou mayest
obtain the divine blessing. Self-love biases the judgment, blinds the
understanding, disturbs the reason, seduces the will, corrupts the
conscience, closes the gates of life, and acknowledges neither God nor
neighbor. It banishes virtue; seeks after honors, riches, and pleasures;
and, in a word, prefers earth to heaven. He, therefore, who thus "loveth
his life, shall lose it; but he that hateth his life" (that is, resists
this principle of self-love), "shall keep it unto life eternal." John
12:25. Self-love is the root of impenitence, and the cause of damnation.
They who are controlled by self-love and self-honor are destitute of
humility and a knowledge of sin; consequently, they never can obtain the
remission of sin, though they seek it with tears; their tears not being
shed because they have offended God, but merely on account of the personal
loss which they have sustained.

11. The kingdom of heaven is compared in Scripture to "a pearl of great
price;" in order to obtain which, a man sold _all_ that he had. Matt.
13:45, 46. This pearl is God himself, and that eternal life which he has
promised, and for the attainment of which every other object must be
forsaken. We have an example of this in our Lord Jesus Christ, who
descended from heaven not for his own sake, but for thy sake; not for his
own profit and advantage, but for thine. Luke 19:10. And wilt thou yet
delay to love him who gave himself up unto death for thee?

12. It doubtless is the part of a faithful spouse, to please her husband
alone: and art thou desirous of pleasing the world, when thou mayest be
espoused unto Christ, the great lover of souls? Forsake therefore and
sincerely despise all that is in the world, in order that thou mayest
become worthy of the eminent dignity of this spiritual marriage: for if
thy love cleave not solely to Christ, it is a corrupt and adulterous love,
and not that which a Christian should bear to the Redeemer. For the
Christian's love to the Redeemer must possess virgin purity.

13. The law of Moses required that the priest should marry a virgin
(Levit. 21:13, 14); and Christ, our High Priest, will espouse only a
_virgin-soul_; one that is attached to nothing that the world can offer,
but solely to himself; nay, one that loves not even herself, in comparison
with Christ. "If any man come to me," he says, "and hate not his _own
life_, he cannot be my disciple." Luke 14:26.

14. In order to understand what is meant by hating ourselves, we are to
remember that we carry about with us "the old man," and are indeed the old
man himself; whose nature is to hasten from one sin to another, to love
himself, to pursue his own profit and honor, and to indulge his own will
and carnal appetite. For the flesh is at all times the same; always
considering itself, easily grieved, envious, bitter, covetous, and
revengeful. This, O Man! is what thou doest: these sinful motions proceed
from thy heart; this is thy very life, even the life of the old man in
thee: and therefore thou must of necessity hate thyself, and thine own
natural life, if ever thou desirest to be a disciple of Christ. Whoever
loves himself, must love his own pride and avarice, his own wrath and
hatred, envy and lying, perfidiousness and unrighteousness; and, in short,
he must love all the progeny of unholy desires, and a corrupt heart. But
if thou desirest to be a Christian indeed, thou must not love, nor excuse,
nor palliate thy sins, but thou must hate them, forsake them, and subdue
them.




Chapter XV.


Showing How The "Old Man" Daily Dies, And The "New Man" Is Daily Renewed,
In A True Christian; Also, Wherein Self-Denial Consists, And What Is Meant
                        By The Christian's Cross.


    _If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up
    his cross daily, and follow me._--LUKE 9:23.


It is the charge of the apostle Paul, "Put off the _old man_, which is
corrupt according to the deceitful lusts; and be renewed in the spirit of
your mind; and put on the _new man_, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness." Eph. 4:22-24. And in another of his
Epistles, he gives us a reason for doing so: "Ye are not your own; for ye
are bought with a price; therefore, glorify God in your body and in your
spirit, which are God's." 1 Cor. 6:19, 20.

2. We have already noticed what is meant by _the old man_; namely, pride,
covetousness, lasciviousness, unrighteousness, wrath, enmity, hatred,
etc.; all of which must die in the Christian, if ever the _new man_ arise
in him again, and is day by day renewed.

3. In proportion as the old man dies, the new man is quickened. As pride
loses its influence, humility, by the grace of God the Holy Spirit,
succeeds; as wrath yields, meekness advances; as covetousness is done
away, trust in God is increased; and as the love of the world is removed,
the love of God takes its place in the soul, and becomes more and more
vigorous and ardent. In this consists the renovation of the new man. This
is the fruit of the Spirit; this is practical and living faith (Gal.
5:22); this is Christ in us; this is the new command of Christ and new
obedience; this is the result of the new birth in us, in which thou must
live if thou desirest to be a child of God; for those only who so live
have a right to be so called.

4. This is the reason why a man ought now to deny himself; to renounce his
own honor and will, his own love and pleasure, and all his profit and
interest in the world; and why he ought freely to give up his own right
and life, and consider himself unworthy of everything that Providence
bestows upon him. A real Christian, who is endued with the humility of
Christ, readily owns that no man can lay claim to even the least of those
benefits that descend from above, because they are all gifts, and freely
proceed from the goodness of God. On this account he uses all as being
really the property of God, with fear and trembling; not to promote his
own pleasure and satisfaction, his own profit and praise, but from
necessity alone, and because he cannot otherwise subsist.

5. Let a true Christian who denies himself, and a false Christian who is
filled with inordinate self-love, be compared together. If an affront be
offered to the latter, you may soon behold his anger rising, and visible
marks of passion and discontent; and these are, not unfrequently, followed
up by reproachful language and actions, by a spirit of revenge, and
sometimes by imprecations and curses. All this proceeds from the _old
man_, whose proper character it is to be angry and bitter, and to exhibit
rancor and asperity. On the contrary, he that is a Christian indeed, and
has sincerely begun to practice self-denial, is gentle, patient, and ready
to forgive; free from a revengeful spirit; full of compassion and
tenderness; and esteems himself worthy of all the sufferings which
Providence may be pleased to allot to him. These qualities are all
included in _self-denial_.

6. In the exercise of this patience, meekness, and lowliness of mind, our
Lord Jesus Christ has set us an example by willingly denying himself. "The
Son of man," he says, "came not to be ministered unto, but to minister"
(Matt. 20:28); and again, "I am among you as he that serveth" (Luke
22:27); and in another place, "The Son of man hath not where to lay his
head." Luke 9:58. David, when reviled by Shimei, practised the duty of
self-denial, for his words were: "The Lord hath said unto him, Curse
David." 2 Sam. 16:10. As if he had said: "I am a worm in the sight of God,
and deserve to suffer far worse things." And thus have all the saints and
prophets of God freely denied their own will, and esteemed themselves
unworthy of every blessing. They bore the burden of their day with
patience (Acts 5:40, 41); they cursed not when they were cursed; they
blessed their persecutors, and prayed for them by whom they were
slaughtered (Acts 7:60); and thus, "through much tribulation, entered into
the kingdom of God." Acts 14:22.

7. This was true when they acknowledged themselves unworthy of any favor,
but worthy of all the evils that could befall them.

8. Now, this self-denial is the cross of Christ, which he has encouraged
us to bear, saying: "If any man will come after me, let him deny himself
and take up his cross daily, and follow me." Luke 9:23. This self-denying
life is a severe cross to the flesh; the natural man desires a life free
from restraint and contradiction, and would follow the inclination of his
own will, and seek after his own ease and pleasure, rather than the
humility, patience, and meekness of Christ, with the other graces of his
life and example.

9. But whatever opposition _the old man may_ raise for a time, he has
received the sentence of death, and if thy soul be ever saved, he must
surely die. For never canst thou be clothed with the humility of Christ
unless thy natural pride be first subdued; nor canst thou feel a love of
his poverty unless thy avarice and thy love of the world be first
overcome. Thou wilt not be able to follow Christ in the contempt of
vainglory, nor to endure the reproach of his cross, until thine ambition
be rooted out; nor wilt thou ever express in thy life the meekness and
patience of Jesus until thy revengeful spirit be inwardly mortified.

10. These are the spiritual exercises which the Scriptures mean when they
speak of _denying ourselves_, of _bearing the cross of Christ_, and of
_following him_,--exercises that are submitted to, not with any expectation
of profit, merit, reward, interest, or praise, but from pure love to the
Saviour, and because Christ hath passed through all this before us, and
"hath left us an example that we should follow his steps." Since the image
of God is the greatest dignity of man, we ought the more earnestly to
practise the duty of self-denial, by which that image, effaced by sin, is
revived within us. And as this is the highest honor of which our nature is
susceptible, so is it the strongest inducement that can possibly be
suggested to endear to us the practice of self-denial.

11. Why, then, should man so eagerly desire the fading honors of this
world, which, however they may raise him in the estimation of his
fellow-mortals, render him in no degree more acceptable in the sight of
God. The great and the wise have bodies composed of flesh and blood as the
meanest and the most despised; so that, in this respect, no man has the
slightest superiority over another. One is born even as the other, and
dies even as the other; for the beginning and end of all men, as to this
world, is alike. What folly then is it to covet worldly honors and the
praise of men! Such desires spring from the root of self-love, that bane
of the soul, that seed of all spiritual diseases, by which the heart of
man is turned from God to the world, and from Christ to _self_. How
incapable and how backward is the lover of himself to obey the words of
the blessed Redeemer, and to lose his life for His sake that he may save
it. This is a paradox hostile to the inclinations of the "old nature," and
therefore but little considered by the bulk of mankind.

12. Alas! how small is the number of those who have a thorough knowledge
of the depraved life of the old Adam, or who heartily strive against it!
And yet, if ever we would rescue our souls from perdition, we must die to
it and to all its restless workings. Whatever corruptions have been
entailed on us by Adam, must be removed in Christ. In his humility, our
pride and ambition must expire; in beholding his poverty, our thirst after
earthly things must die away. The contemplation of his bitter sufferings
should subdue our sensual lusts; the reproaches which he endured, and the
entire resignation with which he submitted to the contempt of the world,
should restrain us from the pursuit of worldly honors, and from the
indulgence of anger and passion.

13. He who is thus dead to himself, will also readily die to the world,
its pomps, and wealth, and honors, and pleasures, solacing himself with
those higher riches, dignities, and enjoyments, to which he is admitted by
faith in Christ. He becomes, indeed, "a stranger upon the earth" (Ps.
39:12), but he is the friend of Christ, and Christ will comfort his heart
with the light of his countenance here, and with joy everlasting and
unutterable in the world to come.




Chapter XVI.


 A Conflict Is Constantly Maintained In The Christian Between The Spirit
                              And The Flesh.


    _I see another law in my members, warring against the law of my
    mind._--ROM. 7:23.


The two opposite principles in the heart of the real Christian, are spoken
of by the apostle under different names, viz.: _the inward and outward
man_ (2 Cor. 4:16), the _law of the mind_ and the law of the members (Rom.
7:23), and the _flesh and spirit_. "The flesh," says he, "lusteth against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh." Gal. 5:17.

2. When the Spirit conquers the flesh, then man lives in the new nature
and is in God and in Christ: but when the flesh vanquishes the Spirit, and
thus gains the ascendency, then man lives in the devil and in the old
nature; he is under the dominion of the world, and without the kingdom of
God, and, consequently, is called _carnal_. And "to be carnally minded is
death." Rom. 8:6.

3. It is according to the predominance of either of these principles (the
flesh and the Spirit), that a man obtains his name in Scripture, and is
called _carnal_ or _spiritual_. When the flesh and its sensual lusts are
subdued, it is an indication of the strength of the spirit, and of a man's
proficiency in the inward life; but if a man be vanquished by the flesh,
it betrays the weakness both of his faith and spirit.

4. Solomon says, "He that ruleth his spirit (his mind), is better than he
that taketh a city." Prov. 16:32. If, then, thou desirest to be a valiant
conqueror, and to gain an immortal victory, conquer thyself; subdue thy
passions, mortify thy pride, quell thine ambition, and destroy every
inordinate lust with which thou art assailed; and thus shalt thou
overthrow the kingdom of Satan, who, by means of such sins, ruleth in the
world. Many have signalized themselves by the capture of towns and cities;
but, alas! how few are they who, in a higher sense, may be denominated
_conquerors of the world_!

5. If thou yieldest too far to the flesh, thou destroyest thy soul. It is
surely better that the soul overcome, and that the body also be preserved,
than that, the body overcoming, both body and soul should be destroyed
together.

6. This contest, though attended with various trials and difficulties,
will, however, issue in a glorious victory and a heavenly crown: "Be thou
faithful unto death," saith the Captain of our salvation, "and I will give
thee a crown of life." Rev. 2:10. And the disciple that lay in his bosom
tells us, "This is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith."
1 John 5:4. Thou wilt say, What is it to overcome the world? We answer, It
is the world within us, which is here principally meant. Overcome thy
_self_, and then the victory over the world is thine.

7. Some may, perhaps, be here ready to inquire, "What, if sin sometimes
closely beset me, and bear me away against my will; must I be excluded
from the number of God's children, according to that saying of St. John,
'He that committeth sin is of the devil'?" 1 John 3:8. To this it must be
replied: If thou feelest the conflict of the Spirit against the flesh, and
art grieved that thou sometimes doest things which thou wouldst not, it is
an evidence that, amidst the infirmities which encompass thee, thy faith
and thy spirit struggle against the flesh, and are opposed to it. St. Paul
himself teaches us that this warfare has place even in godly and believing
souls, when he says, "I see another law in my members warring against the
law of my mind (that is, against the new, inward man), and bringing me
into captivity to the law of sin which is in my members" (Rom. 7:23); thus
causing him sometimes to do the things which he would not. To will, was
present with him; but to perform the good which he would, he was not
always able; inasmuch as he could not do of himself the good which he
would, while to do the evil which he would not, was always easy to him.
Hence he exclaims, "O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from
the body of this death?" Rom. 7:24. And to this agrees what Christ himself
says: "The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak." Matt. 26:41;
Mark 14:38.

8. As long, therefore, as this _conflict_ is felt in man, sin cannot be
said to _rule_ in him; for he who is continually fighting against sin,
resists its struggles for dominion; and sin cannot destroy the man who
opposes the attempts which it makes upon the soul.

9. It is the experience of all the saints, that they alike have sin,
according to the word of St. John: "If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive ourselves." 1 John 1:8. It is not, however, the _indwelling_ sin
that condemns a man, but the _reigning_ sin. The sin with which we
contend, and to the commission of which we do not consent, is not imputed
to us; as St. Paul says: "There is therefore now no condemnation to them
which are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit" (Rom. 8:1); that is, who do not permit the flesh to rule. But as
for those who are altogether strangers to this spiritual strife, this
combat of the flesh and Spirit, they are not born again, but are under the
_reigning_ influence of sin; they remain the servants of sin and Satan,
and are, consequently, damned; for "the law of the Spirit of life" hath
not made them "free from the law of sin and death" (Rom. 8:2), so long as
they thus suffer sin to rule over them, and to "reign in their mortal
body."

10. All this is illustrated in Josh. 16:10. The remnant of the Canaanites
were permitted to dwell amongst the children of Israel, but not to have
dominion over them; and thus the Israel of God feel their remaining
imperfections, but do not allow them to gain the pre-eminence. To preserve
this pre-eminence is the duty of the new man in Christ, whose name is
Israel (that is, _a prince of God_) (Gen. 32:28); and who, as a _prince_,
hath power with God, and shall at last prevail.

11. This daily strife with the old man, is an encouraging evidence of the
existence of the new man; for it plainly indicates that there are two
contending principles in him who is the subject of it. The strength of the
spirit and the victory succeeding it, demonstrate the true Israelite; and
the warfare of the spirit indicates the real Christian. The land of Canaan
cannot indeed be gained without war: but when the flesh, like the
Canaanite of old, invades the territories of the spirit, it then becomes
the part of the spiritual and true Israel not to submit to such a master;
but, after true repentance and remission of sin, to collect new strength
in Christ, and by the grace of God to rise again from his fall, and
earnestly implore Jesus, our true Joshua, to vanquish for him and in him,
the spiritual Canaanite, the enemy of his soul. When this is accomplished,
the sinner is not only forgiven and restored to favor, but he is likewise
refreshed and strengthened in Christ, his great Captain in this spiritual
combat. With regard, therefore, to such as continue to feel many
infirmities in the flesh, and who cannot do the things which they would, I
exhort them to cleave to Jesus as sincere penitents, and to cover their
blemishes with his perfect obedience. It is in this order, and in this
order alone, that the imputation of Christ's merits becomes salutary and
effectual; that is, when a man forsakes his sin, and by daily repentance
strives against it; repairs his former losses, and guards against future
temptations. But while the sinner remains a stranger to brokenness of
heart on account of transgression; while he continues to gratify the
unholy propensities of the flesh, nothing can be more absurd than for him
to suppose that the merits of Christ are imputed to him; for how can the
blood of Christ benefit him who treads it under foot? Heb. 10:29.




Chapter XVII.


The Inheritance And Possessions Of Christians Are Not Of This World; They
 Should, Therefore, Regard Themselves As Strangers In It, While They Make
                          Use Of Earthly Things.


    _We brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can
    carry nothing out. And having food and raiment, let us be
    therewith content._--1 TIM. 6:7, 8.


The design of the blessed God in creating temporal things, was that they
might supply man's bodily wants; and it is right that they should be used
for such a purpose, and be received at the hands of God with gratitude,
attended with fear and trembling. In regard to those things which are not
absolutely necessary, whether gold and silver, food and raiment, etc.,
they are left to man in order to _prove_ him; so that from the manner in
which he employs these objects, it may be discovered how he stands
affected towards God, while possessed of the goods of this world: whether,
on the one hand, he will still cleave to God, and in the midst of earthly
possessions, keep his eye constantly fixed on those which are to come; or
whether, withdrawing his love from God, he will attach himself to this
fleeting world, and prefer a fading earthly paradise, to that which is
permanent and heavenly.

2. Man is therefore left to his own liberty and choice, in order that he
may be judged hereafter according to that which he has chosen here, and
thus be without excuse in that day. Agreeably to this principle, it was
the solemn declaration of Moses to the people of Israel: "I call heaven
and earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you life
and death, blessing and cursing: therefore choose life, that both thou and
thy seed may live." Deut. 30:19.

3. The things of this world are then designed, not to fill us with earthly
delight and pleasures, but to be tests and trials of our fidelity. In
these trials the fall is very easy, when once we begin to withdraw from
God. The pleasures of this world are the fruits of a forbidden tree; of
which we are warned by God not to eat, lest our minds going out after them
should eventually take delight in them, after the manner of those who know
no other pleasures, but such as are derived from earthly objects. These
persons, by indulging the flesh, convert meat, drink, and apparel into
snares by which they are turned away from God.

4. It certainly is the duty of every true Christian, to esteem himself a
stranger and pilgrim in this world; and as bound to use earthly blessings,
not as means of satiating lust or gratifying wantonness, but of supplying
his absolute wants and necessities. We ought not to set our affections on
these inferior objects, but on Him alone who is able to satisfy them. To
do otherwise, is to expose ourselves to dangerous temptations, and with
Eve, to eat daily of the forbidden tree. The real Christian is not intent
upon worldly concerns, or delicious fare; for his interior eye is directed
to that bread which endureth unto eternal life. Nor is he solicitous about
fine and fashionable apparel; aspiring rather after robes of divine light,
and the raiment of glorified bodies. In short, all things that please the
natural man in this world, are, to a true Christian, only so many crosses
and temptations, allurements of sin and snares of death, that continually
exercise his virtue. Whatever man uses without the fear of God, whatever
he applies to the mere gratifying of his flesh, cannot fail to operate as
a poison to the soul, however pleasant and salutary it may appear to be to
the body. Yet, so far from laboring to know the forbidden tree of worldly
pleasures and its various fruits, man gives himself up to a careless and
thoughtless state of life, and yields to the lust of the flesh, not
considering that this lust is really _the forbidden tree_.

5. The Christian, on the other hand, uses all things in the fear of God,
and as a stranger and pilgrim on the earth; avoiding every kind of excess
in meat, drink, apparel, houses, and the other things of this life, lest,
by an improper use of them, he should offend both his Father in heaven,
and his fellow-Christians upon earth. He will not so much as gaze on the
_forbidden tree_, in order that he may not be ensnared; but with the eye
of faith, he steadfastly beholds the future felicity of the soul, and for
the sake of this felicity, refuses to yield to the cravings of corrupt
nature. What does it profit the body that in this world it swims in lusts
and pleasures, when, after a short period, it must be devoured by worms,
and stripped of all its enjoyments! "Naked," says Job, "came I out of my
mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither." Job 1:21. We bring into
the world a naked and infirm, a poor and indigent body; and even this is
the spoil of death; for when we pass out of this world we leave it behind
us forever.

6. Whatever we enjoy from the time of our birth to the period of our
dissolution, is all the bread of mercy and affliction, and designed to
supply the bare wants of this mortal life. At the approach of death all is
taken from us again, and we depart out of the world poorer than when we
entered it. When man enters the world, he brings with him life and a body,
and finds the necessary shelter, meat, and drink provided for him; but,
after existing a short time, he is, in a moment, bereft of all, and leaves
behind him even his body and his life. Consider then, O man! whether there
can be anything more wretched and poor, more naked and miserable, than man
when he dies, if he be not clothed with Christ's righteousness, and
enriched in his God.

7. As, therefore, we are confessedly strangers and pilgrims here, and at
the hour of dissolution must leave behind us every earthly enjoyment, let
us, at least, cease to encumber our souls with things which we cannot
carry out of this world, and the use of which is restricted to this life
only. Is it not a species of madness to heap up riches for a frail body,
for a body which we must leave behind us, and which cannot possibly enjoy
wealth hereafter? Luke 12:20, 21. Are we ignorant that there is another
and a better world, another body and another life, and that, whatever we
may appear in the sight of men, we are in the eye of God only strangers
and sojourners on the earth? Ps. 39:12; Lev. 25:23. "Ye are," saith the
Lord, "strangers and sojourners _with me_," that is, "_before my eyes_,
although ye may not remember it."

8. If, then, we are strangers and sojourners, it follows that our country
and our home must be elsewhere. This will be most evident to us, if we
compare time with eternity, the visible with the invisible world, the
earthly tabernacle with the heavenly, and things that are frail and
perishing, with those that are lasting and eternal. Such a comparison will
afford us a due insight into time and eternity, and lead us to behold with
the eye of faith, such things as remain altogether unknown to the
unthinking multitude. It is from the want of this consideration, that so
many become lax and disorderly in their manners, wallow in the mire of
earthly pleasures, and drown themselves in avarice and worldly cares. It
is from the want of this reflection, that the major part of mankind,
however keen and shrewd in the pursuits of this world, are blind and
insensible to the concerns of the immortal soul. They addict themselves so
much to this life, as to esteem it to be the most delightful, the best and
noblest of all; while the true Christian, on the contrary, accounts it an
exile, a vale of tears, a place of misery, a deep and dark prison.

9. Hence it is that those who love this world, and seek their happiness in
it, do not excel even the brute creation in wisdom or understanding; and
as they live, so they die like beasts. Ps. 49:12, 20. They are totally
blind as it respects the inward man; they do not even think of heavenly
and eternal things; they never rejoice in God, but only in the low and
sordid pleasures afforded by this world. It is in earthly things that they
seek their rest and their enjoyment; and having obtained their object
after much labor and toil, they sit quietly down and congratulate
themselves on their possessions. Wretched, miserable men! blind and
insensible to the tremendous concerns of their eternal salvation! here,
they lie contentedly in the darkness of ignorance, soon to remove hence to
that of death and damnation. Luke 1:79.

10. In order to our better acquaintance with the nature of our pilgrimage
here, we should unceasingly consider the example left us by the Redeemer,
and earnestly follow him both in his life and doctrine. He hath set us an
unerring pattern of universal holiness. He is our captain and our guide;
and to his life and manners, our lives and our manners should be
conformed. Go thou, therefore, and look unto him; unto him who, when the
greatest of all men, voluntarily chose that life in which nothing of
greatness appeared; a life of meanness, poverty, and contempt of honor,
wealth, and pleasure, the threefold deity of this world. All these things,
to which the world offers sacrifice, the Lord contemned; for he himself
said, "He had not where to lay his head." Matt. 8:20.

11. Such, likewise, was the character of David; who, before his exaltation
to the throne, was poor and despised; and who, when created king,
accounted all his regal splendor as nothing compared with eternal life,
and the kingdom of God, to which he was called. "How amiable," says he,
"are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts! My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth
for the courts of the Lord; my heart and my flesh crieth out for the
living God."--"A day in thy courts is better than a thousand." Ps. 84. As
if he had said, I possess indeed a kingdom, and have people subject to my
sway; I possess kingly palaces, and the strong hold of Zion; but what are
all these in comparison of thy tabernacle, O Lord of hosts? So, too, Job
found comfort in his _Redeemer_. Job. 19:25.

12. Neither Peter, nor Paul, nor any of the apostles, sought the riches of
this life, but directed their attention to those which were laid up in
another and better world. Hence they freely espoused the despised life of
Christ, walking in his charity, lowliness, and patience; contemning the
earth, and triumphing over the world, its snares, and its allurements.
They prayed for those who cursed them; they thanked those who reproached
them; they blessed those who reviled them. 1 Cor. 4:12; Acts 5:41. When
they were persecuted, they glorified God; when scourged, they were
immovably patient, professing that "through much tribulation they must
enter into the kingdom of God" (Acts 14:22); and when slaughtered, they
prayed (with Christ their Head), "Father, forgive them" (Luke 23:34); "lay
not this sin to their charge." Acts 7:60. Thus were they, on the one hand,
dead to all wrath and revenge; to bitterness, ambition, and pride; to the
love of the world, and of their own life also; while, on the other, they
lived in Christ and in his love, in his meekness and humility, his
patience and his resignation. They are, indeed, made alive in Christ by
faith, who thus live.

13. To a lover of the world, this excellent way of life is unknown; for
with regard to those who do not live in Christ, nor know that the _truth_
is in him, these are still dead in their sins; dead in wrath and hatred,
in envy and avarice, in pride and revenge; and as long as they so
continue, they are in a state of impenitence, and have not been quickened
by faith in Jesus, be their boasting what it may. But the genuine
disciples of Christ know it to be a duty to follow the steps of their
divine Master (1 Pet. 2:21), and to be conformed to his life, as the
supreme and original pattern of all virtue and goodness. In a word, the
life of Christ is their exemplar; he himself is their _book_, whence they
derive all solid and substantial learning, as it respects both life and
doctrine. Such persons declare with the apostle, "We look not at the
things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen; for the
things which are seen are temporal, but the things which are not seen are
eternal." 2 Cor. 4:8. And with holy men of old they unite in saying, "Here
have we no continuing city, but we seek one to come." Heb. 13:14.

14. If, then, from a review of all these considerations, it evidently
appear, as it surely does, that in this world we are strangers and have no
abiding place, it follows that we were not created for the sake of earthly
things as the ultimate end of our being; but that there remain for us
another country and other dwellings, to gain which we ought not to
hesitate to sacrifice a hundred worlds, or even life itself. These are
subjects upon which the true Christian continually meditates with
pleasure; and it is his joy that here he has no continuing city, but is
created for life eternal. But how sad is the state of those who, occupied
wholly in pursuing the things of this life, lade their souls with a
crushing weight of worldly vanities, and thereby expose them to endless
perdition.




Chapter XVIII.


  Showing How Greatly God Is Offended, When Man Prefers Things That Are
 Temporal To Those That Are Eternal; And How Great The Evil Is, When Our
        Affections Cleave To The Creature And Not To The Creator.


    _And the anger of the Lord was kindled; and the fire of the Lord
    burnt among them, and consumed them, etc._--NUMB. 11:1.


Many there are, in our day, who, under cover of religion, seek after
earthly and carnal things; who use more diligence to become great and
affluent by the gospel, than to be good and happy. They love "the praise
of men, more than the praise of God." John 12:43. They choose rather to
gratify the flesh in its sinful propensities, than to bring it down into
true repentance and brokenness of spirit. But the character of the true
Christian is of an opposite kind. He is more concerned about eternal than
temporal things; he seeks the glory that endureth, more than that which
passeth away; he thirsts after heavenly and invisible riches, and not
after those that are earthly and visible. In short, he mortifies and
crucifies the flesh, in order that the spirit may live.

2. The sum of Christianity is _to follow Christ_. Hence, it should be our
chief care to imitate the example which he has left us. Our thoughts and
actions, our desires and labors, should all terminate in the attainment of
this _one thing needful_, how we may come to Christ; how be saved by, and
united with him to all eternity.

3. Never should we cease to consider that endless felicity to which we are
called; but cheerfully await the dissolution of our earthly bodies, and a
translation to that inheritance which is reserved in heaven for us.

4. By these means, which habituate the soul more and more to the presence
of God, there is begotten in man a holy thirst after eternal things; while
a desire after earthly objects, which is insatiable in its nature, is at
the same time powerfully restrained. This is taught by St. Paul in that
precious saying: "Whatsoever ye do in word or deed, do all in the name of
the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him." Col. 3:17.

5. The _name_ of God, in which all things are to be done, is the honor,
praise, and glory of God. Ps. 48:10. To this great end of human life, all
our works should tend; for then it is that they are wrought in God (John
3:21), and will follow us into a blessed eternity. Rev. 14:13.

6. In a word, Almighty God, our chief and sovereign Good should be the
_principle_ and _end_ of all our designs, if we would not fail of eternal
salvation. Hence St. Paul says, "But thou, O man of God, flee these
things" (1 Tim. 6:11); namely, covetousness and the love of the world. He
calls the Christian, "a man of God," because he is born of God, and lives
in God, and therefore is the son and heir of God; as, on the other hand, a
man of the world, is one who lives in conformity to the world, who "has
his portion in this life, and whose belly is filled with the hid treasure"
of the earth. Psal. 17:14. From these snares the Christian is required
carefully to flee, and to follow after righteousness, godliness, faith,
love, patience, meekness; and to lay hold on eternal life, whereunto he is
called.

7. When a man refuses to be guided by these salutary maxims, he falls of
necessity into every kind of enormous and presumptuous sin, and will at
last be punished with eternal fire. See, for an illustration, Numb. 11:1.

8. Inundations and war, famine, pestilence, and conflagrations, are, it
should be remembered, punishments inflicted by God, on account of our
preferring things temporal to things eternal; and because we are more
careful of a weak and perishing body, than we are of an imperishable,
immortal soul. All this betrays the highest ingratitude, and an open
contempt of the blessed God, deserving to be visited with punishments,
both here and hereafter. For, does not man by such conduct set aside an
almighty, eternal Being, from whom he derives both his body and his soul;
and convert an impotent creature into an idol, to which he surrenders his
love and affection? He who loves the creature more than the Creator, and
things transitory more than those which are eternal, offers surely the
highest possible affront to his Maker, and opposes the great design of the
Christian religion.

9. It is no doubt true, that all the creatures of God are good in
themselves; but when men begin to set their affections on them, and by
their irregular love to convert them, as it were, into idols, they then
become an abomination in the sight of God, and are justly ranked among the
most odious images of gold and silver.

10. What else can result from a carnal love of the world but hell and
damnation! Consider the case of Sodom and Gomorrah (Gen. 19:24), and the
one in Numb. 11:1, already mentioned. These are illustrations of the
eternal fire and damnation which must follow a rejection of God.

11. The love and joy, the wealth and honors of the true Christian, are
circumscribed only by eternity itself; for, "where his _treasure_ is,
there will his _heart_ be also." Luke 12:34. From the lust and love of the
world, on the contrary, nothing can result but eternal damnation. "The
world passeth away and the lust thereof; but he that doeth the will of God
abideth forever" (1 John 2:17): and hence, St. John calls upon the
faithful entirely to withdraw their affections from the world; saying,
"Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world." 1 John
2:15. These and similar considerations powerfully convince us, that God
will not permit us to fix our affections on any creature whatsoever.

12. But this will more fully appear from the following reflections:

I. Love is the very _heart_ of a man, and the noblest of all his
affections; hence, it is due to God only, as the supreme object, and
sovereign Good.

II. It is absolute folly to love temporal things, which cannot love us;
whereas the infinitely blessed God deserves to be loved alone, since from
a pure principle of love, he created us unto eternal life, and hath, to
the same purpose, redeemed and sanctified us.

III. _Like_ things are naturally loved by their _like_. Hence, God made us
after his own image, in order that we might love Him; and that, next to
himself, we might love our neighbor, created after the same image.

IV. The human soul resembles a mirror, representing every object
indifferently that is placed before it, whether it be of heaven or of
earth. Therefore turn thy soul wholly and only to God, that this image may
be fully expressed in it.

V. The patriarch Jacob, when dwelling in Mesopotamia, far removed from his
native soil, never abandoned his purpose to return, and, at length, after
twenty years' service, demanded his wives and wages; and, cheered by the
recollection of the place of his nativity, returned thither. So should thy
soul, amidst the various engagements of this life, and the hurry of
outward employments, long without ceasing after thy heavenly fatherland.

VI. Man is made either better or worse by that which he loves. He that
loves God, partakes freely of the divine virtue and goodness that reside
in Him; but he that loves the world, is defiled with all those sins and
evils which attend it.

VII. When King Nebuchadnezzar (Dan. 4:33) was too much controlled by the
love of the world, he lost the very form of a man, and degenerated into
that of a beast. So all men, blotting from their hearts the image and love
of God, are transformed, as it respects their inward man, into the nature
of brutes. For surely those who wholly surrender themselves to the love of
this world, are no better.

VIII. Lastly, that which a man has loved here, and carried about in his
heart, shall be manifested in him hereafter; and with this he shall
associate himself forever, whether it be God or the world. If the world
have been the object of his love in this life, it will never leave him
hereafter, but will prove his death and his tormentor to all eternity.




Chapter XIX.


 He Who Is Most Of All Conscious Of His Misery, Is Most Of All Acceptable
 To God; And His Christian Knowledge Of His Misery, Urges Him To Seek The
                              Grace Of God.


    _To this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a
    contrite spirit, and trembleth at my word._--ISAIAH 66:2.


These comfortable words, our gracious and merciful God hath spoken by the
prophet, in order to cheer our hearts, when they are most oppressed with
misery and sorrow. Be not thou therefore ashamed to be bruised in spirit,
and abased in thine own eyes. Humble thyself in the dust, and deem thyself
unworthy of all grace and favor; so shalt thou be raised out of thine own
vileness, and obtain, in Christ, acceptance with Almighty God.

2. He who is still _something_ in his own estimation, is not duly humbled
and depressed in his heart; nor can he expect to be regarded by that Being
who looks upon the poor and contrite ones only. "If," says the apostle, "a
man think himself to be something, when he is nothing, he deceiveth
himself" (Gal. 6:3): and the reason of this is, that God is _all in all_,
alone; and the creature must consequently become a bare and empty
_nothing_. So great and so practical is this truth, that man is not only
to believe it in his heart, but to express it in his life and conduct.

3. If ever thou designest, then, to give all the glory and honor to God,
that HE may be ALL, alone, thou must surely thyself become _nothing_ in
thine own eyes; and entertain a very low opinion of thyself, and of thy
profiting in spiritual things. For how is it possible that God should be
_all in all_, whilst thou thyself continuest to be _something_? By this
self-exaltation thou invadest the sovereignty of God, and appropriatest
that to thyself, which is his proper due and prerogative. "It was _before
the Lord_," said David to Michal, who had reproached him, "and I will yet
be more vile than thus, and will be base in mine own sight." 2 Sam. 6:21,
22.

4. A man that will be _something_, is the matter out of which God is wont
to make _nothing_; but he, on the contrary, who loves to be reputed as
nothing, and who, in his own judgment, is so, is the matter out of which
the Almighty maketh _something_. He that will be wise in his own opinion,
is the matter out of which God maketh a fool; and he who is truly sensible
of his own folly and nothingness, is that of which God forms a wise and
great man. He who, before the Lord, sincerely confesses himself to be the
greatest and most miserable of sinners, is, in the sight of God, the first
and greatest of all men. He who believes himself to be the chief of
_sinners_, shall be honored by the Lord as the chief of _saints_. Matt.
23:12; Luke 1:52.

5. This is that humility which God exalts; that misery which he regards;
that _nothing_ from which he createth _something_. And as, at the
creation, the glorious frame of heaven and earth was brought forth out of
_nothing_, so must man be reduced to a deep sense of his vileness and
nothingness, if ever he be exalted to glory and to dignity.

6. Reflect upon the example of David, whose misery God beheld, and to whom
he granted the richest gifts of his grace. Consider, again, the example of
Jacob, who confessed, "I am not worthy of the least of all thy mercies."
Gen. 32:10.

7. But above all, lay to heart the example of Christ, the grand and
blameless pattern of a Christian. He was abased below the meanest of men;
was made a worm and a curse for our sake (Ps. 22:6), despised and rejected
of men. Isaiah 53:3. But the lower he sunk, the higher did he afterwards
rise, when he received a name which is above every name.

8. But who is that blessed and lowly one who is _nothing_ in his own eyes?
It is he who inwardly and in his heart esteems himself worthy of no divine
benefit, whether bodily or spiritual. For he that arrogates anything to
himself, esteems himself to be _something_; and is, therefore, the
farthest removed from divine grace and from this new creation. So
destructive is the spirit of self, that it renders even grace of no
effect, and shuts out that which contains all things in it. For if a man
judge himself worthy of anything, he then does not take all things as a
free gift from the hands of God. Whatever we are, however, is of _grace_
and not _merit_; nor can we call anything our own, except our sins, our
helplessness, and our misery. All else belongs to God.

9. A man considered in himself, that is, independently of God, by whom he
subsists, is no more than a shadow. And as the shadow of a tree constantly
conforms to the tree on which it depends, so should man conform to the
will of God from whom he has his very life and being; as the apostle says:
"In him we live, and move, and have our being." Acts 17:28. It is true,
the fruit will sometimes appear in the shadow of the tree; yet it does not
therefore belong to the shadow, but to the tree: so all the good fruits
that may appear in thy life and conduct, are not the produce of thy own
self and thy ability, but of God alone, who is the original source whence
all good fruits proceed. And as the apple grows not from that gross
substance the wood, which is seen by the eye, but from the seminal virtue
which the tree contains, and which is made active from above; so the new
man, and the fruit he bears, spring not up from anything that is gross and
visible to the eye, but from a supernatural and invisible seed.

10. Now, man is by nature a dry tree; but God is his strength, whereby
life is renewed in him, and he himself is made fat and green in the house
of God. God is the "strength of our life" (Psal. 27:1), says the Psalmist:
and hence we "shall bring forth much fruit whilst we abide in Christ."
John 15:5.

11. When a man is thus wretched and poor in his own eyes, and has nothing
in the world in which to trust but the pure grace of God, manifested in
Christ Jesus, then God graciously "looks upon him." This divine regard
must be understood in a divine sense. The look or countenance of God, is
not as the countenance of men, destitute of life and virtue: but it is
accompanied with a living power and influence that supports and revives
the faint and penitent sinner. And as none but the humble and contrite are
capable of this heavenly regard; so the more fully they receive the
consolation which God grants, the less do they think themselves worthy of
it. Such a one deems himself unworthy of all blessings divine and
temporal. He says with Jacob, "I am not worthy of the least of all the
mercies, and of all the truth which thou hast shewed unto thy servant:"
for behold, since thou gavest me thy Son Jesus Christ, I come with two
bands, with the blessings of grace and of glory. Gen. 32:10. And truly, if
a man should weep a sea of tears, it were by no means sufficient to
purchase or deserve the least part of heavenly comfort: the grace of God
cannot be merited by men, who deserve nothing but wrath and eternal
damnation.

12. Whoever thus acquaints himself in faith with his own misery, is truly
one of those poor and contrite men, to whom the Lord graciously looks.
Without this previous brokenness of heart, man cannot expect to enjoy this
blessed aspect of God, nor indeed that grace and kindness which is
promised to the poor in spirit only. In this weakness and poverty the
apostle glories, when he says: "If I must needs glory, I will glory of the
things which concern mine infirmities" (2 Cor. 11:30): and he adds the
reason: "that the power of Christ may rest upon me." 2 Cor. 12:9. For so
great indeed is the mercy of God, that he will not see the work of his
hands destroyed: but the weaker the creature is in itself, the more is it
sustained by the power of an Almighty Being. For in the weakness of the
creature, the power of God is exalted, as the Lord declared unto Paul: "My
grace is sufficient for thee; for my strength is made perfect in
weakness."

13. The more vile and miserable therefore a Christian is in his own
opinion, the more freely God looks upon him, to the greater manifestation
of the riches of his glory. And in bestowing this heavenly consolation, he
does not look at all on man's merit, but barely on his want and poverty.
And this comfort can in no degree be compared with any human comfort, all
which it infinitely exceeds. In such a sense, then, God looks to the
contrite man and comforts his spirit.

14. By "the poor and contrite man," is not to be understood, a man that is
poor in the outward sense of the word, or who is altogether destitute of
human help and relief; but _he_ is the poor man, who labors under the load
of his sins, and is grieved for them. If sin were not in the world, there
could be no misery: but now so much misery cannot befall a man, but that
he is still worthy of much more. Ps. 103:10. Far be it therefore from us
to grieve, because we have not many temporal benefits conferred upon us;
since we are not worthy even of the least of them, no, not of life itself.
Our flesh and blood may think this a hard saying; yet every penitent
sinner ought to be a severe judge in his own case, and ought not to make
the least allowance to his carnal propensities. This is the order in which
we are to obtain God's favor and mercy.

15. And what has man now left to boast of, or what language shall he
employ when he opens his mouth? The best course he can take will be to say
simply, "Lord, I have sinned; have thou mercy upon me!" And, truly, God
himself requires no more from a man than that he humbly deplore his sin,
and in the unfeigned language of repentance pray for pardon. Whoever
neglects this, may be said to have slighted the best and most needful part
of his being, Weep not therefore, O Man! on account of thy _body_, that it
is naked and sick, pinched with hunger and cold, insulted and persecuted;
or because it is confined by bonds and a prison: but humble thyself before
the Lord, and bewail the woful condition of thy _soul_, which is
constrained to dwell in so wretched a house as thy body is, a house of sin
and death. "O wretched man," says the apostle, "who shall deliver me from
the body of this death?" Rom. 7:24. This free and Christian acknowledgment
