
Q.--Can you describe one of these water beings?

A.--'In the world under the waters--under a lake in the West of Ireland
in this case--I saw a blue and orange coloured king seated on a throne;
and there seemed to be some fountain of mystical fire rising from under
his throne, and he breathed this fire into himself as though it were his
life. As I looked, I saw groups of pale beings, almost grey in colour,
coming down one side of the throne by the fire-fountain. They placed
their head and lips near the heart of the elemental king, and, then, as
they touched him, they shot upwards, plumed and radiant, and passed on
the other side, as though they had received a new life from this chief
of their world.'

_Wood Beings Described._--

Q.--Can you describe one of the wood beings?

A.--'The wood beings I have seen most often are of a shining silvery
colour with a tinge of blue or pale violet, and with dark
purple-coloured hair.'

_Reproduction and Immortality of the 'Sidhe'._--

Q.--Do you consider the races of the _Sidhe_ able to reproduce their
kind; and are they immortal?

A.--'The higher kinds seem capable of breathing forth beings out of
themselves, but I do not understand how they do so. I have seen some of
them who contain elemental beings within themselves, and these they
could send out and receive back within themselves again.

'The immortality ascribed to them by the ancient Irish is only a
relative immortality, their space of life being much greater than ours.
In time, however, I believe that they grow old and then pass into new
bodies just as men do, but whether by birth or by the growth of a new
body I cannot say, since I have no certain knowledge about this.'

_Sex among the 'Sidhe'._--

Q.--Does sexual differentiation seem to prevail among the Sidhe races?

A.--'I have seen forms both male and female, and forms which did not
suggest sex at all.'

_'Sidhe' and Human Life._--

Q.--(1) Is it possible, as the ancient Irish thought, that certain of
the higher _Sidhe_ beings have entered or could enter our plane of life
by submitting to human birth? (2) On the other hand, do you consider it
possible for men in trance or at death to enter the _Sidhe_ world?

A.--(1) 'I cannot say.' (2) 'Yes; both in trance and after death. I
think any one who thought much of the _Sidhe_ during his life and who
saw them frequently and brooded on them would likely go to their world
after death.'

_Social Organization of the 'Sidhe'._--

Q.--You refer to chieftain-like or prince-like beings, and to a king
among water beings; is there therefore definite social organization
among the various _Sidhe_ orders and races, and if so, what is its
nature?

A.--'I cannot say about a definite social organization. I have seen
beings who seemed to command others, and who were held in reverence.
This implies an organization, but whether it is instinctive like that of
a hive of bees, or consciously organized like human society, I cannot
say.'

_Lower 'Sidhe' as Nature Elementals._--

Q.--You speak of the water-being king as an elemental king; do you
suggest thereby a resemblance between lower _Sidhe_ orders and what
mediaeval mystics called elementals?

A.--'The lower orders of the _Sidhe_ are, I think, the nature elementals
of the mediaeval mystics.'

_Nourishment of the Higher 'Sidhe'._--

Q.--The water beings as you have described them seem to be nourished and
kept alive by something akin to electrical fluids; do the higher orders
of the _Sidhe_ seem to be similarly nourished?

A.--'They seemed to me to draw their life out of the Soul of the World.'

_Collective Visions of 'Sidhe' Beings._--

Q.--Have you had visions of the various _Sidhe_ beings in company with
other persons?

A.--'I have had such visions on several occasions.'

And this statement has been confirmed to me by three participants in
such collective visions, who separately at different times have seen in
company with our witness the same vision at the same moment. On another
occasion, on the Greenlands at Rosses Point, County Sligo, the same
_Sidhe_ being was seen by our present witness and a friend with him,
also possessing the faculty of seership, at a time when the two
percipients were some little distance apart, and they hurried to each
other to describe the being, not knowing that the explanation was
mutually unnecessary. I have talked with both percipients so much, and
know them so intimately that I am fully able to state that as
percipients they fulfil all necessary pathological conditions required
by psychologists in order to make their evidence acceptable.


PARALLEL EVIDENCE AS TO THE _SIDHE_ RACES

In general, the rare evidence above recorded from the Irish seer could
be paralleled by similar evidence from at least two other reliable Irish
people, with whom also I have been privileged to discuss the
Fairy-Faith. One is a member of the Royal Irish Academy, the other is
the wife of a well-known Irish historian; and both of them testify to
having likewise had collective visions of _Sidhe_ beings in Ireland.

This is what Mr. William B. Yeats wrote to me, while this study was in
progress, concerning the Celtic Fairy Kingdom:--'I am certain that it
exists, and will some day be studied as it was studied by Kirk.'[21]


INDEPENDENT EVIDENCE FROM THE _SIDHE_ WORLD

One of the most remarkable discoveries of our Celtic researches has been
that the native population of the Rosses Point country, or, as we have
called it, the _Sidhe_ world, in most essentials, and, what is most
important, by independent folk-testimony, substantiate the opinions and
statements of the educated Irish mystics to whom we have just referred,
as follows:--

_John Conway's Vision of the 'Gentry'._--In Upper Rosses Point, Mrs. J.
Conway told me this about the 'gentry':--'John Conway, my husband, who
was a pilot by profession, in watching for in-coming ships used to go
up on the high hill among the Fairy Hills; and there he often saw the
_gentry_ going down the hill to the strand. One night in particular he
recognized them as men and women of the _gentry_; and they were as big
as any living people. It was late at night about forty years ago.'

_Ghosts and Fairies._--When first I introduced myself to Owen Conway, in
his bachelor quarters, a cosy cottage at Upper Rosses Point, he said
that Mr. W. B. Yeats and other men famous in Irish literature had
visited him to hear about the fairies, and that though he knew very
little about the fairies he nevertheless always likes to talk of them.
Then Owen began to tell me about a man's ghost which both he and Bran
Reggan had seen at different times on the road to Sligo, then about a
woman's ghost which he and other people had often seen near where we
were, and then about the exorcizing of a haunted house in Sligo some
sixty years ago by Father McGowan, who as a result died soon afterwards,
apparently having been killed by the exorcized spirits. Finally, I heard
from him the following anecdotes about the fairies:--

_A Stone Wall overthrown by 'Fairy' Agency._--'Nothing is more certain
than that there are fairies. The old folks always thought them the
fallen angels. At the back of this house the fairies had their pass. My
neighbour started to build a cow-shed, and one wall abutting on the pass
was thrown down twice, and nothing but the fairies ever did it. The
third time the wall was built it stood.'

_Fairies passing through Stone Walls._--'Where MacEwen's house stands
was a noted fairy place. Men in building the house saw fairies on horses
coming across the spot, and the stone walls did not stop them at all.'

_Seeing the 'Gentry'._--'A cousin of mine, who was a pilot, once went to
the watch-house up there on the Point to take his brother's place; and
he saw ladies coming towards him as he crossed the Greenlands. At first
he thought they were coming from a dance, but there was no dance going
then, and, if there had been, no human beings dressed like them and
moving as they were could have come from any part of the globe, and in
so great a party, at that hour of the night. Then when they passed him
and he saw how beautiful they were, he knew them for the _gentry_
women.'

'Michael Reddy (our next witness) saw the _gentry_ down on the
Greenlands in regimentals like an army, and in daylight. He was a young
man at the time, and had been sent out to see if any cattle were
astray.'

And this is what Michael Reddy, of Rosses Point, now a sailor on the
ship _Tartar_, sailing from Sligo to neighbouring ports on the Irish
coast, asserts in confirmation of Owen Conway's statement about him:--'I
saw the _gentry_ on the strand (at Lower Rosses Point) about forty years
ago. It was afternoon. I first saw one of them like an officer pointing
at me what seemed a sword; and when I got on the Greenlands I saw a
great company of _gentry_, like soldiers, in red, laughing and shouting.
Their leader was a big man, and they were ordinary human size. As a
result [of this vision] I took to my bed and lay there for weeks. Upon
another occasion, late at night, I was with my mother milking cows, and
we heard the _gentry_ all round us talking, but could not see them.'

_Going to the 'Gentry' through Death, Dreams, or Trance._--John
O'Conway, one of the most reliable citizens of Upper Rosses Point,
offers the following testimony concerning the 'gentry':--'In olden times
the _gentry_ were very numerous about _forts_ and here on the
Greenlands, but rarely seen. They appeared to be the same as any living
men. When people died it was said the _gentry_ took them, for they would
afterwards appear among the _gentry_.'

'We had a ploughman of good habits who came in one day too late for his
morning's work, and he in excuse very seriously said, "May be if you had
travelled all night as much as I have you wouldn't talk. I was away with
the _gentry_, and save for a lady I couldn't have been back now. I saw a
long hall full of many people. Some of them I knew and some I did not
know. The lady saved me by telling me to eat no food there, however
enticing it might be."'

'A young man at Drumcliffe was _taken_ [in a trance state], and was with
the _Daoine Maithe_ some time, and then got back. Another man, whom I
knew well, was haunted by the _gentry_ for a long time, and he often
went off with _them_' (apparently in a dream or trance state).

_'Sidhe' Music._--The story which now follows substantiates the
testimony of cultured Irish seers that at Lower Rosses Point the music
of the _Sidhe_ can be heard:--'Three women were gathering shell-fish, in
the month of March, on the lowest point of the strand (Lower Rosses or
Wren Point) when they heard the most beautiful music. They set to work
to dance with it, and danced themselves sick. They then thanked the
invisible musician and went home.'


THE TESTIMONY OF A COLLEGE PROFESSOR

Our next witness is the Rev. Father ----, a professor in a Catholic
college in West Ireland, and most of his statements are based on events
which happened among his own acquaintances and relatives, and his
deductions are the result of careful investigation:--

_Apparitions from Fairyland._--'Some twenty to thirty years ago, on the
borders of County Roscommon near County Sligo, according to the firm
belief of one of my own relatives, a sister of his was _taken_ by the
fairies on her wedding-night, and she appeared to her mother afterwards
as an apparition. She seemed to want to speak, but her mother, who was
in bed at the time, was thoroughly frightened, and turned her face to
the wall. The mother is convinced that she saw this apparition of her
daughter, and my relative thinks she might have saved her.

'This same relative who gives it as his opinion that his sister was
_taken_ by the fairies, at a different time saw the apparition of
another relative of mine who also, according to similar belief, had been
_taken_ by the fairies when only five years old. The child-apparition
appeared beside its living sister one day while the sister was going
from the yard into the house, and it followed her in. It is said the
child was _taken_ because she was such a good girl.'

_Nature of the Belief in Fairies._--'As children we were always afraid
of fairies, and were taught to say "God bless _them_! God bless _them_!"
whenever we heard them mentioned.

'In our family we always made it a point to have clean water in the
house at night for the fairies.

'If anything like dirty water was thrown out of doors after dark it was
necessary to say "_Hugga, hugga salach!_" as a warning to the fairies
not to get their clothes wet.

'Untasted food, like milk, used to be left on the table at night for the
fairies. If you were eating and food fell from you, it was not right to
take it back, for the fairies wanted it. Many families are very serious
about this even now. The luckiest thing to do in such cases is to pick
up the food and eat just a speck of it and then throw the rest away to
the fairies.

'Ghosts and apparitions are commonly said to live in isolated
thorn-bushes, or thorn-trees. Many lonely bushes of this kind have their
ghosts. For example, there is Fanny's Bush, Sally's Bush, and another I
know of in County Sligo near Boyle.'

_Personal Opinions._--'The fairies of any one race are the people of the
preceding race--the Fomors for the Fir Bolgs, the Fir Bolgs for the
Dananns, and the Dananns for us. The old races died. Where did they go?
They became spirits--and fairies. Second-sight gave our race power to
see the inner world. When Christianity came to Ireland the people had no
_definite_ heaven. Before, their ideas about the other world were vague.
But the older ideas of a spirit world remained side by side with the
Christian ones, and being preserved in a subconscious way gave rise to
the fairy world.'


EVIDENCE FROM COUNTY ROSCOMMON

Our next place for investigation will be the ancient province of the
great fairy-queen Meave, who made herself famous by leading against
Cuchulainn the united armies of four of the five provinces of Ireland,
and all on account of a bull which she coveted. And there could be no
better part of it to visit than Roscommon, which Dr. Douglas Hyde has
made popular in Irish folk-lore.

_Dr. Hyde and the Leprechaun._--One day while I was privileged to be at
Ratra, Dr. Hyde invited me to walk with him in the country. After we had
visited an old _fort_ which belongs to the 'good people', and had
noticed some other of their haunts in that part of Queen Meave's realm,
we entered a straw-thatched cottage on the roadside and found the good
house-wife and her fine-looking daughter both at home. In response to
Dr. Hyde's inquiries, the mother stated that one day, in her girlhood,
near a hedge from which she was gathering wild berries, she saw a
leprechaun in a hole under a stone:--'He wasn't much larger than a doll,
and he was most perfectly formed, with a little mouth and eyes.' Nothing
was told about the little fellow having a money-bag, although the woman
said people told her afterwards that she would have been rich if she had
only had sense enough to catch him when she had so good a chance.[22]

_The Death Coach._--The next tale the mother told was about the death
coach which used to pass by the very house we were in. Every night until
after her daughter was born she used to rise up on her elbow in bed to
listen to the death coach passing by. It passed about midnight, and she
could hear the rushing, the tramping of the horses, and most beautiful
singing, just like fairy music, but she could not understand the words.
Once or twice she was brave enough to open the door and look out as the
coach passed, but she could never see a thing, though there was the
noise and singing. One time a man had to wait on the roadside to let the
fairy horses go by, and he could hear their passing very clearly, and
couldn't see one of them.

When we got home, Dr. Hyde told me that the fairies of the region are
rarely seen. The people usually say that they hear or feel them only.

_The 'Good People' and Mr. Gilleran._--After the mother had testified,
the daughter, who is quite of the younger generation, gave her own
opinion. She said that the 'good people' live in the _forts_ and often
take men and women or youths who pass by the _forts_ after sunset; that
Mr. Gilleran, who died not long ago, once saw certain dead friends and
recognized among them those who were believed to have been _taken_ and
those who died naturally, and that he saw them again when he was on his
death-bed.

We have here, as in so many other accounts, a clear connexion between
the realm of the dead and Fairyland.


THE TESTIMONY OF A LOUGH DERG SEER

Neil Colton, seventy-three years old, who lives in Tamlach Townland, on
the shores of Lough Derg, County Donegal, has a local reputation for
having seen the 'gentle folk', and so I called upon him. As we sat round
his blazing turf fire, and in the midst of his family of three sturdy
boys--for he married late in life--this is what he related:--

_A Girl Recovered from Faerie._--'One day, just before sunset in
midsummer, and I a boy then, my brother and cousin and myself were
gathering bilberries (whortleberries) up by the rocks at the back of
here, when all at once we heard music. We hurried round the rocks, and
there we were within a few hundred feet of six or eight of the _gentle
folk_, and they dancing. When they saw us, a little woman dressed all in
red came running out from them towards us, and she struck my cousin
across the face with what seemed to be a green rush. We ran for home as
hard as we could, and when my cousin reached the house she fell dead.
Father saddled a horse and went for Father Ryan. When Father Ryan
arrived, he put a stole about his neck and began praying over my cousin
and reading psalms and striking her with the stole; and in that way
brought her back. He said if she had not caught hold of my brother, she
would have been _taken_ for ever.'

_The 'Gentle Folk'._--'The _gentle folk_ are not earthly people; they
are a people with a nature of their own. Even in the water there are men
and women of the same character. Others have caves in the rocks, and in
them rooms and apartments. These races were terribly plentiful a hundred
years ago, and they'll come back again. My father lived two miles from
here, where there were plenty of the _gentle folk_. In olden times they
used to take young folks and keep them and draw all the life out of
their bodies. Nobody could ever tell their nature exactly.'


EVIDENCE FROM COUNTY FERMANAGH

From James Summerville, eighty-eight years old, who lives in the country
near Irvinestown, I heard much about the 'wee people' and about
banshees, and then the following remarkable story concerning the 'good
people':--

_Travelling Clairvoyance through 'Fairy' Agency._--'From near Ederney,
County Fermanagh, about seventy years ago, a man whom I knew well was
taken to America on Hallow Eve Night; and _they_ (the _good people_)
made him look down a chimney to see his own daughter cooking at a
kitchen fire. Then _they_ took him to another place in America, where he
saw a friend he knew. The next morning he was at his own home here in
Ireland.

'This man wrote a letter to his daughter to know if she was at the place
and at the work on Hallow Eve Night, and she wrote back that she was. He
was sure that it was the _good people_ who had taken him to America and
back in one night.'


EVIDENCE FROM COUNTY ANTRIM

At the request of Major R. G. Berry, M.R.I.A., of Richill Castle,
Armagh, Mr. H. Higginson, of Glenavy, County Antrim, collected all the
material he could find concerning the fairy-tradition in his part of
County Antrim, and sent to me the results, from which I have selected
the very interesting, and, in some respects, unique tales which
follow:--

_The Fairies and the Weaver._--'Ned Judge, of Sophys Bridge, was a
weaver. Every night after he went to bed the weaving started of itself,
and when he arose in the morning he would find the dressing which had
been made ready for weaving so broken and entangled that it took him
hours to put it right. Yet with all this drawback he got no poorer,
because the fairies left him plenty of household necessaries, and
whenever he sold a web [of cloth] he always received treble the amount
bargained for.'

_Meeting Two Regiments of 'Them'._--'William Megarry, of Ballinderry, as
his daughter who is married to James Megarry, J.P., told me, was one
night going to Crumlin on horseback for a doctor, when after passing
through Glenavy he met just opposite the Vicarage two regiments of
_them_ (the fairies) coming along the road towards Glenavy. One regiment
was dressed in red and one in blue or green uniform. _They_ were playing
music, but when they opened out to let him pass through the middle of
_them_ the music ceased until he had passed by.'


IN CUCHULAINN'S COUNTRY: A CIVIL ENGINEER'S TESTIMONY

In the heroic days of pagan Ireland, as tradition tells, the ancient
earthworks, now called the Navan Rings, just outside Armagh, were the
stronghold of Cuchulainn and the Red Branch Knights; and, later, under
Patrick, Armagh itself, one of the old mystic centres of Erin, became
the ecclesiastical capital of the Gaels. And from this romantic country,
one of its best informed native sons, a graduate civil engineer of
Dublin University, offers the following important evidence:--

_The Fairies are the Dead._--'When I was a youngster near Armagh, I was
kept good by being told that the fairies could take bad boys away. The
sane belief about the fairies, however, is different, as I discovered
when I grew up. The old people in County Armagh seriously believe that
the fairies are the spirits of the dead; and they say that if you have
many friends deceased you have many friendly fairies, or if you have
many enemies deceased you have many fairies looking out to do you harm.'

_Food-Offerings to Place-Fairies._--'It was very usual formerly, and the
practice is not yet given up, to place a bed, some other furniture, and
plenty of food in a newly-constructed dwelling the night before the time
fixed for moving into it; and if the food is not consumed, and the
crumbs swept up by the door in the morning, the house cannot safely be
occupied. I know of two houses now that have never been occupied,
because the fairies did not show their willingness and goodwill by
taking food so offered to them.'


ON THE SLOPES OF SLIEVE GULLION

In climbing to the summit of Cuchulainn's mountain, which overlooks
parts of the territory made famous by the 'Cattle Raid of Cooley', I met
John O'Hare, sixty-eight years old, of Longfield Townland, leading his
horse to pasture, and I stopped to talk with him about the 'good
people'.

'The _good people_ in this mountain,' he said, 'are the people who have
died and been _taken_; the mountain is enchanted.'

_The 'Fairy' Overflowing of the Meal-Chest._--'An old woman came to the
wife of Steven Callaghan and told her not to let Steven cut a certain
hedge. "It is where we shelter at night," the old woman added; and Mrs.
Callaghan recognized the old woman as one who had been _taken_ in
confinement. A few nights later the same old woman appeared to Mrs.
Callaghan and asked for charity; and she was offered some meal, which
she did not take. Then she asked for lodgings, but did not stop. When
Mrs. Callaghan saw the meal-chest next morning it was overflowing with
meal: it was the old woman's gift for the hedge.'


THE TESTIMONY OF TWO DROMINTEE PERCIPIENTS

After my friend, the Rev. Father L. Donnellan, C.C., of Dromintee,
County Armagh, had introduced me to Alice Cunningham, of his parish, and
she had told much about the 'gentle folk', she emphatically declared
that they do exist--and this in the presence of Father Donnellan--because
she has often seen them on Carrickbroad Mountain, near where she lives.
And she then reported as follows concerning enchanted Slieve Gullion:--

_The 'Sidhe' Guardian of Slieve Gullion._--'The top of Slieve Gullion is
a very _gentle_ place. A fairy has her house there by the lake, but she
is invisible. She interferes with nobody. I hear of no _gentler_ places
about here than Carrickbroad and Slieve Gullion.'

Father Donnellan and I called next upon Thomas McCrink and his wife at
Carrifamayan, because Mrs. McCrink claims to have seen some of the 'good
people', and this is her testimony:--

_Nature of the 'Good People'._--'I've heard and felt the _good people_
coming on the wind; and I once saw them down in the middle field on my
father's place playing football. They are still on earth. Among them are
the spirits of our ancestors; and these rejoice whenever good fortune
comes our way, for I saw them before my mother won her land [after a
long legal contest] in the field rejoicing.

'Some of the _good people_ I have thought were fallen angels, though
these may be dead people whose time is not up. We are only like shadows
in this world: my mother died in England, and she came to me in the
spirit. I saw her plainly. I ran to catch her, but my hands ran through
her form as if it were mere mist. Then there was a crack, and she was
gone.' And, finally, after a moment, our percipient said:--'The fairies
once passed down this lane here on a Christmas morning; and I took them
to be suffering souls out of Purgatory, going to mass.'


THE TESTIMONY OF A DROMINTEE SEERESS

Father Donnellan, the following day, took me to talk with almost the
oldest woman in his parish, Mrs. Biddy Grant, eighty-six years old, of
Upper Toughal, beside Slieve Gullion. Mrs. Grant is a fine specimen of
an Irishwoman, with white hair, clear complexion, and an expression of
great natural intelligence, though now somewhat feeble from age. Her
mind is yet clear, however; and her testimony is substantiated by this
statement from her own daughter, who lives with her:--'My mother has the
power of seeing things. It is a fact with her that spirits exist. She
has seen much, even in her old age; and what she is always telling me
scares me half to death.'

The following is Mrs. Grant's direct testimony given at her own home, on
September 20, 1909, in answer to our question if she knew anything about
the 'good people':--

_Seeing the 'Good People' as the Dead._--'I saw _them_ once as plain as
can be--big, little, old, and young. I was in bed at the time, and a boy
whom I had reared since he was born was lying ill beside me. Two of
_them_ came and looked at him; then came in three of _them_. One of
_them_ seemed to have something like a book, and he put his hand to the
boy's mouth; then he went away, while others appeared, opening the back
window to make an avenue through the house; and through this avenue came
great crowds. At this I shook the boy, and said to him, "Do you see
anything?" "No," he said; but as I made him look a second time he said,
"I do." After that he got well.

'These _good people_ were the spirits of our dead friends, but I could
not recognize them. I have often seen them that way while in my bed.
Many women are among them. I once touched a boy of theirs, and he was
just like feathers in my hand; there was no substance in him, and I knew
he wasn't a living being. I don't know where they live; I've heard they
live in the _Carrige_ (rocks). Many a time I've heard of their _taking_
people or leading them astray. They can't live far away when they come
to me in such a rush. They are as big as we are. I think these fairy
people are all through this country and in the mountains.'

_An Apparition of a 'Sidhe' Woman?_--'At a wake I went out of doors at
midnight and saw a woman running up and down the field with a strange
light in her hand. I called out my daughter, but she saw nothing, though
all the time the woman dressed in white was in the field, shaking the
light and running back and forth as fast as you could wink. I thought
the woman might be the spirit of Nancy Frink, but I was not sure.' (Cf.
pp. 60 ff., 83, 155, 215.)


EVIDENCE FROM LOUGH GUR, COUNTY LIMERICK

One of the most interesting parts of Ireland for the archaeologist and
for the folk-lorist alike is the territory immediately surrounding Lough
Gur, County Limerick. Shut in for the most part from the outer world by
a circle of low-lying hills on whose summits fairy goddesses yet dwell
invisibly, this region, famous for its numerous and well-preserved
cromlechs, dolmens, menhirs, and tumuli, and for the rare
folk-traditions current among its peasantry, has long been popularly
regarded as a sort of Otherworld preserve haunted by fairy beings, who
dwell both in its waters and on its land.

There seems to be no reasonable doubt that in pre-Christian times the
Lough Gur country was a very sacred spot, a mystic centre for
pilgrimages and for the celebration of Celtic religious rites, including
those of initiation. The Lough is still enchanted, but once in seven
years the spell passes off it, and it then appears like dry land to any
one that is fortunate enough to behold it. At such a time of
disenchantment a Tree is seen growing up through the lake-bottom--a Tree
like the strange World-Tree of Scandinavian myth. The Tree is covered
with a Green Cloth, and under it sits the lake's guardian, a woman
knitting.[23] The peasantry about Lough Gur still believe that beneath
its waters there is one of the chief entrances in Ireland to
_Tir-na-nog_, the 'Land of Youth', the Fairy Realm. And when a child is
stolen by the Munster fairies, 'Lough Gur is conjectured to be the place
of its unearthly transmutation from the human to the fairy state.'[23]

To my friend, Count John de Salis, of Balliol College, I am indebted for
the following legendary material, collected by him on the fairy-haunted
Lough Gur estate, his ancestral home, and annotated by the Rev. J. F.
Lynch, one of the best-informed antiquarians living in that part of
South Ireland:--

_The Fairy Goddesses, Aine and Fennel (or Finnen)._--'There are two
hills near Lough Gur upon whose summits sacrifices and sacred rites used
to be celebrated according to living tradition. One, about three miles
south-west of the lake, is called Knock Aine, Aine or Ane being the name
of an ancient Irish goddess, derived from _an_, "bright." The other, the
highest hill on the lake-shores, is called Knock Fennel or Hill of the
Goddess Fennel, from _Finnen_ or _Finnine_ or _Fininne_, a form of
_fin_, "white." The peasantry of the region call Aine one of the Good
People;[24] and they say that Fennel (apparently her sister goddess or
a variant of herself) lived on the top of Knock Fennel' (termed Finnen
in a State Paper dated 1200).

_The Fairy Boat-Race._--'Different old peasants have told me that on
clear calm moonlight nights in summer, fairy boats appear racing across
Lough Gur. The boats come from the eastern side of the lake, and when
they have arrived at Garrod Island, where the Desmond Castle lies in
ruins, they vanish behind Knock Adoon. There are four of these phantom
boats, and in each there are two men rowing and a woman steering. No
sound is heard, though the seer can see the weird silvery splash of the
oars and the churning of the water at the bows of the boats as they
shoot along. It is evident that they are racing, because one boat gets
ahead of the others, and all the rowers can be seen straining at the
oars. Boats and occupants seem to be transparent, and you cannot see
exactly what their nature is. One old peasant told me that it is the
shining brightness of the clothes on the phantom rowers and on the women
who steer which makes them visible.

'Another man, who is about forty years of age, and as far as I know of
good habits, assures me that he also has seen this fairy boat-race, and
that it can still be seen at the proper season.'

_The Bean-Tighe._[25]--'The _Bean-tighe_, the fairy housekeeper of the
enchanted submerged castle of the Earl of Desmond, is supposed to appear
sitting on an ancient earthen monument shaped like a great chair and
hence called _Suidheachan_, the "Housekeeper's Little Seat," on Knock
Adoon (Hill of the Fort), which juts out into the Lough. The
_Bean-tighe_, as I have heard an old peasant tell the tale, was once
asleep on her Seat, when the _Buachailleen_[26] or "Little Herd Boy"
stole her golden comb. When the _Bean-tighe_ awoke and saw what had
happened, she cast a curse upon the cattle of the _Buachailleen_, and
soon all of them were dead, and then the "Little Herd Boy" himself died,
but before his death he ordered the golden comb to be cast into the
Lough.'[27]

_Lough Gur Fairies in General._--'The peasantry in the Lough Gur region
commonly speak of the _Good People_ or of the _Kind People_ or of the
_Little People_, their names for the fairies. The leprechaun indicates
the place where hidden treasure is to be found. If the person to whom he
reveals such a secret makes it known to a second person, the first
person dies, or else no money is found: in some cases the money is
changed into ivy leaves or into furze blossoms.

'I am convinced that some of the older peasants still believe in
fairies. I used to go out on the lake occasionally on moonlight nights,
and an old woman supposed to be a "wise woman" (a seeress), hearing
about my doing this, told me that under no circumstances should I
continue the practice, for fear of "Them People" (the fairies). One
evening in particular I was warned by her not to venture on the lake.
She solemnly asserted that the "Powers of Darkness" were then abroad,
and that it would be misfortune for me to be in their path.[28]

'Under ordinary circumstances, as a very close observer of the Lough Gur
peasantry informs me, the old people will pray to the Saints, but if by
any chance such prayers remain unanswered they then invoke other powers,
the fairies, the goddesses Aine and Fennel, or other pagan deities, whom
they seem to remember in a vague subconscious manner through tradition.'


TESTIMONY FROM A COUNTY KERRY SEER

To another of my fellow students in Oxford, a native Irishman of County
Kerry, I am indebted for the following evidence:--

_A Collective Vision of Spiritual Beings._--'Some few weeks before
Christmas, 1910, at midnight on a very dark night, I and another young
man (who like myself was then about twenty-three years of age) were on
horseback on our way home from Limerick. When near Listowel, we noticed
a light about half a mile ahead. At first it seemed to be no more than a
light in some house; but as we came nearer to it and it was passing out
of our direct line of vision we saw that it was moving up and down, to
and fro, diminishing to a spark, then expanding into a yellow luminous
flame. Before we came to Listowel we noticed two lights, about one
hundred yards to our right, resembling the light seen first. Suddenly
each of these lights expanded into the same sort of yellow luminous
flame, about six feet high by four feet broad. In the midst of each
flame we saw a radiant being having human form. Presently the lights
moved toward one another and made contact, whereupon the two beings in
them were seen to be walking side by side. The beings' bodies were
formed of a pure dazzling radiance, white like the radiance of the sun,
and much brighter than the yellow light or aura surrounding them. So
dazzling was the radiance, like a halo, round their heads that we could
not distinguish the countenances of the beings; we could only
distinguish the general shape of their bodies; though their heads were
very clearly outlined because this halo-like radiance, which was the
brightest light about them, seemed to radiate from or rest upon the head
of each being. As we travelled on, a house intervened between us and the
lights, and we saw no more of them. It was the first time we had ever
seen such phenomena, and in our hurry to get home we were not wise
enough to stop and make further examination. But ever since that night I
have frequently seen, both in Ireland and in England, similar lights
with spiritual beings in them.' (Cf. pp. 60 ff., 77, 133, 155, 215,
483.)

_Reality of the Spiritual World._--'Like my companion, who saw all that
I saw of the first three lights, I formerly had always been a sceptic as
to the existence of spirits; now I know that there is a spiritual world.
My brother, a physician, had been equally sceptical until he saw, near
our home at Listowel, similar lights containing spiritual beings and was
obliged to admit the genuineness of the phenomena.

'In whatever country we may be, I believe that we are for ever immersed
in the spiritual world; but most of us cannot perceive it on account of
the unrefined nature of our physical bodies. Through meditation and
psychical training one can come to see the spiritual world and its
beings. We pass into the spirit realm at death and come back into the
human world at birth; and we continue to reincarnate until we have
overcome all earthly desires and mortal appetites. Then the higher life
is open to our consciousness and we cease to be human; we become divine
beings.' (Recorded in Oxford, England, August 12, 1911.)


III. IN SCOTLAND

     Introduction by ALEXANDER CARMICHAEL, Hon. LL.D. of the University of
     Edinburgh; author of _Carmina Gadelica_.

The belief in fairies was once common throughout Scotland--Highland and
Lowland. It is now much less prevalent even in the Highlands and
Islands, where such beliefs linger longer than they do in the Lowlands.
But it still lives among the old people, and is privately entertained
here and there even among younger people; and some who hold the belief
declare that they themselves have seen fairies.

Various theories have been advanced as to the origin of fairies and as
to the belief in them. The most concrete form in which the belief has
been urged has been by the Rev. Robert Kirk, minister of Aberfoyle, in
Perthshire.[29] Another theory of the origin of fairies I took down in
the island of Miunghlaidh (Minglay); and, though I have given it in
_Carmina Gadelica_, it is sufficiently interesting to be quoted here.
During October 1871, Roderick Macneill, known as 'Ruaraidh mac Dhomhuil,'
then ninety-two years of age, told it in Gaelic to the late J. F.
Campbell of Islay and the writer, when they were storm-stayed in the
precipitous island of Miunghlaidh, Barra:--

'The Proud Angel fomented a rebellion among the angels of heaven, where
he had been a leading light. He declared that he would go and found a
kingdom for himself. When going out at the door of heaven the Proud
Angel brought prickly lightning and biting lightning out of the doorstep
with his heels. Many angels followed him--so many that at last the Son
called out, "Father! Father! the city is being emptied!" whereupon the
Father ordered that the gates of heaven and the gates of hell should be
closed. This was instantly done. And those who were in were in, and
those who were out were out; while the hosts who had left heaven and had
not reached hell flew into the holes of the earth, like the stormy
petrels. These are the Fairy Folk--ever since doomed to live under the
ground, and only allowed to emerge where and when the King permits. They
are never allowed abroad on Thursday, that being Columba's Day; nor on
Friday, that being the Son's Day; nor on Saturday, that being Mary's
Day; nor on Sunday, that being the Lord's Day.

  God be between me and every fairy,
  Every ill wish and every druidry;
  To-day is Thursday on sea and land,
  I trust in the King that they do not hear me.

On certain nights when their _bruthain_ (bowers) are open and their
lamps are lit, and the song and the dance are moving merrily, the
fairies may be heard singing lightheartedly:--

  Not of the seed of Adam are we,
  Nor is Abraham our father;
  But of the seed of the Proud Angel,
  Driven forth from Heaven.'

The fairies entered largely into the lives and into the folk-lore of the
Highland people, and the following examples of things named after the
fairies indicate the manner in which the fairies dominated the minds of
the people of Gaeldom:--_teine sith_, 'fairy fire' (_ignis fatuus_);
_breaca sith_, 'fairy marks,' livid spots appearing on the faces of the
dead or dying; _marcachd shith_, 'fairy riding,' paralysis of the spine
in animals, alleged to be brought on by the fairy mouse riding across
the backs of animals while they are lying down; _piob shith_, 'fairy
pipe' or 'elfin pipe', generally found in ancient underground houses;
