baptism, and a holy life, as I said before, all churches must agree
and unite in, as those things which, when wanting, will destroy
their being.  And let not any think, that when I say, believing the
Son of God died for the sins of men is essential to salvation and
church-communion, that I hereby would exclude all other articles of
the Christian creed as not necessary; as the belief of the
resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment, &c., which, for want
of time, I omit to speak particularly to, and the rather, because I
understand this great article of believing the Son of God died for
the sins of men is comprehensive of all others, and is that from
whence all other articles may easily be inferred.

And here I would not be mistaken, as though I held there was nothing
else for Christians to practise, when I say this is all that is
requisite to church-communion; for I very well know, that Christ
requires many other things of us, after we are members of his body,
which, if we knowingly or maliciously refuse, may be the cause, not
only of excommunication, but damnation.  But yet these are such
things as relate to the well-being and not to the being of churches;
as laying on of hands in the primitive times upon believers, by
which they did receive the gifts of the Spirit:  This, I say, was
for the increase and edifying of the body, and not that thereby they
might become of the body of Christ, for that they were before.  And
do not think that I believe laying on of hands was no apostolical
institution, because I say men are not thereby made members of
Christ's body, or because I say that it is not essential to church-
communion.  Why should I be thought to be against a fire in the
chimney, because I say it must not be in the thatch of the house?
Consider, then, how pernicious a thing it is to make every doctrine
(though true) the bond of communion; this is that which destroys
unity, and by this rule all men must be perfect before they can be
in peace:  for do we not see daily, that as soon as men come to a
clearer understanding of the mind of God (to say the best of what
they hold), that presently all men are excommunicable, if not
damnable, that do not agree with them.  Do not some believe and see
that to be pride and covetousness, which others do not, because (it
may be) they have more narrowly and diligently searched into their
duty of these things than others have?  What then?  Must all men
that have not so large acquaintance of their duty herein be
excommunicated?  Indeed it were to be wished that more moderation in
apparel and secular concernments were found among churches:  but God
forbid, that if they should come short herein, that we should say,
as one lately said, that he could not communicate with such a
people, because they were proud and superfluous in their apparel.

Let me appeal to such, and demand of them, if there was not a time,
since they believed and were baptized, wherein they did not believe
laying on of hands a duty? and did they not then believe, and do
they not still believe, they were members of the body of Christ?
And was not there a time when you did not so well understand the
nature and extent of pride and covetousness as now you do?  And did
you not then believe, and do you not still believe, that you were
true members of Christ, though less perfect?  Why then should you
not judge of those that differ from you herein, as you judged of
yourselves when you were as they now are?  How needful then is it
for Christians to distinguish (if ever they would be at peace and
unity) between those truths which are essential to church-communion,
and those that are not?

3.  Unity and peace consists in all as with one shoulder practising
and putting in execution the things we do know; Phil. iii. 16.
"Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the
same rule, and mind the same thing."  How sad is it to see our zeal
consume us and our precious time in things doubtful and disputable,
while we are not concerned nor affected with the practice of those
indisputable things we all agree in!  We all know charity to be the
great command, and yet how few agree to practise it?  We all know
they that labour in the word and doctrine are worthy of double
honour; and that God hath ordained, that they which preach the
gospel should live of the gospel.  These duties, however others have
cavilled at them, I know you agree in them, and are persuaded of
your duty therein:  but where is your zeal to practise?  O how well
would it be with churches, if they were but half as zealous for the
great, and plain, and indisputable things, and the more chargeable
and costly things of religion, as they are for things doubtful or
less necessary, or for things that are no charge to them, and cost
them nothing but the breath of contention, though that may be too
great a price for the small things they purchase with it!

But further, Do we not all agree, that men that preach the gospel
should do it like workmen that need not be ashamed? and yet how
little is this considered by many preachers, who never consider
before they speak of what they say, or whereof they affirm!  How few
give themselves to study that they may be approved!  How few
meditate and give themselves to these things, that their profiting
may appear to all!

For the Lord's sake let us unite to practise those things we know;
and if we would have more talents, let us all agree to improve those
we have.

See the spirit that was among the primitive professors, that knowing
and believing how much it concerned them in the propagating of
Christianity, to shew forth love to one another (that so all might
know them to be Christ's disciples), rather than there should be any
complainings among them, they sold all they had.  O how zealous were
these to practise, and as with one shoulder to do that that was upon
their hearts for God!  I might further add, how often have we agreed
in our judgment? and hath it not been upon our hearts, that this and
the other thing is good to be done, to enlighten the dark world, and
to repair the breaches of churches, and to raise up those churches
that now lie gasping, and among whom the soul of religion is
expiring?  But what do we more than talk of them?  Do not most
decline these things, when they either call for their purses or
their persons to help in this and such like works as these?  Let us
then, in what we know, unite, that we may put it in practice,
remembering, that if we know these things, we shall be happy if we
do them.

4.  This unity and peace consists in our joining and agreeing to
pray for, and to press after, those truths we do not know.  The
disciples in the primitive times were conscious of their
imperfections, and therefore they with one accord continued in
prayer and supplications.  If we were more in the sense of our
ignorance and imperfections, we should carry it better towards those
that differ from us:  then we should abound more in the spirit of
meekness and forbearance, that thereby we might bring others (or be
brought by others) to the knowledge of the truth:  this would make
us go to God, and say with Elihu, Job xxxiv. 32, "That which we know
not, teach thou us."  Brethren, did we but all agree that we were
erring in many things, we should soon agree to go to God, and pray
for more wisdom and revelation of his mind and will concerning us.

But here is our misery, that we no sooner receive any thing for
truth, but we presently ascend the chair of infallibility with it,
as though in this we could not err:  hence it is we are impatient of
contradiction, and become uncharitable to those that are not of the
same mind; but now a consciousness that we may mistake, or that if
my brother err in one thing, I may err in another; this will unite
us in affection, and engage us to press after perfection, according
to that of the apostle; Phil. iii. 13-15, "Brethren, I count not
myself to have apprehended:  But this one thing I do, forgetting
those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things
which are before, I press toward the mark, for the prize of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus.  And if in any thing ye be otherwise
minded, God shall reveal even this unto you."  O then that we could
but unite and agree to go to God for one another, in confidence that
he will teach us; and that if any one of us want wisdom (as who of
us does not), we might agree to ask of God, who giveth to all men
liberally, and upbraideth no man!  Let us, like those people spoken
of in the 2d of Isaiah, say to one another, "Come, let us go to the
Lord, for he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his
paths."

5.  This unity and peace mainly consists in unity of love and
affection:  this is the great and indispensable duty of all
Christians; by this they are declared Christ's disciples; And hence
it is that love is called "the great commandment," "the old
commandment," and "the new commandment;" that which was commanded in
the beginning, and will remain to the end, yea, and after the end. 1
