134. He whose heart is great and who shall attain unto the true
enlightenment is he also that desireth the salvation of all living,
and verily the true faith given of that Blessed One is salvation.

135. The single heart perceiveth the true faith, and so doing is
strong and clear as the diamond, and this strength is the wisdom of
the supreme that strengthened us.

136. When we shall attain, unto the Promised Land, which is that
Nirvana past all understanding, there shall we labour abundantly for
the salvation of all living things. For so the Sutra teaches us in
these words: "A heart that inclineth to the succour of others."


OF THANKSGIVING FOR DONRAN, THE GREAT TEACHER OF CHINA

137. Donran, that great teacher of China, being instructed of
Bodhi-ruci, the priest of India, sought refuge in the Land of
Purity, and thus doing he burned with fire the books of the Taoist
teaching which he had aforetime held in honour.

138. Having thus cast from him the writings that he had so many
years diligently studied, he preached unto all men the doctrine of
the Divine Promise, and, so teaching, he led men that are fast bound
in the fetters of illusion, in at the Gate of the Great Peace.

139. A mighty King of this world brought homage unto him in his
monastery and put unto him this question, saying: "If so it is that
the Land of Purity should be in all the Ten Regions, how then is it
declared unto us in the Sutra that it is in the Western Heaven?"

140. And with humble piety he replied:

"Of this matter can I not tell thee. It is too high for me. Still am
I in the lower rank of wisdom, even still small is my knowledge. I
cannot fathom this great mystery."

141. All men in the priesthood or the people who know not the rock
of their trust, did Donran the Great Priest guide unto the sure
refuge of the doctrine of the Land of Bliss.

142. He abode in the Temple of the Great Rock, being favourably
bidden thereto by the King of the Gi Dynasty, and in the evening of
his days he travelled into the district of Dun.

143. And this King of the Gi Dynasty reverently offered unto him the
holy title of Shinran (Ran of Divinity) and the honourable name of
"Rock of the Venerable Ran"--that his dwelling-place should be
called by it.

144. Great and mighty upon the people was his spiritual power in the
temple of Genchu and in the fourth year of Kokwa of the Gi Dynasty
the Temple of Yosen became his beloved dwelling.

145. And when he had reached sixty-seven years, he sought his final
refuge in the Eternal Kingdom. And at that departing were vouchsafed
many holy marvels unto which all men, both of the priests and
people, came and did reverence.

146. And when Donran the Great High Priest had departed into the
Peace, the King of the Gi Dynasty by a royal order commanded there
should be built for him a holy monument in the lands of Dun.

147. What man could know the unsearchable mystery of the faith and
deeds of the Divine Promise were it not for that most excelling
commentary of Donran the wise Priest, which he wrote concerning the
teaching of Vasubandh that had lived aforetime.

148. He who believeth that the Sole Vehicle of the Divine Promise,
most perfect, most mighty, receiveth within itself the Greatest of
Sinners, and this because it is its chief will so to do, will
receive the depth of this essential teaching--namely, that before
the eyes of the Instructed, illusion and wisdom are in their Essence
One.

149. Among the Five Mysteries that are preached in this Sutra, the
mystery of the Divine Power of the Enlightened One is highest, and
this is the holy vow of our Blessed One, this and this only.

150. Unto us hath our Father given those two spiritual gifts. Of
these the first is the Virtue whereby we attain unto His Kingdom,
and the second is the Virtue whereby having so attained we return
into this world for the Salvation of men. By the merit of these two
gifts are we initiates of the true faith and of its deeds.

151. When we shall have attained unto the faith and the deeds of the
Merciful Promise through our Father that is in all things able to
give them unto us, birth and death are henceforward as Nirvana. And
this is called the Gift of Departure.

152. And when we shall have attained unto that height which is
desire for the ingathering of all beings into Paradise, shall we
return again into this world that we may be Saviours of Men. And
this is called the Gift of Returning.

153. That "Single Mind" expounded unto us by Vasubandh, the Master
of Writings that excel, is nothing other than the faith of us that
are now fast bound in illusion. So teacheth Donran the Great Teacher
in his Commentary.

154. The Buddha of that inexpressible Light that shineth into the
worlds of the Ten Regions, being for ever enlightened in the night
of ignorance, hath most certainly opened the way of Nirvana to every
man who even for one moment rejoiceth in receiving His Divine
Promise.

155. By the merit of His Infinite Light, when we attain unto that
faith divine and omnipotent, the ice of illusion shall melt into the
water of perfect wisdom.

156. Sin is made one with virtue in its essence, even as ice is one
with water. The more there is ice, so much the more water is
there. So also is the binding up of sin with virtue.

157. In the unbounded ocean of the Holy Name is not seen even one
single death of a blasphemer. For the myriad streams of sin are on
purity with the ocean of righteousness when they have flowed into
the impurity thereof.

158. When the streams of illusion have flowed into the Great Sea of
the Merciful Promise of the Enlightened One, whose light shineth
into all the worlds of the Ten Religions, then shall they too become
the pure water of the Perfect Wisdom.

159. No other way is there of attaining unto the Perfect
Enlightenment save only by birth into the Land of Gladness, and
therefore have all the Enlightened Ones exhorted men that they
should receive the Doctrine of the Kingdom Purity.

160. The Great Priest hath well taught us that in order to cleanse
our deeds, words, and thoughts of deceitfulness, our Father hath
performed the three of His pure and universal.

161. There is no way unto the Kingdom of Gladness save only by
attaining unto the true faith through that Holy Name, the very Jewel
of Wonder.

162. When the new birth through the clearness of the Divine Promise
is attained in the Eternal Kingdom, it is not like unto the birth of
this world; then is there no inferiority even in those that in this
world were sinners, for they have entered into Paradise.

163. The Holy Name of the Buddha of that Boundless Light that
shineth into all the worlds of the Ten Regions, and the glory of His
Wisdom, destroy the darkness of ignorance in the Eternal Night, thus
fulfilling all the desires of men.


CONCERNING UNRIGHTEOUS DEEDS

164. These three things are expounded unto us by Donran
Daishi. First, that faith is not holiness, for faith is not
abiding. At one time it abideth, at another it is gone.

165. And second: This faith is not Single Minded, for it hath not
resolution.

And third: It continueth not, for the other thoughts of the heart
divide it against itself.

166. The three ways of this faith lead the one to the other one. On
this must the believer fix his eyes. If his faith is not in
holiness, then hath he not the faith of resolution.

167. And having not the faith that is resolute, that faith cannot
endure, and because it endureth not, how can he attain unto the
faith of determination? And attaining not unto the faith of
determination, the faith is not sanctified in him.

168. For the attainment of Right Practice expounded by the Master of
the Written Word is according unto the true faith and this alone.

169. If a man return into the Great Way of the Divine Promise,
eschewing the narrow ways of deeds and works, in him shall the true
light of Nirvana be made manifest.

170. The mighty king So, he of the Ryo line, worshipped the Great
Teacher Donran Daishi, naming him the Bodhisattva of Ran, turning
his face in worship unto the dwelling-place of his Teacher.


CONCERNING DOSHAKU-ZENJI

171. Having cast away from him all trust in the righteous deeds of
the sages, Doshaku-Zenji, the Great Teacher, hath taught us to enter
in at the only gate that is the Gospel of the Pure Land.

172. Having thus cast away from him the laborious study of the
Doctrine of Nirvana, Doshaku, the Great Teacher, himself trusted
only in the power of the Divine Promise, and he persuaded men to
follow after him.

173. In this world of sin that is so far removed from the blessed
day of our Lord, is there no man who attaineth unto the wisdom
Supreme, yea, not though he should compass all righteous doing. So
teacheth our Lord of Great Teaching.

174. He who succeeded unto the teaching of Donran-Daishi,
Doshaku-zenji, the Great Priest, thus declareth: "To toil and labour
after righteous deeds in this life is the unavailing toil of
self-effort."

175. In this world, the doing of evil and the sin that is wrought of
men is violent and furious as the storm wind and rain. Therefore
have the compassionate Buddhas exhorted men to seek their refuge
within the Land of Purity.

176. From him that sinneth, throughout his life shall the fetters of
illusion fall away, if he shall recite the Holy Name with love and
adoration.

177. That he might lead men into the Eternal Kingdom--those men who
are in this life fast bound unto the evil thing, our Father teacheth
us, saying, "Recite my name," and hath promised further, "Doing
this, if they be not born again, I myself will not attain unto
Wisdom."


CONCERNING ZENDO-DAISHI

178. Rising like unto an incarnation of the Mighty Ocean, Zendo, the
great teacher, came into the world.

And for the sake of mankind in this sinful place, he called unto all
the Buddhas of the Ten Regions to be his testimony unto his
commentary on the Sutra.

179. Two interpreters of Zendo-Daishi were there in the age that
followed his own, and these were Hosho and Shoko. They, it is, who
have opened the Treasury of teaching that the inward purpose of the
Blessed One should be wholly made known.

180. How should women turn their hearts unto wisdom--they who are
fast bound with the five fetters? No, not through the ages of
myriads of Kalpas, until they seek refuge in the Divine Promise of
Him who is mighty.

181. Having thrown open the Gate of Righteousness, our Lord hath
instructed mankind in every sort of righteous deed. He hath set
before us how the five right deeds differ from the confused deeds
that are outside the Five, so that mankind may enter the way of the
Sole Practice.

182. To mingle the right action with the action that is not akin to
it is called the confused practice. The man that erreth therein
hath not attained unto the single heart. He knoweth not thankfulness
for the grace of the Enlightened One.

183. If he entreat in prayer the good things of this world, even
though he recite only the Blessed Name, he is condemned therein,
being also a man of the confused practice. He shall not be born into
