

THE LITTLE GIRL WHO DIED TO SAVE HER FATHER'S LIFE

[Illustration]

My dear little friend: I want to tell you about a little girl in
Switzerland who died to save her father's life. I hope it will lead you
to think of Him who died a dreadful death on the cross, that we might
be saved from sin and sorrow here, and at last dwell with Him in bright
mansions in the skies.

This little girl lived near a deep ravine at the foot of one of the
mountains in Switzerland. A huge rock had fallen down the mountain side,
and lodged in the ravine, and thus made a natural bridge, so that those
who wished to pass from one side of the mountain to the other, could
cross the bridge.

The mother of the child was an earnest Christian, and often told her
daughter about the blessed Savior, who died in the place of sinners,
who deserved to be punished that they might be forgiven and saved in
heaven. And she told her also that unless she came to Jesus, and trusted
in Him, she would be lost forever. At first the little girl did not care
very much about what her mother said, but at last the mother's prayer
was answered. Her little one felt herself to be a lost sinner, and that
Christ alone could save her. God's spirit taught her that Jesus had paid
the debt, and that He stood with open arms ready to receive her, and
wash her sins away. Then she felt sure that heaven would be her home
forever. Her father was not a Christian. He never gathered his loved
ones around the family altar.

One day when about to cross the deep ravine upon the rock bridge, the
mother saw that it was just ready to fall. The frost had loosened it.
She told her little child that if she ever crossed it again it would
fall, and she would be dashed in pieces.

[Illustration]

The next day the father told his child that he was going over to the
other side across the bridge. She told him it was not safe, but he only
laughed at her. He said he had been across it before she was born, and
that he was not afraid. When the dear little thing saw that he was
determined to go she asked if she could go with him.

While they were walking along together, she looked up into her father's
face, and said: "Father, if I should die, will you promise to love Jesus
and meet me in heaven?"

"Pshaw!" he said, "what put such a wild thought into your head? You are
not going to die, I hope. You are only a wee thing and will live many
years."

"Yes, but if I should die, will you promise to love Jesus just as I do,
and meet me in heaven?"

"But you are not going to die. Don't speak of it," he said.

"But if I should die, do promise, Father, you will be a good Christian
and come up and live with Jesus and me in heaven."

"Yes, yes!" he said at last.

When they came near the crossing-place, she said: "Father, please stand
here a minute." She loved him dearly and was willing to run the risk of
dying for him. Strange as it may seem she walked quickly and jumped upon
the loose rock, and down it went with the girl. She was crushed to death.
The trembling parent crept to the edge, and eyes dimmed with tears, gazed
wildly upon the wreck. Then he thought of all his little child had told
him about how Jesus had died to save us. He thought he had never loved
her so much. But he began to see that he had far more reason to love
Jesus who had suffered much more to save him from the "bottomless pit."
And then he thought of the promise he so carefully made to his daughter.
What could he do but kneel down and cry to God to have mercy upon him?

If they meet in heaven, do you think that daughter will be sorry that
she sacrificed her life for her father's sake? Can you not imagine that
tears often filled the eyes of that father when he spoke of his sainted
little one?

You would say that he would have been a very wicked man if he had not
loved the memory of his child. But is it not a thousand times more wicked
for you not to love Him who has loved you so much more than that little
one loved her father?

How can you help loving such a precious Savior? Will you not ask Him
to forgive you and help you to live for Him the rest of your life?

--_The Way of Faith_



"FORGOTTEN MY SOUL"

"Mother, you have forgotten my soul," so said a little girl, three years
old as her kind and careful mother was about to lay her in bed. She had
just risen from repeating the Lord's prayer. "But, Mother," she said,
"you have forgotten my soul."

"What do you mean, Anna?"

"Why,

  'Now I lay me down to sleep,
  I pray the Lord my soul to keep!
  If I should die before I wake,
  I pray the Lord my soul to take.'

"We have not said that."

The child meant nothing more, yet her words were startling. And, oh!
from how many rosy lips might they come with mournful significance!

[Illustration]

You, fond mother, so busy hour after hour preparing and adorning garments
for their pretty little form, have you forgotten the soul? Do you commend
it earnestly to the care of its God and Savior? Are you leading it to
commit itself, in faith and love to his keeping?--Selected.



PREVAILING PRAYER OF A CHILD

At the close of a prayer-meeting, the pastor observed a little girl about
twelve years of age remaining upon her knees, when most of the congregation
had retired. Thinking the child had fallen asleep, he touched her and
told her it was time to return home. To his surprise he found that she
was engaged in prayer, and he said: "All things whatsoever ye shall ask
in prayer, believing, ye shall receive." She looked up at the pastor
earnestly, and inquired: "Is that so? Does God say that?"

[Illustration]

He took up a Bible and read the passage aloud. She immediately began
praying: "Lord, send my father here; Lord, send my father to the chapel."
Thus she continued for about half an hour, attracting by her earnest cry
the attentions of persons who had lingered about the door. At last a man
rushed into the chapel, ran up the aisle and sank upon his knees by the
side of his child, exclaiming: "What do you want of me?" She threw her
arms about his neck, and began to pray: "Oh, Lord, convert my father!"
Soon the man's heart was melted and he began to pray for himself. The
child's father was three miles from the chapel when she began praying
for him. He was packing goods in a wagon and felt impressed with an
irresistible impulse to return home. Driving rapidly to his house, he
left the goods in his wagon and hastened to the chapel, where he found
his daughter crying mightily to God in his behalf; and he was led there
to the Savior.

--_Foster's Encyclopedia_



THE DYING NEWS BOY

In a dark alley in the great city of New York, a small, ragged boy might
be seen. He appeared to be about twelve years old, and had a careworn
expression on his countenance. The cold air seemed to have no pity as
it pierced through his ragged clothes, and made the flesh beneath blue
and almost frozen.

[Illustration: "I am dying now, because I feel so queer; and I can hardly
see you. I can kinder see the angels holding out their hands for me to
come to that beautiful place they call heaven."]

This poor boy had once a happy home. His parents died a year before, and
left him without money or friends. He was compelled to face the cold,
cruel world with but a few cents in his pocket. He tried to earn his
living by selling newspapers and other such things. This day everything
seemed to go against him, and in despair he threw himself down in the
dark alley, with his papers by his side. A few boys gathered around the
poor lad, and asked in a kind way (for a street Arab): "Say, Johnny, why
don't you go to the lodges?" (The lodge was a place where almost all the
boys stayed at night, costing but a few cents.) But the poor little lad
could only murmur that he could not stir, and called the boys about him,
saying: "I am dying now, because I feel so queer: and I can hardly see
you. Gather around me closer boys. I cannot talk so loud. I can kinder
see the angels holding out their hands for me to come to that beautiful
place called heaven. Goodbye, boys. I am to meet father and mother."
And, with these last words on his lips, the poor lad died.

Next morning the passers-by saw a sight that would soften the most
hardened heart. There, lying on the cold stone, with his head against
the hard wall, and his eyes staring upward, was the poor little frozen
newsboy. He was taken to the chapel near by, and was interred by kind
hands. And those who performed this act will never forget the poor
forsaken lad.

--_Golden Dawn_



NEW SHOES

"I wonder if there can be a pair of shoes in it!"

Little Tim sat on the ground close beside a very ugly dark-colored stone
jug. He eyed it sharply, but finding it quite impossible to see through
its sides, pulled out the cork and peered anxiously in. "Can't see
nothin', but it's so dark in there I couldn't see if there was anything.
I've a great mind to break the hateful old thing."

He sat for awhile thinking how badly he wanted a pair of shoes to wear
to the Sunday School picnic. His mother had promised to wash and mend
his clothes, so that he might go looking very neat indeed; but the old
shoes were far past all mending and how could he go barefoot?

Then he began counting the chances of his father being very angry when
he should find his jug broken. He did not like the idea of getting a
whipping for it, as was very likely, but how could he resist the temptation
of making sure about those shoes? The more he thought of them, the more
he couldn't. He sprang up and hunted around until he found a good size
brick-bat, which he flung with such vigorous hand and correct aim that
the next moment the old jug lay in pieces before his eyes.

How eagerly he bent over them in the hope of finding not only what he
was so longing for but, perhaps, other treasure! But his poor little
heart sank as he turned over the fragments with trembling fingers. Nothing
could be found among the broken bits, wet on the inside with a bad-smelling
liquid.

Tim sat down again and sobbed as he had never sobbed before; so hard
that he did not hear a step beside him until a voice said:

"Well, what's all this?"

He sprang up in great alarm. It was his father, who always slept late
in the morning, and was very seldom awake so early as this.

[Illustration]

"Who broke my jug?" he asked. "I did," said Tim, catching his breath
half in terror and half between his sobs.

"Why did you?" Tim looked up. The voice did not sound quite so terrible
as he had expected. The truth was his father had been touched at sight
of the forlorn figure, so very small and so sorrowful, which had bent
over the broken jug.

"Why," he said, "I was looking for a pair of new shoes. I want a pair
of shoes awful bad to wear at the picnic. All the other chaps wear shoes."

"How came you to think you'd find shoes in a jug?"

"Why Mama said so. I asked her for some new shoes and she said they had
gone into the black jug, and that lots of other things had gone into it,
too--coats and hats, and bread and meat and things--and I thought if I
broke it I'd find them all, and there ain't a thing in it--and Mama never
said what wasn't so before--and I thought 'twould be so--sure."

And Tim, hardly able to sob out the words, feeling how keenly his trust
in mother's word had added to his great disappointment, sat down again,
and cried harder than ever.

His father seated himself on a box in the disorderly yard and remained
quiet for so long a time that Tim at last looked timidly up.

"I am real sorry I broke your jug, Father. I'll never do it again."

"No, I guess you won't," he said, laying a hand on the rough little head
as he went away leaving Tim overcome with astonishment that his father
had not been angry with him.

Two days after, on the very evening before the picnic, he handed Tim a
parcel, telling him to open it.

"New shoes! new shoes!" he shouted. "Oh, Father, did you get a new jug
and were they in it?"

"No, my boy, there isn't going to be a new jug. Your mother was right
all the time--the things all went into the jug; but you see getting them
out is no easy matter so I am going to keep them out after this."

--_New York Observer_



LITTLE JENNIE'S SICKNESS AND DEATH

Little Jennie was eight years old, March 30, 1886. The April following
she was taken very sick, and from that time until June 4, she seemed a
little suffering angel. Then Jesus, who had so blessedly sustained her
during all her sufferings took her to Himself. She would say, when able
to talk: "Mama, I do not care what I suffer, God knows best." When she
was very low, we would often see her dear lips moving, and listening,
hear her praying. She would finish her prayer and after saying "Amen"
having noticed that we were listening to her, would look up into our
faces to see if we wanted anything.

This patience and devotion characterized her whole life. Often, when she
was at play with her sister, who was the older by five years, when some
little trouble would arise, she would take her sister by the hand and
say: "Kitty, let's tell Jesus." Then bowing her little head, she would
pour out her whole heart in prayer to God, with the fervency that is
shown by a true Christian.

About three weeks after she was taken ill her little body was paralyzed
and drawn all out of shape it seemed. Then in a few days her little limbs
were so we could almost straighten them. What suffering she endured all
that time, no one knows but those who were with her.

May 25th, which was Tuesday, while suffering terribly, she said: "Mama,
play and sing." I took my guitar, and without stopping to think what to
sing, began that beautiful song in the Gospel Hymns: "Nearer my home,
today, than I have been before." I could praise God just then, for I was
filled with His Spirit. She lay there looking at me with her little blue
eyes and trying in her weak voice to help me. At last she seemed soothed
by the music. But we knew that Jesus in his infinite love, had quieted
her for a time, because we were willing to submit to His will. We had
said all the time: "Lord, not my will, but thine."

She rested quite well until about three o'clock in the afternoon; then
suddenly she spoke and her voice sounded quite strong. She said: "Oh,
Mama see those people, how funny they look! They look like poles." She
was lying so that she could look out of the window and as she spoke her
eyes seemed to rest on some object there. Then she spoke louder; "OH,
MAMMA, COME AND SEE THE LITTLE CHILDREN! I never saw so many in my life."

I sat down on the front of the bed and said: "Jennie, is there any there
that you know?"

She looked them over so earnestly, then said: "No, not one." I asked her
how they looked. She said: "Mama, every one has a gold crown on its head,
and they are all dressed in white." I thought that Jesus was coming for
her then. After telling me that there were none that she knew she sank
back on the pillows exhausted. But in a few moments she raised up again
and said: "Oh, Mama, hear that music! Did you ever hear such grand music?
Now, do not shut the windows tonight, will you?" I told her that I would
not.

The next morning she called Kittie into the room and said: "Kittie, I
want to tell you what I saw last night." She then proceeded to tell her
the same as she had told me the evening before. Then she said: "Now,
Kittie, you will forgive me for ever being cross to you won't you?"

Kittie answered, "Little darling, you have never been cross to me. Will
you forgive me, sister, for being cross to you?"

"Darling sister," she said, "that is all right."

Thursday night she was paralyzed in her left side so that she had no use
of it. Friday all day she lay unconscious, and that night the same.
Saturday, about ten o'clock, she commenced to whisper. We could hear her
say: "Papa, Mama." We tried to understand her, but at first could not.
She kept whispering plainer, and finally we heard her say: "Take--me--
upstairs. I--want--to--lie--on--my--own--bed--once--more." But of course
we could not move her. Suddenly she said aloud: "I am going to die! kiss
me quick, Mama."
