character suffered from his choice. But we may so far anticipate the
future narrative as to point out that it affords a plain instance of
the great truth that the sure way to lose the world as well as our own
souls, is to make it our first object. He would have been safe if he
had stopped up among the hills. The shadowy Eastern kings who swooped
down on the plain would never have ventured up there. But when we
choose the world for our portion, we lay ourselves open to the full
weight of all the blows which change and fortune can inflict, and come
voluntarily down from an impregnable fastness to the undefended open.

Nor is this all; but at the last, when the fiery rain bursts on the
doomed city, Lot has to leave all the wealth for which he has
sacrificed conscience and peace, and escapes with bare life; he suffers
loss even if he himself is 'saved as dragged through the fire.' The
world passeth away and the lust thereof, but he that doeth the will of
God abideth for ever. The riches which wax not old, and need not to be
left when we leave all things besides, are surely the treasures which
the calmest reason dictates should be our chief aim. God is the true
portion of the soul; if we have Him, we have all. So, let us seek Him
first, and, with Him, all else is ours.




ABRAM THE HEBREW


    'And there came one that had escaped, and told Abram the
    Hebrew.'
    GENESIS xiv. 13.

This is a singular designation of Abram as 'The Hebrew.' Probably we
have in its use here a trace of the customary epithet which he bore
among the inhabitants of Canaan, and perhaps the presence of the name
in this narrative may indicate the influence of some older account,
traditional or written, which owed its authorship to some of them. At
all events, this is the first appearance of the name in Scripture. As
we all know, it has become that of the nation, but a Jew did not call
himself a 'Hebrew' except in intercourse with foreigners. As in many
other cases, the national name used by other nations was not that by
which the people called themselves. Here, obviously, it is not a
national name, for the very good reason that there was no nation then.
It is a personal epithet, or, in plain English, a nickname, and it
means, probably, as the ancient Greek translation of Genesis gives it,
neither more nor less than 'The man from the other side,' the man that
had come across the water. Just as a mediaeval prince bore the
_sobriquet_ Outremere-the 'man from beyond the sea'--so Abram, to the
aboriginal, or, at least, long-settled, inhabitants of the country, was
known simply as the foreigner, the 'man from the other side' (of the
Jordan, or more probably of the great river Euphrates), the man from
across the water.

Now that name may suggest, with a permissible, and, I hope, not
misleading play of fancy, just two things, which I seek now to press
upon our hearts and consciences. The one is as to how men become
Christians, and the other is as to how they look to other people when
they are.

1. Men become Christians by a great emigration.

'Get thee out from thy father's house, and from thy country, and from
thy kindred,' was the command to Abram. And he became the heir to God's
promises and the father of the faithful, because he did not hesitate a
moment to make the plunge and to leave behind him all his past, his
associations, his loves, much of his possessions, and, in a very
profound sense, his old self, and put a great impassable gulf between
him and them all.

Now I am not going to say anything so narrow or foolish as that the
Christian life must always begin with a conscious and sudden change;
but this I am quite sure of, that in the vast majority of cases of
thoroughly and out-and-out religious men, there must be a conscious
change, whether it has been diffused through months or years, or
concentrated in one burning moment. There has been a beginning; whether
it has been like the dawn, or whether it has been like the kindling of
a candle, the beginning of the flashing of the divine light into the
heart; and the men that are most really under the influence of
religious truth can, as a rule, looking back upon their past
experience, see that it divides itself into two halves, separated from
each other by a profound gulf--the time on the other side, and that on
this side, of the great river. We must take heed lest by insisting on
any one way of entrance into the kingdom we seem to narrow God's mercy,
or sadden true hearts, or make the method of approach a test of the
fact of entrance. God's city has more than twelve gates; they open to
all the thirty-two points of the compass, yet there is, in the
religious experience of the truest saints, always something analogous
to this change. And what I desire to press upon you is, that unless you
are only religious people after the popular superficial fashion of the
day, there will be something like it in your lives.

There will be a change in a man's deepest self, so that he will be a
'new creature,' with new tastes, new motives stirring to action, new
desires pressing for satisfaction, new loves sweetly filling his heart,
new insight into the meanings and true good of life and time guiding
his conduct, new aversions withdrawing him from old delights which have
become hateful now, new hopes pluming their growing wings, and new
powers bearing him along a new road. There will be a change in his
relations to God and to God's will. God in Christ will have become his
centre, instead of self, which was so before. He lives in a new world,
being himself a new man.

Our Lord uses this very illustration when He says, 'He that heareth My
Word, and believeth Him that sent Me, hath eternal life, and cometh not
into judgment, but hath passed out of death into life.' That is a great
migration, is it not, from the condition of a corpse to that of a
living man? Paul, too, gives the same idea with a somewhat different
turn of the illustration, when he gives 'thanks to the Father who
delivered us out of the power of darkness, and translated us into the
kingdom of,'--not, as we might expect to complete the antithesis, 'the
light,' but--the 'kingdom of the Son of His love,' which is the same
thing as the light. The illustration is probably drawn from the
practice of the ancient conquering monarchs, who, when they subjugated
a country, were wont to lead away captive long files of its inhabitants
as compulsory colonists, and set them down in another land. Thus the
conquering Christ comes, and those whom He conquers by His love, He
shifts by a great emigration out of the dominion of that darkness which
is at once tyranny and anarchy, and leads them into the happy kingdom
of the light.

Thus, then, all Christian men become such, because they turn their
backs upon their old selves, and crucify their affections and lusts;
and paste down the leaf, as it were, on which their blotted past is
writ, and turn over a new and a fairer one. And my question to you,
dear brethren, is, Are you men from the other side, who were not born
where you live now, and who have passed out of the native Chaldea into
the foreign--and yet to the new self home--land of union with God?

2. This designation may be taken as teaching that a Christian should be
known as a foreigner, a man from across the water.

Everybody in Canaan that knew Abram at all knew him as not one of
themselves. The Hebrew was the name he went by, because his unlikeness
to the others was the most conspicuous thing about him, even to the
shallowest eye. Abram found himself, when he had migrated into Canaan,
in no barbarous country, but plunged at once into the midst of an
organised and compact civilisation, that walled its cities, and had the
comforts and conveniences and regularities of a settled order; and in
the midst of it all, what did he do? He elected to live in a tent. 'He
dwelt in tabernacles, as the Epistle to the Hebrews comments upon his
history, 'because he looked for a city.' The more his expectations were
fixed upon a permanent abode, the more transitory did he make his abode
here. If there had been no other city to fill his eyes, he would have
gone and lived in some of those that were in the land. If there had
been no other order to which he felt himself to belong, he would have
had no objection to cast in his lot with the order and the people with
whom he lived on friendly terms. But although he bought and sold with
them, and fought for them and by their sides, and acquired from them
land in which to bury his dead, he was not one of them, but said, 'No!
I am not going into your city. I stay in my tent under this terebinth
tree; for I am here as a stranger and a sojourner.' No doubt there were
differences of language, dress, and a hundred other little things which
helped the impression made on the men of the land by this strange
visitor who lived in amity but in separation, and they are all
crystallised in the name which the popular voice gave him, 'The man
from the other side.'

That is the impression which Christian people ought to make in the
world. They should be recognised, by even unobservant eyes who know
nothing of the inner secret of their lives, as plainly belonging to
another order. If we seek to keep fresh in our own minds the
consciousness that we do so, it will make itself manifest in all our
bearing and actions. So that exhortation to cultivate the continual
sense that our true city--the mother city of our hearts and hopes--is
in heaven is ever to be reiterated, and as constantly obeyed, as the
necessary condition of a life worthy of our true affinities and of our
glorious hopes.

Nor less needful is the other exhortation--live by the laws of your own
land, not by those of the foreign country where you are for a time. If
you do that thoroughly, you will not need to say, 'I am from another
country.' Your conduct will say it for you. An English ship is a bit of
England, in whatever latitude it may be, and however far beyond the
three-mile limit of the King's authority upon the seas it may float.
And so, wherever there is a Christian man, there is a bit of God's
kingdom, and over that little speck in the midst of the ocean of the
world the flag with the Cross on it should fly, and the laws of the
Christ should be the only laws that have currency. If it could be said
of us as Haman said to his king about the Jews, that we were a people
with laws 'diverse from those of all people,' we should be doing more
than, alas! most of us do, to honour Him whom we profess to serve.
Follow Christ, and people will be quick enough to say of you 'The man
from the other side,' 'He does not belong to our city.' There is no
need for ostentation, nor for saying, 'Come and see my zeal for the
Lord,' nor for blowing trumpets before us at street corners or
elsewhere. The less of all that the better. The more we try to do the
common things done by the folk round us, but from another motive, the
more powerful will be our witness for our Master.

For instance, when John Knox was in the French galleys, he was fastened
to the same oar with some criminal, perhaps a murderer. The two men sat
on the same bench, did the same work, tugged at the same heavy sweep,
were fed with the same food, suffered the same sorrows. Do you think
there was any doubt as to the infinite gulf between them? We may be
working side by side, at the very same tasks, and under similar
circumstances, with men that have no share in our faith, and no
sympathy with our hopes and aspirations, and yet, though doing the same
thing, it will _not_ be the same thing. And if we keep Christ before
us, and follow His steps who has left us an example, depend upon it
people will very soon find out that we are men 'from across the water.'

Notice, further, how this dissimilarity and obvious aloofness from the
order of things in which we dwell is still perfectly compatible with
all sorts of helpful associations. The context shows us that. There had
come a flood of invasion, under kings with strange and barbarous names,
from the far East. They had swept down upon the fertile valley of
Siddim, and there had inflicted devastation. Amongst the captives had
been Lot, Abram's relative, and all his goods had been taken. One
fugitive, as it appears, had escaped, and the first thing he did was to
go straight to 'the man from the other side,' and tell him about it, as
if sure of sympathy and help. No doubt the relationship between Abram
and Lot was the main reason why the panting survivor made his way to
the hills where Abram's tent was pitched, but there was also confidence
in his willingness to help the Sodomites who had lost their goods. So
it was not to the sons of Heth in Mamre that the fugitive turned in his
extremity, but he 'told Abram the Hebrew.'

I need not narrate over again the familiar story of how, for once in
his peaceful life, the 'friend of God' girds on his sword and develops
military instincts in his prompt and well-planned pursuit, which show
that if he did not try to conquer some part of the land which he knew
to be his by the will of God, it was not for want of ability, but
because he 'believed God,' and could wait. We all know how he armed his
slaves, and made a swift march to the northern extremity of the land,
and then, by a nocturnal surprise, came down upon the marauders and
scattered them like chaff, before his onset, and recovered Lot and all
the spoil.

Let us learn that, if Christian men will live well apart from the
world, they will be able to sympathise with and help the world; and
that our religion should fit us for the prompt and heroic undertaking,
as it certainly does for the successful accomplishment, of all deeds of
brotherly kindness and sympathy, bringing help and solace to the weak
and the wearied, liberty to the captives, and hope to the despairing.

I do not believe that Christian men have any business to draw swords
now. Abram is in that respect the Old Testament type of a God-fearing
hero, with the actual sword in his hands. The New Testament type of a
Christian warrior without a sword is not one jot less, but more,
heroic. The form of sympathy, help, and 'public spirit' which the 'man
from the other side' displayed is worse than an anachronism now in the
light of Christ's law. It is a contradiction. But the spirit which
breathed through Abram's conduct should be ours. We are bound to 'seek
the peace of the city' where we dwell as strangers and pilgrims,
avoiding no duty of sympathy and help, but by prompt, heroic,
self-forgetting service to all the needy, sorrowful, and oppressed,
building up such characters for ourselves that fugitives and desperate
men shall instinctively turn to men from the other side for that help
which, they know full well, the men of the country are too selfish or
cowardly to give.

May I venture to suggest yet another and very different application of
this name? To the aboriginal inhabitants of heaven, the angels that
kept their first estate, redeemed men are possessors of a unique
experience; and are the 'men from the other side.' They who entered on
their pilgrimage through the Red Sea of conversion, pass out of it
through the Jordan of death. They who become Christ's, by the great
change of yielding their hearts to Him, and who live here as pilgrims
and sojourners, pass dryshod through the stream into His presence. And
there they who have always dwelt in the sunny highlands of the true
Canaan, gather round them, and call them, not unenvying, perhaps, their
experience, 'The men that have crossed.' The 'Hebrews of the Hebrews'
in the heavens are those who have known what it is to be pilgrims and
sojourners, and to whom the promise has been fulfilled in the last hour
of their journey, 'When thou passest through the river, I will be with
thee.' _They_ teach the angels a new song who sing, 'Thou hast led us
through fire and through water, and brought us into a wealthy place.'




GOD'S COVENANT WITH ABRAM


    'And He brought him forth abroad, and said, Look now
    toward heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to
    number them: and He said unto him, So shall thy seed be.
    And he believed in the Lord; and He counted it to him
    for righteousness. And He said unto him, I am the Lord
    that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give
    thee this land to inherit it. And he said, Lord God,
    whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it? And He
    said unto him, Take me an heifer of three years old, and
    a she goat of three years old, and a ram of three years
    old, and a turtledove, and a young pigeon. And he took
    unto him all these, and divided them in the midst, and
    laid each piece one against another: but the birds
    divided he not. And when the fowls came down upon the
    carcases, Abram drove them away. And when the sun was
    going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and, lo, an
    horror of great darkness fell upon him. And he said unto
    Abram, Know of a surety that thy seed shall be a stranger
    in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve them; and
    they shall afflict them four hundred years; And also
    that nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge: and
    afterward shall they come out with great substance. And
    thou shalt go to thy fathers in peace; thou shalt be
    buried in a good old age. But in the fourth generation
    they shall come hither again: for the iniquity of the
    Amorites is not yet full. And it came to pass, that,
    when the sun went down, and it was dark, behold a smoking
    furnace, and a burning lamp that passed between those
    pieces. In the same day the Lord made a covenant with
    Abram, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land,
    from the river of Egypt unto the great river, the river
    Euphrates.'--GENESIS xv. 5-18.

1. Abram had exposed himself to dangerous reprisals by his victory over
the confederate Eastern raiders. In the reaction following the
excitement of battle, dread and despondency seem to have shadowed his
soul. Therefore the assurance with which this chapter opens came to
him. It was new, and came in a new form. He is cast into a state of
spiritual ecstasy, and a mighty 'word' sounds, audible to his inward
ear. The form which it takes--'I am thy shield'--suggests the thought
that God shapes His revelation according to the moment's need. The
unwarlike Abram might well dread the return of the marauders in force,
to avenge their defeat. Therefore God speaks to his fears and present
want. Just as to Jacob the angels appeared as a heavenly camp guarding
his undefended tents and helpless women; so, here and always, God is to
us what we most need at the moment, whether it be comfort, or wisdom,
or guidance, or strength. The manna tasted to each man, as the rabbis
say, what he most desired. God's gifts take the shape of man's
necessity.

Abram had just exercised singular generosity in absolutely refusing to
enrich himself from the spoil. God reveals Himself as 'his exceeding
great reward.' He gives Himself as recompense for all sacrifices.
Whatever is given up at His bidding, 'the Lord is able to give thee
much more than this.' Not outward things, nor even an outward heaven,
is the guerdon of the soul; but a larger possession of Him who alone
fills the heart, and fills the heart alone. Other riches may be
counted, but this is 'exceeding great,' passing comprehension, and ever
unexhausted, and having something over after all experience. Both these
aspects of God's preciousness are true for earth; but we need a shield
only while exposed to attack. In the land of peace, He is only our
reward.

2. Mark the triumphant faith which wings to meet the divine promise.
The first effect of that great assurance is to deepen Abram's
consciousness of the strange contradiction to it apparently given by
his childlessness. It is not distrust that answers the promise with a
question, but it is eagerness to accept the assurance and ingenuous
utterance of difficulties in the hope of their removal. God is too wise
a father not to know the difference between the tones of confidence and
unbelief, however alike they may sound; and He is too patient to be
angry if we cannot take in all His promise at once. He breaks it into
bits not too large for our lips, as He does here. The frequent
reiterations of the same promises in Abram's life are not vain. They
are a specimen of the unwearied repetition of our lessons, 'Here a
little, there a little,' which our teacher gives His slow scholars. So,
once more, Abram gets the promise of posterity in still more glorious
form. Before, it was likened to the dust of the earth; now it is as the
innumerable stars shining in the clear Eastern heaven. As he gazes up
into the solemn depths, the immensity and peace of the steadfast sky
seems to help him to rise above the narrow limits and changefulness of
earth, and a great trust floods his soul. Abram had lived by faith ever
since he left Haran; but the historian, usually so silent about the
thoughts of his characters, breaks through his usual manner of
narrative to insert the all-important words which mark an epoch in
revelation, and are, in some aspects, the most significant in the Old
Testament. Abram 'believed in the Lord; and He counted it to him for
righteousness.'

Observe the teaching as to the nature and object of faith in that first
clause. The word rendered 'believed' literally means to steady oneself
by leaning on something. So it gives in a vivid picture more
instructive than many a long treatise what faith is, and what it does
for us. As a man leans his trembling hand on a staff, so we lay our
weak and changeful selves on God's strength; and as the most mutable
thing is steadied by being fastened to a fixed point, so we, though in
ourselves light as thistledown, may be steadfast as rock, if we are
bound to the rock of ages by the living band of faith. The metaphor
makes it plain that faith cannot be merely an intellectual act of
assent, but must include a moral act, that of confidence. Belief as
credence is mainly an affair of the head, but belief as trust is an act
of the will and the affections.

The object of faith is set in sunlight clearness by these words,--the
first in which Scripture speaks of faith. Abram leaned on 'the Lord.'
It was not the promise, but the promiser, that was truly the object of
Abram's trust. He believed the former, because he trusted Him who made
it. Many confusions in Christian teaching would have been avoided if it
had been always seen that faith grasps a person, not a doctrine, and
that even when the person is revealed by doctrine, it is him, and not
only it, which faith lays hold of. Whether God speaks promises,
teachings of truth, or commandments, faith accepts them, because it
trusts Him. Christ is revealed to us for our faith by the doctrinal
statements of the New Testament. But we must grasp Himself, as so
revealed, if we are to have faith which saves the soul. This same
thought of the true object of faith as personal helps us to understand
the substantial identity of faith in all ages and stages of revelation,
however different the substance of the creeds. Abram knew very little
of God, as compared with our knowledge. But it was the same God whom
Abram trusted, and whom we trust as made known in His Son. Hence we can
stretch out our hands across the ages, and clasp his as partaker of
'like precious faith.' We walk in the light of the same sun,--he in its
morning beams, we in its noonday glory. There has never been but one
road to God, and that is the road which Abram trod, when 'he believed
in the Lord.'

3. Mark the full-orbed gospel truth as to the righteousness of faith
which is embedded in this record of early revelation, 'He counted it to
him for righteousness.' A geologist would be astonished if he came on
remains in some of the primary strata which indicated the existence, in
these remote epochs, of species supposed to be of much more recent
date. So here we are startled at finding the peculiarly New Testament
teaching away back in this dim distance. No wonder that Paul fastened
on this verse, which so remarkably breaks the flow of the narrative, as
proof that his great principle of justification by faith was really the
one only law by which, in all ages, men had found acceptance with God.
Long before law or circumcision, faith had been counted for
righteousness. The whole Mosaic system was a parenthesis; and even in
it, whoever had been accepted had been so because of his trust, not
because of his works. The whole of the subsequent divine dealings with
Israel rested on this act of faith, and on the relation to God into
which, through it, Abram entered. He was not a perfectly righteous man,
as some passages of his life show; but he rose here to the height of
loving and yearning trust in God, and God took that trust in lieu of
perfect conformity to His will. He treated and regarded him as
righteous, as is proved by the covenant which follows. The gospel takes
up this principle, gives us a fuller revelation, presents the perfect
righteousness of Christ as capable of becoming ours by faith, and so
unveils the ground on which Abram and the latest generations are
equally 'accepted in the beloved.' This reckoning of righteousness to
the unrighteous, on condition of their faith, is not because of any
merit in faith. It does not come about in reward of, but by means of,
their faith, which is nothing in itself, but is the channel only of the
blessing. Nor is it a mere arbitrary act of God's, or an unreal
imputing of what is not. But faith unites with Christ; and 'he that is
joined to the Lord is one spirit,' so as that 'in Him we have
redemption.' His righteousness becomes ours. Faith grafts us into the
living Vine, and we are no longer regarded in our poor sinful
individual personality, but as members of Christ. Faith builds us into
the rock; but He is a living Stone, and we are living stones, and the
life of the foundation rises up through all the courses of the great
temple. Faith unites sinful men to God in Christ; therefore it makes
them partakers of the 'blessedness of the man, ... to whom the Lord
will not impute sin,' and of the blessedness of the man to whom the
Lord reckons his faith for righteousness. That same faith which thus
clothes us with the white robe of Christ's righteousness, in lieu of
our own tattered raiment, also is the condition of our becoming
righteous by the actual working out in our character of all things
lovely and of good report. It opens the heart to the entrance of that
divine Christ, who is first made _for_ us, and then, by daily
appropriation of the law of the spirit of life, is made _in_ us,
'righteousness and sanctification, and redemption.' May all who read
these lines 'be found in Him,' having 'that which is through the faith
of Christ, the righteousness which is of God by faith!'

4. Consider the covenant which is the consequence of Abram's faith, and
the proof of his acceptance.

It is important to observe that the whole remainder of this chapter is
regarded by the writer as the result of Abram's believing God. The way
in which verse 7 and the rest are bolted on, as it were, to verse 6,
clearly shows this. The nearer lesson from this fact is, that all the
Old Testament revelation from this point onward rests on the foundation
of faith. The further lesson, for all times, is that faith is ever
rewarded by more intimate and loving manifestations of God's
friendship, and by fuller disclosure of His purposes. The covenant is
not only God's binding Himself anew by solemn acts to fulfil His
promises already made, but it is His entering into far sweeter and
nearer alliance with Abram than even He had hitherto had. That name,
'the friend of God,' by which he is still known over all the Mohammedan
world, contains the very essence of the covenant. In old days men were
wont to conclude a bond of closest amity by cutting their flesh and
interchanging the flowing blood. Henceforth they had, as it were, one
life. We have not here the shedding of Abram's blood, as in the
covenant of circumcision. Still, the slain animals represent the
parties to the covenant, and the notion of a resulting unity of the
closest order as between God and Abram is the very heart of the whole
incident.

The particulars as to the rite by which the covenant was established
are profoundly illuminative. The significant division of the animals
into two shows that they were regarded as representing the contracting
parties, and the passing between them symbolised the taking up of the
obligations of the covenant. This strange rite, which was widely
spread, derives importance from the use of it probably made in Hebrews
ix 16, 17. The new covenant, bringing still closer friendship and
higher blessings, is sealed by the blood of Christ. He represents both
God and man. In His death, may we not say that the manhood and the
Godhead are parted, and we, standing as it were between them,
encompassed by that awful sacrifice, and enclosed in its mysterious
depths, enter into covenant with God, and become His friends?

We need not to dwell upon the detailed promises, of which the covenant
was the seal. They are simply the fuller expansion of those already
made, but now confirmed by more solemn guarantees. The new relation of
familiar friendship, established by the covenant itself, is the main
thing. It was fitting that God's friend should be in the secret of His
purposes. 'The servant knoweth not what his lord doeth,' but the friend
does. And so we have here the assurance that faith will pierce to the
discernment of much of the mind of God, which is hid from sense and the
wisdom of this world. If we would know, we must believe. We may be 'men
of God's counsel,' and see deeply into the realities of the present,
and far ahead into what will then become the certainties of the future,
if only we live by faith in the secret place of the Most High, and,
like John, lean so close on the Master's bosom that we can hear His
lowest whisper.

Notice, too, the lessons of the smoking furnace and the blazing torch.
They are like the pillar of fire and cloud. Darkness and light; a heart
of fire and a wrapping of darkness,--these are not symbols of Israel
and its checkered fate, as Dean Stanley thinks, but of the divine
presence: they proclaim the double aspect of all divine manifestations,
the double element in the divine nature. He can never be completely
known; He is never completely hid. Ever does the lamp flame; ever
around it the smoke wreathes. In all His self-revelation is 'the hiding
of His power'; after all revelation He dwelleth 'in the thick
darkness.' Only the smoke is itself fire, but not illumined to our
vision. The darkness is light inaccessible. Much that was 'smoke' to
Abram has caught fire, and is 'light' to us. But these two elements
will ever remain; and throughout eternity God will be unknown, and yet
well known, pouring Himself in ever-growing radiance on our eyes, and
yet 'the King invisible.'

Nor is this all the teaching of the symbol. It speaks of that twofold
aspect of the divine nature, by which to hearts that love He is
gladsome light, and to unloving ones He is threatening darkness. As to
the Israelites the pillar was light, and to the Egyptians darkness and
terror; so the same God is joy to some, and dread to others. 'What
maketh heaven, that maketh hell.' Light itself can become the source of
pain the most exquisite, if the eye is diseased. God Himself cannot but
be a torment to men who love darkness rather than light. Love and
wrath, life and death, a God who pities and who cannot but judge, are
solemnly proclaimed by that ancient symbol, and are plainly declared to
us in the perfect revelation in Christ Jesus.

Observe, too, the manner of the ratification of the covenant. The
symbol of the Divine presence passed between the pieces. No mention is
made of Abram's doing so. Why this one-sided covenant? Because God's
gracious dealings with men are one-sided. He seeks no oaths from us; He
does not exchange blessings for our gifts. His covenant is the free
result of His unmotived love, and is ratified by a solemn sacrifice,
which we do not offer. We have nothing to do but to take what He gives.
All ideas of barter and bargain are far from Him. Our part is but to
embrace His covenant, which is complete and ratified whether we embrace
it or not. What a wonderful thought that is of a covenant-making and a
covenant-keeping God! We do not hear so much of it as our fathers did.
The more is the pity. It means that God has, as it were, buoyed out
across the boundless ocean of His possible modes of action a plain
course, which He binds Himself to keep; that He has frankly let us into
the very secret of His doings; that He has stooped to use human forms
of assurance to make it easier to trust Him; that He has confirmed His
promise by a mighty sacrifice. Therefore we may enter into closest
friendship with Him, and take for our own the exultant swan-song of
Abram's royal son: 'Although my house be not so with God [although my
life be stained, and my righteousness unfit to be offered to His pure
eyes]; yet He hath made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered in all
things, and sure: for this is all my salvation, and all my desire.'




THE WORD THAT SCATTERS FEAR


    'Fear not, Abram: I am thy shield, and thy exceeding
    great reward.'
    GENESIS XV. 1.


I


Abram was now apparently about eighty-five years old. He had been
fourteen years in Palestine, and had, for the only time in his life,
quite recently been driven to have recourse to arms against a
formidable league of northern kings, whom, after a swift forced march
from the extreme south to the extreme north of the land, he had
defeated. He might well fear attack from their overwhelmingly superior
forces. So this vision, like all God's words, fits closely to moments
needs, but is also for all time and all men.

1. The call to conquer fear.

Fear not.--(_a_) There is abundant reason for fear in facts of life.
There are so many certain evils, and so many possible evils, that any
man who is not a feather-brained fool must sometimes quail.

(_b_) Reasons for fear in our relations to divine law.

(_c_) The only rational way of conquering fears is by showing them to
be unfounded. It is waste of breath to say, Don't be afraid, and to do
nothing to remove the occasions of fear. It is childish to try to get
rid of fears by shutting the eyes tight and refusing to look formidable
facts in the face.

(_d_) The revelation of God is the true antidote to fear.

(_e_) 'Fear not' is the characteristic word of divine revelation. It is
of frequent occurrence from Abraham till John in Patmos.

2. The ground of the call in the Revelation of God as Shield.

 (_a_) As to outward evils, His protection assures us, not of
absolute exemption, but of His entire control of them, so that men and
circumstances are His instruments, and His will only is powerful.
Chedorlaomer and all the allied kings are nothing; 'a noise,' as the
prophet said of a later conqueror. All the bitterness and terror is
taken out of evil. If any fiery dart pass through the shield, all its
poison is wiped off in passage. So there remains no reason for fear,
since all things work together for good. Behind that shield we are safe
as diver in his bell, though seas rave and sea-monsters swim around.

(_b_) As to inward evils, our Shield assures us of absolute exemption.
'Shield of faith.' Faith is shield because it takes hold of God's
strength.

3. The ground of the call in the Revelation of God as Reward. Abraham
had refused all share in booty, a large sacrifice, and here he is
promised, A Reward in God, _i.e._ He gives Himself in recompense for
all sacrifices in path of duty. 'The Lord is able to give thee much
more than these.' This promise opens out to general truth that God
Himself is the true reward of a devout life. There are many recompenses
for all sacrifices for God, some of them outward and material, some of
them inward and spiritual, but the reward which surpasses all others is
that by such sacrifices we attain to greater capacity for God, and
therefore possess more of Him. This is the only Reward worth thinking
of--God only satisfies the soul. With Him we are rich; without Him
poor; 'exceeding great'--'riches in glory,' transcending all measure.
The revelations of God as Shield and Reward are both given in reference
to the present life, but the former applies only to earth, where
'without are fighters, within are fears'; while 'the latter is mainly
true for heaven, where those who have fought, having God for their
Shield, will possess Him for their Reward, in a measure and manner
which will make all earthly experiences seem poor. Here the 'heirs of
God' get subsistence money, which is a small instalment of their
inheritance; there they enter into possession of it all.


II


Many years have passed since Abram was called to go forth from his
father's house, assured that God would make of him a great nation. They
had been years of growing power. He has been dwelling at Mamre, as a
prince among the people of the land, a power. There sweeps down on
Southern Palestine the earliest of those invasions from the vast plains
of the North which afterwards for generations were the standing dread
of Abram's descendants. Like the storm pillars in their own deserts,
are these wild marauders with the wild names that never appear again in
the history. Down on the rich valleys and peaceful pasture lands they
swoop for booty, not for conquest. Like some sea-bird, they snatch
their prey and away. They carry with them among the long train of
captives Abram's ungenerous brother-in-law, Lot. Then the friend of
God, the father of the faithful, musters his men, like an Arab sheikh
as he was, and swiftly follows the track of the marauders over the
hills of Samaria, and across the plain of Jezreel. The night falls, and
down he swoops upon them and scatters them. Coming back he had
interviews with the King of Sodom, when he refuses to take any of the
spoil, and with Melchizedek. Abram is back at Mamre. How natural that
fear and depression should seize him: the reaction from high
excitement; the dread that from the swarming East vengeance would come
for his success in that night surprise; the thought that if it did, he
was a wandering stranger in a strange land and could not count on
allies. Then there would come, perhaps, the remembrance of how long God
had delayed the very beginnings of the fulfilment, 'Seeing I go
childless.'

To this mood of mind the divine vision is addressed. 'Fear not--I am
thy shield' whatever force comes against thee, 'and thine exceeding
great reward,'--perhaps in reference to his refusal to take anything
from the spoil. But God says this to us all. In these antique words the
very loftiest and purest principles of spiritual religion are set forth.

He that loves and trusts God possesses God.

He that possesses God has enough for earth.

He that possesses God has enough for heaven.

1. It is possible for a man to have God for his. 'I am thy
Reward,'--not merely Rewarder, but Reward.

How can one spiritual Being belong to another?--plainly, By mutual love.

The Gospel assures us of God's love, and makes it possible for ours to
be fixed on Him.

Faith gives us God for ours.

The highest view of the blessings of the Gospel is that God Himself
becomes our reward.

How sad the insanity of men appears, in the ordinary aims of their
life, its rewards and its objects of desire! How they chase after
variety!

How much loftier and truer a conception of the blessing of religion
this is than notions of mere escape and the like!

2. The possession of God is enough for earth.

God the all-sufficient object for our spirits, His love, the
communication of Himself, the sense of His presence, the depths of His
infinite character, of His wondrous ways, of His revealed Truth as an
object for thought: of His authoritative will as imperative for will
and conscience: aspiration towards Him.

God the Eternal Object.

To find Him in everything, and everything in Him, is to be at rest.

This is what He promises--

Not a life of outward success and ease--much nobler than if He did.

Take Abram's as a type.

In war He will be our Defence.

In absence of other joys He will be Enough.

Sphered and included in Him is all sweetness. He sustains all
relations, and does for us what these other joys and goods partially do.

The possession of His love should put away all fear, since having Him
we are not at the mercy of externals.

What, then, is Life as men ordinarily make it?--what a blunder!

3. To possess God is enough for heaven.

Such a relationship is the great proof of immortality.

Christ and Sadducees.

The true glory of heaven is in fuller possession of God: no doubt other
things, but these subsidiary.

The Reward is God.

The idea of recompense ample and full for all sorrow.

More than adequate wages for all work.

That final reward will show how wise the wanderer was, who left his
father's house and 'looked for a city.' God is not ashamed to be called
their God.

Christ comes to us--offers Himself.

Think of how rich with Him, and oh, think of how poor without Him!

Which will you have on earth?

Which will you have in another world?




