
And so, dear brethren, if we stay ourselves on, and wait patiently for,
Him, and are content to do what He wishes, and never to run without a
clear commission, nor to act without a full conviction of duty, then
the old story of my text will repeat itself in our daily life, as well
as in the noblest form in the last act of life, which is death. The
Lord will move before us and open a safe, dry path for us between the
heaped waters; and where the feet of our great High Priest, bearing the
Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, stood, amidst the slime and the mud,
we may plant our firm feet on the stones that He has left there. And so
the stream of life, like the river of death, will be parted for
Christ's followers, and they will pass over on dry ground, 'until all
the people are passed clean over Jordan.'




'THE WATERS SAW THEE; THEY WERE AFRAID'

'And Joshua said unto the people, Sanctify yourselves: for tomorrow the
Lord will do wonders among you. 6. And Joshua spake unto the priests,
saying, Take up the ark of the covenant, and pass over before the
people. And they took up the ark of the covenant, and went before the
people. 7. And the Lord said unto Joshua, This day will I begin to
magnify thee in the sight of all Israel, that they may know that, as I
was with Moses, so I will be with thee. 8 And thou shalt command the
priests that bear the ark of the covenant, saying, When ye are come to
the brink of the water of Jordan, ye shall stand still in Jordan. 8.
And Joshua said unto the children of Israel, Come hither, and hear the
words of the Lord your God. 10. And Joshua said, Hereby ye shall know
that the living God is among you, and that He will without fail drive
out from before you the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Hivites,
and the Perizzites, and the Girgashites, and the Amorites, and the
Jebusites. 11. Behold, the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the
earth passeth Over before you into Jordan. 12. Now therefore take you
twelve men out of the tribes of Israel, out of every tribe a man. 13.
And it shall come to pass, as soon as the soles of the feet of the
priests that bear the ark of the Lord, the Lord of all the earth, shall
rest in the waters of Jordan, that the waters of Jordan shall be out
off from the waters that come down from above; and they shall stand
upon an heap. 14. And it came to pass, when the people removed from
their tents, to pass over Jordan, and the priests bearing the ark of
the covenant before the people; 15. And as they that bare the ark were
come unto Jordan, and the feet of the priests that bare the ark were
dipped in the brim of the water, (for Jordan overfloweth all his banks
all the time of harvest,) 16. That the waters which came down from
above stood and rose up upon an heap very far from the city Adam, that
is beside Zaretan: and those that came down toward the sea of the
plain, even the salt sea failed, and were cut off: and the people
passed over right against Jericho. 17. And the priests that bare the
ark of the covenant of the Lord stood firm on dry ground in the midst
of Jordan, and all the Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all
the people were passed clean over Jordan.'--JOSHUA iii 5-17.


The arrangement of the narrative of the passage of Jordan, which
occupies chapters iii. and iv., is remarkable, and has led to
suggestions of interpolation and blending of two accounts, which are
quite unnecessary. It is divided into four sections,--the preparations
(Joshua in. 1-6), the passage (Joshua in. 7-17), the lifting of the
memorial stones from the river's bed and the fixing of one set of them
in it (Joshua iv. 1-14), the return of the waters, and the erection of
the second set of memorial stones at Gilgal (Joshua iv. 15-24).

Each section closes with a summary of the whole transaction, after the
common manner of Old Testament history, which gives to a hasty reader
the impression of confusion and repetition; but a little attention
shows a very symmetrical arrangement, negativing the possibility of
interpolation. The last three sections are all built on the same lines.
In each there is a triple division,--God's command to Joshua, Joshua's
communication of it to the people, and the actual fact, fulfilling
these. So each stage passes thrice before the view, and the
impressiveness of the history is heightened by our seeing it first in
the mirror of the divine Word, and then in the orders of the commander,
before we see it as a thing actually happening.

Verses 5 and 6 of the chapter belong to the section which deals with
the preparation. General instructions had been already issued that the
host was to follow the ark, leaving two thousand cubits between them
and it; but nothing had been said as to how Jordan was to be crossed.
No doubt many a question and doubt had been muttered by the
watch-fires, as the people looked at the muddy, turbid stream, swirling
in flood. The spies probably managed to swim it, but that was a feat
worthy to be named in the epitaph of heroes (1 Chron. xii. 15), and
impossible for the crowd of all ages and both sexes which followed
Joshua. There was the rushing stream, swollen as it always is in
harvest. How were they to get over? And if the people of Jericho, right
over against them, chose to fall upon them as they were struggling
across, what could hinder utter defeat? No doubt, all that was
canvassed, in all sorts of tones; but no inkling of the miracle seems
to have been given.

God often opens His hand by one finger at a time, and leaves us face to
face with some plain but difficult duty, without letting us see the
helps to its performance, till we need to use them. If we go right on
the road which He has traced out, it will never lead us into a blind
alley. The mountains will part before us as we come near what looked
their impassable wall; and some narrow gorge or other, wide enough to
run a track through, but not wide enough to be noticed before we are
close on it, will be sure to open. The attitude of expectation of God's
help, while its nature is unrevealed, is kept up in Joshua's last
instruction. The people are bidden to 'sanctify themselves, because
to-morrow the Lord will do wonders' among them. That sanctifying was
not external, but included the hallowing of spirit by docile waiting
for His intervention, and by obedience while the manner of it was
hidden. The secret of to-morrow is partly made known, and the faith of
the people is nourished by the mystery remaining, as well as by the
light given. The best security for to-morrow's wonders is to-day's
sanctifying.

The command to the priests discloses to them a little more, in bidding
them pass over before the people, but the additional disclosure would
only be an additional trial of faith; for the silence as to how so
impossible a command was to be made possible is absolute. The swollen
river had obliterated all fords; and how were priests, staggering under
the weight of the ark on their shoulders, to 'pass over'? The question
is not answered till the ark is on their shoulders. To-day often sees
to-morrow's duty without seeing how it is to be done. But the bearers
of the ark need never fear but that the God to whom it belongs will
take care of it and of them. The last sentence of verse 6 is the
anticipatory summary which closes each section.

In verses 7-17 we have the narrative of the actual crossing, in its
three divisions of God's command (vs. 7-8), Joshua's repetition of it
(vs. 9-13), and the historical fact (vs. 14-17). The final instructions
were only given on the morning of the day of crossing. The report of
God's commands given in verses 7 and 8 is condensed, as is evident from
the fuller statement of them in Joshua's address to the people, which
immediately follows. In it Joshua is fully aware of the manner of the
miracle and of the details of the crossing, but we have no record of
his having received them. The summary of that eventful morning's
instructions to him emphasises first the bearing of the miracle on his
reputation. The passage of the Red Sea had authenticated the mission of
Moses to the past generation, who, in consequence of it, 'believed God
and His servant Moses.' The new generation are to have a parallel
authentication of Joshua's commission. It is noteworthy that this is
not the purpose of the miracle which the leader announces to the people
in verse 10. It was a message from God to himself, a kind of gracious
whisper meant for his own encouragement. What a thought to fill a man's
heart with humble devotion, that God would work such a wonder in order
to demonstrate that He was with him! And what a glimpse of more to
follow lay in that promise, 'This day will I _begin_ to magnify thee I'

The command to the priests in verse 8 is also obviously condensed; for
Joshua's version of it, which follows, is much more detailed, and
contains particular instructions, which must have been derived from the
divine word to him on that morning.

We may pass on, then, to the second division of the narrative; namely,
Joshua's communication of God's commands to the people. Observe the
form which the purpose of the miracle assumes there. It is the
confirmation of the divine Presence, not with the leader, but with the
people and their consequent victory. Joshua grasped the inmost meaning
of God's Word to himself, and showed noble self-suppression, when he
thus turned the direction of the miracle. The true servant of God knows
that God is with him, not for his personal glorification, but for the
welfare of God's people, and cares little for the estimation in which
men hold him, if they will only believe that the conquering God is with
them. We too often make great leaders and teachers in the church opaque
barriers to hide God from us, instead of transparent windows through
which He shines upon His people. We are a great deal more ready to say,
'God is with him,' than to add, 'and therefore God is with us, in our
Joshuas, and without them.'

Observe the grand emphasis of that name, 'the living God,' tacitly
contrasted with the dead idols of the enemies, and sealing the
assurance of His swift and all-conquering might. Observe, too, the
triumphant contempt in the enumeration of the many tribes of the foe
with their barbarous names. Five of them had been enough, when named by
the spies' trembling lips, to terrify the congregation, but here the
list of the whole seven but strengthens confidence. Faith delights to
look steadily at its enemies, knowing that the one Helper is more than
they all. This catalogue breathes the same spirit as Paul's rapturous
list of the foes impotent to separate from the love of God. Mark, too,
the long-drawn-out designation of the ark, with its accumulation of
nouns, which grammatical purists have found difficult,--'the ark of the
covenant of the Lord of all the earth'; where it leads they need not
fear to follow. It was the pledge of His presence, it contained the Ten
Words on which His covenant was concluded. That covenant enlisted on
their side Him who was Lord of the swollen river as of all the fierce
clans beyond; and with His ark in front, their victory was sure. If
ever the contemplation of His power and covenant relation was in place,
it was on that morning, as Israel stood ranked for the march that was
to lead them through Jordan, and to plant their feet on the soil of
Canaan. Nor must we omit the peculiar appropriateness of this solemn
designation, on the occasion of the ark's first becoming the leader of
the march. Hitherto it had been carried in the centre; now it was moved
to the van, and took the place of the pillar, which blazed no more. But
the guidance was no less divine. The simple coffer which Bezaleel had
made was as august and reliable a symbol of God's presence as the
pillar; and the tables of the law, shut in it, were henceforth to be
the best directors of the nation.

Then follows the command to elect twelve representatives of the tribes,
for a purpose not yet explained; and then, at the last moment, the
manner of crossing is disclosed, to the silencing of wise doubters and
the confirmation of ignorant faith. The brief anticipatory announcement
of the miracle puts stress on the arrest of the waters at the instant
when the priests' feet touched them, and tells what is to befall the
arrested torrent above the point where the ark stood, saying nothing
about the lower stretch of the river, and just hinting by one word
'heap' the parallel between this miracle and that of the passing of the
Red Sea: 'The floods stood upright as an heap' (Exod. xv. 8).

Verses 14-17 narrate the actual crossing. One long sentence, like the
roll of an Atlantic wave, or a long-drawn shout of triumph, masses
together the stages of the march; the breaking up of the encampment;
the solemn advance of the ark, watched by the motionless crowd; its
approach to the foaming stream, running bank-full, as is its wont in
the early harvest months; the decisive moment when the naked feet of
the priests were dipped in the water. What a hush of almost painful
expectation would fall on the gazers! Then, with a rush of triumph, the
long sentence pours on, like a river escaping from some rocky gorge,
and tells the details of the transcendent fact. Looking up stream, the
water 'stood'; and, as the flow above went on, it was dammed up, and,
as would appear, swept back to a point not now known, but apparently
some miles up. Looking down the course, the water flowed naturally to
the Dead Sea; and, in effect, the whole bed southwards was quickly left
bare, giving room for the advance of the people with wide-extended
front, while the priests, with the ark on their shoulders, stood silent
in the midst of the bed, between the heaped waters and the hasting
host. Verse 17 gives the usual summary sentence, which partly
anticipates what is still to follow, but here comes in with special
force, as gathering up the whole wonderful scene, and recounting once
more, and not without a ring of astonished triumph, how the priests
stood firm on dry ground in that strange place, 'until all the nation
were passed clean over Jordan'

From verses 7 and 10 we learn the purpose of this miracle as being
twofold. It was intended to stamp the seal of God's approbation on
Joshua, and to hearten the people by the assurance of God's fighting
for them. The leader was thereby put on the level of Moses, the people,
on that of the generation before whom the Red Sea had been divided. The
parallel with that event is obvious and significant. The miracle which
led Israel into the wilderness is repeated as they pass from it. The
first stage of their deliverance and the second are begun with
analogous displays of divine power. The same arm which cleft the sea is
stretched out, after all sins, for the new generation, and 'is not
shortened that it cannot save.' God does not disdain to duplicate His
wonders, even for very unworthy servants. The unchanging,
long-suffering patience, and the unwearied strength to which all
generations in succession can turn with confidence, are wonderfully set
forth by these two miracles. And though we have passed into the higher
stage, where miracles have ceased, the principle which dictated the
parallelism still holds good, and we too can look back to all these
ancient wonders, and be sure that they are done over and over again
according to our needs. 'As we have heard, so have we seen,' might have
been Israel's song that day, as it may be ours every day.

The beautiful application made of the parted waters of Jordan in
Christian literature, which sees in them the prophecy of conquered
death, is perhaps scarcely in accordance with truth, for the divided
Jordan was the introduction, not to peace, but to warfare. But it is
too deeply impressed on the heart to be lightly put aside, and we may
well allow faith and hope to discern in the stream, whose swollen
waters shrink backwards as soon as the ark is borne into their turbid
and swift current, an emblem of that dark flood that rolled between the
host of God and their home, and was dried up as soon as the pierced
foot of the Christ touched its cold waters.

'What ailest thee, thou sea, that thou fleest; thou Jordan, that thou
turnest back?' Christ has gone up before us. He has shaken His hand
over the river, and caused men to go over dry shod.




STONES CRYING OUT

'For the priests which bare the ark stood in the midst of Jordan, until
every thing was finished that the Lord commanded Joshua to speak unto
the people, according to all that Moses commanded Joshua: and the
people hasted and passed over. 11. And it came to pass, when all the
people were clean passed over, that the ark of the Lord passed over,
and the priests, in the presence of the people. 12. And the children of
Reuben, and the children of Gad, and half the tribe of Manasseh, passed
over armed before the children of Israel, as Moses spake unto them: 13.
About forty thousand prepared for war passed over before the Lord unto
battle, to the plains of Jericho. 14. On that day the Lord magnified
Joshua in the sight of all Israel; and they feared him, as they feared
Moses, all the days of his life. 15. And the Lord spake unto Joshua,
saying, 16. Command the priests that bare the ark of the testimony,
that they come up out of Jordan. 17. Joshua therefore commanded the
priests, saying, Come ye up out of Jordan. 18. And it came to pass,
when the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord were
come up out of the midst of Jordan, and the soles of the priests' feet
were lifted up unto the dry land, that the waters of Jordan returned
unto their place, and flowed over all his banks, as they did before.
19. And the people came up out of Jordan on the tenth day of the first
month, and encamped in Gilgal, in the east border of Jericho. 80. And
those twelve stones, which they took out of Jordan, did Joshua pitch in
Gilgal. 21. And he spake unto the children of Israel, saying, When your
children shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What mean
these stones? 22. Then ye shall let your children know, saying, Israel
came over this Jordan on dry land. 23. For the Lord your God dried up
the waters of Jordan from before you, until ye were passed over, as the
Lord your God did to the Red sea, which He dried up from before us,
until we were gone over: 24. That all the people of the earth might
know the hand of the Lord, that it is mighty: that ye might fear the
Lord your God for ever.'--JOSHUA iv. 10-24.


This chapter is divided into two sections. The first (from verses 1 to
14) has as its main subject the bringing up of the twelve memorial
stones from the bed of Jordan; the second (verse 15 to the end) gives
the conclusion of the whole incident. The plan of arrangement, already
pointed out in a former chapter, is very plain in this. Each section
has God's commands to Joshua, Joshua's to the people, and the execution
of these. To each is appended a summary, which anticipates the more
detailed particulars that follow. Our text begins in the middle of the
first section, but we must glance at the preceding verses. These tell
how, when the people were all across, Joshua, who had apparently
remained on the eastern bank with the twelve representatives of the
tribes, received God's command to tell these the purpose for which they
had been chosen, and to set them to execute it. This additional
instruction is the explanation of the apparent discrepancy between
Joshua iii. 12 and iv. 2. Verses 4-8 tell Joshua's communication of the
instructions to the men; verse 8 narrates the execution of them by each
man's wrenching up from the river's bed a great stone, with which he
toiled through the muddy ooze to the western shore, and thence over the
hot plain to Gilgal, where the host camped; verse 9 tells that twelve
other stones were set up where the priests had stood, and were visible
at some time after date, when it was written; but when that was, or
whether the verse is part of the original or a later note, we cannot
say. At any rate, there were two memorials, one on the bank, one in the
stream--'a grand jury of great stones,' as Thomas Fuller calls them.
There is no difficulty in supposing that the monument in the river was
firm enough to resist its current, and high enough to be visible either
above the surface or beneath the ordinarily shallow water.

I. The first picture here brought before us is that of the motionless
ark in the midst of what had been Jordan. There is an obvious intention
to contrast the stillness of the priests, bearing it on their
shoulders, and standing rooted in that strange place all these long
hours, with the hurry around. 'The priests stood ... and the people
hasted.' However broad the front and swift the march, the crossing must
have taken many hours. The haste was not from fear, but eagerness. It
was 'an industrious speed and mannerly quickness, as not willing to
make God wait upon them, in continuing a miracle longer than necessity
did require.' When all were over, then came the twelve and Joshua, who
would spend some time in gathering the stones and rearing the memorial
in the river-bed. Through all the stir the ark was still. Over all the
march it watched. So long as one Israelite was in the channel it
remained, a silent presence, to ensure his safety. It let their rate of
speed determine the length of its standing there. It waited for the
slowest foot and the weariest laggard. God makes His 'very present
help' of the same length as our necessities, and lets us beat the time
to which He conforms. Not till the last loiterer has struggled to the
farther shore does He cease by His presence to keep His people safe on
the strange road which by His presence He has opened for them.

The silent presence of the ark is enough to dam up the stream. There is
vehement action around, but the cause of it all is in absolute repose.
God moves all things, Himself unmoved. He 'worketh hitherto,' and no
intensity of energy breaks the depth of His perfect rest. His activity
implies no effort, and is followed by no exhaustion. The ark is still,
while it holds back a swollen river for hours. The centre of the
swiftest revolution is a point of rest.

The form of the miracle was a condescension to weak faith, to which
help was ministered by giving sense something to grasp. It was easier
to believe that the torrent would not rush down on them when they could
look at the priests standing there motionless, with the visible symbol
of God's presence on their shoulders. The ark was no more the cause of
the miracle than were its carriers; but, just as Jesus helped one blind
man by laying moistened earth on his eyes, and another by sending him
to Siloam to wash, so God did here. Children learn best when they have
something to look at. Sight is sometimes the servant of faith.

We need not dwell on the summary, beginning with verse 11, which
anticipates the subject of the next section, and adds that the fighting
men of the tribes who had already received their inheritance on the
east bank of Jordan, loyally kept their promise, and marched with their
brethren to the campaign.

II. Verses 15-18 finish the story with the return of the waters to
their bed. The triple division appears again. First God commands
Joshua, who then transmits the command to the people, who, in turn,
then obey. And thus at each stage the divine causality, Joshua's
delegated but absolute authority, and the people's prompt obedience,
are signalised; and the whole incident, in all its parts, is set forth
as on the one hand a conspicuous instance of God's interposition, and,
on the other, of Israel's willing service.

We can fancy how the people who had reached the western shore lined the
bank, gazing on the group in the channel, who still stood waiting God's
command to relieve them at their post. The word comes at last, and is
immediately obeyed. May we not learn the lesson to stand fixed and
patient wherever God sets us, as long as He does not call us thence?
God's priests should be like the legionary on guard in Pompeii, who
stuck to his post while the ashes were falling thick, and was smothered
by them, rather than leave his charge without his commander's orders.
One graphic word pictures the priests lifting, or, as it might be
translated, 'plucking,' the soles of their feet from the slimy bottom
into which they had settled down by reason of long standing still. They
reach the bank, marching as steadily with their sacred burden as might
be over so rough and slippery a road. The first to enter were the last
to leave the river's bed. God's ark 'goes before us,' and 'is our
rearward.' He besets us behind and before, and all dangerous service is
safe if begun and ended in Him. The one point made prominent is the
instantaneous rush back of the impatient torrent as soon as the curb
was taken off. Like some horse rejoicing to be free, the tawny flood
pours down, and soon everything looks 'as aforetime,' except for the
new rock, piled by human hands, round which the waters chafed. The
dullest would understand what had wrought the miracle when they saw the
immediate consequence of the ark's leaving its place. Cause and effect
seldom come thus close together in God's dealings; but sometimes He
lets us see them as near each other as the lightning and the thunder,
that we may learn to trace them in faith, when centuries part them. How
the people would gaze as the hurrying stream covered up their path, and
would look across to the further shore, almost doubting if they had
really stood there that morning I They were indeed 'Hebrews'--men from
the other side-now, and would set themselves to the dangerous task
before them with courage. 'Well begun is half done'; and God would not
divide the river for them to thrust them into a tiger's den, where they
would be torn to pieces. Retreat was impossible now. A new page in
their history was turned. The desert was as unreachable as Egypt, The
passage of the Jordan rounded off the epoch which the passage of the
Bed Sea introduced, and began a new era.

That parallelism of the two crossings is suggested by the notice of
date in verse 19. 'The tenth day of the first month' was just forty
years to a day since the first Paschal lamb had been chosen, and four
days short of the Passover, which was solemnised at Gilgal (Joshua v.
10) where they encamped that night. It was a short march from the point
of crossing, and a still shorter from Jericho. It would have been easy
to fall upon the invaders as they straggled across the river, but no
attempt was made to dispute the passage, though, no doubt, many a keen
pair of eyes watched it from the neighbouring hills. In the beginning
of the next chapter we are told why there was this singular supineness.
'Their heart melted, neither was there spirit in them any more,' or, in
more modern language, panic laid hold of the enemy, and they could not
pluck up courage to oppose the advance of Israel. If we add this result
to those mentioned in chapter in., we find sufficient motive for the
miracle to take it out of the class of purposeless, legendary wonders.
Given the importance of Israel as the depositaries of revelation, there
is nothing unreasonable in a miracle which so powerfully contributed to
their conquest of Canaan, and we have yet to learn that there is
anything unreasonable in the belief that they were the depositaries of
revelation. The fundamental postulate of the Old Testament is a
supernatural revelation, and that opens the door for any miracle
needful for its accomplishment. It is folly to seek to conciliate by
minimising the miraculous element. However much may be thrown out to
the wolves, they will not cease to pursue and show their teeth. We
should be very slow to pronounce on what is worthy of God; but any man
who believes in a divine revelation, given to the world through Israel,
may well believe in such a miracle as this at such a moment of their
history.

III. The memorial stones (verses 20-24). Gilgal, the first encampment,
lay defenceless in the open plain, and the first thing to be done would
be to throw up some earthwork round the camp. It seems to have been the
resting-place of the ark and probably of the non-combatants, during the
conquest, and to have derived thence a sacredness which long clung to
it, and finally led, singularly enough, to its becoming a centre of
idolatrous worship. The rude circle of unhewn stones without
inscription was, no doubt, exactly like the many prehistoric monuments
found all over the world, which forgotten races have raised to keep in
everlasting remembrance forgotten fights and heroes. It was a
comparatively small thing; for each stone was but a load for one man,
and it would seem mean enough by the side of Stonehenge or Carnac, just
as Israel's history is on a small scale, as compared with the
world-embracing empires of old. Size is not greatness; and Joshua's
little circle told a more wonderful story than its taller kindred, or
Egyptian obelisks or colossi.

These grey stones preached at once the duty of remembering, and the
danger of forgetting, the past mercies of God. When they were reared,
they would seem needless; but the deepest impressions get filled up by
degrees, as the river of time deposits its sands on them. We do not
forget pain so quickly as joy, and most men have a longer and keener
remembrance of their injurers than of their benefactors, human or
divine. The stones were set up because Israel remembered, but also lest
Israel should forget. We often think of the Jews as monsters of
ingratitude; but we should more truly learn the lesson of their
history, if we regarded them as fair, average men, and asked ourselves
whether our recollection of God's goodness to us is much more vivid
than theirs. Unless we make distinct and frequent efforts to recall, we
shall certainly forget 'all His benefits.' The cultivation of thankful
remembrance is a very large part of practical religion; and it is not
by accident that the Psalmist puts it in the middle, between hope and
obedience, when he says 'that they might set their hope in God, and not
forget the works of God, but keep His commandments' (Psalm lxxviii.7).

The memorial stones further proclaimed the duty of parental instruction
in God's mercies. They speak of a time when tradition was the vehicle
of history; when books were rare, and monuments were relied upon to
awaken curiosity which a father's words would satisfy. Notwithstanding
all differences in means of obtaining knowledge, the old law remains in
full force, that the parent is the natural and most powerful instructor
in the ways of God. The Jewish father was not to send his child to some
Levite or other to get his question answered, but was to answer it
himself. I am afraid that a good many English parents, who call
themselves Christians, are too apt to say, 'Ask your Sunday-school
teacher,' when such questions are put to them. The decay of parental
religious teaching is working enormous mischief in Christian
households; and the happiest results would follow if Joshua's homely
advice were attended to, '_Ye_ shall let your children know.'

The same principle which led to the erection of this simple monument
reaches its highest and sacredest instance in the institution of the
Lord's Supper, in which Jesus, with wonderful lowliness, condescends to
avail Himself of material symbols in order to secure a firmer place in
treacherous memories. He might well have expected that such stupendous
love could never be forgotten; but He 'knoweth our frame,' and trusts
some share in keeping His death vividly in the hearts of His people to
the humble ministry of bread and wine, Strange that we should need to
be reminded of the death which it is life to remember! Blessed that,
needing it, we have the need so tenderly met, and that He does not
disdain to accept loving memories which slumber till stirred by such
poor reminders of His unspeakable love!




THE CAPTAIN OF THE LORD'S HOST

And he said, Nay, but as captain of the host of the Lord am I now come.
JOSHUA v. 14.


The army of Israel was just beginning a hard conflict under an untried
leader. Behind them the Jordan barred their retreat, in front of them
Jericho forbade their advance. Most of them had never seen a fortified
city, and had no experience nor engines for a siege. So we may well
suppose that many doubts and fears shook the courage of the host, as it
drew around the doomed city. Their chief had his own heavy burden. He
seems to have gone apart to meditate on what his next step was to be.
Absorbed in thought, he lifts up his eyes mechanically, as brooding men
will, not expecting to see anything, and is startled by the silent
figure of 'a man with a sword drawn' in his hand, close beside him.
There is nothing supernatural in his appearance; and the immediate
thought of the leader is, 'Is this one of the enemy that has stolen
upon my solitude?' So, promptly and boldly, he strides up to him with
the quick challenge: 'Whose side are you on? Are you one of us, or from
the enemy's camp?' And then the silent lips open. 'Upon neither the one
nor the other. I am not on your side, you are on mine, for as Captain
of the Lord's host, am I come up.' And then Joshua falls on his face,
recognises his Commander-in-Chief, owns himself a subordinate, and asks
for orders. 'What saith my Lord unto his servant?'

Now let us try to gather the meaning and the lessons of this striking
incident.

I. I see in it a transient revelation of an eternal truth.

I believe, as the vast majority of careful students of the course of
Old Testament revelation and its relation to the New Testament
completion believe, that we have here not a record of the appearance of
a created superhuman person, but that of a preliminary manifestation of
the Eternal Word of God, who, in the fulness of time, 'became flesh and
dwelt among us.'

You will observe that there run throughout the whole of the Old
Testament notices of the occasional manifestation of a mysterious
person who is named '_the_ Angel,' 'the Angel of the Lord.' For
instance, in the great scene in the wilderness, where the bush burned
and was not consumed, he who appeared is named 'the Angel of the Lord';
and his lips declare 'I am that I am.' In like manner, soon after, the
divine voice speaks to Moses of 'the Angel in whom is My name.'

When Balaam had his path blocked amongst the vineyards, it was a
_replica_ of the figure of my text that stayed his way, a man with a
drawn sword in his hand, who spoke in autocratic and divine fashion.
When the parents of Samson were apprised of the coming birth of the
hero, it was 'the Angel of the Lord' that appeared to them, accepted
their sacrifice, declared the divine will, and disappeared in a flame
of fire from the altar. A psalm speaks of 'the Angel of the Lord' as
encamping round about them that fear him, and delivering them. Isaiah
tells us of the 'Angel of his face,' who was 'afflicted in all Israel's
afflictions, and saved them.' And the last prophetic utterance of the
Old Testament is most distinct and remarkable in its strange
identification and separation of Jehovah and the Angel, when it says,
'the Lord shall suddenly come to His Temple, even the Angel of the
Covenant.' Now, if we put all these passages--and they are but select
instances--if we put all these passages together, I think we cannot
help seeing that there runs, as I said, throughout the whole of the Old
Testament a singular strain of revelation in regard to a Person who, in
a remarkable manner, is distinguished from the created hosts of angel
beings, and also is distinguished from, and yet in name, attributes,
and worship all but identified with, the Lord Himself.

If we turn to the narrative before us, we find there similar phenomena
marked out. For this mysterious 'man with the sword drawn' in his hand,
quotes the very words which were spoken at the bush, when he says,
'Loose thy shoes from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest
is holy.' And by fair implication, He would have us to identify the
persons in these two great theophanies. He ascribes to Himself, in the
further conversation in the next chapter, directly divine attributes,
and is named by the sacred name; 'The Lord said unto Joshua, see, I
have given into thy hand Jericho and its king.'

If we turn to the New Testament, we find that there under another image
the same strain of thought is presented. The Word of God, who from
everlasting 'was with God, and was God,' is represented as being the
Agent of Creation, the Source of all human illumination, the Director
of Providence, the Lord of the Universe. 'By him were all things, and
in him all things consists.' So, surely, these two halves make a whole;
and the Angel of the Lord, separate and yet so strangely identified
with Jehovah, who at the crises of the nation's history, and stages of
the development of the process of Revelation, is manifested, and the
Eternal Word of God, whom the New Testament reveals to us, are one and
the same.

This truth was transiently manifested in our text. The vision passed,
the ground that was hallowed by His foot is undistinguished now in the
sweltering plain round the mound that once was Jericho. But the fact
remains, the humanity, that was only in appearance, and for a few
minutes, assumed then, has now been taken up into everlasting union
with the divine nature, and a Man reigns on the Throne, and is
Commander of all who battle for the truth and the right. The eternal
order of the universe is before us here.

It only remains to say a word in reference to the sweep of the command
which our vision assigns to the Angel of the Lord. 'Captain of the
Lord's host' means a great deal more than the true General of Israel's
little army. It does mean that, or the words and the vision would cease
to have relevance and bearing on the moment's circumstances and need.
But it includes also, as the usage of Scripture would sufficiently
show, if it were needful to adduce instances of it, all the ordered
ranks of loftier intelligent beings, and all the powers and forces of
the universe. These are conceived of as an embattled host, comparable
to an army in the strictness of their discipline and their obedience to
a single will. It is the modern thought that the universe is a Cosmos
and not a Chaos, an ordered unit, with the addition of the truth beyond
the reach and range of science, that its unity is the expression of a
personal will. It is the same thought which the centurion had, to
Christ's wonder, when he compared his own power as an officer in a
legion, where his will was implicitly obeyed, to the power of Christ
over diseases and sorrows and miseries and death, and recognised that
all these were His servants, to whom, if His autocratic lips chose to
say 'Go,' they went, and if He said, 'Do this,' they did it.

So the Lord of the universe and its ordered ranks is Jesus Christ. That
is the truth which was flashed from the unknown, like a vanishing
meteor in the midnight, before the face of Joshua, and which stands
like the noonday sun, unsetting and irradiating for us who live under
the Gospel.

II. I see here the Leader of all the warfare against the world's evil.

'The Captain of the Lord's host.' He Himself takes part in the fight.
He is not like a general who, on some safe knoll behind the army, sends
his soldiers to death, and keeps his own skin whole. But He _has_
fought, and He _is_ fighting. Do you remember that wonderful picture in
two halves, at the end of one of the Gospels, 'the Lord went up into
Heaven and sat at the right hand of God, ... they went forth everywhere
preaching the Word'? Strange contrast between the repose of the seated
Christ and the toils of His peripatetic servants! Yes, strange
contrast; but the next words harmonise the two halves of it; 'the Lord
also working with them, and confirming the word with signs following.'
The Leader does not so rest as that He does not fight; and the servants
do not need so to fight, as that they cannot rest. Thus the old legends
of many a land and tongue have a glorious truth in them to the eye of
faith, and at the head of all the armies that are charging against any
form of the world's misery and sin, there moves the form of the Son of
Man, whose aid we have to invoke, even from His crowned repose at the
right hand of God. 'Gird thy sword upon Thy thigh, O Most Mighty, and
in Thy majesty ride forth prosperously, and Thy right hand shall teach
Thee terrible things.'

If this, then, be for us, as truly as for Joshua and his host, a
revelation of who is our true leader, surely all of us in our various
degrees, and especially any of us who have any 'Quixotic crusade' for
the world's good on our consciences and on our hands, may take the
lessons and the encouragements that are here. Own your Leader; that is
one plain duty. And recognise this fact, that by no other power than by
His, and with no other weapons than those which He puts into our hands,
in His Cross and meekness, can a world's evils be overcome, and the
victory be won for the right and the truth. I have no faith in crusades
which are not under the Captain of our salvation. And I would that the
earnest men, and there are many of them, the laborious and the
self-sacrificing men in many departments of philanthropy and
benevolence and social reformation--who labour unaware of who is their
Leader, and not dependent upon His help, nor trusting in His
strength--would take to heart this vision of my text, and see beside
them the 'man with the drawn sword in his hand,' the Christ with the
'sharp two-edged sword going out of his mouth,' by whom, and by whom
alone, the world's evil can be overcome and slain.

Own your General; submit to His authority; pick the weapons that He can
bless; trust absolutely in His help. We _may_ have, we _shall_ have, in
all enterprises for God and man that are worth doing, 'need of
patience,' just as the army of Israel had to parade for six weary days
round Jericho blowing their useless trumpets, whilst the impregnable
walls stood firm, and the defenders flouted and jeered their aimless
procession. But the seventh day will come, and at the trumpet blast
down will go the loftiest ramparts of the cities that are 'walled up to
heaven' with a rush and a crash, and through the dust and over the
ruined rubbish Christ's soldiers will march and take possession. So
trust in your Leader, and be sure of the victory, and have patience and
keep on at your work.

Do not make Joshua's mistake. 'Art Thou for us?'--'Nay! Thou art for
_me._' That is a very different thing. We have the right to be sure
that God is on our side, when we have made sure that we are on God's.
So take care of self-will and self-regard, and human passions, and all
the other parasitical insects that creep round philanthropic religious
work, lest they spoil your service. There is a great deal that calls
itself after Jehu's fashion, 'My zeal for the Lord,' which is nothing
better than zeal for my own notions and their preponderance. Therefore
we must strip ourselves of all that, and not fancy that the cause is
ours, and then graciously admit Christ to help us, but recognise that
it is _His_, and lowly submit ourselves to His direction, and what we
do, do, and when we fight, fight, in His name and for His sake.

III. Here is the Ally in all our warfare with ourselves.

That is the worst fight. Far worse than all these Hittites and Hivites,
and the other tribes with their barbarous names, far worse than all
external foes, are the foes that each man carries about in his own
heart. In that slow hand-to-hand and foot-to-foot struggle I do not
believe that there is any conquering power available for a man that can
for a moment be compared with the power that comes through submission
to Christ's command and acceptance of Christ's help. He has fought
every foot of the ground before us. We have to 'run the race'--to take
another metaphor--'that is set before us, looking unto Jesus,' the
great Leader, and in His own self the Perfecter of the faith which
conquers. In Him, His example, the actual communication of His divine
Spirit, and in the motives for brave and persistent conflict which flow
from His Cross and Passion, we shall find that which alone will make us
the victors in this internecine warfare. There can be no better
directory given to any man than to tread in Christ's footsteps, and
learn how to fight, from Him who in the wilderness repelled the triple
assault with the single 'It is written'; thus recognising the word and
will of God as the only directory and defence.

Thus, brethren, if we humbly take service in His ranks, and ask Him to
show us where our foes within are, and to give us the grace to grapple
with them, and cast them out, anything is possible rather than ultimate
defeat, and however long and sore the struggle may be, its length and
its severity are precious parts of the discipline that makes us strong,
and we shall at last be more than conquerors through Him that loveth us.

IV. Lastly, I see here the Power which it is madness to resist.

Think of this vision. Think of the deep truths, partially shadowed and
symbolised by it. Think of Christ, what He is, and what resources He
has at His back, of what are His claims for our service, and our loyal,
militant obedience. Think of the certain victory of all who follow Him
amongst 'the armies of Heaven, clad in fine linen, clean and white.'
Think of the crown and the throne for him that 'overcomes.'

Remember the destructive powers that sleep in Him: the 'drawn sword in
His hand,' the 'two-edged sword out of His mouth' the 'wrath of the
Lamb.' Think of the ultimate certain defeat of all antagonisms; of that
last campaign when He goes forth with the 'name written on His vesture
and on His thigh "King of kings and Lord of lords."' Think of how He
'strikes through kings in the day of His wrath, and fills the place
with the bodies of the dead'; and how His 'enemies become His
footstool.'

Ponder His own solemn word, 'He that is not with Me, is against Me.'
There is no neutrality in this warfare. Either we are for Him or we are
for His adversary. 'Under which King? speak or die!' As sensible men,
not indifferent to your highest and lasting well-being, ask yourselves,
'Can I, with my ten thousand, meet Him with His twenty thousand?' Put
yourselves under His orders, and He will be on your side. He will teach
your hands to war, and your fingers to fight; will cover your heads in
the day of battle, and bring you at last, palm-bearing and
laurel-crowned, to that blissful state where there will still be
service, and He still be the 'Captain of the Lord's host,' but where
'swords will be beaten into ploughshares' and the victors shall need to
'learn war no more.'




THE SIEGE OF JERICHO

'And Joshua had commanded the people, saying, Ye shall not shout, nor
make any noise with your voice, ... until the day I bid you shout; then
shall ye shout. 11. So the ark of the Lord compassed the city, going
about it once: and they came into the camp, and lodged in the
camp.'--JOSHUA vi.10, 11.

The cheerful uniform obedience of Israel to Joshua stands in very
remarkable contrast with their perpetual murmurings and rebellions
under Moses. Many reasons probably concurred in bringing about this
change of tone. For one thing the long period of suspense was over; and
to average sense-bound people there is no greater trial of faith and
submission than waiting, inactive, for something that is to come. Now
they are face to face with their enemies, and it is a great deal easier
to fight than to expect; and their courage mounts higher as dangers
come nearer. Then there were great miracles which left their impression
upon the people, such as the passage of the Jordan, and so on.

So that the Epistle to the Hebrews is right when it says, 'By faith the
walls of Jericho fell down after they were compassed about seven days.'
And that faith was as manifest in the six days' march round the city,
as on the seventh day of victorious entrance. For, if you will read the
narrative carefully, you will see that it says that the Israelites were
not told what was to be the end of that apparently useless and aimless
promenade. It was only on the morning of the day of the miracle that it
was announced. So there are two stages in this instance of faith. There
is the protracted trial of it, in doing an apparently useless thing;
and there is the victory, which explains and vindicates it. Let us look
at these two points now.

I. Consider that strange protracted trial of faith.

The command comes to the people, through Joshua's lips, unaccompanied
by any explanation or reasons. If Moses had called for a like obedience
from the people in their wilderness mood, there would have been no end
of grumbling. But whatever some of them may have thought, there is
nothing recorded now but prompt submission. Notice, too, the order of
the procession. First come the armed men, then seven white-robed
priests, blowing, probably, discordant music upon their ram's horn
trumpets; then the Ark, the symbol and token of God's presence; and
then the rereward. So the _Ark_ is the centre; and it is not only
Israel that is marching round the city, but rather it is God who is
circling the walls. Very impressive would be the grim silence of it
all. Tramp, tramp, tramp, round and round, six days on end, without a
word spoken (though no doubt taunts in plenty were being showered down
from the walls), they marched, and went back to the camp, and subsided
into inactivity for another four-and-twenty hours, until they 'turned
out' for the procession once more.

Now, what did all that mean? The blast of the trumpet was, in the
Jewish feasts, the solemn proclamation of the presence of God. And
hence the purpose of that singular march circumambulating Jericho was
to declare 'Here is the Lord of the whole earth, weaving His invisible
cordon and network around the doomed city.' In fact the meaning of the
procession, emphasised by the silence of the soldiers, was that God
Himself was saying, in the long-drawn blasts of the priestly trumpet,
'Lift up your heads, O ye gates! even lift them up, ye everlasting
doors; and the King of Glory shall come in.' Now, whatever Jericho and
its people thought about that, Israel, according to the commentary of
the New Testament, had to some extent, at all events, learnt the
lesson, and knew, of course very rudimentarily and with a great deal of
mere human passion mingled with it, but still knew, that this was God's
summons, and the manifestation of God's presence. And so round the city
they went, and day by day they did the thing in which their faith
apprehended its true meaning, and which, by reason of their faith, they
were willing to do. Let us take some lessons from that.
