it meant something that he saw clearly, and a great deal beyond that
he saw but dimly. It meant that God had sent, and was in some special
sense the Father of, this Jesus of Nazareth.

'Thou art the King of Israel,' John had been preaching, 'The Kingdom
of Heaven is at hand.' The Messiah was to be the theocratic King, the
King, not of 'Judah' nor of 'the Jews,' but of 'Israel,' the nation
that had entered into covenant with God. So the substance of the
confession was the Messiahship of Jesus, as resting upon His special
divine relationship and leading to His Kingly sway.

Notice also the enthusiasm of the confession; one's ear hears clearly
a tone of rapture in it. The joy-bells of the man's heart are all
a-ringing. It is no mere intellectual acknowledgment of Christ as
Messiah. The difference between mere head-belief and heart-faith lies
precisely in the presence of these elements of confidence, of
enthusiastic loyalty, and absolute submission.

So the great question for each of us is, not, Do I believe as a piece
of my intellectual creed that Christ is 'the Messiah, the Son of God,
the King of Israel'? I suppose almost all my hearers here now do that.
That will not make you a Christian, my friend. That will neither save
your soul nor quiet your heart, nor bring you peace and strength in
life, nor open the gates of the Kingdom of Heaven to you. A man may be
miserable, wholly sunk in all manner of wickedness and evil, die the
death of a dog, and go to punishment hereafter, though he believe that
Jesus Christ is the Son of God and the King of Israel. You want
something more than that. You want just this element of rapturous
acknowledgment, of loyal submission, absolute obedience, of
unfaltering trust.

Look at these first disciples, six brave men that had all that loyalty
and love to Him; though there was not a soul in the world but
themselves to share their convictions. Do they not shame you? When He
comes to you, as He does come, with this question, 'Whom do ye say
that I am?' may God give you grace to answer, 'Thou art the Christ,
the Son of the living God,' and not only to answer it with your lips,
but to trust Him wholly with your hearts, and with enthusiastic
devotion to bow your whole being in adoring wonder and glad submission
at His feet. If we are 'Israelites indeed,' our hearts will crown Him
as the 'King of Israel.'




THE FIRST DISCIPLES: V. BELIEVING AND SEEING

'Jesus answered and said unto him, Because I said unto thee, I saw
thee under the fig tree, believest thou? thou shalt see greater things
than these. 51. And He saith unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
Hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending
and descending upon the Son of Man.'--JOHN i. 50, 51.

Here we have the end of the narrative of the gathering together of the
first disciples, which has occupied several sermons. We have had
occasion to point out how each incident in the series has thrown some
fresh light upon two main subjects, namely, upon some phase or other
of the character and work of Jesus Christ, or upon the various ways by
which faith, which is the condition of discipleship, is kindled in
men's souls. These closing words may be taken as the crowning thoughts
on both these matters.

Our Lord recognises and accepts the faith of Nathanael and his
fellows, but, like a wise Teacher, lets His pupils at the very
beginning get a glimpse of how much lies ahead for them to learn; and
in the act of accepting the faith gives just one hint of the great
tract of yet uncomprehended knowledge of Him which lies before them;
'Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, believest
thou? thou shalt see greater things than these.' He accepts
Nathanael's confession and the confession of his fellows. Human lips
have given Him many great and wonderful titles in this chapter. John
called Him 'the Lamb of God'; the first disciples hailed Him as the
'Messias, which is the Christ'; Nathanael fell before Him with the
rapturous exclamation, 'Thou art the Son of God; Thou art the King of
Israel!' All these crowns had been put on His head by human hands, but
here He crowns Himself. He makes a mightier claim than any that they
had dreamed of, and proclaims Himself to be the medium of all
communication and intercourse between heaven and earth: 'Hereafter ye
shall see heaven opened, and the angels of God ascending and
descending upon the Son of Man.'

So, then, there are two great principles that lie in these verses, and
are contained in, first, our Lord's mighty promise to His new
disciples, and second, in our Lord's witness to Himself. Let me say a
word or two about each of these.

I. Our Lord's promise to His new disciples.

Christ's words here may be translated either as a question or as an
affirmation. It makes comparatively little difference to the
substantial meaning whether we read 'believest thou?' or 'thou
believest.' In the former case there will be a little more vivid
expression of surprise and admiration at the swiftness of Nathanael's
faith, but in neither case are we to find anything of the nature of
blame or of doubt as to the reality of his belief. The question, if it
be a question, is no question as to whether Nathanael's faith was a
genuine thing or not. There is no hint that he has been too quick with
his confession, and has climbed too rapidly to the point that he has
attained. But in either case, whether the word be a question or an
affirmation, we are to see in it the solemn and glad recognition of
the reality of Nathanael's confession and belief.

Here is the first time that that word 'belief' came from Christ's
lips; and when we remember all the importance that has been attached
to it in the subsequent history of the Church, and the revolution in
human thought which followed upon our Lord's demand of our faith,
there is an interest in noticing the first appearance of the word. It
was an epoch in the history of the world when Christ first claimed and
accepted a man's faith.

Of course the second part of this verse, 'Thou shalt see greater
things than these,' has its proper fulfilment in the gradual
manifestation of His person and character, which followed through the
events recorded in the Gospels. His life of service, His words of
wisdom, His deeds of power and of pity, His death of shame and of
glory, His Resurrection and His Ascension, these are the 'greater
things' which Nathanael is promised. They all lay unrevealed yet, and
what our Lord means is simply this: 'If you will continue to trust in
Me, as you have trusted Me, and stand beside Me, you will see unrolled
before your eyes and comprehended by your faith the great facts which
will make the manifestation of God to the world.' But though that be
the original application of the words, yet I think we may fairly draw
from them some lessons that are of importance to ourselves; and I ask
you to look at the hint that they give us about three things,--faith
and discipleship, faith and sight, faith and progress. 'Believest
thou? thou shalt see greater things than these.'

First, here is light thrown upon the relation between faith and
discipleship. It is clear that our Lord here uses the word for the
first time in the full Christian sense, that He regards the exercise
of faith as being practically synonymous with being a disciple, that
from the very first, believers were disciples, and disciples were
believers.

Then, notice still further that our Lord here employs the word
'belief' without any definition of what or whom it is that they were
to believe. He Himself, and not certain thoughts about Him, is the
true object of a man's faith. We may believe a proposition, but faith
must grasp a person. Even when the person is made known to us by a
proposition which we have to believe before we can trust the person,
still the essence of faith is not the intellectual process of laying
hold upon a certain thought, and acquiescing in it, but the moral
process of casting myself in full confidence upon the Being that is
revealed to me by the thought,--of laying my hand, and leaning my
weight, on the Man about whom it tells me. And so faith, which is
discipleship, has in it for its very essence the personal element of
trust in Jesus Christ.

Then, further, notice how widely different from our creed was
Nathanael's creed, and yet how identical with our faith, if we are
Christians, was Nathanael's faith. He knew nothing about the very
heart of Christ's work, His atoning death. He knew nothing about the
highest glory of Christ's person, His divine Sonship, in its unique
and lofty sense. These lay unrevealed, and were amongst the greater
things which he was yet to see; but though thus his knowledge was
imperfect, and his creed incomplete as compared with ours, his faith
was the very same. He laid hold upon Christ, he clave to Him with all
his heart, he was ready to accept His teaching, he was willing to do
His will, and as for the rest--'Thou shalt see greater things than
these.' So, dear brethren, from these words of my text here, from the
unhesitating attribution of the lofty notion of faith to this man,
from the way in which our Lord uses the word, are gathered these three
points that I beseech you to ponder: there is no discipleship without
faith; faith is the personal grasp of Christ Himself; the contents of
creeds may differ whilst the element of faith remains the same. I
beseech you let Christ come to you with the question of my text, and
as He looks you in the eyes, hear Him say to you, 'Believest _thou_?'

Secondly, notice how in this great promise to the new disciples there
is light thrown upon another subject, viz. the connection between
faith and sight. There is a great deal about seeing in this context.
Christ said to the first two that followed Him, 'Come and see.' Philip
met Nathanael's thin film of prejudice with the same words, 'Come and
see.' Christ greeted the approaching Nathanael with 'When thou wast
under the fig tree I saw thee.' And now His promise is cast into the
same metaphor: 'Thou shalt see greater things than these.'

There is a double antithesis here. 'I saw thee,' 'Thou shalt see Me.'
'Thou wast convinced because thou didst feel that thou wert the
passive object of My vision. Thou shalt be still more convinced when
illuminated by Me. Thou shalt see even as thou art seen. I saw thee,
and that bound thee to Me; thou shalt see Me, and that will confirm
the bond.'

There is another antithesis, namely--between believing and seeing.
'Thou believest--that is thy present; thou shalt see, that is thy hope
for the future.' Now I have already explained that, in the proper
primary meaning and application of the words, the sight which is here
promised is simply the observance with the outward eye of the
historical facts of our Lord's life which were yet to be learned. But
still we may gather a truth from this antithesis which will be of use
to us. 'Thou believest--thou shalt see'; that is to say, in the
loftiest region of spiritual experience you must believe first, in
order that you may see.

I do not mean, as is sometimes meant, by that statement that a man has
to try to force his understanding into the attitude of accepting
religious truth, in order that he may have an experience which will
convince him that it is true. I mean a very much simpler thing than
that, and a very much truer one, viz. this, that unless we trust to
Christ and take our illumination from Him, we shall never behold a
whole set of truths which, when once we trust Him, are all plain and
clear to us. It is no mysticism to say that. What do you _know_ about
God?--I put emphasis upon the word 'know'--What do you know about Him,
however much you may argue and speculate and think probable, and fear,
and hope, and question, about Him? What do you know about Him apart
from Jesus Christ? What do you know about human duty, apart from Him?
What do you know of all that dim region that lies beyond the grave,
apart from Him? If you trust Him, if you fall at His feet and say
'Rabbi! Thou art my Teacher and mine illumination,' then you will see.
You will see God, man, yourselves, duty; you will see light upon a
thousand complications and perplexities; and you will have a
brightness above that of the noonday sun, streaming into the thickest
darkness of death and the grave and the awful hereafter. Christ is the
Light. In that 'Light shall we see light.' And just as it needs the
sun to rise in order that my eye may behold the outer world, so it
needs that I shall have Christ shining in my heaven to illuminate the
whole universe, in order that I may see clearly. 'Believe and thou
shalt see.' For only when we trust Him do the mightiest truths that
affect humanity stand plain and clear before us.

And besides that, if we trust Christ, we get a living experience of a
multitude of facts and principles which are all mist and darkness to
men except through their faith; an experience which is so vivid and
brings such certitude as that it may well be called vision. The world
says, 'Seeing is believing.' So it is about the coarse things that you
can handle, but about everything that is higher than these invert the
proverb, and you get the truth. 'Seeing is believing.' Yes, in regard
to outward things. Believing is seeing in regard to God and spiritual
truth. 'Believest thou? thou shalt see.'

Then, thirdly, there is light here about another matter, the
connection between faith and progress. 'Thou shalt see greater things
than these.' A wise teacher stimulates his scholars from the
beginning, by giving them glimpses of how much there is ahead to be
learnt. That does not drive them to despair; it braces all their
powers. And so Christ, as His first lesson to these men, substantially
says, 'You have learnt nothing yet, you are only beginning.' That is
true about us all. Faith at first, both in regard to its contents and
its quality, is very rudimentary and infantile. A man when he is first
converted--perhaps suddenly--knows after a fashion that he himself is
a very sinful, wretched, poor creature, and he knows that Jesus Christ
has died for him, and is his Saviour, and his heart goes out to Him,
in confidence and love and obedience. But he is only standing at the
door and peeping in as yet. He has only mastered the alphabet. He is
but on the frontier of the promised land. His faith has brought him
into contact with infinite power, and what will be the end of that? He
will indefinitely grow. His faith has started him on a course to which
there is no natural end. As long as it keeps alive he will be growing
and growing, and getting nearer and nearer to the great centre of all.

So here is a grand possibility opened out in these simple words, a
possibility which alone meets what you need, and what you are craving
for, whether you know it or not, namely, something that will give you
ever new powers and acquirements; something which will ensure your
closer and ever closer approach to an absolute object of joy and
truth; something that will ensure you against stagnation and guarantee
unceasing progress. Everything else gets worn out, sooner or later; if
not in this world, then in another. There is one course on which a man
can enter with the certainty that there is no end to it, that it will
open out, and out, and out as he advances--with the certainty that,
come life, come death, it is all the same.

When the plant grows too tall for the greenhouse they lift the roof,
and it grows higher still. Whether you have your growth in this lower
world, or whether you have your top up in the brightness and the blue
of heaven, the growth is in one direction. There is a way that secures
endless progress, and here lies the secret of it: 'Thou believest!
thou shalt see greater things than these.'

Now, brethren, that is a grand possibility, and it is a solemn lesson
for some of you. You professing Christian people, are you any taller
than you were when you were born? Have you grown at all? Are you
growing now? Have you seen any further into the depths of Jesus Christ
than you did on that first day when you fell at His feet and said,
'Thou art the Son of God, Thou art the King of Israel'? His promise to
you then was, 'Thou believest, thou shalt see greater things.' If you
have not seen greater things it is because your faith has broken down,
if it has not expired.

II. Now let me turn to the second thought which lies in these great
words.

We have here, as I said, our Lord crowning Himself by His own witness
to His own dignity. 'Hereafter ye shall see the heavens opened.' Mark
how, with superbly autocratic lips, He bases this great utterance upon
nothing else but His own word. Prophets ever said, 'Thus saith the
Lord.' Christ ever said: 'Verily, verily, I say unto you.' 'Because He
could swear by no greater, He sware by Himself.' He puts His own
assurance instead of all argument and of all support to His words.

'Hereafter.' A word which is possibly not genuine, and is omitted, as
you will observe, in the Revised Version. If it is to be retained it
must be translated, not 'hereafter,' as if it were pointing to some
indefinite period in the future, but 'from henceforth,' as if
asserting that the opening heavens and the descending angels began to
be manifested from that first hour of His official work. 'Ye shall see
heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending.' That is
an allusion from the story of Jacob at Bethel. We have found reference
to Jacob's history already in the conversation with Nathanael, 'An
Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile.' And here is an unmistakable
reference to that story, when the fugitive, with his head on the stony
pillow, and the violet Syrian sky, with all its stars, rounding itself
above him, beheld the ladder on which the angels of God ascended and
descended. 'So,' says Christ, 'you shall see, in no vision of the
night, in no transitory appearance, but in a practical waking reality,
that ladder come down again, and the angels of God moving upon it in
their errands of mercy.'

And who, or what, is this ladder? Christ. Do not read these words as
meaning that the angels of God were to come down on Him to help, and
to honour, and to succour Him as they did once or twice in His life,
but as meaning that they are to ascend and descend by Him for the help
and blessing of the whole world.

That is to say, to put it into plain words, Christ is the sole medium
of communication between heaven and earth, the ladder with its foot
upon the earth in His humanity, and its top in the heavens. 'No man
hath ascended up into heaven save He which came down from heaven, even
the Son of Man which is in heaven.'

My time will not allow me to expand these thoughts as I would have
done; let me put them in the briefest outline. Christ is the medium of
all communication between heaven and earth, inasmuch as He is the
medium of all revelation. I have spoken incidentally about that in the
former part of this sermon, so I do not dwell on it now. Christ is the
ladder between heaven and earth, inasmuch as in Him the sense of
separation, and the reality of separation, are swept away. Sin has
shut heaven; there comes down from it many a blessing upon unthankful
heads, but between it in its purity and the earth in its muddy
foulness 'there is a great gulf fixed.' It is not because God is great
and I am small, or because He is Infinite and I am a mere pin-point as
against a great continent, it is not because He lives for ever, and my
life is but a hand-breadth, it is not because of the difference
between His Omniscience and my ignorance, His strength and my
weakness, that I am parted from Him. 'Your sins have separated between
you and your God,' and no man, build he Babels ever so high, can reach
thither. There is one means by which the separation is at an end, and
by which all objective hindrances to union, and all subjective
hindrances, are alike swept away. Christ has come, and in Him the
heavens have bended down to touch, and touching to bless, this low
earth, and man and God are at one once more.

He is the ladder, or sole medium of communication, inasmuch as by Him
all divine blessings, grace, helps, and favours, come down angel-like,
into our weak and needy hearts. Every strength, every mercy, every
spiritual power, consolation in every sorrow, fitness for duty,
illumination in darkness, all gifts that any of us can need, come to
us down on that one shining way, the mediation and the work of the
Divine-Human Christ, the Lord.

He is the ladder, the sole medium of communication between heaven and
earth, inasmuch as by Him my poor desires and prayers and
intercessions, my wishes, my sighs, my confessions rise to God. 'No
man cometh to the Father but by Me.' He is the ladder, the means of
all communication between heaven and earth, inasmuch as at the last,
if ever we enter there at all, we shall enter through Him and through
Him alone, who is 'the Way, the Truth, and the Life.'

Ah, dear brethren! men are telling us now that there is no connection
between earth and heaven except such as telescopes and spectroscopes
can make out. We are told that there is no ladder, that there are no
angels, that possibly there is no God, or if that there be, we have
nothing to do with Him nor He with us; that our prayers cannot get to
His ears, if He have ears, nor His hand be stretched out to help us,
if He have a hand. I do not know how this cultivated generation is to
be brought back again to faith in God and delivered from that ghastly
doubt which empties heaven and saddens earth to its victims, but by
giving heed to the word which Christ spoke to the whole race while He
addressed Nathanael, 'Ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God
ascending and descending upon the Son of Man.' If He be the Son of
God, then all these heavenly messengers reach the earth by Him. If He
be the Son of Man, then every man may share in the gifts which through
Him are brought into the world, and His Manhood, which evermore dwelt
in heaven, even while on earth, and was ever girt about by angel
presences, is at once the measure of what each of us may become, and
the power by which we may become it.

One thing is needful for this wonderful consummation, even our faith.
And oh! how blessed it will be if in waste solitudes we can see the
open heaven, and in the blackest night the blaze of the glory of a
present Christ, and hear the soft rustle of angels' wings filling the
air, and find in every place 'a house of God and a gate of heaven,'
because He is there. All that may be yours on one condition:
'Believest thou? Thou shalt see heaven open, and the angels of God
ascending and descending upon the Son of Man.'




JESUS THE JOY-BRINGER

'And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee; and the
mother of Jesus was there: 2. And both Jesus was called, and His
disciples, to the marriage. 3. And when they wanted wine, the mother
of Jesus saith unto Him, They have no wine. 4. Jesus saith unto her,
Woman, what have I to do with thee? Mine hour is not yet come. 5. His
mother saith unto the servants, Whatsoever He saith unto you, do it.
6. And there were set there six waterpots of stone, after the manner
of the purifying of the Jews, containing two or three firkins apiece.
7. Jesus saith unto them, Fill the waterpots with water. And they
filled them up to the brim. 8. And He saith unto them, Draw out now,
and bear unto the governor of the feast. And they bare it. 9. When the
ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine, and knew
not whence it was: (but the servants which drew the water knew;) the
governor of the feast called the bridegroom, 10. And saith unto him,
Every man at the beginning doth set forth good wine; and when men have
well drunk, then that which is worse; but thou hast kept the good wine
until now. 11. This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of
Galilee, and manifested forth His glory; and His disciples believed on
Him.'--JOHN ii. 1-11.

The exact dating of this first miracle indicates an eye-witness. As
Nazareth was some thirty miles distant from the place where John was
baptizing, and Cana about four miles from Nazareth, the 'third day' is
probably reckoned from the day of the calling of Philip. Jesus and His
disciples seem to have been invited to the marriage feast later than
the other guests, as Mary was already there. She appears to have been
closely connected with the family celebrating the feast, as appears
from her knowledge of the deficiency in the wine, and her direction to
the servants.

The first point, which John makes all but as emphatic as the miracle
itself, is the new relation between Mary and Jesus, the lesson she had
to learn, and her sweet triumphant trust. Now that she sees her Son
surrounded by His disciples, the secret hope which she had nourished
silently for so long bursts into flame, and she turns to Him with
beautiful faith in His power to help, even in the small present need.
What an example her first word to Him sets us all! Like the two sad
sisters at Bethany, she is sure that to tell Him of trouble is enough,
for that His own heart will impel Him to share, and perchance to
relieve it. Let us tell Jesus our wants and leave Him to deal with
them as He knows how.

Of course, His addressing her as 'Woman' has not the meaning which it
would have with us, for the term is one of respect and courtesy, but
there is a plain intimation of a new distance in it, which is
strengthened by the question, 'What is there in common between us?'
What in common between a mother and her son! Yes, but she has to learn
that the assumption of the position of Messiah in which her mother's
pride so rejoiced, carried necessarily a consequence, the first of the
swords which were to pierce that mother's heart of hers. That her Son
should no more call her 'mother,' but 'woman,' told her that the old
days of being subject to her were past for ever, and that the old
relation was merged in the new one of Messiah and disciple--a bitter
thought, which many a parent has to taste the bitterness of still,
when wider outlooks and new sense of a vocation come to their
children. Few mothers are able to accept the inevitable as Mary did,
Jesus' 'hour' is not to be prescribed to Him, but His own
consciousness of the fit time must determine His action. What gave Him
the signal that the hour was struck is not told us, nor how soon after
that moment it came. But the saying gently but decisively declares His
freedom, His infallible accuracy, and certain intervention at the
right time. We may think that He delays, but He always helps, 'and
that right early.'

Mary's sweet humility and strong trust come out wonderfully in her
direction to the servants, which is the exact opposite of what might
have been expected after the cold douche administered to her eagerness
to prompt Jesus. Her faith had laid hold of the little spark of
promise in that 'not yet,' and had fanned it into a flame. 'Then He
will intervene, and I can leave Him to settle when.' How firm, though
ignorant, must have been the faith which did not falter even at the
bitter lesson and the apparent repulse, and how it puts to shame our
feebler confidence in our better known Lord, if ever He delays our
requests! Mary left all to Jesus; His commands were to be implicitly
obeyed. Do we submit to Him in that absolute fashion both as to the
time and the manner of His responses to our petitions?

The next point is the actual miracle. It is told with remarkable
vividness and equally remarkable reserve. We do not even learn in what
precisely it consisted. Was all the water in the vessels turned into
wine? Did the change affect only what was drawn out? No answer is
possible to these questions. Jesus spoke no word of power, nor put
forth His hand. His will silently effected the change on matter. So He
manifested forth His glory as Creator and Sustainer, as wielding the
divine prerogative of affecting material things by His bare volition.

The reality of the miracle is certified by the jovial remark of the
'ruler of the feast.' As Bengel says: 'The ignorance of the ruler
proves the goodness of the wine; the knowledge of the servants, the
reality of the miracle.' His palate, at any rate, was not so dulled as
to be unable to tell a good 'brand' when he tasted it, nor is there
any reason to suppose that Jesus was supplying more wine to a company
that had already had more than enough.

The ruler's words are not meant to apply to the guests at that feast,
but are quite general. But this Evangelist is fond of quoting words
which have deeper meanings than the speakers dreamed, and with his
mystically contemplative eye he sees hints and symbols of the
spiritual in very common things. So we are not forcing higher meanings
into the ruler's jest, but catching one intention of John's quotation
of it, when we see in it an unconscious utterance of the great truth
that Jesus keeps His best wine till the last. How many poor deluded
souls are ever finding that the world does the very opposite, luring
men on to be its slaves and victims by brilliant promises and
shortlived delights, which sooner or later lose their deceitful lustre
and become stale, and often positively bitter! 'The end of that mirth
is heaviness.' The dreariest thing in all the world is a godless old
age, and one of the most beautiful things in all the world is the calm
sunset which so often glorifies a godly life that has been full of
effort for Jesus, and of sorrows patiently borne as being sent by Him.

  'Full often clad in radiant vest
  Deceitfully goes forth the morn,'

but Christ more than keeps His morning's promises, and Christian
experience is steadily progressive, if Christians cling close to Him,
and Heaven will supply the transcendent confirmation of the blessed
truth that was spoken unawares by the 'ruler' at that humble feast.

What effect the miracle produced on others is not told; probably the
guests shared the ruler's ignorance, but its effect on the disciples
is that they 'believed on Him.' They had 'believed' already, or they
would not have been disciples (John i. 50), but their faith was
deepened as well as called forth afresh. Our faith ought to be
continuously and increasingly responsive to His continuous
manifestations of Himself which we can all find in our own experience.

Jesus 'manifested His glory' in this first sign. What were the rays of
that mild radiance? Surely the chief of them, in addition to the
revelation of His sovereignty over matter, to which we have already
referred, is that therein He hallowed the sweet sacred joys of
marriage and family life, that therein He revealed Himself as looking
with sympathetic eye on the ties that bind us together, and on the
gladness of our common humanity, that therein He reveals Himself as
able and glad to sanctify and elevate our joys and infuse into them a
strange new fragrance and power. The 'water' of our ordinary lives is
changed into 'wine.' Jesus became 'acquainted with grief' in order
that He might impart to every believing and willing soul His own joy,
and that by its remaining in us, our joy might be full.




THE FIRST MIRACLE IN CANA--THE WATER MADE WINE

'This beginning of miracles did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and
manifested forth His glory.'--JOHN ii. 11.

The keynote of this Gospel was struck in the earlier verses of the
first chapter in the great words, 'The Word was made flesh and dwelt
among us, and we beheld His glory, full of grace and truth.' To these
words there is an evident reference in this language. The Evangelist
regards Christ's first miracle as the first ray of that forth-flashing
glory of the Incarnate Word. To this Evangelist all miracles are
especially important as being _signs_, which is the word he generally
employs to designate them. They are not mere portents, but significant
revelations as well as wonders. It is not, I think, accidental that
there are just seven miracles of our Lord's, before His crucifixion,
recorded by John, and one of the Risen Lord.

These signs are all set forth by the Evangelist as manifestations of
various aspects of that one white light, of uncreated glory which rays
from Christ. They are, if I may so say, the sevenfold colours into
which the one beam is analysed. Each of them might be looked at in
turn as presenting some fresh thought of what the 'glory...full of
grace and truth' is.

I begin with the first of the series. What, then, is the 'glory of the
only Begotten Son' which flashes forth upon us from the miracle? My
object is simply to try to answer that question for you.

I. First, then, we see here the revelation of His creative power.

It is very noteworthy that the miraculous fact is veiled entirely in
the narrative. Not a word is said of the method of operation, it is
not even said that the miracle was wrought; we are only told what
preceded it, and what followed it. Itself is shrouded in deep silence.
The servants fill the water-pots.--'Draw out now,' and they draw, 'and
bear it to the governor of the feast.' Where the miraculous act comes
in we do not know; what was its nature we cannot tell. How far it
extended is left obscure. Was all the large quantity of water in these
six great vessels of stone transformed into wine, or was the change
effected in the moment when the portion that was wanted was drawn from
them and on that portion only? We cannot answer the question.
Probably, I think, the latter; but at all events a veil is dropped
over the fact.

Only this, we see that in this miracle, even more conspicuously than
in any other of our Lord's, there are no means at all employed.
Sometimes He used material vehicles, anointing a man's eyes with clay,
or moistening the ear with the spittle; sometimes sending a man to
bathe in the Pool of Siloam; sometimes laying His hand on the sick;
sometimes healing from a distance by the mere utterance of His word.
But here there is not even a word; no means of any kind employed, but
the silent forth-putting of His will, which, without token, without
visible audible indication of any sort, passes with sovereign power
into the midst of material things and there works according to His own
purpose. Is not this the signature of divinity, that without means the
mere forth-putting of the will is all that is wanted to mould matter
as plastic to His command? It is not even, 'He spake and it was done,'
but silently He willed, and 'the conscious water knew its Lord, and
blushed.' This is the glory of the Incarnate Word.

Now that was no interruption of the order of things established in the
Creation. There was no suspension of natural laws here. What happened
was only this, that the power which generally works through mediating
links came into immediate connection with the effect. What does it
matter whether your engine transmits its powers through half a dozen
cranks, or two or three less? What does it matter whether the chain be
longer or shorter? Some parenthetical links are dropped here, that is
all that is unusual. For in all ordinary natural operations, as we
call them, the profound prologue of this Gospel teaches us to believe
that Christ, the Eternal Word, works according to His will. He was the
Agent of creation. He is the Agent of that preservation which is only
a continual creation. In Him is life, and all living things live
because of the continual presence and operation upon them of His
divine power. And again I say, what is phenomenal and unusual in this
miracle is but the suppression of two or three of the connecting links
between the continual cause of all creatural existences, and its
effect. So let us learn that whether through a long chain of so-called
causes, or whether close up against the effect, without the
intervention of these parenthetical and transmitting media, the divine
power works. The power is one, and the reason for the effect is one,
that Christ ever works in the world, and is that Eternal Word,
'without whom was not anything made that was made.' 'This beginning of
miracles did Christ... and manifested His glory.'

II. Then, again, we see here, I think, the revelation of one great
purpose of our Lord's coming, to hallow all common, and especially all
family, life.

What a strange contrast there is between the simple gladness of the
rustic village wedding and the tremendous scene of the Temptation in
the wilderness, which preceded it only by a few days! What a strange
contrast there is between the sublime heights of the first chapter and
the homely incident which opens the ministry! What a contrast between
the rigid asceticism of the Forerunner, 'who came neither eating nor
drinking,' and the Son of Man, who enters thus freely and cheerfully
into the common joys and relationships of human nature! How unlike the
scene at the marriage-feast must have been to the anticipations of the
half-dozen disciples that had gathered round Him, all a-tingling with
expectation as to what would be the first manifestation of His
Messianic power! The last thing they would have dreamed of would have
been to find Him in the humble home in Cana of Galilee. Some people
say 'this miracle is unworthy of Him, for it was wrought upon such a
trivial occasion.' And was it a trivial occasion that prompted Him
thus to commence His career, not by some high and strained and remote
exhibition of more than human saintliness or power, but by entering
like a Brother into the midst of common, homespun, earthly joys, and
showing how His presence ennobled and sanctified these? Surely the
world has gained from Him, among the many gifts that He has given to
it, few that have been the fountain of more sacred sweetness and
blessedness than is opened in that fact that the first manifestation
of His glory had for its result the hallowing of the marriage tie.

And is it not in accordance with the whole meaning and spirit of His
works that 'forasmuch as the brethren were partakers of' anything, 'He
Himself likewise should take part of the same,' and sanctify every
incident of life by His sharing of it? So He protests against that
faithless and wicked division of life into sacred and secular, which
has wrought such harm both in the sacred and in the secular regions.
So He protests against the notion that religion has to do with another
world rather than with this. So He protests against the narrowing
conception of His work which would remove from its influence anything
that interests humanity. So He says, as it were, at the very beginning
of His career, 'I am a Man, and nothing that is human do I reckon
foreign to Myself.'

Brethren! let us learn the lesson that all life is the region of His
Kingdom; that the sphere of His rule is everything which a man can do
or feel or think. Let us learn that where His footsteps have trod is
hallowed ground. If a prince shares for a few moments in the
festivities of his gathered people on some great occasion, how
ennobled the feast seems! If he joins in their sports or in their
occupations for a while as an act of condescension, how they return to
them with renewed vigour! And so we. We have had our King in the midst
of all our family life, in the midst of all our common duties;
therefore are they consecrated. Let us learn that all things done with
the consciousness of His presence are sacred. He has hallowed every
corner of human life by His presence; and the consecration, like some
pungent and perennial perfume, lingers for us yet in the else
scentless air of daily life, if we follow His footsteps.

Sanctity is not singularity. There is no need to withdraw from any
region of human activity and human interest in order to develop the
whitest saintliness, the most Christlike purity. The saint is to be in
the world, but not of it; like the Master, who went straight from the
wilderness and its temptations to the homely gladness of the rustic
marriage.

III. Still further, we have here a symbol of Christ's glory as the
ennobler and heightener of all earthly joys.

That may be taken with perhaps a permissible play of fancy as one
meaning, at any rate, of the transformation of water into wine; the
less savoury and fragrant and powerful liquid into the more so. Wine,
in the Old Testament especially, is the symbol of gladness, and though
it received a deeper and a sacreder meaning in the New Testament as
being the emblem of His blood shed for us, it is the Old Testament
point of view that prevails here. And therefore, I say, we may read in
the incident the symbol of His transforming power. He comes, the Man
of Sorrows, with the gift of joy in His hand. It is not an unworthy
object--not unworthy, I mean, of a divine sacrifice--to make men glad.
It is worth His while to come from Heaven to agonise and to die, in
order that He may sprinkle some drops of incorruptible and everlasting
joy over the weary and sorrowful hearts of earth. We do not always
give its true importance to gladness in the economy of our lives,
because we are so accustomed to draw our joys from ignoble sources
that in most of our joys there is something not altogether creditable
or lofty. But Christ came to bring gladness, and to transform its
earthly sources into heavenly fountains; and so to change all the less
sweet, satisfying, and potent draughts which we take from earth's
cisterns into the wine of the Kingdom; the new wine, strong and
invigorating, 'making glad the heart of man.'

Our commonest blessings, our commonest joys, if only they be not foul
and filthy, are capable of this transformation. Link them with Christ;
be glad in Him. Bring Him into your mirth, and it will change its
character. Like a taper plunged into a jar of oxygen, it will blaze up
more brightly. Earth, at its best and highest, without Him is like
some fair landscape lying in the shadow; and when He comes to it, it
is like the same scene when the sun blazes out upon it, flashes from
every bend of the rippling river, brings beauty into many a shady
corner, opens all the flowering petals and sets all the birds singing
in the sky. The whole scene changes when a beam of light from Him
falls upon earthly joys. He will transform them and ennoble them and
make them perpetual. Do not meddle with mirth over which you cannot
make the sign of the Cross and ask Him to bless it; and do not keep
Him out of your gladness, or it will leave bitterness on your lips,
howsoever sweet it tastes at first.

Ay! and not only can this Master transform the water at the marriage
feast into the wine of gladness, but the cups that we all carry, into
which our tears have dropped--upon these too He can lay His hand and
change them into cups of blessing and of salvation.

'Blessed are they... who, passing through the valley of weeping,
gather their tears into a well; the rain also covereth it with
blessings.' So the old Psalm put the thought that sorrow may be turned
into a solemn joy, and may lie at the foundation of our most flowery
fruitfulness. And the same lesson we may learn from this symbol. The
Christ who transforms the water of earthly gladness into the wine of
heavenly blessedness, can do the same thing for the bitter waters of
sorrow, and can make them the occasions of solemn joy. When the leaves
drop we see through the bare branches. Shivering and cold they may
look, but we see the stars beyond, and that is better. 'This beginning
of miracles' will Jesus repeat in every sad heart that trusts itself
to Him.

IV. And last of all, we have here a token of His glory as supplying
the deficiencies of earthly sources.

'His mother saith unto Him, "They have no wine."' The world's banquet
runs out, Christ supplies an infinite gift. These great water-pots
that stood there, if the whole contents of them were changed, as is
possible, contained far more than sufficient for the modest wants of
the little company. The water that flowed from each of them, in
obedience to the touch of the servant's hand, if the change were
effected then, as is possible, would flow on so long as any thirsted
or any asked. And Christ gives to each of us, if we choose, a fountain
that will spring unto life eternal. And when the world's platters are
