There are lessons for our hearts to-day.  Government is a delegated
trust from God, who alone has the right to govern.  He gives to every
nation the right to say in what form this trust shall be clothed.  No
man has the right to be his brother's master.  Take away the truth that
government is a trust which comes from God, and you have left nothing
between man and man but cunning and brute force.  Burke said, "this
sacred trust of government does not arise from our conventions and
compacts," but it gives our conventions and compacts all the force and
sanction which they have.  I shall be told that the name of God is not
found in the Constitution of the United States; it did not need to be
when it was written on the people's hearts.

While we commemorate the noble deeds of our fathers, which under God
were this day crowned with success, we gratefully remember that our
fathers' God has guided us through all dangers.  What other nation has
come out of the horrors of civil war with victors and vanquished vieing
with each other in love for one common country?  Where has the hand of
the assassin bowed the whole people by the leader's grave?  This is no
day for boasting or to call over the roll of our great dead.

We have sinned deeply, and deeply have we paid the penalty.  No hand but
God's could have over-ruled our mistakes and given us our favored
position to-day.  We must not forget that no nation has ever survived
the loss of its religion.  The year which saw Washington inaugurated
president, saw in the fair land of Lafayette the beginnings of that
holocaust of murder which turned France into a hell.  "The fear of the
Lord is the beginning of wisdom."  No high-sounding words about freedom,
no Godless philosophy, no infidel creed, which robs men of homes here
and heaven hereafter, can save this nation.  "Not unto us, but unto Thy
name be the praise," must be our song, as it was the song of our
fathers.


There are clouds and darkness on the horizon for the future.  I see it
in the impatience of law, in the jealousies between class and class, in
the selfishness of the rich, and in the misery of the poor, in bribery
and corruption in high places, and in the turbulence of mobs.  I see it
in the foul monster of intemperance and impurity which stalk unabashed
through the land.  But I see the greatest danger in that insidious
teaching which robs humanity of an eternal standard of right, which
makes morality prudence or imprudence, which limits man's horizon by the
grave, and takes from hearts and homes God and Christ and heaven.  Yet,
I reverently believe that God has set us in the forefront of the nations
to be, as our text says, "a beacon on the mountain-top," to lead on in
His work in the last time.  It may be that for our sins we shall walk
again into the furnace, as we have walked and come out of it purified
and fitted for the Master's use.  I sometimes lose faith in men, but I
will not lose faith in God.  It is ours to work and bide our time; so
did our fathers, and so will God give the harvest.  I should wrong my
heart and yours to-day, if I forgot the daughters of the Revolution.  We
might have had no Washington but for the lessons he learned at that
mother's knee, that his duty to God was to believe in Him, to fear Him
and to love Him with all his heart, with all his mind, with all his soul
and with all his strength, to worship Him, to give Him thanks, to put
his whole trust in Him, to call on Him, to honor His holy name and His
word and to love Him truly all the days of his life; that his duty
towards his neighbor--was to love him as himself, and to do to all men as
he would have them do unto him, to love, honor and succor his father and
mother, to honor and obey the civil authority, to hurt nobody by word or
deed, to be true and just in all his dealings, to bear no malice or
hatred in his heart, to keep his hands from picking and stealing, and
his tongue from evil speaking, lying and slandering, to keep his body in
temperance, soberness and chastity.  Not to covet or desire other men's
goods, but to learn and labor truly to get his own living and to do his
duty in that state of life unto which it should please God to call him.
We know this was the rule of his life.  The Father of his Country found
his solace, inspiration and help, as many of us have found it, in the
love of a Christian wife.  There are no fairer names in our country's
history than Martha Washington, Abigail Adams, Elizabeth Schuyler
Hamilton, Sally Foster Otis, Alice DeLancy Izard, Jane Ketelas Beekman,
and many more, who made up the republican court of Washington; and we do
not forget humble names like Mollie Stark, whose lives were consecrated
to their country.  Wives, mothers, daughters! none have places of
greater influence in shaping and moulding our country than you.  Your
power is the power of a Christian mother, a Christian wife, a Christian
daughter.  In the darkest hour look to God, believe that your mission is
a nobler one than to be a slave of fashion or the leader of a party.
Plant your feet on the rock of eternal truth--never speak with uncertain
voice of the verities of the Christian faith.  For you St. Paul said:
"How knowest thou, O Woman, but thou mayest save thy husband and thy
child," and saving them a nation is saved.





III. _SERMON AT THE SECOND ANNUAL MEETING OF THE MISSIONARY COUNCIL
IN WASHINGTON, D.C., NOV. 13, 1888_.


"_The kingdoms of this world have become the kingdoms of our Lord and of
His Christ, and He shall reign for ever and ever_."--REVELATION xi. 15.


THESE words are God's surety that the prayers, the trials and the labors
of His Church shall be crowned with success.

We are living in the great missionary age of the Church.  Impenetrable
barriers have been broken down.  Fast-closed doors have been opened.
There is no country where we may not carry the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
Divine Providence has been fusing the nations of the earth into one
common brotherhood.  Man has created nothing.  The lightening would run
its circuit in the Garden of Eden as well as when Morse made it man's
messenger.  In the fullness of time God has lifted the veil from human
eyes to see the mysteries of His bounty, and so prepare a highway for
the coming of our King.

I have no argument about the obligation of missions.  It is eighteen
hundred years too late for this.

I speak to you to-day of the progress of the Kingdom of Christ.  Pray
for me that the story may lead us to the foot of the Cross to consecrate
all that we have to His blessed service.


At the close of the last century a thoughtful young Englishman asked the
governor of the East India Company to go to India to preach the Gospel.
The answer was: "The man that would go to India upon that errand is as
mad as a man who would put a torch to a powder magazine."

A few years ago Chunder Sen, the great scholar of India, died.  On his
death-bed a friend asked him what he thought were the prospects of
Christianity in India.  He answered: "Jesus Christ has conquered the
heart of India."  Not that great battles are not yet to be fought, much
weary work to be done, but with more than half a million of Christians
in India, which have been won in this century, we are certain that the
nation will be won to Christ.

I turn to that dark continent which has had more of human sorrow bound
up in its history than any place on earth.  Forty years ago in a cottage
in the highlands of Scotland an aged man said to his son: "David, you
will have family prayer to-day, for when we part we shall never meet
again until we meet before the great white throne."  David Livingstone
read the thirty-fourth Psalm, the key-note of that wonderful life, and
then poured out his heart to God in prayer, threw his arms around his
father's neck and kissed him; they parted never to meet again in this
world, and so he went to Africa.  He did a wonderful work in the
Bechuana country.  He was a carpenter, blacksmith, teacher, laborer,
physician and minister to these poor souls, but the man's heart was in
the interior of Africa.  One day, with about as much preparation as I
take when I go to the north woods of Minnesota, he left for the interior
of Africa.  His route was along the path of slave traders, and every few
days he came to some place where a poor woman had fainted in the
chain-gang and had been strapped to a tree with her babe at her breast
and left to be stung to death by insects.  No wonder that he wrote in
his Journal, and blotted it with tears: "Oh, God, when will the great
sore of the world be healed?"

When you remember that the followers of the false prophet are the only
people engaged in this traffic in human flesh, and that to the poor
African it means slavery or death, you have the answer to the stories of
the progress of Mohammedanism in Africa.

I cannot tell the story of his life.   One day he was found dead on his
knees in prayer in an African hut.  That life had so impressed itself
upon the heathen folk that they did what will always be a marvel of
history.  They wrapped the body in leaves.  They covered it with pitch.
They carried it nine months on their shoulders.  They fought hostile
tribes.  They swam swollen rivers.  They cut their way through
impenetrable thickets, and at last stood at the door of a mission house
in Zanzibar, and said, "We have brought the man of God to be buried with
his people."  And so David Livingstone sleeps in Westminster Abbey.

Our Stanley took up Livingstone's work, and he laid Africa open to the
gaze of the world.  He travelled nine hundred and ninety-nine days, and
the thousandth day reached the sea-coast.  In all that journey he did
not meet a single, solitary soul who had heard that Jesus Christ had
come into the world.  Stanley tells the reason why he went back to
Africa.  He said:


"When I found Livingstone I cared no more for missions than the veriest
atheist in England.  I had been a press reporter, and my business was to
follow armies and to describe battles; to attend conventions and report
speeches, but my heart had not been touched with sympathy for missions.
When I found this grand old man I asked: 'What is he here for?  Is he
crazy?  Is he cracked?  I sat at his feet four months and I saw that a
power above his will had taken possession of his life, and given him a
hunger to lead poor heathen folk out of their darkness.

"I have heard the same voice speaking to my heart, 'Follow me,' and I go
back to Africa to finish Livingstone's work."

This was a few years ago.  To-day there are fifteen Christian Bishops of
our communion in Africa.  Eight were present at the Lambeth Conference.
One of them, Bishop Crowther, was captured when a boy ten years of age
on a slave ship, placed in a mission school, transferred to a high
school, then to the university, graduated with honors, and went back to
Africa as a Bishop.  As I looked in the face of that black man and
thought of his wonderful history, I remembered another man from Africa
that carried the cross of my blessed Master up the hill to Calvary, and
that this aged servant of Christ was following in his blessed footsteps.

Another of these Bishops was one of the manliest men that I ever looked
upon; Bishop Smythies, the picture of manly beauty, honored by his
university, beloved by friends, a face gentle and loving as that of St.
John.  When I thought of this man going on foot in the interior of
Africa, perhaps to die for Christ, I could not keep back the tears, and
I went to him and said, "My good brother, I cannot tell you how my heart
goes out to you in loving sympathy."  He smiled and said, "Bishop, when
the Church in Jerusalem had more work than it knew how to do, the Holy
Ghost sent one of its ministers upon a long journey to convert one
African.  Surely it is not much for the Christians of Christian England
to send a Christian Bishop to millions who never heard there is a
Savior."

And now I turn to the opposite quarter of the globe--Australasia, New
