are hungering for the bread of life, offer them nothing but your own
nostrum, the Catechism?

Yes, my friends, I do.  I know that the Church Catechism is not the
bread of life.  Neither, I beg you to remember, is any other
Catechism, or doctrine, or tract, or sermon, or book or anything
else whatsoever.  Christ is the Bread of Life.  But how shall they
know Christ, unless they be taught what Christ is; and how can they
be taught what Christ is, unless the conception of him which is
offered them be true?

And, I say, that the Catechism does give a true conception of
Christ; and more, a far truer one--I had almost said, an infinitely
truer--than any which I have yet seen in these realms:  that from
the Catechism a child may learn who God is, who Christ is, who he
himself is, what are his relation and duty to God, what are his
relation and duty to his neighbours, to his country, and to the
whole human race, far better than from any document of the kind of
which I am aware.

I know well the substitutes for the Catechism which are becoming
more and more fashionable; the limitations, the explainings away,
the non-natural and dishonest interpretations, which are more and
more applied to it when it is used; and I warn you, that those
substitutes for, and those defacements of, the Catechism, will be no
barrier against an outburst of fanaticism, did one arise; nay, that
many of them would directly excite it; and prove, when too late,
that instead of feeding the masses with the bread of life, which
should preserve them, soul and body, some persons had been feeding
them with poison, which had maddened them, soul and body.  But I see
no such danger in the Catechism.  I see in the Catechism; in its
freedom alike from sentimental horror and sentimental raptures; its
freedom alike from slavish terror, and from Pharisaic assurance; a
guarantee that those who learn it will learn something of that sound
religion, sober, trusty, cheerful, manful, which may be seen still,
thank God, in country Church folk of the good old school; and which
will, in the day of trial, be proof against the phantoms of a
diseased conscience, and the ravings of spiritual demagogues.

And therefore I preach gladly for this institution; therefore I urge
strongly its claims on you, whom I am bound to suppose honest
Churchmen, because the fact of its being a Diocesan Board of
Education is, at least in this diocese, a guarantee that the schools
which it supports will teach their children, honestly and literally,
the Catechism of the Church of England, which may God preserve!

Not that I expect it to teach only that.  I take for granted, that
that will be its primary object, the guarantee that all the rest is
well done:  but I know that much more than that must be done; that
much more will be done, even unintentionally.

For, shall I--I trust that I shall not--make a too fanciful
application of the last fact recorded of this great miracle, if I
bid you find in it a fresh source of hope in your work?

'And they took up of the fragments which were left seven baskets
full.'

The plain historic fact is, that not only do the seven loaves feed
4,000, but that what they leave, and are about to throw away, far
exceeds the original supply.

I believe the fact:  I ask you to consider why it was recorded?
Surely, like all facts in the gospels, to teach us more of the
character of Christ, which (a fact too often forgotten in these
days) is the character of God.  To teach us that he is an utterly
bountiful God.  That as in him there is no weakness, nor difficulty,
so in him is no grudging, no parsimony.  That he is not only able,
but willing, to give exceeding abundantly, beyond all that we can
ask or think.  That there is a magnificence in God and in God's
workings, which ought to fill us with boundless hope, if we are but
fellow-workers with God.

You see that magnificence in the seeming prodigality of nature; in
the prodigality which creates a thousand beautiful species of
butterfly, where a single plain one would have sufficed; in the
prodigality which creates a thousand acorns, only one of which is
destined to grow into an oak.  Everywhere in the kingdom of nature
it shows itself; believe that it exists as richly in the higher
kingdom of grace.  Yes.  Believe, that whenever you begin to work
according to God's law and God's will, let your means seem as
inadequate as they may, not only will your work multiply, as by
miracle, under your hands; but the very fragments of it, which you
are inclined to neglect and overlook, will form in time a heap of
unexpected treasure.  Plans which you have thrown aside, because
they seemed to fail, details which seemed to encumber you, accessory
work which formed no part of your original plan, all will be of use
to some one, somehow, somewhere.

You began, for instance, by wishing to educate the masses of London;
you are educating over and above, indirectly, thousands who never
saw London.  You began by wishing to teach them spiritual truth; you
have been drawn on to give them an excellent secular education
besides.  You intended to make them live as good Christians here at
home.  But since you began, the interpenetration of town and country
by railroads, and the rush of emigrants to our colonies, have
widened infinitely the sphere of your influence; and you are now
teaching them also to live as useful men in the farthest corners of
these isles, and in far lands beyond the seas, to become educated
emigrants, loyal colonists; to raise, by their example, rude
settlers, and ruder savages; and so, the very fragments of your good
work, without your will or intent, will bless thousands of whom you
never heard, and help to sow the seeds of civilization and
Christianity, wherever the English flag commands Justice, and the
English Church preaches Love.



SERMON XI.  BLESSING AND CURSING



(Preached at the Chapel Royal, Whitehall, Ash Wednesday, 1860.)

Deuteronomy xxviii. 15.  It shall come to pass, if thou wilt not
hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to observe to do all his
commandments and his statutes which I command thee this day; that
all these curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee.

Many good people are pained by the Commination Service which we have
just heard read.  They dislike to listen to it.  They cannot say
'Amen' to its awful words.  It seems to them to curse men; and their
conscience forbids them to join in curses.  To imprecate evil on any
living being seems to them unchristian, barbarous, a relic of dark
ages and dark superstitions.

But does the Commination Service curse men?  Are these good people
(who are certainly right in their horror of cursing) right in the
accusations which they bring against it?  Or have they fallen into a
mistake as to the meaning of the service, owing, it may be supposed,
to that carelessness about the exact use of words, that want of
accurate and critical habits of mind, which is but too common among
religious people at the present day?

I cannot but think that they mistake, when they say that the
Commination Service curses men.  For to curse a man, is to pray and
wish that God may become angry with him, and may vent his anger on
the man by punishing him.  But I find no such prayer and wish in any
word of the Commination Service.  Its form is not, 'Cursed _be_ he
that doeth such and such things,' but 'Cursed _is_ he that doeth
them.'

Does this seem to you a small difference?  A fine-drawn question of
words?  Is it, then, a small difference whether I say to my fellow-
man, I hope and pray that you may be stricken with disease, or
whether I say, You are stricken with disease, whether you know it or
not.  I warn you of it, and I warn you to go to the physician?  For
so great, and no less, is the difference.

And if any one shall say, that it is very probable that the authors
of the Liturgy were not conscious of this distinction; but that they
meant by cursing what priests in most ages have meant by it; I must
answer, that it is dealing them most hard and unfair measure, to
take for granted that they were as careless about words as we are;
that they were (like some of us) so ignorant of grammar as not to
know the difference between the indicative and the imperative mood;
and to assume this, in order to make them say exactly what they do
_not_ say, and to impute to them a ferocity of which no hint is
given in their Commination Service.

But some will say, Granted that the authors of the Commination
Service did not wish evil to sinners--granted that they did not long
to pray, with bell, book, and candle, that they might be tormented
for ever in Gehenna--granted that they did not desire to burn their
bodies on earth; those words are still dark and unchristian.  They
could only be written by men who believed that God hates sinners,
that his will is to destroy them on earth, and torture them for ever
after death.

We may impute, alas! what motives and thoughts we choose, in the
face of our Lord's own words, Judge not, and ye shall not be judged.
But we shall not be fair and honest in imputing, unless we first
settle what these men meant, in the words which they have actually
written.  What did they mean by 'cursed' is the question.  And that
we can only answer by the context of the Commination Service.  And
that again we can only answer by seeing what it means in the Bible,
which the Reformers profess to follow in all their writings.

Now, what does the Bible mean by a curse, and cursing?--For we are
bound to believe, in all fairness, that the Reformers meant the
same, and neither more nor less.  The text, I think, tells us
plainly enough.  We know that its words came true.  We know that the
Jews _did_ perish out of their native land, as the Author of this
book foretold, in consequence of doing that against which Moses
warned them.  We know also that they did not perish by any
miraculous intervention of Providence:  but simply as any other
nation would have perished; by profligacy, internal weakness, civil
war, and, at last, by foreign conquest.

We know that their destruction was the natural consequence of their
own folly.  Why are we to suppose that the prophet meant anything
but that?  He foretells the result.  Why are we to suppose that he
did not foresee the means by which that result would happen?  Why
are we, in the name of all justice, to impute to him an expectation
of miraculous interferences, about which he says no word?  The curse
which he foretold was the natural consequence of the sins of the
nation.  Why are we not to believe that he considered it as such?
Why are we not to believe that the Bible meaning of a curse, is
simply the natural ill-consequence of men's own ill-actions?  I
believe that if you will apply the same rule to other places of
Scripture, you will have reason to reverence the letter and the
Spirit of Scripture more and more, and will free your minds from
many a superstitious and magical fancy, which will prevent you alike
from understanding the Bible and the Commination Service.

The Book of Deuteronomy, like the rest of Moses' laws, says nothing
whatever about the life to come.  It says, that sin is to be
punished, and virtue rewarded, in this life; and the Commination
Service, when it quotes the Book of Deuteronomy, means so, so I
presume, likewise.  Indeed, if we look at the very remarkable, and
most invaluable address which the Commination Service contains, we
shall find its author saying the same thing, in the very passages
which are to some minds most offensive.

For even in this life the door of mercy may be shut, and we may cry
in vain for mercy, when it is the time for justice.  This is not
merely a doctrine:  it is a fact; a common, patent fact.  Men do
wrong, and escape, again and again, the just punishment of their
deeds; but how often there are cases in which a man does not escape;
when he is filled with the fruit of his own devices, and left to the
misery which he has earned; when the covetous and dishonest man
ruins himself past all recovery; when the profligate is left in a
shameful old age, with worn-out body and defiled mind, to rot into
an unhonoured grave; when the hypocrite who has tampered with his
conscience is left without any conscience at all.

They have chosen the curse, and the curse is come upon them to the
uttermost.  So it is.  Is the Commination service uncharitable, is
the preacher uncharitable, when they tell men so?  No more so, than
the physician is uncharitable, when he says,--'If you go on misusing
thus your lungs, or your digestion, you will ruin them past all
cure.'  Is God to be blamed because this is a fact?  Why then
because the other is a fact likewise?

Now if this be, as I believe, the doctrine of the commination
service; if this be, as I believe, the message of Ash-Wednesday, it
is one which is quite free from superstition or cruelty:  but it is
a message more disagreeable, and more terrible too, than any magical
imprecations of harm to the sinner could bring.  More disagreeable.
For which is more galling to human pride, to be told,--Sin is
certainly a clever, and politic, and successful trade, as far as
this world is concerned.  It is only in the next world, or in the
case of rare and peculiar visitations and judgments in this world,
that it will harm you?  Or to be told,--Sin is no more clever,
politic, or successful here, than hereafter.  The wrong-doing which
looks to you so prudent is folly.  You, man of the world as you may
think yourself, are simply, as often as you do wrong, blind,
ignorant, suicidal.  You are your own curse; your acts are their own
curse.  The injury to your own character and spirit, the injury to
your fellow-creatures, which will again re-act on you,--these are
the curses of God, which you will feel some day too heavy to be
borne.  And which is more terrible?  To tell a man, that God will
judge and curse him by unexpected afflictions, or at least by
casting him into Gehenna in the world to come:  or to tell him, 'You
are judged already.  The curse is on you already?'

The first threat he may get rid of, by denying the fact; by saying
that God does not generally interfere to punish bad men in this
life; that he does not strike them dead, swallow them up; and he may
even quote Scripture on his side, and call on Solomon to bear
witness how as dieth the fool, so dieth wise man; and that there is
one event to the righteous and the wicked.

As for the fear of Gehenna, again, after he dies:  that is too dim
and distant; too unlike anything which he has seen in this life (now
that the tortures and Autos da fe of the middle age have
disappeared) to frighten him very severely, except in rare moments,
when his imagination is highly excited.  And even then, he can--in
practice he does--look forward to 'making his peace with God' as it
is called, at last, and fulfilling Baalam's wish of dying the death
of the righteous, after living the life of the wicked.  He knows
well, too, that when that day comes, he can find--alas! that it
should be so--priests and preachers in plenty, of some communion or
other, who will give him his viaticum, and bid him depart in peace
to that God, who has said that there is no peace to the wicked.

But terrible, truly terrible and heart searching for the wrongdoer
is the message--God does not curse thee:  thou hast cursed thyself.
God will not go out of his way to punish thee:  thou hast gone out
of his way, and thereby thou art punishing thyself, just as, by
abusing thy body, thou bringest a curse upon it; so by abusing thy
soul.  God does not break his laws to punish drunkenness or
gluttony.  The laws themselves, the laws of nature, the beneficent
laws of life, nutrition, growth, and health, they punish thee; and
kill by the very same means by which they make alive.  And so with
thy soul, thy character, thy humanity.  God does not break his laws
to punish its sins.  The laws themselves punish; every fresh wrong
deed, and wrong thought, and wrong desire of thine sets thee more
and more out of tune with those immutable and eternal laws of the
Moral Universe, which have their root in the absolute and necessary
character of God himself.  All things that he has ordained; the laws
of the human body, the laws of the human soul, the laws of society,
the laws of all heaven and earth are arrayed against thee; for thou
hast arrayed thyself against them.  They have not excommunicated
thee:  thou hast, single-handed, excommunicated thyself.  In thine
own self-will, thou hast set thyself to try thy strength against God
and his whole universe.  Dost thou fancy that he needs to interfere
with the working of that universe, to punish such a worm as thee?
No more than the great mill engine need stop, and the overseer of it
interfere with the machinery, if the drunken or careless workman
should entangle himself among the wheels.  The wheels move on, doing
their duty, spinning cloth for the use of man:  but the workman who
should have worked with them, is entangled among them.  He is out of
his place; and slowly, but irresistibly, they are grinding him to
powder, as the whole universe is grinding thee.  Heart-searching,
indeed, is such a message; for it will come home, not merely to that
very rare character, the absolutely wicked man, the ideal sinner, at
whom the preacher too often aims ideal arrows, which vanish in the
air:  not to him merely will it come home, but to ourselves, to us
average human beings, inconsistent, half-formed, struggling lamely
and confusedly between good and evil.  Oh let us take home with us
to-day this belief, the only belief in this matter possible in an
age of science, which is daily revealing more and more that God is a
God, not of disorder, but of order.  Let us take home, I say, the
awful belief, that every wrong act of ours does of itself sow the
seeds of its own punishment; and that those seeds will assuredly
bear fruit, now, here in this life.  Let us believe that God's
judgments, though they will culminate, no doubt, hereafter in one
great day, and "one divine far-off event, to which the whole
creation moves," are yet about our path and about our bed, now,
here, in this life.  Let us believe, that if we are to prepare to
meet our God, we must do it now, here in this life, yea and all day
long; for he is not far off from any one of us, seeing that in him
we live, and move, and have our being; and can never go from his
presence, never flee from his spirit.  Let us believe that God's
good laws, and God's good order, are in themselves and of
themselves, the curse and punishment of every sin of ours; and that
Ash-Wednesday, returning year after year, whether we be glad or
sorry, good or evil, bears witness to that most awful and yet most
blessed fact.

My friends, this is the preacher's Ash-Wednesday's message:  but,
thanks be to God, it is not all.  It is written--'If thou, Lord,
wilt be extreme to mark what is done amiss:  Oh Lord, who may abide
it?  For there is mercy with thee; therefore shalt thou be feared.'

It is written--'On whomsoever this stone shall fall, it shall grind
him to powder:' but it is written too--'Whosoever shall fall on this
stone shall be broken;' and again, 'The broken and the contrite
heart, O God, thou shall not despise.'  There is such a thing as
pardon; pardon full and free, for the sake of the precious blood of
Christ.  Lent may be a time of awe and of shame:  but it is not a
time of despair.  Meanwhile remember this; that God has set before
you blessing and cursing, and that you may turn your life and God's
whole universe, as you will, either into that blessing or into that
curse.



SERMON XII.  WORK



(Twenty-fourth Sunday after Trinity.)

Proverbs xiv. 23.  In all labour there is profit.

I fear there are more lessons in the Book of Proverbs than most of
us care to learn.  There is a lesson in every verse of it, and a
shrewd one.  Certain I am, that for a practical, business man, who
has to do his duty and to make his way in this world, there is no
guide so safe as these same Proverbs of Solomon.  In _this_ world, I
say; for they say little about the world to come.  Their doctrine
is, that what is good for the next world, is good for this; that he
who wishes to go out of this world happily, must first go through
this world wisely; and more, that he who wishes to go through this
world happily, must likewise go through it wisely.

The righteous, says Solomon, shall be recompensed in the earth, and
not merely at the end of judgment hereafter:  much more the wicked
and the sinner.

That is the doctrine of the Proverbs; that men do, to a very great
extent, earn for themselves their good or their evil fortunes, and
are filled with the fruit of their own devices; and it is that
doctrine which makes them the best of text-books for the practical
man.

For the Proverbs do not look on religion as a thing to be kept out
of our daily dealings, and thought of only on Sundays:  they look on
true religion, which is to obey God, as a thing which mixes itself
up with all the cares and business of this mortal life, this work-
day world; and, therefore, they are written in work-day language; in
homely words taken from the common doings of this mortal life, as
our Lord's parables are.  And, like the most simple of those
parables, the most simple of the proverbs have often the very
deepest meaning.

'In all labour there is profit.'  Whatsoever is worth doing, is
worth doing well.  It is always worth while to take pains.  In
another proverb, homely enough--but if it be in the Bible, it is not
too homely for us--'Where no oxen are, the crib is clean,' Solomon
says the same thing as in the text.  He says, 'Where no oxen are,
the farmer is saved trouble; the clearing away of dirt and refuse;
and all the labour required to keep his cattle in condition:  but
all that trouble,' Solomon says, if a man will but undergo it, will
repay itself; 'for much increase is in the strength of the ox.'  For
the ox, in that country, as in most parts of the world now, is the
beast used for ploughing, and for all the work of the farm.

Now, herein, I think, Solomon gives us a lesson which holds good
through all matters of life.  That it is a short-sighted mistake to
avoid taking trouble; for God has so well ordered this world, that
industry will always repay itself.  No doubt it is much easier and
pleasanter for the savage to scratch the seed into the ground with
some rude wooden tool, and sit idle till the grain ripens:  much
easier and pleasanter, than to breed and break in beasts, and to
labour all the year round at the different duties of a well-ordered
farm:  but here is the mighty difference; that the savage, growing
only enough for himself, is in continual danger of famine, he and
all his tribe; while the civilized farmer, producing many times more
than he needs for himself, gains food, comfort, and safety, not only
for himself, but for many other human beings.  The savage has an
easy life enough, if that be any gain:  but it is a life of poverty,
uncertainty, danger of starvation.  The civilized man works hard and
heavily, using body and mind more in one month than the savage does
in the whole year:  but he gains in return a life of safety,
comfort, and continually increasing prosperity.

This is Solomon's lesson:  and be sure it holds good, not only of
tilling the ground, but of all other labours, all other duties, to
which God may call us.  'Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do,' says
Solomon, 'do it with all thy might.'  God has set thee thy work;
then fulfil it.  Fill it full.  Throw thy whole heart and soul into
it.  Do it carefully, accurately, completely.  It will be better for
thee, and for thy children after thee.  All neglect, carelessness,
slurring over work, is a sin; a sin against God, who has called us
to our work; a sin against our country and our neighbours, who ought
to profit by our work; and a sin against ourselves also, for we (as
I shall shew you soon) ought to be made wiser and better men by our
work.

Oh, if there is one rule above another which I should like to bring
home to young men and women setting out in life, it is this--_Take
pains_.  Take trouble.  Whatever you do, do thoroughly.  Whatever
you begin, finish.  It may not seem to be worth your while at the
moment, to be so very painstaking, so very exact.  In after years,
you will find that it was worth your while; that it has _paid_ you,
