turn us from this way, say they, that we should affirm ourselves holy
and godly; far be this arrogance and rashness from us: we are miserable
sinners; we should be mad, if we should arrogate holiness to ourselves.
Thus they mock at true faith, and count such doctrine as this execrable
error; and thus try to extinguish the Gospel. These are they that deny
the faith of Christ, and persecute it throughout the whole world; of
whom Paul speaks: "In the latter times many shall depart from the
faith," etc., for we see by these means that true faith lies everywhere
opprest; it is not preached, but commonly disallowed and condemned.

The pope, bishops, colleges, monasteries, and universities have more
than five hundred years persecuted it with one mind and consent most
obstinately, which has been the means of driving many to hell. If any
object against the admiration, or rather the mad senselessness of these
men, if we count ourselves even holy, trusting the goodness of God to
justify us, or as David prayed, "Preserve Thou me, O Lord, for I am
holy," or as Paul saith, "The Spirit of God beareth witness with our
spirit that we are the children of God"; they answer that the prophet
and apostle would not teach us in these words, or give us an example
which we should follow, but that they, being particularly and specially
enlightened, received such revelation of themselves. In this way they
misrepresent the Scripture, which affirms that they are holy, saying
that such doctrine is not written for us, but that it is rather peculiar
miracles, which do not belong to all. This forged imagination we account
of as having come from their sickly brain. Again, they believe that they
shall be made righteous and holy by their own works, and that because of
them God will give them salvation and eternal blessedness.

In the opinion of these men it is a Christian duty to think that we
shall be righteous and sacred because of our works; but to believe that
these things are given by the grace of God, they condemn as heretical;
attributing that to their own works which they do not attribute to the
grace of God. They that are endued with true faith, and rest upon the
grace of the Lord, rejoice with holy joy, and apply themselves with
pleasure to good works, not such as those of Cain's progeny do, as
feigned prayers, fasting, base and filthy apparel, and such like
trifles, but to true and good works whereby their neighbors are
profited.

Perhaps some godly man may think, if the matter be so, and our work do
not save us, to what end are so many precepts given us, and why doth God
require that they be obeyed? The present text of the apostle will give a
solution of this question, and upon this occasion we will give an
exposition thereof. The Galatians being taught of Paul the faith of
Christ, but afterward seduced by false apostles, thought that our
salvation must be finished and made perfect by the works of the law; and
that faith alone doth not suffice. These Paul calls back again from
works unto faith with great diligence; plainly proving that the works of
the law, which go before faith, make us only servants, and are of no
importance toward godliness and salvation; but that faith makes us the
sons of God, and from thence good works without constraint forthwith
plentifully flow.

But here we must observe the words of the apostle; he calls him a
servant that is occupied in works without faith, of which we have
already treated at large; but he calls him a son which is righteous by
faith alone. The reason is this, altho the servant apply himself to good
works, yet he does it not with the same mind as doth the son; that is,
with a mind free, willing, and certain that the inheritance and all the
good things of the Father are his; but does it as he that is hired in
another man's house, who hopes not that the inheritance shall come to
him. The works indeed of the son and the servant are alike; and almost
the same in outward appearance; but their minds differ exceedingly: as
Christ saith, "The servant abideth not in the house forever, but the son
abideth ever."

Those of Cain's progeny want the faith of sons, which they confess
themselves; for they think it most absurd, and wicked arrogancy, to
affirm themselves to be the sons of God, and holy; therefore as they
believe, even so are they counted before God; they neither become holy
nor the sons of God, nevertheless are they exercised with the works of
the law; wherefore they are and remain servants forever. They receive no
reward except temporal things; such as quietness of life, abundance of
goods, dignity, honor, etc., which we see to be common among the
followers of popish religion. But this is their reward, for they are
servants, and not sons; wherefore in death they shall be separated from
all good things, neither shall any portion of the eternal inheritance be
theirs, who in this life would believe nothing thereof. We perceive,
therefore, that servants and sons are not unlike in works, but in mind
and faith they have no resemblance.

The apostle endeavors here to prove that the law with all the works
thereof makes us but mere servants, if we have not faith in Christ; for
this alone make us sons of God. It is the word of grace followed by the
Holy Ghost, as is shown in many places, where we read of the Holy Ghost
falling on Cornelius and his family while hearing the preaching of
Peter. Paul teaches that no man is justified before God by the works of
the law; for sin only cometh by the law. He that trusts in works
condemns faith as the most pernicious arrogancy and error of all others.
Here thou seest plainly that such a man is not righteous, being
destitute of that faith and belief which is necessary to make him
acceptable before God and His Son; yea, he is an enemy to this faith,
and therefore to righteousness also. Thus it is easy to understand that
which Paul saith, that no man is justified before God by the works of
the law.

The worker must be justified before God before he can work any good
thing. Men judge the worker by the works; God judges the works by the
worker. The first precept requires us to acknowledge and worship one
God, that is, to trust Him alone, which is the true faith whereby we
become the sons of God. Thou canst not be delivered from the evil of
unbelief by thine own power, nor by the power of the law; wherefore all
thy works which thou doest to satisfy the law can be nothing but works
of the law; of far less importance than to be able to justify thee
before God, who counteth them righteous only who truly believe in Him;
for they that acknowledge Him the true God are His sons, and do truly
fulfil the law. If thou shouldst even kill thyself by working, thy heart
can not obtain this faith thereby, for thy works are even a hindrance to
it, and cause thee to persecute it.

He that studieth to fulfil the law without faith is afflicted for the
devil's sake; and continues a persecutor both of faith and the law,
until he come to himself, and cease to trust in his own works; he then
gives glory to God, who justifies the ungodly, and acknowledges himself
to be nothing, and sighs for the grace of God, of which he knows that he
has need. Faith and grace now fill his empty mind, and satisfy his
hunger; then follow works which are truly good; neither are they works
of the law, but of the spirit, of faith and grace; they are called in
the Scripture the works of God, which He worketh in us.

Whatsoever we do of our own power and strength, that which is not
wrought in us by His grace, without doubt is a work of the law, and
avails nothing toward justification; but is displeasing to God, because
of the unbelief wherein it is done. He that trusts in works does nothing
freely and with a willing mind; he would do no good work at all if he
were not compelled by the fear of hell, or allured by the hope of
present good. Whereby it is plainly seen that they strive only for gain,
or are moved with fear, showing that they rather hate the law from their
hearts, and had rather there were no law at all. An evil heart can do
nothing that is good. This evil propensity of the heart, and
unwillingness to do good, the law betrays when it teaches that God does
not esteem the works of the hand, but those of the heart.

Thus sin is known by the law, as Paul teaches; for we learn thereby that
our affections are not placed on that which is good. This ought to teach
us not to trust in ourselves, but to long after the grace of God,
whereby the evil of the heart may be taken away, and we become ready to
do good works, and love the law voluntarily; not for fear of any
punishment, but for the love of righteousness. By this means one is
made of a servant, a son; of a slave an heir.

We shall now come to treat more particularly of the text. Verse 1. "The
heir, as long as he is a child, differeth nothing from a servant, tho he
be lord of all." We see that the children unto whom their parents have
left some substance are brought up no otherwise than if they were
servants. They are fed and clothed with their goods, but they are not
permitted to do with them, nor use them according to their own minds,
but are ruled with fear and discipline of manners, so that even in their
own inheritance they live no otherwise than as servants. After the same
sort it is in spiritual things. God made with His people a covenant,
when He promised that in the seed of Abraham, that is in Christ, all
nations of the earth should be blest. That covenant was afterward
confirmed by the death of Christ, and revealed and published abroad by
the preaching gospel. For the gospel is an open and general preaching of
this grace, that in Christ is laid up a blessing for all men that
believe.

Before this covenant is truly opened and made manifest to men, the sons
of God live after the manner of servants under the law; and are
exercised with the works of the law, altho they can not be justified by
them; they are true heirs of heavenly things, of this blessing and grace
of the covenant; altho they do not as yet know or enjoy it. Those that
are justified by grace cease from the works of the law, and come unto
the inheritance of justification; they then freely work those things
that are good, to the glory of God and benefit of their neighbors. For
they have possest it by the covenant of the Father, confirmed by Christ,
revealed, published, and as it were delivered into their hands by the
gospel, through the grace and mercy of God.

This covenant Abraham, and all the fathers which were endued with true
faith, had no otherwise than we have: altho before Christ was glorified
this grace was not openly preached and published: they lived in like
faith, and therefore obtained the like good things. They had the same
grace, blessing, and covenant that we have; for there is one Father and
God over all. Thou seest that Paul here, as in almost all other places,
treats much of faith; that we are not justified by works, but by faith
alone. There is no good thing which is not contained in this covenant of
God; it gives righteousness, salvation, and peace. By faith the whole
inheritance of God is at once received. From thence good works come; not
meritorious, whereby thou mayest seek salvation, but which with a mind
already possessing righteousness thou must do with great pleasure to the
profit of thy neighbors.

Verse 2. "But is under tutors and governors until the time appointed of
the Father." Tutors and governors are they which bring up the heir, and
so rule him and order his goods that he neither waste his inheritance by
riotous living, nor his goods perish or be otherwise consumed. They
permit him not to use his goods at his own will or pleasure, but suffer
him to enjoy them as they shall be needful and profitable to him. They
keep him at home, and instruct him whereby he may long and comfortably
enjoy his inheritance: but as soon as he arrives to the years of
discretion and judgment, it can not but be grievous to him to live in
subjection to the commands and will of another.

In the same manner stands the case of the children of God, which are
brought up and instructed under the law, as under a master in the
liberty of sons. The law profits them in this, that by the fear of it
and the punishment which it threatens, they are driven from sin, at
least from the outward work: by it they are brought to a knowledge of
themselves, and that they do no good at all with a willing and ready
mind as becomes sons; whereby they may easily see what is the root of
this evil, and what is especially needful unto salvation; to wit, a new
and living spirit to that which is good: which neither the law nor the
works of the law is able to give; yea, the more they apply themselves to
it, the more unwilling they find themselves to work those things which
are good.

Here they learn that they do not satisfy the law, altho outwardly they
live according to its precepts. They pretend to obey it in works, altho
in mind they hate it; they pretend themselves righteous, but they remain
sinners. These are like unto those of Cain's progeny, and hypocrites;
whose hands are compelled to do good, but their hearts consent unto sin
and are subject thereto. To know this concerning one's self is not the
lowest degree toward salvation. Paul calls such constrained works the
works of the law; for they flow not from a ready and willing heart;
howbeit the law does not require works alone, but the heart itself;
wherefore it is said in the first psalm of the blest man, "But his
delight is in the law of the Lord: and in His law doth he meditate day
and night." Such a mind the law requires, but it gives it not; neither
can it of its own nature: whereby it comes to pass that while the law
continues to exact it of a man, and condemns him as long as he hath such
a mind, as being disobedient to God, he is in anguish on every side; his
conscience being grievously terrified.

Then, indeed, is he most ready to receive the grace of God; this being
the time appointed by the Father when his servitude shall end, and he
enter into the liberty of the sons of God. For being thus in distress,
and terrified, seeing that by no other means he can avoid the
condemnation of the law, he prays to the Father for grace; he
acknowledges his frailty, he confesses his sin, he ceases to trust in
works, and humbles himself, perceiving that between him and a manifest
sinner there is no difference at all except of works, that he hath a
wicked heart, even as every other sinner hath. The condition of man's
nature is such that it is able to give to the law works only, and not
the heart; an unequal division, truly, to dedicate the heart, which,
incomparably excels all other things, to sin, and the hand to the law:
which is offering chaff to the law, and the wheat to sin; the shell to
God, and the kernel to Satan; whose ungodliness if one reprove, they
become enraged, and would even take the life of innocent Abel, and
persecute all those that follow the truth.

Those that trust in works seem to defend them to obtain righteousness;
they promise to themselves a great reward for this, by persecuting
heretics and blasphemers, as they say, who seduce with error, and entice
many from good works. But those that God hath chosen, learn by the law
how unwilling the heart is to conform to the works of the law; they fall
from their arrogancy, and are by this knowledge of themselves brought to
see their own unworthiness. Hereby they receive that covenant of the
eternal blessing and the Holy Ghost which renews the heart: whereby
they are delighted with the law, and hate sin; and are willing and ready
to do those things which are good. This is the time appointed by the
Father, when the heir must no longer remain a servant, but a son; being
led by a free spirit, he is no more kept in subjection under tutors and
governors after the manner of a servant; which is even that which Paul
teaches in the following:

Verse 3. "Even so we, when we were children, were in bondage under the
elements of the word." By the word elements thou mayest here understand
the first principles or law written; which is as it were the first
exercises and instructions of holy learning; as it is said: "As
concerning the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach
you again which be the first principles of the oracles of God." "Beware
lest any man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the
tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world." "How turn ye again
to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in
bondage."

Here Paul calls the law rudiments; because it is not able to perform
that righteousness which it requires. For whereas it earnestly requires
a heart and mind given to godliness, nature is not able to satisfy it:
herein it makes a man feel his poverty, and acknowledge his infirmity:
it requires that of him by right which he has not, neither is able to
have. "The letter killeth, but the Spirit giveth life." Paul calls them
the rudiments of the world, which, not being renewed by the Spirit, only
perform worldly things; to wit, in places, times, apparel, persons,
vessels, and such like. But faith rests not in worldly things, but in
the grace, word, and mercy of God: counting alike, days, meats, persons,
apparel, and all things of this world.

None of these by themselves either help or hinder godliness or
salvation. With those of Cain's progeny, faith neither agrees in name or
anything else; one of them eats flesh, another abstains from it; one
wears black apparel, another white; one keeps this day holy, and another
that; every one has his rudiments, under which he is in bondage: all of
them are addicted to the things of the world, which are frail and
perishable. Against these Paul speaks, "Wherefore, if ye be dead with
Christ from the rudiments of the world, why, as tho living in the world,
are ye subject to ordinances: touch not, taste not, handle not, which
all are to perish with the using, after the commandments and doctrines
of men? Which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will-worship and
humility, and neglecting of the body; not in any honor to the satisfying
of the flesh."

By this and other places above mentioned, it is evident that
monasteries and colleges, whereby we measure the state of spiritual men
as we call them, plainly disagree with the Gospel and Christian liberty:
and therefore it is much more dangerous to live in this kind of life
than among the most profane men. All their works are nothing but
rudiments and ordinances of the world; neither are they Christians but
in name, wherefore all their life and holiness are sinful and most
detestable hypocrisy. The fair show of feigned holiness which is in
those ordinances does, in a marvelous and secret manner, withdraw from
faith more than those manifest and gross sins of which open sinners are
guilty. Now this false and servile opinion faith alone takes away, and
teaches us to trust in, and rest upon, the grace of God, whereby is
given freely that which is needful to work all things.

Verse 4. "But when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth His
Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under
the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons." After Paul had
taught us that righteousness and faith can not come to us by the law,
neither can we deserve it by nature, he shows us by whom we obtain it;
and who is the author of our justification. The apostle saith, "When the
fulness of the time was come"; here Paul speaks of the time which was
appointed by the Father to the Son, wherein He should live under
tutors, etc. This time being come to the Jews, and ended, Christ came in
the flesh; so it is daily fulfilled to others, when they come to the
knowledge of Christ, and change the servitude of the law for the faith
of sons. Christ for this cause came unto us, that believing in Him we
may be restored to true liberty; by which faith they of ancient times
also obtained the liberty of the Spirit.

As soon as thou believest in Christ, He comes to thee, a deliverer and
Savior; and now the time of bondage is ended; as the apostle saith, the
fulness thereof is come.

Verse 6. "And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of His
Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father." Here we see plainly that
the Holy Ghost cometh to the saints, not by works, but by faith alone.
Sons believe, while servants only work; sons are free from the law,
servants are held under the law, as appears by those things that have
been before spoken. But how comes it to pass that he saith "because ye
are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit," etc., seeing it is before
said that by the coming of the Spirit we are changed from servants to
sons: but here, as tho we could be sons before the coming of the Spirit,
he saith "because ye are sons," etc. To this question we must answer,
that Paul speaks here in the same manner that he did before, that is,
before the fulness of the time came, we were in bondage under the
rudiments of the world: all that shall become sons are counted in the
place of sons with God: therefore he saith rightly, "because ye are
sons," that is, because the state of sons is appointed to you from
everlasting, "God hath sent forth the Spirit of His Son," to wit, that
He might finish it in you, and make you such as He hath long since of
His goodness determined that He would make you.

Now if the Father give unto us His Spirit, He will make us His true sons
and heirs, that we may with confidence cry with Christ, Abba, Father;
being His brethren and fellow heirs. The apostle has well set forth the
goodness of God which makes us partakers with Christ, and causes us to
have all things common with Him, so that we live and are led by the same
Spirit. These words of the apostle show that the Holy Ghost proceeds
from Christ, as he calls Him his Spirit. So God hath sent forth the
Spirit of His Son, that is, of Christ, for He is the Spirit of God, and
comes from God to us, and not ours, unless one will say after this
manner, "my Holy Spirit," as we say, "my God," "my Lord," etc. As He is
said to be the Holy Spirit of Christ, it proves Him to be God of whom
that Spirit is sent, therefore it is counted His Spirit.

Christians may perceive by this whether they have in themselves the Holy
Ghost, to wit, the Spirit of sons; whether they hear His voice in their
hearts: for Paul saith, He crieth in the hearts which He possesseth,
Abba, Father; he saith also, "We have received the Spirit of adoption,
whereby we cry Abba, Father." Thou hearest this voice when thou findest
so much faith in thyself that thou dost assuredly, without doubting,
presume that not only thy sins are forgiven thee, but also that thou art
the beloved Son of God, who, being certain of eternal salvation, durst
both call Him Father, and be delighted in Him with a joyful and
confident heart. To doubt these things brings a reproach upon the death
of Christ, as tho He had not obtained all things for us.

It may be that thou shalt be so tempted as to fear and doubt, and think
plainly that God is not a favorable Father, but a wrathful revenger of
sins, as it happened with Job, and many other saints: but in such a
conflict this trust and confidence that thou art a son ought to prevail
and overcome. It is said "The Spirit itself maketh intercession for us
with groanings which can not be uttered; and that He beareth witness
with our spirit that we are the children of God." How can it therefore
be that our hearts should not hear this cry and testimony of the Spirit?
But if thou dost not feel this cry, take heed that thou be not slothful
and secure; pray constantly, for thou art in an evil state.

Cain saith, "My punishment is greater than I can bear. Behold, Thou
hast driven me out this day from the face of the earth, and from Thy
face shall I be hid; and it shall come to pass that every one that
findeth me shall slay me." This is a dreadful and terrible cry, which is
heard from all Cain's progeny, all such as trust to themselves and their
own works, who put not their trust in the Son of God, neither consider
that He was sent from the Father, made of a woman under the law, much
less that all these things were done for their salvation. And while
their ungodliness is not herewith content, they begin to persecute even
the sons of God, and grow so cruel that, after the example of their
father Cain, they can not rest until they slay their righteous brother
Abel, wherefore the blood of Christ continually cries out against them
nothing but punishment and vengeance; but for the heirs of salvation it
cries by the Spirit of Christ for nothing but grace and reconciliation.

The apostle here uses a Syrian and Greek word, saying, Abba, Pater. This
word Abba, in the Syrian tongue, signifies a father, by which name the
heads of monasteries are still called; and by the same name, hermits in
times past, being holy men, called their presidents: at last, by use, it
was also made a Latin word. Therefore that which Paul saith is as much
as Father, Father; or if thou hadst rather, "my Father."

Verse 7. "Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son, and if a
son, then an heir of God through Christ." He saith, that after the
coming of the Spirit, after the knowledge of Christ, "thou art not a
servant." A son is free and willing, a servant is compelled and
unwilling; a son liveth and resteth in faith, a servant in works.
Therefore it appears that we can not obtain salvation of God by works,
but before thou workest that which is acceptable to Him, it is necessary
that thou receive salvation; then good works will freely flow, to the
honor of thy heavenly Father, and to the profit of thy neighbors;
without any fear of punishment, or looking for reward.

If this inheritance of the Father be thine by faith, surely thou art
rich in all things, before thou hast wrought any thing. It is said "Your
salvation is prepared and reserved in heaven, to be showed in the last
time," wherefore the works of a Christian ought to have no regard to
merit, which is the manner of servants, but only for the use and benefit
of our neighbors, whereby we may truly live to the glory of God. Lest
that any think that so great an inheritance cometh to us without cost
(altho it be given to us without our cost or merit), yet it cost Christ
a dear price, who, that He might purchase it for us, was made under the
law, and satisfied it for us, both by life and also by death.

Those benefits which from love we bestow upon our neighbor, come to him
freely, without any charges or labor of his, notwithstanding they cost
us something, even as Christ hath bestowed those things which are His
upon us. Thus hath Paul called back the Galatians from the teachers of
works, which preached nothing but the law, perverting the Gospel of
Christ. Which things are very necessary to be marked of us also: for the
Pope, with his prelates and monks hath for a long time intruded, urging
his laws, which are foolish and pernicious, disagreeing in every respect
with the Word of God, seducing almost the whole world from the gospel of
Christ, and plainly extinguishing the faith of sons, as the Scripture
hath in diverse places manifestly prophesied of His kingdom. Wherefore
let every one that desires salvation, diligently take heed of him and
his followers, no otherwise than Satan himself.




LATIMER

ON CHRISTIAN LOVE


BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

Hugh Latimer, reformer and martyr, was born in Leicestershire, England,
in 1485, or two years later than Luther. On completing an education at
Cambridge, he took holy orders and preached strenuously in favor of the
Lutheran views. As a profound canonist, he was placed on the commission
appointed to decide on the legality of Henry VII's marriage with
Katharine of Aragon. His decision in favor of Henry gained him a royal
chaplaincy and a living.

Appointed Bishop of Worcester in 1535, he preached boldly the reformed
doctrines, but lost favor at court, and when Gardiner and Bonner pushed
a reactionary movement to the front, he retired from his see (1539).
Latimer lived in peaceful retirement under Edward VI, but under Mary he,
with other reformers, was arrested and thrown into the Tower. Brought to
Oxford for examination, he refused to recant, and was confined for a
year in the common prison, and on October 16, 1555, put to death by
fire, along with Ridley, at a place opposite Balliol College, where the
Martyr's Memorial was subsequently erected.



LATIMER
1485--1555

ON CHRISTIAN LOVE

_This is my commandment, that ye love one another, as I have loved
you_.--John xv., 12.


Seeing the time is so far spent, we will take no more in hand at this
time than this one sentence; for it will be enough for us to consider
this well, and to bear it away with us. "This I command unto you, that
ye love one another." Our Savior himself spake these words at His last
supper: it was the last sermon that He made unto His disciples before
His departure; it is a very long sermon. For our Savior, like as one
that knows he shall die shortly, is desirous to spend that little time
that He has with His friends, in exhorting and instructing them how they
should lead their lives. Now among other things that He commanded this
was one: "This I command unto you, that ye love one another." The
English expresses as tho it were but one, "This is my commandment." I
examined the Greek, where it is in the plural number, and very well; for
there are many things that pertain to a Christian man, and yet all those
things are contained in this one thing, that is, love. He lappeth up
all things in love.

Our whole duty is contained in these words, "Love together." Therefore
St. Paul saith, "He that loveth another fulfilleth the whole law"; so it
appeareth that all things are contained in this word love. This love is
a precious thing; our Savior saith, "By this shall all men know that ye
are my disciples, if ye shall love one another."

So Christ makes love His cognizance, His badge, His livery. Like as
every lord commonly gives a certain livery to his servants, whereby they
may be known that they pertain unto him; and so we say, yonder is this
lord's servants, because they wear his livery: so our Savior, who is the
Lord above all lords, would have His servants known by their liveries
and badge, which badge is love alone. Whosoever now is endued with love
and charity is His servant; him we may call Christ's servant; for love
is the token whereby you may know that such a servant pertaineth to
Christ; so that charity may be called the very livery of Christ. He that
hath charity is Christ's servant; he that hath not charity is the
servant of the devil. For as Christ's livery is love and charity, so the
devil's livery is hatred, malice and discord.

But I think the devil has a great many more servants than Christ has;
for there are a great many more in his livery than in Christ's livery;
there are but very few who are endued with Christ's livery; with love
and charity, gentleness and meekness of spirit; but there are a great
number that bear hatred and malice in their hearts, that are proud,
stout, and lofty; therefore the number of the devil's servants is
greater than the number of Christ's servants.

Now St. Paul shows how needful this love is. I speak not of carnal love,
which is only animal affection; but of this charitable love, which is so
necessary that when a man hath it, without all other things it will
suffice him. Again, if a man have all other things and lacketh that love
it will not help him, it is all vain and lost. St. Paul used it so: "Tho
I speak with tongues of men and angels, and yet had no love, I were even
as sounding brass, or as a tinkling cymbal. And tho I could prophesy and
understand all secrets and all knowledge; yet if I had faith, so that I
could move mountains out of their places, and yet had no love, I were
nothing. And tho I bestowed all my goods to feed the poor, and tho I
