every church is a fringe of deep, sometimes a deep fringe and broad, of
those practically untouched by the warm message of Jesus; and around every
Christian Association of men and of women. In the heart and on the edges
of every village and town and city unfathomed deeps lie; deeps in a man's
own state, deeps in our land, great untouched deeps in the world.

Wherever there is a man who has not felt the warm side of the story of
Jesus' dying there is a deep. Wherever a group of such can be found is a
deep increased in depth by the number in the group. Wherever the great
crowds are gathered together to whom no word at all has come, neither by
personal touch nor printed page nor any other wise, there is the deepest
deep. With a deep glow in His eyes as He speaks the word, and the
tenderness and softness of deep emotion, and the earnestness of one who
has Himself been in the deep Jesus says anew to us to-day, "out into the
_deep_."

We are to be ambitious in service. Jesus was ambitious. He reached out for
all, those nearest, those farthest. He talked of all nations, of a world.
His follower must have a long reach to keep up. That word ambition has
been much abused. It has been used much in connection with selfish
self-seeking, until that meaning has become almost its whole meaning in
the thinking of many people. But with the purpose dominant in Jesus we can
properly use it in its old literal meaning. Originally it simply meant
going around, being used in the sense of going out among people soliciting
their favor or their votes.

It has the fine vitality of that word "go" in it. That for which a man is
ambitious decides the quality of the word. A pure, holy purpose makes the
intense reaching for it pure and holy too. An intense reaching out to the
farthest reach of the Master's word, that finds expression in the dominant
spirit of the life, in the service, in the giving, the sacrificing, the
praying--this is the true ambition.

Paul uses three times a word that has the force of our word ambition.[15]
The American Revision uses ambition in the margin for it. In advising the
group of followers in Thessalonica he says, "_Study_ to be quiet." The
practical force of the phrase there is this: be ambitious to be
unambitious in the world's abused meaning of ambitious. In writing the
second time to the friends at Corinth where his motives had been much
criticised he said, "I make it my aim (or ambition) to be well-pleasing
unto Him."

And later, in writing to the Christians at Rome, whom he had never seen,
he said that he had made it his aim or had been ambitious to preach the
Gospel where nobody had yet gone. The literal meaning of the word he uses
is something like this, striving from a love of honor. And we may find a
fine meaning in that which was doubtless used otherwise.

It was a matter of honor with Paul to do as he was doing. And he would
have the honor of having fully carried out his Master's wish. He coveted
earnestly the honor of being always pleasing to his Master both in life
and in the sort and reach of his service. Here are Paul's three ambitions:
to be wholly free of the fires of worldly ambitions; to be well-pleasing
to Jesus, his Lord; to reach out beyond, where nobody had yet gone with
the story of Jesus' dying and living again.

Paul was obeying Jesus. Jesus said to those fishermen on Galilee's waters,
"Launch out into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught." Paul
said, "I have steadily made it the one thing I drove hard at in service,
to get out beyond all other lines and nets to where nobody has yet gone."



Use What You Have.


The third step in this service-call is this: _practicality in service_:
"Let down your nets." I can imagine Peter saying, "Master, if we had known
your plans for this morning, I would have sent up to Tyre for the newest
patented nets, or down to Cairo. These nets of ours have been patched and
patched. They are so old." The Master says, "Let down _your_ nets."

There is a very common delusion that holds us back from doing something
because we are not skilled in doing it. "Let the pastor speak to that
young man; I can't do it very well." "I can't teach very well; let some
one else take that class." The Master says, "Use what you have." Do your
best. Your best may not be _the_ best, but if it be your best, it will be
God-blest, and always bring a harvest.

Use what you have. Do not despise the stuff God put into you. Train and
discipline it the best you can, and use it. And in using it you will be
training it. The best training is in _use_. Brains and pains and prayer
are an irresistible trinity. When the gray matter and the finger tips and
the knees get into a combination great results always come.

The old Hebrew farmer Shamgar had only a long ox-goad with which to prod
his beasts in the field. The traditional enemy, the Philistine, comes up
over the hill. Shamgar's neighbors have taken to their heels. But Shamgar
is made of different stuff. He asks a man hurrying by, "How many do you
think there are?" And the man calls out, "About six hundred, I should
say."

Shamgar sets his jaws together hard, gets a fresh grip on his ox-goad,
digs his heels into the ground for a good hold, and mutters to himself, "I
guess they are about four hundred short." And he smites, left and right,
up and down, hip and thigh, with his strange weapon. And a great victory
comes to the nation under its new leader.

David had only a leather sling, home-made likely, and a few smooth stones
out of the running brook. He had skill in slinging stones, a keen trained
eye, a steady nerve, a practiced arm, and well-knit muscles. But what were
these against a giant almost twice his height and years, and armed to the
teeth? Yet the ruddy-faced stripling had something better yet along with
his sling and stones and skill. He had a simple trust in God. He had a hot
protest in his heart against the slandering of God's people by this
heathen giant. He _combined_ all he had, sling, stones, skill, and faith,
and the laughing, sneering giant is soon under his feet, and feeling the
edge of his own sword. "Let down your nets." Use what you have.

There was a woman living down by the east coast of the Mediterranean Sea a
good while ago. Her heart had been touched by God, and ever after beat
warm for others. But what could _she_ do? She couldn't make speeches, nor
write papers for the missionary society, nor preside over its meetings.
She seemed to have one special gift. She could sew. She could do plain
sewing and overcast, cross-stitch and hem-stitch. I suppose she knew the
herring-bone-stitch and feather-stitch, and other sorts too.

And so she just busied herself finding out poor folks who needed clothing,
some women too hard-worked to care for their children's clothing. And she
sewed for them. She was a seamstress for Jesus' sake to all the needy
folks she could find. I expect she stuck pretty closely to the plain
stitching, though likely as not she would put in some of the fancy too to
please the people she was winning to her Master.

And she sewed the story of Jesus, and the heart of Jesus, into coats and
skirts and such. All through Joppa her message went into homes not
otherwise open perhaps. And the women read the story of her heart in the
stitches and they found Jesus through her needle. She used what she had.
And the women of the church have rightly honored her name in their
societies.

But mark keenly this: while using to the full, and faithfully, just what
you have, there must needs be utter dependence upon God. Not what you
have, nor what you can do, but Somebody _in_ what you have, and _through_
what you do. Notice, "Their nets were _breaking_." They were to use their
nets, but the power was somewhere else. As we are made up, there
frequently needs to be a breaking before the glory of God is revealed. It
need not be so, necessarily.

Yet as a matter of fact most people have to stub their toes and then go
stumbling down with a clash, measuring their length on the earth, and
getting some scars that stay before they can be mightily used. So many
strong wills are strong enough to be stubborn, but not strong enough to
yield. Gideon's pitchers had to be broken before the lights flashed out
and brought panic to the enemy.

It was when the alabaster box was broken that its fine fragrance filled
the house, and spread out into all the world. Somebody prayed, "O Lord,
take me, and break me, and make me." That is the usual order as a matter
of fact. Yet if the strength of stubbornness that must be broken down to
change its direction, were but swung God's way at once--But most folks
that have been greatly used have some of this sort of scars. Utter
dependence upon God's strength in doing God's service is the lesson of the
breaking nets.



Expectancy in Service.


The climax of this message of Jesus is in its end: "Let down your nets
_for a draught_." There is to be _expectancy in service_. Ideas of
draughts changed that day. "Peter, what would you call a good draught?"
"Well," the old fisherman says, as he sits stitching up the holes in his
nets, "after last night I think if we got a boat half full it wouldn't be
a bad haul." "Andrew, what's a draught?" And Andrew says, "I think after
this water haul we've had, a haul of holes, Peter hits it pretty close."

"Master, how much is _a draught_?" And His answer comes back over the
water, "Twice as much as you are able to take care of, and then more."
They filled that boat, sent for another, filled that, and then didn't land
all they had caught.

How much do you reckon a draught in your life, in your church, in your
mission, your field, _how much_ are you _saying_?--"Master, what is your
reckoning of a draught here in this man's life, out here in this field of
service?" And from this Galilean story there comes back anew to our hearts
the Master's reply, "Twice as much as you have planned for, and then
more."

Expectancy is the eye of faith. Faith always has a watch-tower. When
Elijah went to the tiptop of Carmel to pray, he was careful to send his
servant to watch the sea. Prayer is faith looking up. Expectancy is faith
looking out.



Jesus Went into the Deeps.


And so to every one of us to-day comes afresh that ringing command,
"Launch out into the deep and let down your nets for a draught."

    "'Launch out into the deep;'
      The awful depth of a world's despair;
    Hearts that are breaking and eyes that weep;
      Sorrow and ruin and death are there.
    And the sea is wide;
      And its pitiless tide
    Bears on its bosom away.
      Beauty and youth,
    In relentless ruth,
      To its dark abyss for aye.
    But the Master's voice comes over the sea,
      'Let down your nets for a draught for Me.'
    And He stands in our midst,
      On our wreck-strewn strand.
    And sweet and loving is His command.
      His loving word is to each, to all.
    And wherever that loving word is heard,
      There hang the nets of the royal Word.
    Trust to the nets, and not to your skill;
      Trust to the royal Master's will.
    Let down the nets this day, this hour;
      For the word of a king is a word of power,
    And the King's own word comes over the sea,
      Let down your nets for a draught for Me.'"

There is a last word that comes up insisting to be said. It is this: Jesus
went down into the deeps for us. Deeper deeps than we know or ever shall
He sounded with the line of His own life on our behalf. He got badly
scarred that night of darkness. It is this scarred Jesus who earnestly
asks us to come along after Him so far as we can. His voice with a
tenderness of love wrought into it on the cross says to us, "Launch out
into the deep, and let down your nets for a draught."




Money: The Golden Channel of Service.



    Touching a Limitless Circle.
    Peculiar Effects of Money.
    Jesus' Law for the Use of Money.
    Foreign Exchange.
    Gold-Exchanged Lives.
    Spirit Alchemy.
    The Fragrance of the Life in the Gift.
    Sacrifice Hallows and Increases the Gift.
    A Living Sacrifice.




Money: The Golden Channel of Service.[16]

(Luke xvi:1-18.)



Touching a Limitless Circle.


There is an inky shadow over the home of God. There is a sharp pain
tugging at the heart of God. It's a family matter; a family disgrace. One
of God's family has gone off from the home circle and made a bad mess of
things. Such an affair is always a source of great grief, especially where
the family is an old one, with fine blood. And here the family is of the
oldest, and the blood the best. The Father feels the sharp edge of the
knife of disgrace very keenly. The hearth fire of God is lonely for the
one gone away.

All of that Father's great love and rare wisdom have centered and blended
on a plan for winning the estranged member of His family back home, of his
own free glad accord. The other members of His family have gazed with
awe-touched faces upon the marvels of that plan. Its tenderness, its
depth, its wondrous love-wisdom have excited their deepest admiration
while they watch breathlessly to see the outcome.

That prodigal is our own splendid planet. Some of us down here have gladly
welcomed the Father's plan and the Father's Son. His Son is His plan. But
most of us don't seem to understand the Father. And that is hard on Him.
And the greater number of us, by far the greater number, haven't even
heard of the Father's plan or of His Son, and have lost the memory of His
loving voice calling. He is always calling. And everyone hears that
calling voice. But very many do not recognize it as the Father's.

In great tenderness the Father's plan for winning all includes the help of
those already won. Through His Son first, and then through His sons,
newborn, reborn, He is reaching out His warm, eager hand to all. He
breathed His own Spirit upon His Son. He breathes that same Spirit upon
each of us who will, that so we may, each of us, touch all the others with
the touch of God.

Five great touches of God there are, each charged with a mighty current of
power. The fragrant life-touch, the musical voice-touch, the warm
service-touch, the potent golden-touch, the secret, subtle prayer-touch.
The first three of these are limited to a narrow circle, the circle of the
immediate personality. The last two are limitless. They are like our own
spirits. They reach directly, resistlessly, clear out through the personal
circle as far as the spirit reaches, even around the whole circle of the
planet.

Just now for a little while we want to talk together about one of these,
the potent yellow golden-touch. The word service has been thought of quite
commonly as referring to certain restricted things that one may do for
another. It has a broader meaning too. Whatever we do to help another is
service. Not merely the direct activities, but praying and giving are
service of most potent influence. Money supplies a channel through which
one may reach most intimately to others, near by and around the world. It
is the golden channel of service.



Peculiar Effects of Money.


Money is queer stuff. The opposites meet in it so strikingly. It may be
the most cruel, exacting tyrant. It may be the most faithful, intelligent
servant. If it come into a man's life unaccompanied by a high, controlling
motive power, it has most peculiar effects upon him. It often wrinkles up
his face, and ties hard knots in the wrinkled lines. It can dwarf a warm
hand into a cold, hard, muscle-bound fist. It drains the warm blood from
the heart, and dries all the sweet, fragrant dew out of the spirit. The
hand suffers much. It is often stricken with a sort of palsy while in the
pocket, and cannot be withdrawn. Sometimes there is a violent cramp, or a
sort of pen paralysis that prevents the signing of the name--to certain
sorts of checks.

But if, on the other hand, it come into a man's possession accompanied by
a pure unselfish motive that _controls_, it comes the nearest to
omnipotence of anything we handle. Gold of itself seems to have the
puckering quality of a green persimmon. The green fruit will contract the
mouth to its smallest proportions. And unmellowed gold acts in the same
way upon the mouth of the pocket.

This is true of all gold and of all pockets. There are no exceptions. The
only possible way of effecting a change is to let a stronger power come in
and counteract the contracting power. Gold has the greatest contracting
power of any earthly substance. Its only sufficient counteractant is God.
God has the greatest expanding power known to angels or men. Gold
contracts. God expands. If God be the dominating motive power in a man's
life, then does gold come the nearest to omnipotence of any tangible
thing. It takes on the quality of Him who breathes upon it.



Jesus' Law for the Use of Money.


Jesus gives us the simple law for the right use of money. It is in that
sixteenth chapter of Luke. He is talking about the dishonest overseer of a
wealthy man's estate. His dishonest practices have been discovered, and he
is required to make a final settlement preliminary to his being
discharged. He has evidently been living extravagantly, for the loss of
position threatens him with beggary. Distressed to know what to do he hits
upon a farther extension of his dishonest practices, and uses the position
he is about to lose to buy up friends for his coming days of want.

As he tells the story Jesus adds this comment: "for the sons of this world
are for their own generation wiser than the sons of light." Practically
they go on the supposition that the present generation is the only one.
For the short space of years making up their own generation they are wiser
than the sons of light. But for the long space of all coming generations
they are the rankest fools. That is included by contrast in Jesus' words.
The man who in his use of money thinks only or chiefly of the years making
up his own present life is--a fool. The man who takes into his reckoning
not only the present generation, but all coming generations, in disposing
of his money is the shrewd financier.

Then occurs the sentence[17] that contains a wonderfully simple statement
for the keen, wise use of gold. The old version runs like this: "Make to
yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness that when ye fail they
may receive you into everlasting habitations." The revised version, both
English and American, reads this way: "Make to yourselves friends by means
of the mammon of unrighteousness that when _it_ shall fail they may
receive you into the eternal tabernacles."

I have ventured to make a rather free translation that I feel sure is true
to the words here in their connection and that gives in simple English
just what Jesus means. "Make to yourselves friends by means of money,
which the unrighteous world reckons riches, that when it fails they may
receive you," and so on. Money is not riches. The world commonly has been
befooled into thinking that it is. Perhaps we have not all quite escaped
that delusion. And money is not unrighteous. It is neither righteous, nor
unrighteous. It gets its moral quality from the man owning it for the time
being. It is as he is. It takes on the color of its ownership.

Make to yourselves friends by means of the money that comes into your
control that when it fails they may receive you. That is to say, exchange
your money into the kind of coin that is current in the kingdom of God.
Exchange your gold into _lives_. That is the sort of coin current in the
homeland. This yellow stuff we call riches they use for paving stones up
in the homeland. Would that we might get it under our feet down here,
instead of being ruled by it.

The current coin of heaven is lives of men. And that too will be reckoned
the precious metal when the Kingdom of God comes to the earth. Exchange
your money into _men_; purified, uplifted, redeemed men. Buy letters of
credit that will be good in the homeland, and in the coming Kingdom days
on the earth, if you would be wealthy.

"That when it fails," Jesus says with fine discernment. Money will fail.
There is an end to the power of gold in itself. Money will be bankrupt
some day. It has enormous buying power now. Some day its buying power will
be all gone. Then it will take the place of cobble-stones. Yet it would
seem to be a failure there unless some new hardening process had been
found for it. Better use it while it has power of purchase. Better not be
caught with much of the yellow stuff sticking to you when the true values
are being settled. It'll all be dead loss then; dead stock, not worth the
space it occupies.

You remember the very old story of the wealthy man who died. And in a
group of people talking together somebody asked the usual question, "How
much did he _leave_?" And a wise man in the company replied tersely,
"Every cent; didn't take a copper along." That story is apt to provoke a
smile. But, do you know, it is sadder than it is witty. The man had gained
great wealth. He must have been endowed with some force and talent to do
that. His whole life and strength and talent had been devoted to making
money and hoarding it. That money was the whole output of the man's life.
Then he died and the whole output of his life was left behind. He passed
out of this life stripped to the skin. Into the other world, where wealth
is reckoned otherwise than in gold, he entered a sheer pauper. The
purchasing power of his wealth stopped at the line of departure out of
this world. _It failed_.



Foreign Exchange.


Exchange your gold into men. Buy up some of the kind of coin they use in
the homeland, so that you may have some wealth when you get there. Suppose
you should be over on the continent of Europe, shopping in Berlin. You buy
some goods in a store and lay down upon the counter a twenty-dollar gold
piece in payment. The salesman would say, "What sort of money is this?"
and you would likely say, "That is good American gold, sir." And he would
probably reply, "I have no doubt that is true, and that it is good money.
But it is not the sort we receive here. You will have to go to the bankers
and get it changed into German marks and then I'll be pleased to complete
this sale." And so you would be obliged to do if you had not thought to
provide yourself with German money.

There are some people that will have an experience like that after a
while, I'm thinking. Some one thinks that that is not a very likely
illustration. A man going to Europe would provide himself with proper
money to use. Maybe it is not a very good illustration for _Europe_. But
how about some other strange lands to which folks go? There seem to be
several people who expect to go to a strange country, and yet do not
provide any of its recognized coinage before going.

Here is a man who gets through his life down on the earth, and goes out
into the other life. Judging by the whole tenor of his life he will
attempt to take some of his belongings with him. Indeed so much are these
belongings a part of his very life that they seem inseparable from him.
Here he comes up to the gateway of the upper world. He is lugging along a
farm or two, some town lots, and houses, and a lot of beautifully engraved
paper, bank stock and railroad bonds and other bonds. They are absorbing
him completely as he puffs slowly along.

And as he gets up to the gateway, the gateman will say, "What's all that
stuff?" "_Stuff!_" he will say, astonished; "this is the most precious
wealth of earth, sir. I have spent my whole life, the cream of my strength
in accumulating this." "Oh, well," the reply will be, "I have no doubt
that is so. I am not disputing your word at all. But that sort of thing
does not pass current up in this land. That has to be exchanged at the
bankers' offices for the sort of coinage we use here."

The man looks a little relieved at this last remark. The other talk has
sounded strange, and given him a queer misgiving in his heart, as he
listened. But "banker" and "exchange"--that sounds familiar. The ground
feels a bit steadier. He picks up new spirit. "Where are the bankers'
offices, please?" he asks eagerly. "They are all down on the earth," comes
the quiet answer. "You must do your exchanging before you get as far up as
this. That stuff is all dead loss now. You can't take it back to the
bankers' now, and it is of no value here. Just leave it over on that dump
heap there outside the gate, and come in yourself." And the man comes in
with a strangely stripped and bare feeling.

What we get and keep for the sake of having, we lose, for we leave it
behind. What we give away freely for _Jesus'_ sake, for men's sake, we
will find by and by we have kept, for we have sent it ahead in a changed
form.

There will be a strange readjustment of values on the other side. Some
men of splendid strength have spent it in accumulating earth's wealth.
They give, even freely it seems to be, in very large amounts. Yet be it
keenly marked the sum given by these men always bears a small proportion
to what is kept.

Others there are of equally splendid strength, and fine powers, who have
been spending that strength in influencing men. Their passion seems to
have been for _men_, for men's _selves_, for men's _lives_. The great bulk
of their strength and time has been deliberately given to this. And some
that have not understood have thought such conduct strange, a sort of fad
with these men. But when values are readjusted by the standards of the
final clearing house, some who have been very wealthy down here will be
reckoned among the very poor. And some who have been reckoned poor will be
found to be the shrewdest of investors. They will be the millionaires of
the Kingdom time and in the homeland. I do not mean _dollar_-millionaires,
but _life-millionaires._ The standard of wealth in the homeland is
