of yours who says he does not care for God--who says he can go on without
the aid of God. Listen not. Listen not. The strongest and greatest pray
often. Only they do not talk of this to others. They never make a show of
their devotion. But they have all prayed and do all pray. They believe in
personal effort--they also believe in Divine leading and guidance. Learn
to be "lead by the Spirit." Everything shall come to you in this way. You
will also notice that the Fearless Man is not a mere God-fearing man. He
is a God-loving Individual. He loves God for God's sake largely. That man
who is fearful in spite of his devotion to God is a sham devotee. But the
grace of the LORD'S name is such that it shall purify the most impure of
heart. It shall build up even a sham devotee into a real devotee who in
time shall transcend all limitation. Therefore have faith in God. "Be
regular" in your devotions. Also remember that each trial is a pain
accompanying spiritual regeneration--each pain a process of strengthening
the herald of a mere glorious dawn of wisdom. Hence give up a grumbling.
The great God whose Infinite power regulates the motions of planets
and yet takes note of the sparrow's fall has your soul's best interest at
heart. All you do, all you say, all you feel, all you hope, all your
experiences--all, all is His will. Man's Will is God's Will. God's Will
is Man's Will. And who can define God? God alone has the power to define
Himself. He has defined Himself as the Universe--Bramhanda. Nothing is
impossible for the devotee of God. Let him but be willing to work and God
shall give him everything. Regular devotion to God will surely develop
extreme Fearlessness. "God is Love."

(2). KNOWLEDGE _(Gnayanam)_.

Fear is due to ignorance. When in the dark of night you mistook the rope
for a snake, you shrieked out in terror. Cause? IGNORANCE. But when you
saw the rope as a rope, you laughed out in amusement. Cause? KNOWLEDGE.
All your fear is due to your ignorance of your real nature. All the fear
at the last is fear of death. You have to realise through knowledge of
the Vedanta that you are birthless, deathless. You have to unfold by
meditation a consciousness of your Real Self. I give you hereunder a
meditation exercise that will help you in this direction.

MEDITATION EXERCISE NO. 1.

Retire into the SILENCE. Shut off all thoughts and purposes relating
to the external world. Try to realise that you, the Real Ego are not
the body but that it is a mere garment you have put on for functioning
on the physical plane and which you shall put off some day. Try to
realise that you are immortal and that although a thousand bodies might
come and go, you, the Ego, shall be as alive as ever. These are your
shadows--your personalities. What dies and is born is a mirage--a
mere phantasm--which you materialise for certain purposes. All these
purposes centralise in one POTENTIALISED PURPOSE--the conquest of matter.
Realise that you the Ego, have your dwelling in Supernal Regions--on the
spiritual plane--with your Father-in-Heaven--but that you have come down
into matter that you may find the fullest possible objective expression.
Realise that you, the Ego, are a differentiated centre of consciousness
in the Great Consciousness--THE ABSOLUTE--EGO--SUM of the entire Universe
with all its gross and subtle manifestations--that you are endowed with
all the powers and attributes of the Absolute Self. Realise that you are
not the emotional and passional manifestations--surging up in your
personality. These are subject to the law of Flux and Rhythm and must be
brought under the control of Reason and Will--the balancing, equating
principle of mind. Realise that you are not the mind nor the intellect,
but that you exercise this function in order to analyse the external
manifestations of nature and study same. Realise that you are pure
Consciousness, Bliss and Existence in your essential nature--on with the
all-life. Realise that the form side of manifestation is but a
concentration, a precipitation within you. Your subjective nature is one
with the subjective self of others--an inlet for the influx and
efflux of the GREAT SUB-CONSCIOUS. Realise thus your Unity with
All-Life-manifesting objectively as Universal Brotherhood of all living
beings and the perfect recognition of the All-Father-Mother, the Great
Cosmic Power and Intelligence known as God whose intelligence
all-blissfulness and existence are ever pouring into each Unit of
Individualised Divine Energy and evolving through nature. And, student,
when you meditate daily that you are neither the body nor the emotions
nor the mind, you shall then unfold the consciousness of the "I am I"
that which rules the personality that which has been called
Soul-Consciousness. You shall then be Chaitanya-Spiritually awake.
You shall then know no Fear. Fear shall drop away like a worn-out
sheath. All fear-thoughts are due to undeveloped race-consciousness
which reacts upon individual consciousness and is stamped more or less
upon every atom of matter. You 'fear' because you think you are the
body. When you realise that you can command as many bodies for your
use as you like; when you realise in your heart of hearts that you are a
Spiritual Being expressing and energising through material personalities;
when you realise that you cannot die, fear shall be afraid of you and
drop tormenting and teasing you. Fear resides in the matter-fed
mind--that mind which has been grown and matured by the reception and
re-action upon external sensations and stimuli--what has been called
the objective mind. This mind identifies itself with the form, the body.
It has an incorrigible determination towards the form-side, the
concrete-side of existence. It sees nothing but the body and is darkened
by the forces of _Maya_. It sees nothing but separation. Yes, it is the
matter-fed mind. People with a development of this side of consciousness
are invariably selfish; have generally small, conical eyes, understand
nothing, but the welfare of the body. They are subject to the fear and
the delight in making others fear them. This mind needs illumination from
the soul, the Subjective Man, the "I am I" side of consciousness. It is
not that you are a body and have a soul--this is the dirty conviction of
the matter-fed mind--but you are a soul and have a body. The dawn of
Soul-Consciousness makes a man a Force for good. He himself is Fearless.
His is the voice of strength that does not crush and dominate but that
puts warmth, life, energy, hope and indomitable courage into cold and
despairing hearts. Some are born with this Soul-Consciousness. Do not
think that I am feeding with the theories of eccentricity. Often when a
boy playing with others the thought would strike me hard, "Are you the
same that is running and jumping and shouting." I would stop, looking
blankly ahead. A feeling of confusion would come over me and I would
forget everything. I could recall the feeling distinctly and vividly. Now
I understand. These were flashes of Soul-Consciousness unfolded in a
past life and struggling for "recognition" in this life. Such men face
DEATH for themselves calmly. They know they can't die. Such men are
incapable of sustained hatred. They too have their physiognomical
signs and distinctions. They represent an advanced order of intellect.
And, lastly, when the full blaze of realisation comes, your one object in
life shall be to bestow your sense of freedom on others. You shall
not be able to mock and smile calmly at the pain, the ignorance to
imperfections of your brother-man. You shall realise what it is to 'feel'
for humanity, yea, even for animals. You shall glimpse, in some measures,
the great feeling of pain that rent the hearts of the Buddas, the
Christs, the Ramakrishnas, the Vivekanandas of this world. They suffered,
they felt for humanity. And when undeveloped humanity forced them to the
Cross; they bore it in the same spirit in which the gentle nurse bears
the blows and abuses of the disease-racked patient. "Father forgive them,
for they know not what they do." Verily to know all is to forgive all.
This Soul-Consciousness is as much yours as that of anyone. It comes
through meditation on the Infinite, and the Formless Absolute--the
Over-soul of the universe--the Brahman of the Vedanta--the Self of the
philosophers--the Atman of the Yogis--the personal--impersonal God
of the devotee--and, last, but not least, the humanity of the
humanitarian.


CONCENTRATION.

The mind can think of one thing only. Fear is an acute form of negative
concentration--worry its chronic form. If you learn how to place your
mind upon a particular subject and inhibit or "shut off" all other
thoughts, the fascination of fear and worry shall have no power over you.
Most of the things you fear never happen--others can be routed by a bold
front. Even if something ugly does befall you, you have the power within
to enable you to 'bear up' heroically. Fear is a mere negative
thought-habit. It is a negative tendency in the mind. You can best
eradicate this weed from your mind by cultivating the positive attitude
of Courage. There are particular sets of brain-cells being created or
destroyed by particular types of thoughts. The best way to destroy
negative brain-cells is to develop positive brain-cells. If you want to
_Kill off Fear-thoughts_, do not fight them. That would be like trying to
realise how dark a place is and then starting to pitch it out by the
handful. You know you cannot do it. Just open the blinds and let in
sunshine and the place will be flooded with light. The mind hypnotised
by negative thoughts has been compared by a mental scientist to a dirty
wash-bowl full of dirty water. Take the wash-bowl near a tap and turn
the tap on. The steady pour of clean water will soon wash off all the
dirty water and fill the wash-bowl with clear water. So the only way
to root out and destroy evil thoughts is to turn a steady stream of
positive thoughts to overcome all fear thoughts, you should think
courage-thoughts. Don't crawl on your belly; don't call upon Heaven to
witness that despicable creature you are. No--a thousand times--no. Act
Courage. Think Courage. Say Courage. That's the way. Turn your face
towards the rising sun. Take "Courage" for your watchword. Affirm
it as far as you can. Fasten it deep and strong in your mind. Always tell
yourself that you are full of courage, morning, noon and night; never
tell yourself that you are weak.

Now, in order to inhibit fear-thoughts and exhibit Courage-thoughts,
you must possess CONCENTRATION. You should be able to take your mind off
a certain subject and put it on something else at your will. Do you know
what Concentration means? Let me give you in my own words something I
remember reading about Napoleon. When banished to St. Helena and
suffering from disease, one day his doctor expressed his curiosity as to
the secret of his success and astonishing power. Napoleon replied
"Doctor, there are drawers in my brain. When I want to think of politics
I pull out the drawer of politics, when I want to think of Josephine, I
pull out the drawer of Law, and so on; and when I shut all these drawers,
I can go to sleep." The doctor smiled incredulity blandly. "Doctor, I can
show you this minute. Doctor, I shut all drawers"--even while saying
this, Napoleon fell with a thud on his pillow. He was fast asleep. The
man of science and medicine examined him in all ways, but Napoleon had
fallen actually fast asleep. This is Concentration and Mind-Control. I
don't admire men of Napoleon's selfish types. Their place is in dark
hell. They use their power for preying upon others. But that his powers
of mind were great, I don't deny. Napoleon in his past life had been a
great Yogi, but the remnants of self and cumulative force of bad Karma
precipitated the bloody results you all know in connection with
Napoleon's career. No doubt, this man was only a means used by God to
bring about certain changes and revolutions.

To develop Concentration, pay attention to the daily work of your life.
Don't neglect small things. Put interest and attention into whatever
you think, say, or do. Be a wide-awake man. Don't go about your work
half-asleep. Wake up and display a few signs of life. Be progressive.
Think much and to the purpose.

WILL-POWER.

You all understand this. It is that aspect of your make-up that enables
you to make your mind and body obey you. The true principle of Will is
closely interlocked with the "I am I" as I have already explained it.
Resolve at the start to do one thing once in 24 hours that you would do
if you were not afraid. Face fear and it is your slave. Your Will-power
enables you to prove things practically to yourself and to the world; to
make actions match-thoughts. Give your Will much exercise in the right
direction. Without Will a man is no better than a log of wood. Keep
your Will strong by auto-suggestion and exercise. Try the powers of your
Will on your personality till you can do anything and be anything. Say "I
can and I will" in a thousand different ways and prove it too. The
requisite qualities that form valuable adjuncts to Will-power are:
1. Determination. 2. Stick-to-it-ive-ness. 3. Perseverance. 4. Invincible
and indomitable courage. 5. Non-attachment. 6. Faith in yourself.
7. Faith in God. 8. I can and I will. Repeat this affirmation often till
it becomes a constant mental trait.

AFFIRMATIONS.

1. I am fearless. I am full of courage. There is nothing to fear.
I say courage, I think, I act courage.

2. Courage is my distinct and leading trait. Everyone knows me
as a man of Indomitable courage. The criticisms and opinions of others
cannot affect me the least.

3. I am part of the Divine Self. I harm none. My nature knows
no harm. Hence no harm comes to me.

4. I am equal to anything. Nothing can crush my spirit. I can
face everything. I can face everybody.

5. My powers of resistance are strong, strong, strong. I use them
never for the aggression of others. They are for my self-defence.

6. I am absolutely fearless morally and physically.

7. I stand for absolute truthfulness and justice and manifest them
in myself.

8. Work with this affirmation. Strongly implant it in your mind.
The use of strong, positive Affirmation in the Silence is valuable in
that it gives you a firm hold of your thought so that you can "carry the
thought" mentally. The value of expressing thought in act and speech lies
in this that it clinches your thought into a permanent habit. Remember
this psychologic axiom: 1. Thoughts take form in action. 2. Action
induces thought and corresponding habits. Therefore act out the part
physically. If you want a courageous mind--"act out" the part physically,
in your daily life, on suitable occasions, in all earnestness as you
would in a theatre or drama. In a very short time it shall become a
confirmed habit. Force yourself to it. Take an interest in what you do
and say. Have confident expectations of SUCCESS. Never be daunted and
cowed down by initial difficulties and failures. Never say die. If you
go down--don't remain lying and moaning. Never, I say, never. Get up.
Shake yourself up free and say, like the royal lion "Come one, come all,
this rock shall fly sooner from its base than I." Have a will of your
own and be a force for good. Exercise your Will-power. Be something.
Do something.

LOVE FOR HUMANITY, ENERGY, ASPIRATION, SELF-ESTEEM.

I cannot too strongly emphasise the difference between Self-Esteem
and Self-Conceit. I wish to drive and thoroughly pound this difference
into your brain. Self-Esteem is decidedly a manly trait. It is based
upon a conviction of the Kingship of God and the Sonship of Man. Man
is a dignified being with divine attributes. He should not disgrace his
Maker by crawling on the ground. This is Self-Esteem. Self-Esteem
does not lower itself. It never lowers others. You shall never see a
leader of mankind without tremendous faith in himself. But equally truly
you shall never see a true man or woman taking delight in having others
crawl to dust before them. They feel pained and shocked at such a sight.
There is infinite humiliation to them hi this sorry spectacle. But
Self-Conceit is that original obliquity that leads a man to make a hog of
himself. It is the old, dirty, unmanly "I-am-greater-than-you" feeling.
Such men are hogs, hogs, hogs. They are not the true sons of their
mothers. They are bastards and imbeciles. If you come across this type
and get a chance to deal with him on your private strength open his eyes
to his hoggishness. If he has any manly stuff in himself, he shall
reform. If not, let him sizzle in his fat. Nature and its rigorous Laws
will rub the lesson home some day. But don't you stand their nonsense for
want of moral backbone. And the "I am" in you shall revolt against any
such meanness and smallness in yourself. Encourage it not. Revere God.
Revere yourself. Revere others. Next, as to energy and aspiration--these
two characteristics transmute your mind from a negative into a positive
type. They give you an aura of thought-force such as never knows fear. In
point of fact fear is starved off to death. Be progressive. Take an
interest in the affairs of this world and be a force for good. Raise
yourself first. Then give others a lift. Have an Increasing Purpose
in your life. Work towards its accomplishment. The man who renounces the
world does not become a burden unto others. He helps others to shoulder
their responsibilities. Nature aids at building up strong individuals. It
has no use for barnacles and is always scraping them off. Nature does not
tolerate leeches, vampires and parasites. Aspire to do something great in
life "for the good of many, for the happiness of many." Live to some
purpose. When you have a positive life-purpose, your tone of mind shall
be dominant and positive and your thoughts shall match. All-strength
shall come to you. Bad health, fear, worry and the whole array of
disintegrating forces are set into active motion by a purposeless life.
The Purposeful Man has no time to bother about them. Understand clearly,
spirituality is not laziness, whatever else it may be.

AFFIRMATIONS.

1. I have perfect Self-Confidence. I am a Divine Being. I lower
not myself--I lower not others.

2. My Life-Purpose is Constructive--not Destructive.

3. I will be great spiritually and mentally. I will make others
great. I am an irresistible force for good.

4. I live to some great purpose. I am an Individual. I recognise
the Fatherhood of God and the Brotherhood of man.

HEALTH, CHASTITY AND SELF-CONTROL.

Chastity and Self-Control bring to you a clean healthy physique. Strong
health means strong brain. And strong brain means abounding vitality,
magnetism and ambition. Remember our aim is the development of courage.
The Chaste brain has tremendous energy. You should observe
Bramhacharya--the conservation of vital energy in the body. You should
acquire control over your passions and appetites. The energy generated in
your body should not be drawn off at the lower end of your being, but
should be transmuted into creative activity mentally and spiritually. Get
a clean body, first. You can get it by fasting, breathing and exercise.

FASTING AND SELF-CONTROL.

If you feel heavy in body and brain, if you feel mentally sluggish it
is a sure indication that your system is "clogged" with waste matter, due
to partial or total inactivity of the physical channels of elimination.
You have been indulging in high living and gluttony or you have been
indulging in physical gratifications and have thus exhausted the vital
fibres of your body. Perhaps you have drunk very little water which is
nature's demand for cleaning the vessels of the body. Perhaps you have
exercised little and thus the supply of oxygen required for burning off
carbon and energising the blood has been rather limited. Mental
depression, 'weak nerves,' melancholy, despair, fear, lack of
concentration and lots of other mental weakness are due to a clogging of
the system with accumulated refuse. In brief, the following are a few of
the benefits derivable from scientific fasting:--(1) It gives nature a
chance to "Clean Up." The day of fasting is a day of physical "house
cleaning." (2) Like the galvanic battery the body "recuperates" its
energies. Strength is invariably rested to one's powers of digestion
after a careful fast. No case of dyspepsia, constipation, etc., there is,
but can benefit or be totally and radically cured by fasting. Fasting
will increase powers of assimilation, quicken hunger, purify and
strengthen the nerves and raise your health in all ways. (3) By gaining
control over appetite you gain control over your lower nature. It is a
splendid drill for your Will. You shall gain in spiritual strength. You
shall grow positive to your flesh and its cravings. Jesus Christ fasted
for 40 days in order to prepare himself to face his great trial and
temptation. Our Yogis are all great fasters.

HOW TO FAST.

Don't undertake too much. If you have never observed a fast begin
with a 24 hour fast. Drink at least 5, if possible, 8 tumblers of pure
water at frequent intervals slowly. Keep yourself gently active and
occupied the whole day, mentally and physically. You may feel a feeling
of faintness, all-goneness and an irresistible craving for food. These
are mischievous pranks of a cultivated and pampered and artificial
