she reckons much upon them; pray do not disappoint her. Beg of GOD
that she may make her sacrifice in the view of His love alone, and
with a firm resolution to be wholly devoted to Him. I will send you
one of these books which treat of _the presence of_ GOD; a subject
which, in my opinion, contains the whole spiritual life; and it seems
to me that whoever duly practices it will soon become spiritual.

I know that for the right practice of it, the heart must be empty of
all other things; because GOD will possess the heart _alone_; and as
He cannot possess it _alone_ without emptying it of all besides, so
neither can He act _there_, and do in it what He pleases, unless it be
left vacant to Him.

There is not in the world a kind of life more sweet and delightful
than that of a continual conversation with GOD. Those only can
comprehend it who practice and experience it; yet I do not advise you
to do it from that motive. It is not pleasure which we ought to seek
in this exercise; but let us do it from a principle of love, and
because GOD would have us.

Were I a preacher, I should, above all other things, preach the
practice of _the presence of_ GOD; and, were I a director, I should
advise all the world to do it, so necessary do I think it, and so easy
too.

Ah! knew we but the want we have of the grace and assistance of GOD,
we should never lose sight of Him, no, not for a moment. Believe me;
make immediately a holy and firm resolution never more wilfully to
forget Him, and to spend the rest of your days in His sacred presence,
deprived for the love of Him, if He thinks fit, of all consolations.

Set heartily about this work, and if you do it as you ought, be
assured that you will soon find the effects of it. I will assist you
with my prayers, poor as they are. I recommend myself earnestly to
yours and those of your holy society being theirs, and more
particularly

Yours, &c.



SIXTH LETTER.


_To the Same_.

I have received from Mrs. ----, the things which you gave her for me.
I wonder that you have not given me your thoughts of the little book I
sent to you, and which you must have received. Pray set heartily about
the practice of it in your old age: it is better late than never.

I cannot imagine how religious persons can live satisfied without the
practice of _the presence of_ GOD. For my part. I keep myself retired
with Him in the fund or centre of my soul as much as I can; and while
I am so with Him I fear nothing, but the least turning from Him is
insupportable.

This exercise does not much fatigue the body; it is, however, proper
to deprive it sometimes, nay often; of many little pleasures which are
innocent and lawful, for GOD will not permit that a soul which desires
to be devoted entirely to Him should take other pleasures than with
Him: that is more than reasonable.

I do not say that therefore we must put any violent constraint upon
ourselves. No, we must serve GOD in a holy freedom; we must do our
business faithfully; without trouble or disquiet, recalling our mind
to GOD mildly, and with tranquility, as often as we find it wandering
from Him.

It is, however, necessary to put our whole trust in GOD, laying aside
all other cares, and even some particular forms of devotion, though
very good in themselves, yet such as one often engages in
unreasonably, because these devotions are only means to attain to the
end. So when by this exercise of _the presence of_ GOD we are _with
Him_ who is our end, it is then useless to return to the means; but we
may continue with Him our commerce of love, persevering in His holy
presence, one while by an act of praise, of adoration or of desire;
one while by an act of resignation or thanksgiving; and in all the
ways which our spirit can invent.

Be not discouraged by the repugnance which you may find in it from
nature; you must do yourself violence. At the first one often thinks
it lost time, but you must go on, and resolve to persevere in it to
death, notwithstanding all the difficulties that may occur. I
recommend myself to the prayers of your holy society, and yours in
particular. I am, in our LORD,

Yours, &c.



SEVENTH LETTER.


I pity you much. It will be of great importance if you can leave the
care of your affairs to ----, and spend the remainder of your life
only in worshiping GOD. He requires no great matters of us; a little
remembrance of Him from time to time; a little adoration; sometimes to
pray for His grace, sometimes to offer Him your sufferings, and
sometimes to return Him thanks for the favors He has given you, and
still gives you, in the midst of your troubles, and to console
yourself with Him the oftenest you can. Lift up your heart to Him,
sometimes even at your meals, and when you are in company: the least
little remembrance will always be acceptable to Him. You need not cry
very loud; He is nearer to us than we are aware of.

It is not necessary for being with GOD to be always at church: we may
make an oratory of our heart wherein to retire from time to time to
converse with Him in meekness, humility and love. Every one is capable
of such familiar conversation with GOD, some more, some less: He knows
what we can do. Let us begin, then. Perhaps He expects but one
generous resolution on our part. Have courage. We have but little time
to live; you are near sixty-four, and I am almost eighty. Let us live
and die with GOD. Sufferings will be sweet and pleasant to us while we
are with Him; and the greatest pleasures will be, without Him, a cruel
punishment to us. May He be blessed for all. Amen.

Accustom yourself, then, by degrees thus to worship Him, to beg His
grace, to offer Him your heart from time to time in the midst of your
business, even every moment, if you can. Do not always scrupulously
confine yourself to certain rules, or particular forms of devotion,
but act with a general confidence in GOD, with love and humility. You
may assure ---- of my poor prayers, and that I am their servant, and
particularly

Yours in our LORD, &c.



EIGHTH LETTER.


_(Concerning wandering thoughts in Prayer.)_

You tell me nothing new; you are not the only one that is troubled
with wandering thoughts. Our mind is extremely roving; but, as the
will is mistress of all our faculties, she must recall them, and carry
them to GOD as their last end.

When the mind, for want of being sufficiently reduced by recollection
at our first engaging in devotion, has contracted certain bad habits
of wandering and dissipation, they are difficult to overcome, and
commonly draw us, even against our wills, to the things of the earth.

I believe one remedy for this is to confess our faults, and to humble
ourselves before GOD. I do not advise you to use multiplicity of words
in prayer: many words and long discourses being often the occasions of
wandering. Hold yourself in prayer before GOD, like a dumb or
paralytic beggar at a rich man's gate. Let it be _your_ business to
keep your mind in the presence of the LORD. If it sometimes wander and
withdraw itself from Him, do not much disquiet yourself for that:
trouble and disquiet serve rather to distract the mind than to
re-collect it: the will must bring it back in tranquility. If you
persevere in this manner, GOD will have pity on you.

One way to re-collect the mind easily in the time of prayer, and
preserve it more in tranquility, is _not to let it wander too far at
other times_: you should keep it strictly in the presence of GOD; and
being accustomed to think of Him often, you will find it easy to keep
your mind calm in the time of prayer, or at least to recall it from
its wanderings.

I have told you already at large, in my former letters, of the
advantages we may draw from this practice of the presence of GOD: let
