
I have stated these great principles, and made these general
remarks upon the subject presented in our texts, on account of some
recent teachings which have been put forth as _religious_--put forth
in _religious_ publications, by _ministers_ of the gospel. I have no
reference to mere politics--to political papers or political
parties, whig or democrat. I have never entered into such matters:
other things occupy me. I have never given but one vote in any legal
election, during the eighteen years I have resided in the State
since I returned to it; and I never expect to give another. And if
principles opposite to those I have laid down in this sermon were
promulgated among us, only by politicians and political parties and
papers, I should not advert to them here. I have always supposed,
that some extravagant and evil principles would be occasionally
promulgated for party purposes and political effect, and that the
people very well understand this, and therefore will not be led very
far astray by them. And whenever such evil principles have been put
forth in the name of religion, by men whose fanatical phrensy
contemned the Sabbath and other institutions of God, (like some of
our Northern fanatics, "men of one idea" and not capable of two,) I
have very seldom adverted to them at all, but have supposed it best
to leave them to be counteracted by their own extravagance and by
the character of their advocates, and let them die by their own
contemptibility. But now, principles, contrary to the plain meaning
of the texts before us, come to our ears from some more respectable
quarters, and in the name of religion. I should be a traitor to the
high trust of this pulpit, if I did not caution you against them.
Forbearance and delicacy must sometimes have limits. We owe duties
to truth and Christianity, which tenderness must not make us
violate.

The "New York Evangelical Congregational Association" recently
passed the following Resolution in respect to the "Fugitive-Slave
Law,"--a Law regularly enacted by the Congress of the United
States:--

"Resolved, That we cannot recognize this Law, as of any binding
force upon the citizens of our country."--(I am thankful that these
modest men did not go on, like him of the triple crown, to absolve
"the citizens of our country" from all allegiance to the government,
and give our rulers over into the hands of a majesty fit to take
care of them.)

A _religious_ paper, edited by Congregational clergymen, holding
respectable stations, Pastors of churches,--a paper professedly
devoted to the cause of Christ,--holds the following language in an
_Editorial_ article, under the caption, "How to oppose the
Fugitive-Slave Law":--

This _religious_ paper says,--"To the fugitives themselves ... this
Law is no Law ... and to resist it even unto death, is their right,
and it may be their duty.... To each _individual_ fugitive, to every
man or woman, who having escaped from bondage and tasted liberty, is
in hourly peril of being seized and dragged back to slavery, we
say,--Be fully prepared for your own defense. If to you death seems
better than slavery, then refuse not to die--whether on the
way-side, at your own threshold, or even as a felon upon the
gallows. Defend your liberty and the liberty of your wife and
children, as you would defend your life and theirs against the
assassin. If you die thus, you die nobly, and your blood shall be
the redemption of your race. Should you destroy the life of your
assailant, you will pass into the custody of the criminal Law ...
under an indictment for murder; but the verdict of the community,
and the verdict of almost any jury will be, justifiable homicide in
self-defense.... Or should a different verdict be found, and you be
condemned to die as a murderer, your ignominious death shall be
luminous with the halo of a martyr, and your sacrifice shall be for
the deliverance of your people."

Such are the _religious_ principles, and such is the _religious_
advice of these _religious_ ministers!

I am sorry to see this. _I never read more wicked and abominable
principles!_ They deserve not only the reprehension of every
Christian, but the entire indignation of _all civilized mankind_!
They advise private arming with bloody weapons--they advise violent
resistance and murder--the murder of officers of civil Law engaged
in the discharge of the duty which they have sworn to perform! I
have no words to express my abhorrence of these wicked and
outrageous sentiments, so directly contrary to the whole nature of
all civilized society, to the precepts of the Bible, and the whole
spirit of Christianity! I speak not of the _men_. Good men may err.
But these principles, which these ministers have published as
religious ones, are horribly and outrageously wicked!

There are other things in this religious paper, which we think are
calculated to do immense mischief. This editorial article "would
utter its remonstrance against all violent resistance to the
execution of the Law." Indeed! Very quiet and peaceful, after having
talked about being "fully prepared for defense"--about death "on the
wayside, at the threshold and on the gallows"--about "murder," and
about "martyrdom." Away with such morality! aiming at one thing and
professing another!--"If one sees a fellow man struggling with his
captors,... he may lawfully interpose his own person between the
parties and separate them." Away with such morality! encouraging
people to "act a lie," by opposing Law while professing to obey it!
And this species of morality is virtually commended to the jury-box;
and its inmates are furnished in advance with a verdict here
prepared for their use--"justifiable homicide in self-defense"! Away
with such morality! encouraging a juror to violate his oath, by
disregarding the Law, which he has just sworn to his country and to
his God, shall govern his verdict! and encouraging a fugitive to
expect him to do so!--We may yet see whether the jurymen of our
country will regard their oath, or will follow the religious counsel
of this religious paper.

I am not justifying slavery. I am pleading obedience to the texts
before me. Slavery may be wrong. Be it so; there is still a
_righteous_ method to get rid of it. But if slavery _is_ wrong, that
does not make violence and murder _right_.

I am not justifying the fugitive-slave Law. It may be wrong: it may
be unwise and unconstitutional. I think that any wise and modest man
would hesitate much to pronounce it unconstitutional, after its
enactment by a body of men who _aimed_ to abide by the constitution,
and who studied the matter most intensely, with every opportunity
for information and with minds trained for years in the depths of
legal science. But, be it wrong--be it unwise and unconstitutional;
there are civil courts to decide upon its constitutionality, and
no man has _any right_ to decide for _himself_ that it is
unconstitutional, and act upon that decision: if he had such a
right, then every man would be his own Lawmaker, and public
Constitution and Law would be nothing but a bugbear or a bubble! Be
it wrong; there is a peaceful, prescribed way of amending both Law
and Constitution,--and a wrong in the Law does not make
