mistress, the representative of the stone age.

In many tales of fairy-brides, they are won by a kind of force.  The
lover in the familiar Welsh and German Marchen sees the swan-maidens
throw off their swan plumage and dance naked..  He steals the feather-
garb of one of them, and so compels her to his love.  Finally, she leaves
him, in anger, or because he has broken some taboo.  Far from being
peculiar to Aryan mythology, this legend occurs, as Mr. Farrer has shown,
{83a} in Algonquin and Bornoese tradition.  The Red Indian story told by
Schoolcraft in his 'Algic Researches' is most like the Aryan version, but
has some native peculiarities.  Wampee was a great hunter, who, on the
lonely prairie, once heard strains of music.  Looking up he saw a speck
in the sky: the speck drew nearer and nearer, and proved to be a basket
containing twelve heavenly maidens.  They reached the earth and began to
dance, inflaming the heart of Wampee with love.  But Wampee could not
draw near the fairy girls in his proper form without alarming them.  Like
Zeus in his love adventures, Wampee exercised the medicine-man's power of
metamorphosing himself.  He assumed the form of a mouse, approached
unobserved, and caught one of the dancing maidens.  After living with
Wampee for some time she wearied of earth, and, by virtue of a 'mystic
chain of verse,' she ascended again to her heavenly home.

Now is there any reason to believe that this incident was once part of
the myth of Pururavas and Urvasi?  Was the fairy-love, Urvasi, originally
caught and held by Pururavas among her naked and struggling companions?
Though this does not appear to have been much noticed, it seems to follow
from a speech of Pururavas in the Vedic dialogue {83b} (x. 95, 8, 9).  Mr.
Max Muller translates thus: 'When I, the mortal, threw my arms round
those flighty immortals, they trembled away from me like a trembling doe,
like horses that kick against the cart.' {84a}  Ludwig's rendering suits
our view--that Pururavas is telling how he first caught Urvasi--still
better: 'When I, the mortal, held converse with the immortals who had
laid aside their raiment, like slippery serpents they glided from me,
like horses yoked to the car.'  These words would well express the
adventure of a lover among the naked flying swan-maidens, an adventure
familiar to the Red Men as to Persian legends of the Peris.

To end our comparison of myths like the tale of 'Cupid and Psyche,' we
find an example among the Zulus.  Here {84b} the mystic lover came in
when all was dark, and felt the damsel's face.  After certain rites, 'in
the morning he went away, he speaking continually, the girl not seeing
him.  During all those days he would not allow the girl (sic), when she
said she would light a fire.  Finally, after a magical ceremony, he said,
"Light the fire!" and stood before her revealed, a shining shape.'  This
has a curious resemblance to the myth of Cupid and Psyche; but a more
curious detail remains.  In the Zulu story of Ukcombekcansini, the
friends of a bride break a taboo and kill a tabooed animal.  Instantly,
like Urvasi and her companions in the Yajur Veda, the bride and her
maidens disappear _and are turned into birds_! {84c}  They are afterwards
surprised in human shape, and the bride is restored to her lover.

Here we conclude, having traced parallels to Cupid and Psyche in many non-
Aryan lands.  Our theory of the myth does not rest on etymology.  We have
seen that the most renowned scholars, Max Muller, Kuhn, Roth, all analyse
the names Urvasi and Pururavas in different ways, and extract different
interpretations.  We have found the story where these names were probably
never heard of.  We interpret it as a tale of the intercourse between
mortal men and immortal maids, or between men and metamorphosed animals,
as in India and North America.  We explain the separation of the lovers
as the result of breaking a taboo, or law of etiquette, binding among men
and women, as well as between men and fairies.

* * * * *

The taboos are, to see the beloved unveiled, to utter his or her name, to
touch her with a metal 'terrible to ghosts and spirits,' or to do some
action which will revive the associations of a former life.  We have
shown that rules of nuptial etiquette resembling these in character do
exist, and have existed, even among Greeks--as where the Milesian, like
the Zulu, women made a law not to utter their husbands' names.  Finally,
we think it a reasonable hypothesis that tales on the pattern of 'Cupid
and Psyche' might have been evolved wherever a curious nuptial taboo
required to be sanctioned, or explained, by a myth.  On this hypothesis,
the stories may have been separately invented in different lands; but
there is also a chance that they have been transmitted from people to
people in the unknown past of our scattered and wandering race.  This
theory seems at least as probable as the hypothesis that the meaning of
an Aryan proverbial statement about sun and dawn was forgotten, and was
altered unconsciously into a tale which is found among various non-Aryan
tribes.  That hypothesis again, learned and ingenious as it is, has the
misfortune to be opposed by other scholarly hypotheses not less ingenious
and learned.

* * * * *

As for the sun-frog, we may hope that he has sunk for ever beneath the
western wave.




A FAR-TRAVELLED TALE.


A modern novelist has boasted that her books are read 'from Tobolsk to
Tangiers.'  This is a wide circulation, but the widest circulation in the
world has probably been achieved by a story whose author, unlike Ouida,
will never be known to fame.  The tale which we are about to examine is,
perhaps, of all myths the most widely diffused, yet there is no ready way
of accounting for its extraordinary popularity.  Any true 'nature-myth,'
any myth which accounts for the processes of nature or the aspects of
natural phenomena, may conceivably have been invented separately,
wherever men in an early state of thought observed the same facts, and
attempted to explain them by telling a story.  Thus we have seen that the
earlier part of the Myth of Cronus is a nature-myth, setting forth the
cause of the separation of Heaven and Earth.  Star-myths again, are
everywhere similar, because men who believed all nature to be animated
and personal, accounted for the grouping of constellations in accordance
with these crude beliefs. {87}  Once more, if a story like that of 'Cupid
and Psyche' be found among the most diverse races, the distribution
becomes intelligible if the myth was invented to illustrate or enforce a
widely prevalent custom.  But in the following story no such explanation
is even provisionally acceptable.

The gist of the tale (which has many different 'openings,' and
conclusions in different places) may be stated thus: A young man is
brought to the home of a hostile animal, a giant, cannibal, wizard, or a
malevolent king.  He is put by his unfriendly host to various severe
trials, in which it is hoped that he will perish.  In each trial he is
assisted by the daughter of his host.  After achieving the adventures, he
elopes with the girl, and is pursued by her father.  The runaway pair
throw various common objects behind them, which are changed into magical
obstacles and check the pursuit of the father.  The myth has various
endings, usually happy, in various places.  Another form of the narrative
is known, in which the visitors to the home of the hostile being are, not
wooers of his daughter, but brothers of his wife. {88}  The incidents of
the flight, in this variant, are still of the same character.  Finally,
when the flight is that of a brother from his sister's malevolent ghost,
in Hades (Japan), or of two sisters from a cannibal mother or step-mother
(Zulu and Samoyed), the events of the flight and the magical aids to
escape remain little altered.  We shall afterwards see that attempts have
been made to interpret one of these narratives as a nature-myth; but the
attempts seem unsuccessful.  We are therefore at a loss to account for
the wide diffusion of this tale, unless it has been transmitted slowly
from people to people, in the immense unknown prehistoric past of the
human race.

* * * * *

Before comparing the various forms of the myth in its first shape--that
which tells of the mortal lover and the giant's or wizard's daughter--let
us give the Scottish version of the story.  This version was written down
for me, many years ago, by an aged lady in Morayshire.  I published it in
the 'Revue Celtique'; but it is probably new to story-comparers, in its
broad Scotch variant.



NICHT NOUGHT NOTHING.


   There once lived a king and a queen.  They were long married and had
   no bairns; but at last the queen had a bairn, when the king was away
   in far countries.  The queen would not christen the bairn till the
   king came back, and she said, 'We will just call him Nicht Nought
   Nothing until his father comes home.'  But it was long before he came
   home, and the boy had grown a nice little laddie.  At length the king
   was on his way back; but he had a big river to cross, and there was a
   spate, and he could not get over the water.  But a giant came up to
   him, and said, 'If you will give me Nicht Nought Nothing, I will carry
   you over the water on my back.'  The king had never heard that his son
   was called Nicht Nought Nothing, and so he promised him.  When the
   king got home again, he was very happy to see his wife again, and his
   young son.  She told him that she had not given the child any name but
   Nicht Nought Nothing, until he should come home again himself.  The
   poor king was in a terrible case.  He said, 'What have I done?  I
   promised to give the giant who carried me over the river on his back,
   Nicht Nought Nothing.'  The king and the queen were sad and sorry, but
   they said, 'When the giant comes we will give him the hen-wife's
   bairn; he will never know the difference.'  The next day the giant
   came to claim the king's promise, and he sent for the hen-wife's
   bairn; and the giant went away with the bairn on his back.  He
   travelled till he came to a big stone, and there he sat down to rest.
   He said,

   'Hidge, Hodge, on my back, what time of day is it?'  The poor little
   bairn said, 'It is the time that my mother, the hen-wife, takes up the
   eggs for the queen's breakfast.'

   The giant was very angry, and dashed the bairn on the stone and killed
   it.

   . . . . .

   The same adventure is repeated with the gardener's son.

   . . . . .

   Then the giant went back to the king's house, and said he would
   destroy them all if they did not give him Nicht Nought Nothing this
   time.  They had to do it; and when he came to the big stone, the giant
   said, 'What time of day is it?'  Nicht Nought Nothing said, 'It is the
   time that my father the king will be sitting down to supper.'  The
   giant said, 'I've got the richt ane noo;' and took Nicht Nought
   Nothing to his own house and brought him up till he was a man.

   The giant had a bonny dochter, and she and the lad grew very fond of
   each other.  The giant said one day to Nicht Nought Nothing, 'I've
   work for you to-morrow.  There is a stable seven miles long and seven
   miles broad, and it has not been cleaned for seven years, and you must
   clean it to-morrow, or I will have you for my supper.'

   The giant's dochter went out next morning with the lad's breakfast,
   and found him in a terrible state, for aye as he cleaned out a bit, it
   aye fell in again.  The giant's dochter said she would help him, and
   she cried a' the beasts of the field, and a' the fowls o' the air, and
   in a minute they a' came, and carried awa' everything that was in the
   stable and made a' clean before the giant came home.  He said, 'Shame
   for the wit that helped you; but I have a worse job for you
   to-morrow.'  Then he told Nicht Nought Nothing that there was a loch
   seven miles long, and seven miles deep, and seven miles broad, and he
   must drain it the next day, or else he would have him for his supper.
   Nicht Nought Nothing began early next morning and tried to lave the
   water with his pail, but the loch was never getting any less, and he
   did no ken what to do; but the giant's dochter called on all the fish
   in the sea to come and drink the water, and very soon they drank it
   dry.  When the giant saw the work done he was in a rage, and said,
   'I've a worse job for you to-morrow; there is a tree seven miles high,
   and no branch on it, till you get to the top, and there is a nest, and
   you must bring down the eggs without breaking one, or else I will have
   you for my supper.'  At first the giant's dochter did not know how to
   help Nicht Nought Nothing; but she cut off first her fingers and then
   her toes, and made steps of them, and he clomb the tree, and got all
   the eggs safe till he came to the bottom, and then one was broken.  The
   giant's dochter advised him to run away, and she would follow him.  So
   he travelled till he came to a king's palace, and the king and queen
   took him in and were very kind to him.  The giant's dochter left her
   father's house, and he pursued her and was drowned.  Then she came to
   the king's palace where Nicht Nought Nothing was.  And she went up
   into a tree to watch for him.  The gardener's dochter, going to draw
   water in the well, saw the shadow of the lady in the water, and
   thought it was herself, and said, 'If I'm so bonny, if I'm so brave,
   do you send me to draw water?'  The gardener's wife went out, and she
   said the same thing.  Then the gardener went himself, and brought the
   lady from the tree, and led her in.  And he told her that a stranger
   was to marry the king's dochter, and showed her the man: and it was
   Nicht Nought Nothing asleep in a chair.  And she saw him, and cried to
   him, 'Waken, waken, and speak to me!'  But he would not waken, and
   syne she cried,

   'I cleaned the stable, I laved the loch, and I clamb the tree,
         And all for the love of thee,
         And thou wilt not waken and speak to me.'

   The king and the queen heard this, and came to the bonny young lady,
   and she said,

   'I canna get Nicht Nought Nothing to speak to me for all that I can
   do.'

   Then were they greatly astonished when she spoke of Nicht Nought
   Nothing, and asked where he was, and she said, 'He that sits there in
   the chair.'  Then they ran to him and kissed him and called him their
   own dear son, and he wakened, and told them all that the giant's
   dochter had done for him, and of all her kindness.  Then they took her
   in their arms and kissed her, and said she should now be their
   dochter, for their son should marry her.

   And they lived happy all their days.

In this variant of the story, which we may use as our text, it is to be
noticed that a lacuna exists.  The narrative of the flight omits to
mention that the runaways threw things behind them which became obstacles
in the giant's way.  One of these objects probably turned into a lake, in
which the giant was drowned. {92}  A common incident is the throwing
behind of a comb, which changes into a thicket.  The formula of leaving
obstacles behind occurs in the Indian collection, the 'Kathasarit sagara'
(vii. xxxix.).  The 'Battle of the Birds,' in Campbell's 'Tales of the
West Highlands,' is a very copious Gaelic variant.  Russian parallels are
'Vasilissa the Wise and the Water King,' and 'The King Bear.' {93a}  The
incident of the flight and the magical obstacles is found in Japanese
mythology. {93b}  The 'ugly woman of Hades' is sent to pursue the hero.
He casts down his black head-dress, and it is instantly turned into
grapes; he fled while she was eating them.  Again, 'he cast down his
multitudinous and close-toothed comb, and it instantly turned into bamboo
sprouts.'  In the Gaelic version, the pursuer is detained by talkative
objects which the pursued leave at home, and this marvel recurs in
Zululand, and is found among the Bushmen.  The Zulu versions are
numerous. {93c}  Oddly enough, in the last variant, the girl performs no
magic feat, but merely throws sesamum on the ground to delay the
cannibals, for cannibals are very fond of sesamum. {93d}

* * * * *

Here, then, we have the remarkable details of the flight, in Zulu,
Gaelic, Norse, Malagasy, {93e} Russian, Italian, Japanese.  Of all
incidents in the myth, the incidents of the flight are most widely known.
But the whole connected series of events--the coming of the wooer; the
love of the hostile being's daughter; the tasks imposed on the wooer; the
aid rendered by the daughter; the flight of the pair; the defeat or
destruction of the hostile being--all these, or most of these, are
extant, in due sequence, among the following races.  The Greeks have the
tale, the people of Madagascar have it, the Lowland Scotch, the Celts,
the Russians, the Italians, the Algonquins, the Finns, and the Samoans
have it.  Now if the story were confined to the Aryan race, we might
account for its diffusion, by supposing it to be the common heritage of
the Indo-European peoples, carried everywhere with them in their
wanderings.  But when the tale is found in Madagascar, North America,
Samoa, and among the Finns, while many scattered incidents occur in even
more widely severed races, such as Zulus, Bushmen, Japanese, Eskimo,
Samoyeds, the Aryan hypothesis becomes inadequate.

To show how closely, all things considered, the Aryan and non-Aryan
possessors of the tale agree, let us first examine the myth of Jason.

* * * * *

The earliest literary reference to the myth of Jason is in the 'Iliad'
(vii. 467, xxiii. 747).  Here we read of Euneos, a son whom Hypsipyle
bore to Jason in Lemnos.  Already, even in the 'Iliad,' the legend of
Argo's voyage has been fitted into certain well-known geographical
localities.  A reference in the 'Odyssey' (xii. 72) has a more antique
ring: we are told that of all barques Argo alone escaped the jaws of the
Rocks Wandering, which clashed together and destroyed ships.  Argo
escaped, it is said, 'because Jason was dear to Hera.'  It is plain, from
various fragmentary notices, that Hesiod was familiar with several of the
adventures in the legend of Jason.  In the 'Theogony' (993-998) Hesiod
mentions the essential facts of the legend: how Jason carried off from
AEetes his daughter, 'after achieving the adventures, many and grievous,'
which were laid upon him.  At what period the home of AEetes was placed
in Colchis, it is not easy to determine.  Mimnermus, a contemporary of
Solon, makes the home of AEetes lie 'on the brink of ocean,' a very vague
description. {95}  Pindar, on the other hand, in the splendid Fourth
Pythian Ode, already knows Colchis as the scene of the loves and flight
of Jason and Medea.

* * * *

'Long were it for me to go by the beaten track,' says Pindar, 'and I know
a certain short path.'  Like Pindar, we may abridge the tale of Jason.  He
seeks the golden fleece in Colchis: AEetes offers it to him as a prize
for success in certain labours.  By the aid of Medea, the daughter of
AEetes, the wizard-king, Jason tames the fire-breathing oxen, yokes them
to the plough, and drives a furrow.  By Medea's help he conquers the
children of the teeth of the dragon, subdues the snake that guards the
fleece of gold, and escapes, but is pursued by AEetes.  To detain AEetes,
Medea throws behind the mangled remains of her own brother, Apsyrtos, and
the Colchians pursue no further than the scene of this bloody deed.  The
savagery of this act survives even in the work of a poet so late as
Apollonius Rhodius (iv. 477), where we read how Jason performed a rite of
savage magic, mutilating the body of Apsyrtos in a manner which was
believed to appease the avenging ghost of the slain.  'Thrice he tasted
the blood, thrice spat it out between his teeth,' a passage which the
Scholiast says contains the description of an archaic custom popular
among murderers.

Beyond Tomi, where a popular etymology fixed the 'cutting up' of
Apsyrtos, we need not follow the fortunes of Jason and Medea.  We have
already seen the wooer come to the hostile being, win his daughter's
love, achieve the adventures by her aid, and flee in her company,
delaying, by a horrible device, the advance of the pursuers.  To these
incidents in the tale we confine our attention.

Many explanations of the Jason myth have been given by Scholars who
thought they recognised elemental phenomena in the characters.  As usual
these explanations differ widely.  Whenever a myth has to be interpreted,
it is certain that one set of Scholars will discover the sun and the
dawn, where another set will see the thunder-cloud and lightning.  The
moon is thrown in at pleasure.  Sir G. W. Cox determines {96} 'that the
name Jason (Iason) must be classed with the many others, Iasion, Iamus,
Iolaus, Iaso, belonging to the same root.'  Well, what is the root?
Apparently the root is 'the root i, as denoting a crying colour, that is,
a loud colour' (ii. 81).  Seemingly (i. 229) violet is a loud colour,
and, wherever you have the root i, you have 'the violet-tinted morning
from which the sun is born.'  Medea is 'the daughter of the sun,' and
most likely, in her 'beneficent aspect,' is the dawn.  But (ii. 81, note)
ios has another meaning, 'which, as a spear, represents the far-darting
ray of the sun'; so that, in one way or another, Jason is connected with
the violet-tinted morning or with the sun's rays.  This is the gist of
the theory of Sir George Cox.

Preller {97a} is another Scholar, with another set of etymologies.  Jason
is derived, he thinks, from [Greek], to heal, because Jason studied
medicine under the Centaur Chiron.  This is the view of the Scholiast on
Apollonius Rhodius (i. 554).  Jason, to Preller's mind, is a form of
Asclepius, 'a spirit of the spring with its soft suns and fertile rains.'
Medea is the moon.  Medea, on the other hand, is a lightning goddess, in
the opinion of Schwartz. {97b}  No philological reason is offered.
Meanwhile, in Sir George Cox's system, the equivalent of Medea, 'in her
beneficent aspect,' is the dawn.

We must suppose, it seems, that either the soft spring rains and the
moon, or the dawn and the sun, or the lightning and the thunder-cloud, in
one arrangement or another, irresistibly suggested, to early Aryan minds,
the picture of a wooer, arriving in a hostile home, winning a maiden's
love, achieving adventures by her aid, fleeing with her from her angry
father and delaying his pursuit by various devices.  Why the spring, the
moon, the lightning, the dawn--any of them or all of them--should have
suggested such a tale, let Scholars determine when they have reconciled
their own differences.  It is more to our purpose to follow the myth
among Samoans, Algonquins, and Finns.  None of these races speak an Aryan
language, and none can have been beguiled into telling the same sort of
tale by a disease of Aryan speech.

Samoa, where we find our story, is the name of a group of volcanic
islands in Central Polynesia.  They are about 3,000 miles from Sidney,
were first observed by Europeans in 1722, and are as far removed as most
spots from direct Aryan influences.  Our position is, however, that in
the shiftings and migrations of peoples, the Jason tale has somehow been
swept, like a piece of drift-wood, on to the coasts of Samoa.  In the
islands, the tale has an epical form, and is chanted in a poem of twenty-
six stanzas.  There is something Greek in the free and happy life of the
Samoans--something Greek, too, in this myth of theirs.  There was once a
youth, Siati, famous for his singing, a young Thamyris of Samoa.  But as,
according to Homer, 'the Muses met Thamyris the Thracian, and made an end
