
    Quae tandem poterit lingua retexere
  laudes Christe tuas? qui domitam Pharon
  plagis multimodis cedere praesuli
  cogis iustitiae vindice dextera.

    Qui pontum rapidis aestibus invium         85
  persultare vetas, ut refluo in salo
  securus pateat te duce transitus,
  et mox unda rapax devoret inpios.

    Cui ieiuna eremi saxa loquacibus
  exundant scatebris, et latices novos         90
  fundit scissa silex, quae sitientibus
  dat potum populis axe sub igneo.

    Instar fellis aqua tristifico in lacu
  fit ligni venia mel velut Atticum:
  lignum est, quo sapiunt aspera dulcius;      95
  uam praefixa cruci spes hominum viget.

    Inplet castra cibus tunc quoque ninguidus,
  inlabens gelida grandine densius:
  his mensas epulis, hac dape construunt,
  quam dat sidereo Christus ab aethere.       100

    Nec non imbrifero ventus anhelitu
  crassa nube leves invehit alites,
  quae conflata in humum, cum semel agmina
  fluxerunt, reduci non revolant fuga.

    Haec olim patribus praemia contulit       105
  insignis pietas numinis unici,
  cuius subsidio nos quoque vescimur
  pascentes dapibus pectora mysticis.

    Fessos ille vocat per freta seculi
  discissis populum turbinibus regens         110
  iactatasque animas mille laboribus
  iustorum in patriam scandere praecipit.

    Illic purpureis tecta rosariis
  omnis fragrat humus calthaque pinguia
  et molles violas et tenues crocos           115
  fundit fonticulis uda fugacibus.

    Illic et gracili balsama surculo
  desudata fluunt, raraque cinnama
  spirant et folium, fonte quod abdito
  praelambens fluvius portat in exitum.       120

    Felices animae prata per herbida
  concentu parili suave sonantibus
  hymnorum modulis dulce canunt melos,
  calcant et pedibus lilia candidis.

    Sunt et spiritibus saepe nocentibus       125
  paenarum celebres sub Styge feriae
  illa nocte, sacer qua rediit Deus
  stagnis ad superos ex Acheronticis.

    Non sicut tenebras de face fulgida
  surgens oceano Lucifer inbuit,              130
  sed terris Domini de cruce tristibus
  maior sole novum restituens diem.

    Marcent suppliciis tartara mitibus,
  exultatque sui carceris otio
  functorum populus liber ab ignibus,         135
  nec fervent solito flumina sulphure.

    Nos festis trahimus per pia gaudia
  noctem conciliis votaque prospera
  certatim vigili congerimus prece
  extructoque agimus liba sacrario.           140

    Pendent mobilibus lumina funibus,
  quae suffixa micant per laquearia,
  et de languidulis fota natatibus
  lucem perspicuo flamma iacit vitro.

    Credas stelligeram desuper aream          145
  ornatam geminis stare trionibus,
  et qua bosporeum temo regit iugum,
  passim purpureos spargier hesperos.

    O res digna, Pater, quam tibi roscidae
  noctis principio grex tuus offerat,         150
  lucem, qua tribuis nil pretiosius,
  lucem, qua reliqua praemia cernimus.

    Tu lux vera oculis, lux quoque sensibus,
  intus tu speculum, tu speculum foris,
  lumen, quod famulans offero, suscipe,       155
  tinctum pacifici chrismatis unguine.

    Per Christum genitum, summe Pater, tuum,
  in quo visibilis stat tibi gloria,
  qui noster Dominus, qui tuus unicus
  spirat de patrio corde paraclitum.          160

    Per quem splendor, honos, laus, sapientia,
  maiestas, bonitas, et pietas tua
  regnum continuat numine triplici
  texens perpetuis secula seculis.




                 V. HYMN FOR THE LIGHTING OF THE LAMPS


  Blest Lord, Creator of the glowing light,
    At Whose behest the hours successive move,
    The sun has set: black darkness broods above:
  Christ! light Thy faithful through the coming night.

  Thy courts are lit with stars unnumbered,
    And in the cloudless vault the pale moon rides;
    Yet Thou dost bid us seek the fire that hides
  Till swift we strike it from its flinty bed.

  So man may learn that in Christ's body came
    The hidden hope of light to mortals given:
    He is the Rock--'tis His own word--that riven
  Sends forth to all our race the eternal flame.

  From lamps that brim with rich and fragrant oil,
    Or torches dry this heaven-sent fire we feed;
    Or make us rushlights from the flowering reed
  And wax, whereon the bees have spent their toil.

  Bright glows the light, whether the resin thick
    Of pine-brand flares, or waxen tapers burn
    With melting radiance, or the hollow urn
  Yields its stored sweetness to the thirsty wick.

  Beneath the might of fire, in slow decay
    The scented tears of glowing nectar fall;
    Lower and lower droops the candle tall
  And ever dwindling weeps itself away.

  So by Thy gifts, great Father, hearth and hall
    Are all ablaze with points of twinkling light
    That vie with daylight spent; and vanquished Night
  Rends, as she flies away, her sable pall.

  Who knoweth not that from high Heaven first came
    Our light, from God Himself the rushing fire?
    For Moses erst, amid the prickly brier,
  Saw God made manifest in lambent flame.

  Ah, happy he! deemed worthy face to face
    To see heaven's Lord within that sacred brake;
    Bidden the sandals from his feet to take,
  Nor with his shoon defile that holy place.

  The mighty children of the chosen name,
    Saved by the merits of their sires, and free
    After long years of savage tyranny,
  Through the drear desert followed still that flame.

  Striking their camp beneath the silent night
    Where'er they went, to lead their darkling way,
    The cloud of glory lent its guiding ray
  And shone more splendid than the noonday light.

  But, mad with jealous fury, Egypt's king
    Calls his great host to battle for their lord:
    Swiftly the cohorts gather at his word,
  And down the mail-clad lines the clarions ring.

  Girding their trusty swords the warriors go
    To fill the ranks; hoarse bugles rend the air;
    These seize their massy javelins, these prepare
  The death-winged arrow and the Cretan bow.

  The footmen throng in close battalions pressed;
    The chariots thunder; to the saddle spring
    The riders of the Nile, as forth they fling
  Egypt's proud banner with the serpent crest.

  And now, forgetful of the bondage past,
    Thy children, tortured by the desert heat,
    Drag to the Red Sea's brink their weary feet,
  And on its sandy margin rest at last.

  See! with their forsworn king the savage foe
    Draws nigh: the threatening squadrons nearer ride;
    But ever onward urged the intrepid guide
  And through the waves bade Israel fearless go.

  Before that steadfast march the billows fall,
    Then raise on either hand their crystal mass,
    While through the sundered deep Thy people pass
  And ocean guards them with a liquid wall.

  But, mad with baffled rage, the dusky horde
    Of Egypt, by their impious despot led,
    Athirst the hated Hebrews' blood to shed
  Pursued, all reckless of the o'er-arching flood.

  Swift as the wind the royal squadrons ride,
    But swifter yet the crystal barriers break,
    The waves exultantly their bounds forsake
  And roll together in a roaring tide.

  'Mid steeds and chariots and drifting mail
    The drowned lords of Egypt found a grave
    With all their swart retainers 'neath the wave;
  And in their haughty courts the mourners wail.

  What tongue, O Christ, Thy glories can unfold?
    Thine was the arm, outstretched in wrath, that made
    The stricken land of Pharaoh, sore afraid,
  Bow down before Thy minister of old.

  Thy pathless deep did at the voice restrain
    Its surging billows, till with Thee for guide
    Thy host passed scathless, and the refluent tide
  Swept down the wicked to the engulfing main.

  At Thy command the desert, parched and dry,
    Breaks into laughing rills, and water clear
    Wells from the smitten rock Thy flock to cheer
  And quench their thirst beneath that brazen sky.

  Then Marah's bitterness grew passing sweet,
    Touched by the mystic tree; so by the grace
    Of Thine own Tree, O Christ, our sinful race
  Regains its lost hopes at Thy pierced feet.

  Faster than icy hail the manna falls,
    Like snow down drifting from a wintry sky;
    The feast is set: they heap the tables high
  With that rich food from Thy celestial halls.

  Fresh blow the breezes from the distant shore
    And bear a fluttering cloud that hides the light,
    Till the frail pinions, faltering in their flight,
  Sink in the wilderness to rise no more.

  How great the love of God's own Son, that shed
    Such wondrous bounty on His chosen race!
    And still to us He proffers in His grace
  The mystic Feast, wherewith our souls are fed.

  Through the world's raging sea He bids us come,
    And 'twixt the sundered billows guides our path,
    Till, spent and wearied with the ocean's wrath,
  He calls His storm-tossed saints to Heaven and home.

  There in His paradise red roses blow,
    With golden daffodils and lilies pale
    And gentle violets, and down the vale
  The murmuring rivulets for ever flow.

  Sweet balsams, welling from the slender tree,
    And precious spices fill the fragrant air,
    And, hiding by the stream, that blossom rare
  Whose leaves the river hurries to the sea.

  There the blest souls with one accord unite
    To hymn in dulcet song their Saviour's praise,
    And as the chanting quire their voices raise
  They tread with shining feet the lilies bright.

  Yea, e'en the spirits of the lost, that dwell
    Where the black stream of sullen Acheron flows,
    Rest on that holy night when Christ arose,
  And for a while 'tis holiday in Hell.

  No sun from ocean rising drives away
    Their darkness, with his flaming shafts far-hurled,
    But from the cross of Christ o'er that wan world
  There streams the radiance of a new-born day.

  The sulphurous floods with lessened fury glow,
    The aching limbs find respite from their pain,
    While, in glad freedom from the galling chain,
  The tortured ghosts a short-lived solace know.

  In holy gladness let this night be sped,
    As here we gather, Lord, to watch and pray;
    To Thee with one consent our vows we pay
  And on Thy altar set the sacred Bread.

  From pendent chains the lamps of crystal blaze;
    By fragrant oil sustained the clear flame glows
    With strength undimmed, and through the darkness throws
  High o'er the fretted roof a golden haze,

  As 'twere Heaven's starry floor our wondering eye
    Beheld, wherein the Bears their light display,
    Where Phosphor heralds the approach of day
  And Hesper's radiance floods the evening sky.

  Meet is the gift we offer here to Thee,
    Father of all, as falls the dewy night;
    Thine own most precious gift we bring--the light
  Whereby mankind Thy other bounties see.

  Thou art the Light indeed; on our dull eyes
    And on our inmost souls Thy rays are poured;
    To Thee we light our lamps: receive them, Lord,
  Filled with the oil of peace and sacrifice.

  O hear us, Father, through Thine only Son,
    Our Lord and Saviour, by Whose love bequeathed
    The Paraclete upon our hearts has breathed,
  With Him and Thee through endless ages one.

  Through Christ Thy Kingdom shall for ever be,
