since matter has no life, and such misbelief must enthrone another power,
an imaginary life, above the living and true God. A material sense of life
robs God, by declaring that not He alone is Life, but that something else
also is life,--thus affirming the existence and rulership of more gods than
one. This idolatrous and false sense of life is all that dies, or appears
to die.

The opposite understanding of God brings to light Life and immortality.
Death has no quality of Life; and no divine fiat commands us to believe in
aught which is unlike God, or to deny that He is Life eternal.

Life as God, moral and spiritual good, is not seen in the mineral,
vegetable, or animal kingdoms. Hence the inevitable conclusion that Life is
not in these kingdoms, and that the popular views to this effect are not up
to the Christian standard of Life, or equal to the reality of being, whose
Principle is God.

When "the Word" is "made flesh" among mortals, the Truth of Life is
rendered practical on the body. Eternal Life is partially understood; and
sickness, sin, and death yield to holiness, health, and Life,--that is, to
God. The lust of the flesh and the pride of physical life must be quenched
in the divine essence,--that omnipotent Love which annihilates hate, that
Life which knows no death.

"Who hath believed our report?" Who understands these sayings? He to whom
the arm of the Lord is revealed. He loves them from whom divine Science
removes human weakness by divine strength, and who unveil the Messiah,
whose name is Wonderful.

Man has no underived power. That selfhood is false which opposes itself to
God, claims another father, and denies spiritual sonship; but as many as
receive the knowledge of God in Science must reflect, in some degree, the
power of Him who gave and giveth man dominion over all the earth.

As soldiers of the cross we must be brave, and let Science declare the
immortal status of man, and deny the evidence of the material senses, which
testify that man dies.

As the image of God, or Life, man forever reflects and embodies Life, not
death. The material senses testify falsely. They presuppose that God is
good and that man is evil, that Deity is deathless, but that man dies,
losing the divine likeness.

Science and material sense conflict at all points, from the revolution of
the earth to the fall of a sparrow. It is mortality only that dies.

To say that you and I, as mortals, will not enter this dark shadow of
material sense, called _death_, is to assert what we have not proved; but
man in Science never dies. Material sense, or the belief of life in matter,
must perish, in order to prove man deathless.

As Truth supersedes error, and bears the fruits of Love, this understanding
of Truth subordinates the belief in death, and demonstrates Life as
imperative in the divine order of being.

Jesus declares that they who believe his sayings will never die; therefore
mortals can no more receive everlasting life by believing in death, than
they can become perfect by believing in imperfection and living
imperfectly.

Life is God, and God is good. Hence Life abides in man, if man abides in
good, if he lives in God, who holds Life by a spiritual and not by a
material sense of being.

A sense of death is not requisite to a proper or true sense of Life, but
beclouds it. Death can never alarm or even appear to him who fully
understands Life. The death-penalty comes through our ignorance of
Life,--of that which is without beginning and without end,--and is the
punishment of this ignorance.

Holding a material sense of Life, and lacking the spiritual sense of it,
mortals die, in belief, and regard all things as temporal. A sense material
apprehends nothing strictly belonging to the nature and office of Life. It
conceives and beholds nothing but mortality, and has but a feeble concept
of immortality.

In order to reach the true knowledge and consciousness of Life, we must
learn it of good. Of evil we can never learn it, because sin shuts out the
real sense of Life, and brings in an unreal sense of suffering and death.

Knowledge of evil, or belief in it, involves a loss of the true sense of
good, God; and to know death, or to believe in it, involves a temporary
loss of God, the infinite and only Life.

Resurrection from the dead (that is, from the belief in death) must come to
all sooner or later; and they who have part in this resurrection are they
upon whom the second death has no power.

The sweet and sacred sense of the permanence of man's unity with his Maker
can illumine our present being with a continual presence and power of good,
opening wide the portal from death into Life; and when this Life shall
appear "we shall be like Him," and we shall go to the Father, not through
death, but through Life; not through error, but through Truth.

All Life is Spirit, and Spirit can never dwell in its antagonist, matter.
Life, therefore, is deathless, because God cannot be the opposite of
Himself. In Christian Science there is no matter; hence matter neither
lives nor dies. To the senses, matter appears to both live and die, and
these phenomena appear to go on _ad infinitum_; but such a theory implies
perpetual disagreement with Spirit.

Life, God, being everywhere, it must follow that death can be nowhere;
because there is no place left for it.

Soul, Spirit, is deathless. Matter, sin, and death are not the outcome of
Spirit, holiness, and Life. What then are matter, sin, and death? They can
be nothing except the results of material consciousness; but material
consciousness can have no real existence, because it is not a living--that
is to say, a divine and intelligent--reality.

That man must be vicious before he can be virtuous, dying before he can be
deathless, material before he can be spiritual, is an error of the senses;
for the very opposite of this error is the genuine Science of being.

Man, in Science, is as perfect and immortal now, as when "the morning stars
sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy."

With Christ, Life was not merely a sense of existence, but a sense of might
and ability to subdue material conditions. No wonder "people were
astonished at his doctrine; for he taught them as one having authority, and
not as the scribes."

As defined by Jesus, Life had no beginning; nor was it the result of
organization, or of an infusion of power into matter. To him, Life was
Spirit.

Truth, defiant of error or matter, is Science, dispelling a false sense and
leading man into the true sense of selfhood and Godhood; wherein the mortal
does not develop the immortal, nor the material the spiritual, but wherein
true manhood and womanhood go forth in the radiance of eternal being and
its perfections, unchanged and unchangeable.

This generation seems too material for any strong demonstration over death,
and hence cannot bring out the infinite reality of Life,--namely, that
there is no death, but only Life. The present mortal sense of being is too
finite for anchorage in infinite good, God, because mortals now believe in
the possibility that Life can be evil.

The achievement of this ultimatum of Science, complete triumph over death,
requires time and immense spiritual growth.

I have by no means spoken of myself, I _cannot_ speak of myself as
"sufficient for these things." I insist only upon the fact, as it exists in
divine Science, that man dies not, and on the words of the Master in
support of this verity,--words which can never "pass away till all be
fulfilled."

Because of these profound reasons I urge Christians to have more faith in
living than in dying. I exhort them to accept Christ's promise, and unite
the influence of their own thoughts with the power of his teachings, in the
Science of being. This will interpret the divine power to human capacity,
and enable us to _apprehend_, or lay hold upon, "that for which," as Paul
says in the third chapter of Philippians, we are also "apprehended of [or
grasped by] Christ Jesus,"--the ever-present Life which knows no death, the
omnipresent Spirit which knows no matter.




Personal Statements


Many misrepresentations are made concerning my doctrines, some of which are
as unkind and unjust as they are untrue; but I can only repeat the Master's
words: "They know not what they do."

The foundations of these assertions, like the structure raised thereupon,
are vain shadows, repeating--if the popular couplet may be so paraphrased--

            The old, old story,
    Of _Satan_ and his _lie_.

In the days of Eden, humanity was misled by a false personality,--a talking
snake,--according to Biblical history. This pretender taught the opposite
of Truth. This abortive ego, this fable of error, is laid bare in Christian
Science.

Human theories call, or miscall, this evil a child of God. Philosophy would
multiply and subdivide personality into everything that exists, whether
expressive or not expressive of the Mind which is God. Human wisdom says of
evil, "The Lord knows it!" thus carrying out the serpent's assurance: "In
the day ye eat thereof [when you, lie, get the floor], then your eyes shall
be opened [you shall be conscious matter], and ye shall be as gods, knowing
good and evil [you shall believe a lie, and this lie shall seem truth]."

Bruise the head of this serpent, as Truth and "the woman" are doing in
Christian Science, and it stings your heel, rears its crest proudly, and
goes on saying, "Am I not myself? Am I not mind and matter, person and
thing?" We should answer: "Yes! you are indeed yourself, and need most of
all to be rid of this self, for it is very far from God's likeness."

The egotist must come down and learn, in humility, that God never made
evil. An evil ego, and his assumed power, are falsities. These falsities
need a denial. The falsity is the teaching that matter can be conscious;
and conscious matter implies pantheism. This pantheism I unveil. I try to
show its all-pervading presence in certain forms of theology and
philosophy, where it becomes error's affirmative to Truth's negative.
Anatomy and physiology make mind-matter a habitant of the cerebellum,
whence it telegraphs and telephones over its own body, and goes forth into
an imaginary sphere of its own creation and limitation, until it finally
dies in order to better itself. But Truth never dies, and death is not the
goal which Truth seeks.

The evil ego has but the visionary substance of matter. It lacks the
substance of Spirit,--Mind, Life, Soul. Mortal mind is self-creative and
self-sustained, until it becomes non-existent. It has no origin or
