 come hereafter, our knowledge shall not be superseded by a higher
 knowledge; we presume not to say that in a state of existence
 future--yea even here upon this earth, at that period which is
 mysteriously referred to in Scripture as "the coming of the Son of
 Man"--there shall not be given to the soul an intellectual conception
 of the Almighty, a vision of the Eternal, in comparison with whose
 brightness and clearness our present knowledge of the Trinity shall be
 as rudimentary and as childlike as the knowledge of the Jew was in
 comparison with the knowledge of the Christian.

 Now the passage which I have undertaken to expound to-day, is one in
 which the doctrine of the Trinity is brought into connection
 practically with the doctrine of our Humanity. Before entering into it
 brethren, let us lay down these two observations and duties for
 ourselves. In the first place, let us examine the doctrine of the
 Trinity ever in the spirit of charity.

 A clear statement of the deepest doctrine that man can know, and the
 intellectual conception of that doctrine, are by no means easy. We are
 puzzled and perplexed by _words_; we fight respecting _words_.
 Quarrels are nearly always verbal quarrels. Words lose their meaning
 in the course of time; nay, the very words of the Athanasian creed
 which we read to-day mean not in this age, the same thing which they
 meant in ages past. Therefore it is possible that men, externally
 Trinitarians, may differ from each other though using the same words,
 as greatly as a Unitarian differs from a Trinitarian. There may be
 found in the same Church and in the same congregation, men holding all
 possible shades of opinion, though agreeing externally, and in words.

 I speak within the limit of my own experience when I say that persons
 have been known and heard to express the language of bitter
 condemnation respecting Unitarianism, who when examined and calmly
 required to draw out verbally the meaning of their own conceptions,
 have been proved to be holding all the time--unconsciously--the very
 doctrine of Sabellianism. And this doctrine is condemned by the Church
 as distinctly as that of Unitarianism. Therefore let us learn from all
 this a large and catholic charity. There are in almost every
 congregation, themselves not knowing it, Trinitarians who are
 practically Tri-theists, worshipping three Gods; and Sabellians, or
 worshippers of one person under three different manifestations. To
 know God so that we may be said intellectually, to appreciate Him, is
 blessed: to be unable to do so is a misfortune. Be content with your
 own blessedness, in comparison with others' misfortunes. Do not give
 to that misfortune the additional sting of illiberal and unchristian
 vituperation.

 The next observation we have to lay down for ourselves is, that we
 should examine this doctrine in the spirit of modesty. There are those
 who are inclined to sneer at the Trinitarian; those to whom the
 doctrine appears merely a contradiction--a puzzle--an entangled,
 labyrinthine enigma, in which there is no meaning whatever. But let
 all such remember, that though the doctrine may appear to them absurd,
 because they have not the proper conception of it, some of the
 profoundest thinkers, and some of the holiest spirits among mankind,
 have believed in this doctrine--have clung to it as a matter of life
 or death. Let them be assured of this, that whether the doctrine be
 true or false, it is not necessarily a doctrine self-contradictory.
 Let them be assured of this, in all modesty, that such men never could
 have held it unless there was latent in the doctrine a deep
 truth,--perchance the truth of God.

 We pass on now to the consideration of this verse under the following
 divisions. In the first place, we shall view it as a triad in discord:
 "I pray God your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved
 blameless;" in the second place, as a Trinity in Unity: "the God of
 peace sanctify you wholly." We take then first of all for our
 consideration the triad in discord: "I pray God your whole body and
 soul and spirit be preserved blameless."

 The apostle here divides human nature into a three-fold division; and
 here we have to observe again the difficulty often experienced in
 understanding words. Thus words in the Athanasian creed have become
 obsolete, or lost their meaning: so that in the present day the words
 "person," "substance," "procession," "generation," to an ordinary
 person, mean almost nothing. So this language of the apostle, when
 rendered into English, shows no difference whatever between "soul" and
 "spirit." We say, for instance, that the soul of a man has departed
 from him. We also say that the spirit of a man has departed from him.
 There is no distinct difference between the two; but in the original
 two very different kinds of thoughts--two very different modes of
 conception--are represented by the two English words "soul" and
 "spirit."

 It is our business, therefore, in the first place, to understand what
 is meant by this threefold division. When the apostle speaks of the
 body, what he means is the animal life--that which we share in common
 with beasts, birds, and reptiles; for our life my Christian
 brethren--our sensational existence--differs but little from that of
 the lower animals. There is the same external form, the same material
 in the blood-vessels, in the nerves, and in the muscular system. Nay,
 more than that, our appetites and instincts are alike, our lower
 pleasures like their lower pleasures, our lower pain like their lower
 pain, our life is supported by the same means, and our animal
 functions are almost indistinguishably the same.

 But, once more, the apostle speaks of what he calls the "soul." What
 the apostle meant by what is translated "soul," is the immortal part
 of man--the immaterial as distinguished from the material: those
 powers, in fact, which man has by nature--powers natural, which are
 yet to survive the grave. There is a distinction made in scripture by
 our Lord between these two things. "Fear not," says He, "them who can
 kill the body; but rather fear Him who can destroy both body and
 soul in hell."

 We have again, to observe respecting this, that what the apostle
 called the "soul," is not simply distinguishable from the body, but
 also from the spirit; and on that distinction I have already touched.
 By the soul the apostle means our powers natural--the powers which we
 have by nature. Herein is the soul distinguishable from the spirit. In
 the Epistle to the Corinthians we read--"But the natural man receiveth
 not the things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto
 him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned.
 But he that is spiritual judgeth all things." Observe, there is a
 distinction drawn between the natural man and the spiritual. What is
 there translated "natural" is derived from precisely the same word as
 that which is here translated "soul." So that we may read just as
 correctly: "The man under the dominion of the soul receiveth not the
 things of the Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto him;
 neither can he know them because they are spiritually discerned. But
 he that is spiritual judgeth all things." And again, the apostle, in
 the same Epistle to the Corinthians, writes: "That is not first which
 is spiritual, but that which is natural:" that is, the endowments of
 the soul precede the endowments of the spirit. You have the same truth
 in other places. The powers that belong to the Spirit were not the
 first developed; but the powers which belong to the soul, that is the
 powers of nature. Again in the same chapter, reference is made to the
 natural and spiritual body. "There is a natural body and there is a
 spiritual body." Literally, there is a body governed by the soul--that
 is, powers natural: and there is a body governed by the Spirit--that
 is, higher nature.

 Let then this be borne in mind, that what the apostle calls "soul" is
 the same as that which he calls, in another place, the "natural man."
 These powers are divisible into two branches--the intellectual powers
 and the moral sense. The intellectual powers man has by nature. Man
 need not be regenerated in order to possess the power of reasoning, or
 in order to invent. The intellectual powers belong to what the apostle
 calls the "soul." The moral sense distinguishes between right and
 wrong. The apostle tells us, in the Epistle to the Romans, that the
 heathen--manifestly natural men--had the "work of the law written in
 their hearts; their conscience also bearing witness."

 The third division of which the apostle speaks, he calls the "spirit;"
 and by the spirit he means that life in man which, in his natural
 state, is in such an embryo condition, that it can scarcely be said to
 exist at all--that which is called out into power and vitality by
 regeneration--the perfection of the powers of human nature. And you
 will observe, that it is not merely the instinctive life, nor the
 intellectual life, nor the moral life, but it is principally our
 nobler affections--that existence, that state of being, which we call
 love. That is the department of human nature which the apostle calls
 the spirit; and accordingly, when the Spirit of God was given on the
 day of Pentecost, you will, remember that another power of man was
 called out, differing from what he had before. That Spirit granted on
 the day of Pentecost did subordinate to Himself, and was, intended to
 subordinate to Himself, the will, the understanding, and the affection
 of man; but you often find these spiritual powers were distinguished
 from the natural powers, and existed without them.

 So in the highest state of religious life, we are told, men prayed in
 the spirit. Till the spirit has subordinated the understanding, the
 gift of God is not complete--has not done its work. It is abundantly
 evident that a new life was called out. It was not merely the
 sharpening of the intellectual powers; it was calling out powers of
 aspiration and love to God; those affections which have in them
 something boundless, that are not limited to this earth, but seek
 their completion in the mind of God Himself.

 Now, what we have to say respecting this threefold state of man is, it
 is a state of discord. Let us take up a very simple, popular,
 every-day illustration. We hear it remarked frequently in conversation
 of a man, that if only his will were commensurate with his knowledge,
 he would be a great man. His knowledge is great--his powers are almost
 unbounded; he has gained knowledge from nearly every department of
 science; but somehow or other--you cannot tell why--there is such an
 indecision, such a vacillation about the man, that he scarcely knows
 what to do, and, perhaps does nothing in this world. You find it
 remarked, respecting another class of men, that their will is strong,
 almost unbounded in its strength--they have iron wills, yet there is
 something so narrow in their conceptions, something so bounded in
 their views, so much of stagnation in their thoughts, so much of
 prejudice in all their opinions, that their will is prevented from
 being directed to anything in a proper manner. Here is the discord in
 human nature. There is a distinction between the will and the
 understanding. And sometimes a feeble will goes with a strong
 understanding, or a powerful will is found in connection with great
 feebleness or ignorance of the understanding.

 Let us however, go into this more specially. The first cause of
 discord in this threefold state of man is the state in which the body
 is the ruler; and this, my Christian brethren, you find most visibly
 developed in the uneducated and irreligious poor. I say uneducated and
 irreligious, because it is by no means education alone which can
 subordinate the flesh to the higher man. The religious uneducated poor
 man may be master of his lower passions; but in the uneducated and
 irreligious poor man, these show themselves in full force; this
 discord--this want of unity--appears, as it were, in a magnified form.
 There is a strong man--health bursting, as it were, at every pore,
 with an athletic body; but coarse, and rude, and intellectually
 weak--almost an animal. When you are regarding the upper classes of
 society, you see less distinctly the absence of the spirit, unless,
 you look with a spiritual eye. The coarseness has passed away--the
 rudeness is no longer seen: there is a refinement in the pleasures.
 But if you take the life led by the young men of our country--strong,
 athletic, healthy men--it is still the life of the flesh: the
 unthinking, and the unprincipled life in which there is as yet no
 higher life developed. It is a life which, in spite of its refinement,
 the Bible condemns as the life of the sensualist.

 We pass on now, to another state of discord--a state in which the soul
 is ruined. Brethren, this is a natural result--this is what might have
 been expected. The natural man gradually subordinates the flesh, the
 body, to the soul. It is natural in the development of individuals, it
 is natural in the development of society: in the development of
 individuals, because that childlike, infantine life which exists at
 first, and is almost entirely a life of appetites, gradually subsides.
 Higher wants, higher desires, loftier inclinations arise; the passions
 of the young man gradually subside, and by degrees the more rational
 life comes: the life is changed--the pleasures of the senses are
 forsaken for those of the intellect.

 It appears natural, again, in the development of society. Civilization
 will subordinate the flesh to the soul. In the savage state, you find
 the life of the animal. Civilization is teaching a man, on the
 principle of this world, to subordinate his appetites; to rule
 himself; and there comes a refinement, and a gentleness, and a
 polish, and an enjoyment of intellectual pleasures; so that the man is
 no longer what the apostle calls a sensual man, but he becomes now
 what the apostle calls a natural man. We can see this character
 delineated in the Epistle to the Ephesians. "Then we were," says the
 apostle, "in our Gentile state, fulfilling the desires of the flesh
 and of the mind." Man naturally fulfils not merely the desires of the
 flesh, but the desires of the mind. "And were," says the apostle,
 "children of wrath."

 One of the saddest spectacles is the decay of the natural man before
 the work of the Spirit has been accomplished in him. When the savage
 dies--when a mere infant dies--when an animal dies--there is nothing
 that is appalling or depressing there; but when the high, the
 developed intellect--when the cultivated man comes to the last hours
 of life, and the memory becomes less powerful, and the judgment fails,
 and all that belongs to nature and to earth visibly perishes, and the
 higher life has not been yet developed, though it is destined to
 survive the grave for ever--even the life of God--there is here ample
 cause for grief; and it is no wonder that the man of genius merely
 should shed tears at he idea of decaying life.

 We pass on to consider the Trinity in unity. All this is contained in
 that simple expression, "The God of peace." God is a God of unity. He
 makes one where before there were two. He is the God of peace, and
 therefore can make peace. Now this peace, according to the Trinitarian
 doctrine, consists in a threefold unity. Brethren, as we remarked
 respecting this first of all, the distinction in this Trinity is not a
 physical distinction, but a metaphysical one. The illustrations which
 are often given are illustrations drawn from material sources: if we
 take only those, we get into contradiction: for example, when we talk
 of personality, our idea is of a being bounded by space; and then to
 say in this sense that three persons are one, and one is three, is
 simply contradictory and absurd. Remember that the doctrine of the
 Trinity is a metaphysical doctrine. It is a trinity--a division in the
 mind of God. It is not three materials; it is three persons in a sense
 we shall explain by and by.

 In the next place I will endeavour to explain the doctrine--not to
 prove it, but to show its rationality, and to explain what it is.

 The first illustration we endeavour to give in this is taken from the
 world of matter. We will take any material substance: we find in that
 substance qualities; we will say three qualities--colour, shape, and
 size. Colour is not shape, shape is not size, size is not colour. They
 are three distinct essences, three distinct qualities, and yet they
 all form one unity, one single conception, one idea--the idea for
 example, of a tree.

 Now we will ascend from that into the immaterial world; and here to be
 something more distinct still. Hitherto we have had but three
 qualities; we now come to the mind of man, where we find something
 more than qualities. We will take three--the will, the affections, and
 the thoughts of man. His will is not his affections, neither are his
 affections his thoughts; and it would be imperfect and incomplete to
 say that these are mere qualities in the man. They are separate
 consciousnesses, living consciousnesses--as distinct, and as really
 sundered as it is possible for three things to be, yet bound together
 by one unity of consciousness. Now we have distincter proof than even
 this that these things are three. The anatomist can tell you that the
 localities of these powers are different. He can point out the seat of
 the nerve of sensation; he can localize the feeling of affection; he
 can point to a nerve and say, "There resides the locality of thought."

 There are three distinct localities for three distinct qualities,
 personalities, consciousnesses; yet all these three are one.

 Once more, we will give proof even beyond all that. The act that a man
 does is done by one particular part of that man. You may say it was a
 work of his genius, or of his fancy; it may have been a manifestation
 of his love, or an exhibition of his courage; yet that work was the
 work of the whole man: his courage, his intellect, his habits of
 perseverance, all helped towards the completion of that single work.
 Just in this way certain special works are attributed to certain
 personalities of the Deity; the work of Redemption being attributed to
 one, the work of Sanctification to another. And yet just as the whole
 man was engaged in doing that work, so does the whole Deity perform
 that work which is attributed to one essential.

 Once more, let us remember that principle which we expounded last
 Sunday, that it is the law of Being that in proportion as you rise
 from lower to higher life, the parts are more distinctly developed,
 while yet the unity becomes more entire. You find for example, in the
 lowest forms of animal life one organ performs several functions, one
 organ being at the same time heart and brain and blood-vessels. But
 when you come to man, you find all these various functions existing in
 different organs, and every organ more distinctly developed; and yet
 the unity of a man is a higher unity than that of a limpet. When you
 come from the material world to the world immaterial, you find that
 the more society is cultivated--the more man is cultivated--the more
 marvellous is the power of developing distinct powers. In the savage
 life it is almost all one feeling; but in proportion as the higher
 education advances and the higher life appears, every power and
 faculty developes and distinguishes itself, and becomes distinct and
 separate. And yet just in proportion as in a nation every part is
 distinct, the unity is greater, and just in proportion as in an
