How can physical eating and drinking do such great things?

Of course, eating and drinking do not do these things. These words,
written here, do them: "given for you" and "shed for you to forgive
sins." These words, along with physical eating and drinking are the
important part of the sacrament. Anyone who believes these words has
what they say and what they record, namely, the forgiveness of sins.

Who, then, receives such a sacrament in a worthy way?

Of course, fasting and other physical preparations are excellent
disciplines for the body. But anyone who believes these words, "Given
for you," and "Shed for you to forgive sins," is really worthy and well
prepared. But whoever doubts or does not believe these words is not
worthy and is unprepared, because the words, "for you" demand a heart
that fully believes.

Appendix I
How a Father Should Teach His Household
to Conduct Morning and Evening Devotions.

Morning Devotions

As soon as you get out of bed in the morning, you should bless yourself
with the sign of the Holy Cross and say:

May the will of God, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit be done!
Amen.
Then, kneeling or standing, say the creed and pray the Lord's Prayer.
If you wish, you may then pray this little prayer as well:
My Heavenly Father, I thank You, through Jesus Christ, Your beloved
Son, that You kept me safe from all evil and danger last night. Save
me, I pray, that you will keep me safe today from every evil and sin as
well,, so that all I do and the way that I live will please you. I put
myself in your care, body and soul and all that I have. Let Your holy
Angels be with me, so that the evil enemy will not gain power over me.
Amen.
After that, with joy go about your work and perhaps sing a song
inspired by the Ten Commandments or your own thoughts.

Evening Devotions

When you go to bed in the evening, you should bless yourself with the
sign of the Holy Cross and say:
May the will of God, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit be done!
Amen.
Then, kneeling or standing, say the creed and pray the Lord's Prayer.
If you wish, then you may pray this little prayer as well:
My Heavenly Father, I thank You, through Jesus Christ, Your beloved
Son, that You have protected me, by Your grace. Forgive, I pray, all my
sins and the evil I have done. Protect me, by Your grace, tonight. I
put myself in your care, body and soul and all that I have. Let Your
holy angels be with me, so that the evil enemy will not gain power over
me. Amen.

After this, go to sleep immediately with joy.

Appendix II
How a Father Should Teach His Household
to say Grace and Return Thanks at Meals:

The Blessing

The children and servants should come to the table modestly and with
folded hands and say:
All eyes look to you, O Lord, and You give everyone food at the right
time. You open Your generous hands and satisfy the hunger of all living
things with what they desire. (Psalm 145:15-16)
Note: "What they desire" means that all animals get so much to eat,
that they are happy and cheerful. Because, worry and greed interferes
with such desires.
After this, pray the Lord's Prayer and the following prayer:
Lord God, Heavenly Father, bless us and these gifts, which we receive
from Your generous hand, through Jesus Christ, our Lord. Amen.

Thanking God

After eating, too, they should modestly fold their hands and say:

Thank the Lord, because He is kind and His goodness lasts forever! He
gives all creatures food. He gives livestock their food and feeds the
young ravens that call out to Him. A horse's strength does not give Him
pleasure. A man's legs do not give Him joy. People who fear the Lord
and who wait for His goodness please Him.

After this, pray the Lord's Prayer and the following prayer:
We thank You, Lord God, Father, through Jesus Christ our Lord, for all
Your blessings. You live and rule forever! Amen!

Appendix III
The Home Chart
A number of passages to use to teach and admonish people in all holy
orders and statuses in life about their
duties.

For Bishops, Pastors and Preachers:
1 Tim. 3:2-4
Titus 1: 6

What Hearers owe their Pastors:
1 Cor. 9:14
Gal. 6: 6
1 Tim. 5:17-18
