


FAITH-CURE


It is often asked, Why are faith-cures sometimes more speedy than some of
the cures wrought through Christian Scientists? Because faith is belief,
and not understanding; and it is easier to believe, than to understand
spiritual Truth. It demands less cross-bearing, self-renunciation, and
divine Science to admit the claims of the corporeal senses and appeal to
God for relief through a humanized conception of His power, than to deny
these claims and learn the divine way,--drinking Jesus' cup, being baptized
with his baptism, gaining the end through persecution and purity.

Millions are believing in God, or good, without bearing the fruits of
goodness, not having reached its Science. Belief is virtually blindness,
when it admits Truth without understanding it. Blind belief cannot say with
the apostle, "I know whom I have believed." There is danger in this mental
state called belief; for if Truth is admitted, but not understood, it may
be lost, and error may enter through this same channel of ignorant belief.
The faith-cure has devout followers, whose Christian practice is far in
advance of their theory.

The work of healing, in the Science of Mind, is the most sacred and
salutary power which can be wielded. My Christian students, impressed with
the true sense of the great work before them, enter this strait and narrow
path, and work conscientiously.

Let us follow the example of Jesus, the master Metaphysician, and gain
sufficient knowledge of error to destroy it with Truth. Evil is not
mastered by evil; it can only be overcome with good. This brings out the
nothingness of evil and the eternal somethingness, vindicates the divine
Principle, and improves the race of Adam.




FOUNDATION-STONES


The following ideas of Deity, antagonized by finite theories, doctrines,
and hypotheses, I found to be demonstrable rules in Christian Science, and
that we must abide by them.

Whatever diverges from the one divine Mind, or God,--or divides Mind into
minds, Spirit into spirits, Soul into souls, and Being into beings,--is a
misstatement of the unerring divine Principle of Science, which interrupts
the meaning of the omnipotence, omniscience, and omnipresence of Spirit,
and is of human instead of divine origin.

War is waged between the evidences of Spirit and the evidences of the five
physical senses; and this contest must go on until peace be declared by the
final triumph of Spirit in immutable harmony. Divine Science disclaims sin,
sickness, and death, on the basis of the omnipotence and omnipresence of
God, or divine good.

All consciousness is Mind, and Mind is God. Hence there is but one Mind;
and that one is the infinite good, supplying all Mind by the reflection,
not the subdivision, of God. Whatever else claims to be mind, or
consciousness, is untrue. The sun sends forth light, but not suns; so God
reflects Himself, or Mind, but does not subdivide Mind, or good, into
minds, good and evil. Divine Science demands mighty wrestlings with mortal
beliefs, as we sail into the eternal haven over the unfathomable sea of
possibilities.

Neither ancient nor modern philosophy furnishes a scientific basis for the
Science of Mind-healing. Plato believed he had a soul, which must be
doctored in order to heal his body. This would be like correcting the
principle of music for the purpose of destroying discord. Principle is
right; it is practice that is wrong. Soul is right; it is the flesh that is
evil. Soul is the synonym of Spirit, God; hence there is but one Soul, and
that one is infinite. If that pagan philosopher had known that physical
sense, not Soul, causes all bodily ailments, his philosophy would have
yielded to Science.

Man shines by borrowed light. He reflects God as his Mind, and this
reflection is substance,--the substance of good. Matter is substance in
error, Spirit is substance in Truth.

Evil, or error, is not Mind; but infinite Mind is sufficient to supply all
manifestations of intelligence. The notion of more than one Mind, or Life,
is as unsatisfying as it is unscientific. All must be of God, and not our
own, separated from Him.

Human systems of philosophy and religion are departures from Christian
Science. Mistaking divine Principle for corporeal personality, ingrafting
upon one First Cause such opposite effects as good and evil, health and
sickness, life and death; making mortality the status and rule of
divinity,--such methods can never reach the perfection and demonstration of
metaphysical, or Christian Science.

Stating the divine Principle, omnipotence (_omnis potens_), and then
departing from this statement and taking the rule of finite matter, with
which to work out the problem of infinity or Spirit,--all this is like
trying to compensate for the absence of omnipotence by a physical, false,
and finite substitute.

With our Master, life was not merely a sense of existence, but an
accompanying sense of power that subdued matter and brought to light
immortality, insomuch that the people "were astonished at his doctrine: for
he taught them as one having authority, and not as the scribes." Life, as
defined by Jesus, had no beginning; it was not the result of organization,
or infused into matter; it was Spirit.




THE GREAT REVELATION


Christian Science reveals the grand verity, that to believe man has a
finite and erring mind, and consequently a mortal mind and soul and life,
is error. Scientific terms have no contradictory significations.

In Science, Life is not temporal, but eternal, without beginning or ending.
The word _Life_ never means that which is the source of death, and of good
and evil. Such an inference is unscientific. It is like saying that
addition means subtraction in one instance and addition in another, and
then applying this rule to a demonstration of the science of numbers; even
as mortals apply finite terms to God, in demonstration of infinity. _Life_
is a term used to indicate Deity; and every other name for the Supreme
Being, if properly employed, has the signification of Life. Whatever errs
is mortal, and is the antipodes of Life, or God, and of health and
holiness, both in idea and demonstration.

Christian Science reveals Mind, the only living and true God, and all that
is made by Him, Mind, as harmonious, immortal, and spiritual: the five
material senses define Mind and matter as distinct, but mutually dependent,
each on the other, for intelligence and existence. Science defines man as
immortal, as coexistent and coeternal with God, as made in His own image
and likeness; material sense defines life as something apart from God,
beginning and ending, and man as very far from the divine likeness. Science
reveals Life as a complete sphere, as eternal, self-existent Mind; material
sense defines life as a broken sphere, as organized matter, and mind as
something separate from God. Science reveals Spirit as All, averring that
there is nothing beside God; material sense says that matter, His antipode,
is something besides God. Material sense adds that the divine Spirit
created matter, and that matter and evil are as real as Spirit and good.

Christian Science reveals God and His idea as the All and Only. It declares
that evil is the absence of good; whereas, good is God ever-present, and
therefore evil is unreal and good is all that is real. Christian Science
saith to the wave and storm, "Be still," and there is a great calm.
Material sense asks, in its ignorance of Science, "When will the raging of
the material elements cease?" Science saith to all manner of disease, "Know
that God is all-power and all-presence, and there is nothing beside Him;"
and the sick are healed. Material sense saith, "Oh, when will my sufferings
cease? Where is God? Sickness is something besides Him, which He cannot, or
does not, heal."

Christian Science is the only sure basis of harmony. Material sense
contradicts Science, for matter and its so-called organizations take no
cognizance of the spiritual facts of the universe, or of the real man and
God. Christian Science declares that there is but one Truth, Life, Love,
but one Spirit, Mind, Soul. Any attempt to divide these arises from the
fallibility of sense, from mortal man's ignorance, from enmity to God and
divine Science.

Christian Science declares that sickness is a belief, a latent fear, made
manifest on the body in different forms of fear or disease. This fear is
formed unconsciously in the silent thought, as when you awaken from sleep
and feel ill, experiencing the effect of a fear whose existence you do not
realize; but if you fall asleep, actually conscious of the truth of
Christian Science,--namely, that man's harmony is no more to be invaded
than the rhythm of the universe,--you cannot awake in fear or suffering of
any sort.

Science saith to fear, "You are the cause of all sickness; but you are a
self-constituted falsity,--you are darkness, nothingness. You are without
'hope, and without God in the world.' You do not exist, and have no right
to exist, for 'perfect Love casteth out fear.'"

God is everywhere. "There is no speech nor language, where their voice is
not heard;" and this voice is Truth that destroys error and Love that casts
out fear.

Christian Science reveals the fact that, if suffering exists, it is in the
mortal mind only, for matter has no sensation and cannot suffer.

If you rule out every sense of disease and suffering from mortal mind, it
cannot be found in the body.

Posterity will have the right to demand that Christian Science be stated
and demonstrated in its godliness and grandeur,--that however little be
taught or learned, that little shall be right. Let there be milk for babes,
but let not the milk be adulterated. Unless this method be pursued, the
Science of Christian healing will again be lost, and human suffering will
increase.

Test Christian Science by its effect on society, and you will find that the
views here set forth--as to the illusion of sin, sickness, and death--bring
forth better fruits of health, righteousness, and Life, than _a belief in
their reality has ever done_. A demonstration of the _unreality_ of evil
destroys evil.




SIN, SINNER, AND ECCLESIASTICISM


Why do Christian Scientists say God and His idea are the only realities,
and then insist on the need of healing sickness and sin? Because Christian
Science heals sin as it heals sickness, by establishing the recognition
that God _is All_, and there is none beside Him,--that all is good, and
there is in reality no evil, neither sickness nor sin. We attack the
sinner's belief in the pleasure of sin, _alias_ the reality of sin, which
makes him a sinner, in order to destroy this belief and save him from sin;
and we attack the belief of the sick in the reality of sickness, in order
to heal them. When we deny the authority of sin, we begin to sap it; for
this denunciation must precede its destruction.

God is good, hence goodness is something, for it represents God, the Life
of man. Its opposite, nothing, named _evil_, is nothing but a conspiracy
against man's Life and goodness. Do you not feel bound to expose this
conspiracy, and so to save man from it? Whosoever covers iniquity becomes
accessory to it. Sin, as a claim, is more dangerous than sickness, more
subtle, more difficult to heal.

St. Augustine once said, "The devil is but the ape of God." Sin is worse
than sickness; but recollect that it encourages sin to say, "There is no
sin," and leave the subject there.

Sin ultimates in sinner, and in this sense they are one. You cannot
separate sin from the sinner, nor the sinner from his sin. The sin is the
sinner, and _vice versa_, for such is the unity of evil; and together both
sinner and sin will be destroyed by the supremacy of good. This, however,
does not annihilate man, for to efface sin, _alias_ the sinner, brings to
light, makes apparent, the real man, even God's "image and likeness." Need
it be said that any opposite theory is heterodox to divine Science, which
teaches that good is equally _one_ and _all_, even as the opposite claim of
evil is one.

In Christian Science the fact is made obvious that the sinner and the sin
are alike simply nothingness; and this view is supported by the Scripture,
where the Psalmist saith: "He shall go to the generation of his fathers;
they shall never see light. Man that is in honor, and understandeth not, is
like the beasts that perish." God's ways and works and thoughts have never
changed, either in Principle or practice.

Since there is in belief an illusion termed sin, which must be met and
mastered, we classify sin, sickness, and death as illusions. They are
supposititious claims of error; and error being a false claim, they are no
claims at all. It is scientific to abide in conscious harmony, in
health-giving, deathless Truth and Love. To do this, mortals must first
open their eyes to all the illusive forms, methods, and subtlety of error,
in order that the illusion, error, may be destroyed; if this is not done,
mortals will become the victims of error.

If evangelical churches refuse fellowship with the Church of Christ,
Scientist, or with Christian Science, they must rest their opinions of
Truth and Love on the evidences of the physical senses, rather than on the
teaching and practice of Jesus, or the works of the Spirit.

Ritualism and dogma lead to self-righteousness and bigotry, which freeze
out the spiritual element. Pharisaism killeth; Spirit giveth Life. The
odors of persecution, tobacco, and alcohol are not the sweet-smelling savor
of Truth and Love. Feasting the senses, gratification of appetite and
passion, have no warrant in the gospel or the Decalogue. Mortals must take
up the cross if they would follow Christ, and worship the Father "in spirit
and in truth."

The Jewish religion was not spiritual; hence Jesus denounced it. If the
religion of to-day is constituted of such elements as of old ruled Christ
out of the synagogues, it will continue to avoid whatever follows the
example of our Lord and prefers Christ to creed. Christian Science is the
pure evangelic truth. It accords with the trend and tenor of Christ's
teaching and example, while it demonstrates the power of Christ as taught
in the four Gospels. Truth, casting out evils and healing the sick; Love,
fulfilling the law and keeping man unspotted from the world,--these
practical manifestations of Christianity constitute the only evangelism,
and they need no creed.

As well expect to determine, without a telescope, the magnitude and
distance of the stars, as to expect to obtain health, harmony, and holiness
through an unspiritual and unhealing religion. Christianity reveals God as
ever-present Truth and Love, to be utilized in healing the sick, in
casting out error, in raising the dead.

