This is nothing but clear enchantment.

006.008
Y: They say: "Why is not an angel sent down to him?" If we did send down
an angel, the matter would be settled at once, and no respite would be
granted them.

P: They say: Why hath not an angel been sent down unto him? If We sent
down an angel, then the matter would be judged; no further time would
be allowed them (for reflection).

S: And they say: Why has not an angel been sent down to him? And had We
sent down an angel, the matter would have certainly been decided and
then they would not have been respited.

006.009
Y: If We had made it an angel, We should have sent him as a man, and We
should certainly have caused them confusion in a matter which they have
already covered with confusion.

P: Had we appointed him (Our messenger) an angel, We assuredly had made
him (as) a man (that he might speak to men); and (thus) obscured for
them (the truth) they (now) obscure.

S: And if We had made him angel, We would certainly have made him a man,
and We would certainly have made confused to them what they make
confused.

006.010
Y: Mocked were (many) messengers before thee; but their scoffers were
hemmed in by the thing that they mocked.

P: Messengers (of Allah) have been derided before thee, but that whereat
they scoffed surrounded such of them as did deride.

S: And certainly messengers before you were mocked at, but that which
they mocked at encompassed the scoffers among them.

006.011
Y: Say: "Travel through the earth and see what was the end of those who
rejected Truth."

P: Say (unto the disbelievers): Travel in the land, and see the nature
of the consequence for the rejecters!

S: Say: Travel in the land, then see what was the end of the rejecters.

006.012
Y: Say: "To whom belongeth all that is in the heavens and on earth?"
Say: "To Allah. He hath inscribed for Himself (the rule of) Mercy. That
He will gather you together for the Day of Judgment, there is no doubt
whatever. It is they who have lost their own souls, that will not
believe."

P: Say: Unto whom belongeth whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth?
Say: Unto Allah. He hath prescribed for Himself mercy, that He may
bring you all together to the Day of Resurrection whereof there is no
doubt. Those who ruin their souls will not believe.

S: Say: To whom belongs what is in the heavens and the earth? Say: To
Allah; He has ordained mercy on Himself; most certainly He will gather
you on the resurrection day-- there is no doubt about it. (As for)
those who have lost their souls, they will not believe.

006.013
Y: "To him belongeth all that dwelleth (or lurketh) in the night and the
day. For he is the one who heareth and knoweth all things."

P: Unto Him belongeth whatsoever resteth in the night and the day. He is
the Hearer, the Knower.

S: And to Him belongs whatever dwells in the night and the day; and He
is the Hearing, the Knowing.

006.014
Y: Say: "Shall I take for my protector any other than Allah, the Maker
of the heavens and the earth? And He it is that feedeth but is not
fed." Say: "Nay! but I am commanded to be the first of those who bow to
Allah (in Islam), and be not thou of the company of those who join gods
with Allah."

P: Say: Shall I choose for a protecting friend other than Allah, the
Originator of the heavens and the earth, Who feedeth and is never fed?
Say: I am ordered to be the first to surrender (unto Him). And be not
thou (O Muhammad) of the idolaters.

S: Say: Shall I take a guardian besides Allah, the Originator of the
heavens and the earth, and He feeds (others) and is not (Himself) fed.
Say: I am commanded to be the first who submits himself, and you should
not be of the polytheists.

006.015
Y: Say: "I would, if I disobeyed my Lord, indeed have fear of the
penalty of a Mighty Day."

P: Say: I fear, if I rebel against my Lord, the retribution of an Awful
Day.

S: Say: Surely I fear, if I disobey my Lord, the chastisement of a
grievous day.

006.016
Y: "On that day, if the penalty is averted from any, it is due to
Allah's mercy; And that would be (Salvation), the obvious fulfilment of
all desire."

P: He from whom (such retribution) is averted on that day, (Allah) hath
in truth had mercy on him. That will be the signal triumph.

S: He from whom it is averted on that day, Allah indeed has shown mercy
to him; and this is a manifest achievement.

006.017
Y: "If Allah touch thee with affliction, none can remove it but He; if
He touch thee with happiness, He hath power over all things."

P: If Allah touch thee with affliction, there is none that can relieve
therefrom save Him, and if He touch thee with good fortune (there is
none that can impair it); for He is Able to do all things.

S: And if Allah touch you with affliction, there is none to take it off
but He; and if He visit you with good, then He has power over all
things.

006.018
Y: "He is the irresistible, (watching) from above over His worshippers;
and He is the Wise, acquainted with all things."

P: He is the Omnipotent over His slaves, and He is the Wise, the Knower.

S: And He is the Supreme, above His servants; and He is the Wise, the
Aware.

006.019
Y: Say: "What thing is most weighty in evidence?" Say: "Allah is witness
between me and you; This Qur'an hath been revealed to me by
inspiration, that I may warn you and all whom it reaches. Can ye
possibly bear witness that besides Allah there is another Allah?" Say:
"Nay! I cannot bear witness!" Say: "But in truth He is the one Allah,
and I truly am innocent of (your blasphemy of) joining others with
Him."

P: Say (O Muhammad): What thing is of most weight in testimony? Say:
Allah is Witness between me and you. And this Qur'an hath been inspired
in me, that I may warn therewith you and whomsoever it may reach. Do ye
in sooth bear witness that there are gods beside Allah? Say: I bear no
such witness. Say: He is only One Allah. Lo! I am innocent of that
which ye associate (with Him).

S: Say: What thing is the weightiest in testimony? Say: Allah is witness
between you and me; and this Quran has been revealed to me that with it
I may warn you and whomsoever it reaches. Do you really bear witness
that there are other gods with Allah? Say: I do not bear witness. Say:
He is only one Allah, and surely I am clear of that which you set up
(with Him).

006.020
Y: Those to whom We have given the Book know this as they know their own
sons. Those who have lost their own souls refuse therefore to believe.

P: Those unto whom We gave the Scripture recognise (this revelation) as
they recognise their sons. Those who ruin their own souls will not
believe.

S: Those whom We have given the Book recognize him as they recognize
their sons; (as for) those who have lost their souls, they will not
believe.

006.021
Y: Who doth more wrong than he who inventeth a lie against Allah or
rejecteth His signs? But verily the wrong-doers never shall prosper.

P: Who doth greater wrong than he who inventeth a lie against Allah or
denieth His revelations? Lo! the wrongdoers will not be successful.

S: And who is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah or (he
who) gives the lie to His communications; surely the unjust will not be
successful.

006.022
Y: One day shall We gather them all together: We shall say to those who
ascribed partners (to Us): "Where are the partners whom ye (invented
and) talked about?"

P: And on the day We gather them together We shall say unto those who
ascribed partners (unto Allah): Where are (now) those partners of your
make-believe?

S: And on the day when We shall gather them all together, then shall We
say to those who associated others (with Allah): Where are your
associates whom you asserted?

006.023
Y: There will then be (left) no subterfuge for them but to say: "By
Allah our Lord, we were not those who joined gods with Allah."

P: Then will they have no contention save that they will say: By Allah,
our Lord, we never were idolaters.

S: Then their excuse would be nothing but that they would say: By Allah,
our Lord, we were not polytheists.

006.024
Y: Behold! how they lie against their own souls! But the (lie) which
they invented will leave them in the lurch.

P: See how they lie against themselves, and (how) the thing which they
devised hath failed them!

S: See how they lie against their own souls, and that which they forged
has passed away from them.

006.025
Y: Of them there are some who (pretend to) listen to thee; but We have
thrown veils on their hearts, So they understand it not, and deafness
in their ears; if they saw every one of the signs, not they will
believe in them; in so much that when they come to thee, they (but)
dispute with thee; the Unbelievers say: "These are nothing but tales of
the ancients."

P: Of them are some who listen unto thee, but We have placed upon their
hearts veils, lest they should understand, and in their ears a
deafness. If they saw every token they would not believe therein; to
the point that, when they come unto thee to argue with thee, the
disbelievers say: This is naught else than fables of the men of old.

S: And of them is he who hearkens to you, and We have cast veils over
their hearts lest they understand it and a heaviness into their ears;
and even if they see every sign they will not believe in it; so much so
that when they come to you they only dispute with you; those who
disbelieve say: This is naught but the stories of the ancients.

006.026
Y: Others they keep away from it, and themselves they keep away; but
they only destroy their own souls, and they perceive it not.

P: And they forbid (men) from it and avoid it, and they ruin none save
themselves, though they perceive not.

S: And they prohibit (others) from it and go far away from it, and they
only bring destruction upon their own souls while they do not perceive.

006.027
Y: If thou couldst but see when they are confronted with the Fire! They
will say: "Would that we were but sent back! Then would we not reject
the signs of our Lord, but would be amongst those who believe!"

P: If thou couldst see when they are set before the Fire and say: Oh,
would that we might return! Then would we not deny the revelations of
our Lord but we would be of the believers!

S: And could you see when they are made to stand before the fire, then
they shall say: Would that we were sent back, and we would not reject
the communications of our Lord and we would be of the believers.

006.028
Y: Yea, in their own (eyes) will become manifest what before they
concealed. But if they were returned, they would certainly relapse to
the things they were forbidden, for they are indeed liars.

P: Nay, but that hath become clear unto them which before they used to
hide. And if they were sent back they would return unto that which they
are forbidden. Lo! they are liars.

S: Nay, what they concealed before shall become manifest to them; and if
they were sent back, they would certainly go back to that which they
are forbidden, and most surely they are liars.

006.029
Y: And they (sometimes) say: "There is nothing except our life on this
earth, and never shall we be raised up again."

P: And they say: There is naught save our life of the world, and we
shall not be raised (again).

S: And they say: There is nothing but our life of this world, and we
shall not be raised.

006.030
Y: If thou couldst but see when they are confronted with their Lord! He
will say: "Is not this the truth?" They will say: "Yea, by our Lord!"
He will say: "Taste ye then the penalty, because ye rejected Faith."

P: If thou couldst see when they are set before their Lord! He will say:
Is not this real? They will say: Yea, verily, by our Lord! He will say:
Taste now the retribution for that ye used to disbelieve.

S: And could you see when they are made to stand before their Lord. He
will say: Is not this the truth? They will say: Yea! by our Lord. He
will say: Taste then the chastisement because you disbelieved.

006.031
Y: Lost indeed are they who treat it as a falsehood that they must meet
Allah,- until on a sudden the hour is on them, and they say: "Ah! woe
unto us that we took no thought of it"; for they bear their burdens on
their backs, and evil indeed are the burdens that they bear?

P: They indeed are losers who deny their meeting with Allah until, when
the Hour cometh on them suddenly, they cry: Alas for us, that we
neglected it! They bear upon their backs their burdens. Ah, evil is
that which they bear!

S: They are losers indeed who reject the meeting of Allah; until when
the hour comes upon them all of a sudden they shall say: O our grief
for our neglecting it! and they shall bear their burdens on their
backs; now surely evil is that which they bear.

006.032
Y: What is the life of this world but play and amusement? But best is
the home in the hereafter, for those who are righteous. Will ye not
then understand?

P: Naught is the life of the world save a pastime and a spot. Better far
is the abode of the Hereafter for those who keep their duty (to Allah).
Have ye then no sense?

S: And this world's life is naught but a play and an idle sport and
certainly the abode of the hereafter is better for those who guard
(against evil); do you not then understand?

006.033
Y: We know indeed the grief which their words do cause thee: It is not
thee they reject: it is the signs of Allah, which the wicked contemn.

P: We know well how their talk grieveth thee, though in truth they deny
not thee (Muhammad) but evil-doers flout the revelations of Allah.

S: We know indeed that what they say certainly grieves you, but surely
they do not call you a liar; but the unjust deny the communications of
Allah.

006.034
Y: Rejected were the messengers before thee: with patience and constancy
they bore their rejection and their wrongs, until Our aid did reach
them: there is none that can alter the words (and decrees) of Allah.
Already hast thou received some account of those messengers.

P: Messengers indeed have been denied before thee, and they were patient
under the denial and the persecution till Our succour reached them.
There is none to alter the decisions of Allah. Already there hath
reached thee (somewhat) of the tidings of the messengers (We sent
before).

S: And certainly messengers before you were rejected, but they were
patient on being rejected and persecuted until Our help came to them;
and there is none to change the words of Allah, and certainly there has
come to you some information about the messengers.

006.035
Y: If their spurning is hard on thy mind, yet if thou wert able to seek
a tunnel in the ground or a ladder to the skies and bring them a sign,-
(what good?). If it were Allah's will, He could gather them together
unto true guidance: so be not thou amongst those who are swayed by
ignorance (and impatience)!

P: And if their aversion is grievous unto thee, then, if thou canst,
seek a way down into the earth or a ladder unto the sky that thou mayst
bring unto them a portent (to convince them all)! - If Allah willed, He
could have brought them all together to the guidance - So be not thou
among the foolish ones.

S: And if their turning away is hard on you, then if you can seek an
opening (to go down) into the earth or a ladder (to ascend up) to
heaven so that you should bring them a sign and if Allah had pleased He
would certainly have gathered them all on guidance, therefore be not of
the ignorant.

006.036
Y: Those who listen (in truth), be sure, will accept: as to the dead,
Allah will raise them up; then will they be turned unto Him.

P: Only those can accept who hear. As for the dead, Allah will raise
them up; then unto Him they will be returned.

S: Only those accept who listen; and (as to) the dead, Allah will raise
them, then to Him they shall be returned.

006.037
Y: They say: "Why is not a sign sent down to him from his Lord?" Say:
"Allah hath certainly power to send down a sign: but most of them
understand not."

P: They say: Why hath no portent been sent down upon him from his Lord?
Say: Lo! Allah is Able to send down a portent. But most of them know
not.

S: And they say: Why has not a sign been sent down to him from his Lord?
Say: Surely Allah is able to send down a sign, but most of them do not
know.

006.038
Y: There is not an animal (that lives) on the earth, nor a being that
flies on its wings, but (forms part of) communities like you. Nothing
have we omitted from the Book, and they (all) shall be gathered to
their Lord in the end.

P: There is not an animal in the earth, nor a flying creature flying on
two wings, but they are peoples like unto you. We have neglected
nothing in the Book (of Our decrees). Then unto their Lord they will be
gathered.

S: And there is no animal that walks upon the earth nor a bird that
flies with its two wings but (they are) genera like yourselves; We have
not neglected anything in the Book, then to their Lord shall they be
gathered.

006.039
Y: Those who reject our signs are deaf and dumb,- in the midst of
darkness profound: whom Allah willeth, He leaveth to wander: whom He
willeth, He placeth on the way that is straight.

P: Those who deny Our revelations are deaf and dumb in darkness. Whom
Allah will sendeth astray, and whom He will He placeth on a straight
path.

S: And they who reject Our communications are deaf and dumb, in utter
darkness; whom Allah pleases He causes to err and whom He pleases He
puts on the right way.

006.040
Y: Say: "Think ye to yourselves, if there come upon you the wrath of
Allah, or the Hour (that ye dread), would ye then call upon other than
Allah?- (reply) if ye are truthful!"

P: Say: Can ye see yourselves, if the punishment of Allah come upon you
or the Hour come upon you, (calling upon other than Allah)? Do ye then
call (for help) to any other than Allah? (Answer that) if ye are
truthful.

S: Say: Tell me if the chastisement of Allah should overtake you or the
hour should come upon you, will you call (on others) besides Allah, if
you are truthful?

006.041
Y: "Nay,- On Him would ye call, and if it be His will, He would remove
(the distress) which occasioned your call upon Him, and ye would forget
(the false gods) which ye join with Him!"

P: Nay, but unto Him ye call, and He removeth that because of which ye
call unto Him, if He will, and ye forget whatever partners ye ascribed
unto Him.

S: Nay, Him you call upon, so He clears away that for which you pray if
He pleases and you forget what you set up (with Him).

006.042
Y: Before thee We sent (messengers) to many nations, and We afflicted
the nations with suffering and adversity, that they might learn
humility.

P: We have sent already unto peoples that were before thee, and We
visited them with tribulation and adversity, in order that they might
grow humble.

S: And certainly We sent (messengers) to nations before you then We
seized them with distress and affliction in order that they might
humble themselves.

006.043
Y: When the suffering reached them from us, why then did they not learn
humility? On the contrary their hearts became hardened, and Satan made
their (sinful) acts seem alluring to them.

P: If only, when Our disaster came on them, they had been humble! But
their hearts were hardened and the devil made all that they used to do
seem fair unto them!

S: Yet why did they not, when Our punishment came to them, humble
themselves? But their hearts hardened and the Shaitan made what they
did fair-seeming to them.

006.044
Y: But when they forgot the warning they had received, We opened to them
the gates of all (good) things, until, in the midst of their enjoyment
of Our gifts, on a sudden, We called them to account, when lo! they
were plunged in despair!

P: Then, when they forgot that whereof they had been reminded, We opened
unto them the gates of all things till, even as they were rejoicing in
that which they were given, We seized them unawares, and lo! they were
dumbfounded.

S: But when they neglected that with which they had been admonished, We
opened for them the doors of all things, until when they rejoiced in
what they were given We seized them suddenly; then lo! they were in
utter despair.

006.045
Y: Of the wrong-doers the last remnant was cut off. Praise be to Allah,
the Cherisher of the worlds.

P: So of the people who did wrong the last remnant was cut off. Praise
be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds!

S: So the roots of the people who were unjust were cut off; and all
praise is due to Allah, the Lord of the worlds.

006.046
Y: Say: "Think ye, if Allah took away your hearing and your sight, and
sealed up your hearts, who - a god other than Allah - could restore
them to you?" See how We explain the signs by various (symbols); yet
they turn aside.

P: Say: Have ye imagined, if Allah should take away your hearing and
your sight and seal your hearts, who is the God who could restore it
to you save Allah? See how We display the revelations unto them! Yet
still they turn away.

S: Say: Have you considered that if Allah takes away your hearing and
your sight and sets a seal on your hearts, who is the god besides Allah
that can bring it to you? See how We repeat the communications, yet
they turn away.

006.047
Y: Say: "Think ye, if the punishment of Allah comes to you, whether
suddenly or openly, will any be destroyed except those who do wrong?"

P: Say: Can ye see yourselves, if the punishment of Allah come upon you
unawares or openly? Would any perish save wrongdoing folk?

S: Say: Have you considered if the chastisement of Allah should overtake
you suddenly or openly, will any be destroyed but the unjust people?

006.048
Y: We send the messengers only to give good news and to warn: so those
who believe and mend (their lives),- upon them shall be no fear, nor
shall they grieve.

P: We send not the messengers save as bearers of good news and warners.
Whoso believeth and doeth right, there shall no fear come upon them
neither shall they grieve.

S: And We send not messengers but as announcers of good news and givers
of warning, then whoever believes and acts aright, they shall have no
fear, nor shall they grieve.

006.049
Y: But those who reject our signs,- them shall punishment touch, for
that they ceased not from transgressing.

P: But as for those who deny Our revelations, torment will afflict them
for that they used to disobey.

S: And (as for) those who reject Our communications, chastisement shall
afflict them because they transgressed.

006.050
Y: Say: "I tell you not that with me are the treasures of Allah, nor do
I know what is hidden, nor do I tell you I am an angel. I but follow
what is revealed to me." Say: "can the blind be held equal to the
seeing?" Will ye then consider not?

P: Say (O Muhammad, to the disbelievers): I say not unto you (that) I
possess the treasures of Allah, nor that I have knowledge of the
Unseen; and I say not unto you: Lo! I am an angel. I follow only that
which is inspired in me. Say: Are the blind man and the seer equal?
Will ye not then take thought?

S: Say: I do not say to you, I have with me the treasures of Allah, nor
do I know the unseen, nor do I say to you that I am an angel; I do not
follow aught save that which is revealed to me. Say: Are the blind and
the seeing one alike? Do you not then reflect?

006.051
Y: Give this warning to those in whose (hearts) is the fear that they
will be brought (to judgment) before their Lord: except for Him they
will have no protector nor intercessor: that they may guard (against
evil).

P: Warn hereby those who fear (because they know) that they will be
gathered unto their Lord, for whom there is no protecting ally nor
intercessor beside Him, that they may ward off (evil).

S: And warn with it those who fear that they shall be gathered to their
Lord-- there is no guardian for them, nor any intercessor besides Him--
that they may guard (against evil).

006.052
Y: Send not away those who call on their Lord morning and evening,
seeking His face. In naught art thou accountable for them, and in
naught are they accountable for thee, that thou shouldst turn them
away, and thus be (one) of the unjust.

P: Repel not those who call upon their Lord at morn and evening, seeking
His Countenance. Thou art not accountable for them in aught, nor are
they accountable for thee in aught, that thou shouldst repel them and
be of the wrong-doers.

S: And do not drive away those who call upon their Lord in the morning
and the evening, they desire only His favor; neither are you answerable
for any reckoning of theirs, nor are they answerable for any reckoning
of yours, so that you should drive them away and thus be of the unjust.

006.053
Y: Thus did We try some of them by comparison with others, that they
should say: "Is it these then that Allah hath favoured from amongst
us?" Doth not Allah know best those who are grateful?

P: And even so do We try some of them by others, that they say: Are
these they whom Allah favoureth among us? Is not Allah best Aware of
the thanksgivers?

S: And thus do We try some of them by others so that they say: Are these
they upon whom Allah has conferred benefit from among us? Does not
Allah best know the grateful?

006.054
Y: When those come to thee who believe in Our signs, Say: "Peace be on
you: Your Lord had inscribed for Himself (the rule of) mercy: verily,
if any of you did evil in ignorance, and thereafter repented, and amend
(his conduct), lo! He is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

P: And when those who believe in Our revelations come unto thee, say:
Peace be unto you! Your Lord hath prescribed for Himself mercy, that
whoso of you doeth evil through ignorance and repenteth afterward
thereof and doeth right, (for him) lo! He is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: And when those who believe in Our communications come to you, say:
Peace be on you, your Lord has ordained mercy on Himself, (so) that if
any one of you does evil in ignorance, then turns after that and acts
aright, then He is Forgiving, Merciful.

006.055
Y: Thus do We explain the signs in detail: that the way of the sinners
may be shown up.

P: Thus do We expound the revelations that the way of the unrighteous
may be manifest.

S: And thus do We make distinct the communications and so that the way
of the guilty may become clear.

006.056
Y: Say: "I am forbidden to worship those - others than Allah - whom ye
call upon." Say: "I will not follow your vain desires: If I did, I
would stray from the path, and be not of the company of those who
receive guidance."

P: Say: I am forbidden to worship those on whom ye call instead of
Allah. Say: I will not follow your desires, for then should I go astray
and I should not be of the rightly guided.

S: Say: I am forbidden to serve those whom you call upon besides Allah.
Say: I do not follow your low desires, for then indeed I should have
gone astray and I should not be of those who go aright.

006.057
Y: Say: "For me, I (work) on a clear sign from my Lord, but ye reject
Him. What ye would see hastened, is not in my power. The command rests
with none but Allah: He declares the truth, and He is the best of
judges."

P: Say: I am (relying) on clear proof from my Lord, while ye deny Him. I
have not that for which ye are impatient. The decision is for Allah
only. He telleth the truth and He is the Best of Deciders.

S: Say: Surely I have manifest proof from my Lord and you call it a lie;
I have not with me that which you would hasten; the judgment is only
Allah's; He relates the truth and He is the best of deciders.

006.058
Y: Say: "If what ye would see hastened were in my power, the matter
would be settled at once between you and me. But Allah knoweth best
those who do wrong."

P: Say: If I had that for which ye are impatient, then would the case
(ere this) have been decided between me and you. Allah is Best Aware of
the wrong-doers.

S: Say: If that which you desire to hasten were with me, the matter
would have certainly been decided between you and me; and Allah best
knows the unjust.

006.059
Y: With Him are the keys of the unseen, the treasures that none knoweth
but He. He knoweth whatever there is on the earth and in the sea. Not a
leaf doth fall but with His knowledge: there is not a grain in the
darkness (or depths) of the earth, nor anything fresh or dry (green or
withered), but is (inscribed) in a record clear (to those who can
read).

P: And with Him are the keys of the Invisible. None but He knoweth them.
And He knoweth what is in the land and the sea. Not a leaf falleth but
He knoweth it, not a grain amid the darkness of the earth, naught of
wet or dry but (it is noted) in a clear record.

S: And with Him are the keys of the unseen treasures-- none knows them
but He; and He knows what is in the land and the sea, and there falls
not a leaf but He knows it, nor a grain in the darkness of the earth,
nor anything green nor dry but (it is all) in a clear book.

006.060
Y: It is He who doth take your souls by night, and hath knowledge of all
that ye have done by day: by day doth He raise you up again; that a
term appointed be fulfilled; In the end unto Him will be your return;
then will He show you the truth of all that ye did.

P: He it is Who gathereth you at night and knoweth that which ye commit
by day. Then He raiseth you again to life therein, that the term
appointed (for you) may be accomplished. And afterward unto Him is your
return. Then He will proclaim unto you what ye used to do.

S: And He it is Who takes your souls at night (in sleep), and He knows
what you acquire in the day, then He raises you up therein that an
appointed term may be fulfilled; then to Him is your return, then He
will inform you of what you were doing.

006.061
Y: He is the irresistible, (watching) from above over His worshippers,
and He sets guardians over you. At length, when death approaches one of
you, Our angels take his soul, and they never fail in their duty.

P: He is the Omnipotent over His slaves. He sendeth guardians over you
until, when death cometh unto one of you, Our messengers receive him,
and they neglect not.

S: And He is the Supreme, above His servants, and He sends keepers over
you; until when death comes to one of you, Our messengers cause him to
die, and they are not remiss.

006.062
Y: Then are men returned unto Allah, their protector, the (only)
reality: Is not His the command? and He is the swiftest in taking
account.

P: Then are they restored unto Allah, their Lord, the Just. Surely His
is the judgment. And He is the most swift of reckoners.

S: Then are they sent back to Allah, their Master, the True one; now
surely His is the judgment and He is swiftest in taking account.

006.063
Y: Say: "Who is it that delivereth you from the dark recesses of land
and sea, when ye call upon Him in humility and silent terror: 'If He
only delivers us from these (dangers), (we vow) we shall truly show our
gratitude'?"

P: Say: Who delivereth you from the darkness of the land and the sea? Ye
call upon Him humbly and in secret, (saying): If we are delivered from
this (fear) we truly will be of the thankful.

S: Say: Who is it that delivers you from the dangers of the land and the
sea (when) you call upon Him (openly) humiliating yourselves, and in
secret: If He delivers us from this, we should certainly be of the
grateful ones.

006.064
Y: Say "It is Allah that delivereth you from these and all (other)
distresses: and yet ye worship false gods!"

P: Say: Allah delivereth you from this and from all affliction. Yet ye
attribute partners unto Him.

S: Say: Allah delivers you from them and from every distress, but again
you set up others (with Him).

006.065
Y: Say: "He hath power to send calamities on you, from above and below,
or to cover you with confusion in party strife, giving you a taste of
mutual vengeance - each from the other." See how We explain the signs
by various (symbols); that they may understand.

P: Say: He is able to send punishment upon you from above you or from
beneath your feet, or to bewilder you with dissension and make you
taste the tyranny one of another. See how We display the revelations so
that they may understand.

S: Say: He has the power that He should send on you a chastisement from
above you or from beneath your feet, or that He should throw you into
confusion, (making you) of different parties; and make some of you
taste the fighting of others. See how We repeat the communications that
they may understand.

006.066
Y: But thy people reject this, though it is the truth. Say: "Not mine is
the responsibility for arranging your affairs;"

P: Thy people (O Muhammad) have denied it, though it is the Truth. Say:
I am not put in charge of you.

S: And your people call it a lie and it is the very truth. Say: I am not
placed in charge of you.

006.067
Y: "For every message is a limit of time, and soon shall ye know it."

P: For every announcement there is a term, and ye will come to know.

S: For every prophecy is a term, and you will come to know (it).

006.068
Y: When thou seest men engaged in vain discourse about Our signs, turn
away from them unless they turn to a different theme. If Satan ever
makes thee forget, then after recollection, sit not thou in the company
of those who do wrong.

P: And when thou seest those who meddle with Our revelations, withdraw
from them until they meddle with another topic. And if the devil cause
thee to forget, sit not, after the remembrance, with the congregation
of wrong-doers.

S: And when you see those who enter into false discourses about Our
communications, withdraw from them until they enter into some other
discourse, and if the Shaitan causes you to forget, then do not sit
after recollection with the unjust people.

006.069
Y: On their account no responsibility falls on the righteous, but (their
duty) is to remind them, that they may (learn to) fear Allah.

P: Those who ward off (evil) are not accountable for them in aught, but
the Reminder (must be given them) that haply they (too) may ward off
(evil).

S: And nought of the reckoning of their (deeds) shall be against those
who guard (against evil), but (theirs) is only to remind, haply they
may guard.

006.070
Y: Leave alone those who take their religion to be mere play and
amusement, and are deceived by the life of this world. But proclaim (to
them) this (truth): that every soul delivers itself to ruin by its own
acts: it will find for itself no protector or intercessor except Allah:
if it offered every ransom, (or reparation), none will be accepted:
such is (the end of) those who deliver themselves to ruin by their own
acts: they will have for drink (only) boiling water, and for
punishment, one most grievous: for they persisted in rejecting Allah.

P: And forsake those who take their religion for a pastime and a jest,
and whom the life of the world beguileth. Remind (mankind) hereby lest
a soul be destroyed by what it earneth. It hath beside Allah no
protecting ally nor intercessor, and though it offer every compensation
it will not be accepted from it. Those are they who perish by their own
deserts. For them is drink of boiling water and a painful doom, because
they disbelieved.

S: And leave those who have taken their religion for a play and an idle
sport, and whom this world's life has deceived, and remind (them)
thereby lest a soul should be given up to destruction for what it has
earned; it shall not have besides Allah any guardian nor an
intercessor, and if it should seek to give every compensation, it shall
not be accepted from it; these are they who shall be given up to
destruction for what they earned; they shall have a drink of boiling
water and a painful chastisement because they disbelieved.

006.071
Y: Say: "Shall we indeed call on others besides Allah,- things that can
do us neither good nor harm,- and turn on our heels after receiving
guidance from Allah? - like one whom the evil ones have made into a
fool, wandering bewildered through the earth, his friends calling, come
to us', (vainly) guiding him to the path." Say: "Allah's guidance is
the (only) guidance, and we have been directed to submit ourselves to
the Lord of the worlds;-"

P: Say: Shall we cry, instead of unto Allah, unto that which neither
profiteth us nor hurteth us, and shall we turn back after Allah hath
guided us, like one bewildered whom the devils have infatuated in the
earth, who hath companions who invite him to the guidance (saying):
Come unto us? Say: Lo! the guidance of Allah is Guidance, and we are
ordered to surrender to the Lord of the Worlds,

S: Say: Shall we call on that besides Allah, which does not benefit us
nor harm us, and shall we be returned back on our heels after Allah has
guided us, like him whom the Shaitans have made to fall down perplexed
in the earth? He has companions who call him to the right way,
(saying): Come to us. Say: Surely the guidance of Allah, that is the
(true) guidance, and we are commanded that we should submit to the Lord
of the worlds.

006.072
Y: "To establish regular prayers and to fear Allah: for it is to Him
that we shall be gathered together."

P: And to establish worship and be dutiful to Him, and He it is unto
Whom ye will be gathered.

S: And that you should keep up prayer and be careful of (your duty to)
Him; and He it is to Whom you shall be gathered.

006.073
Y: It is He who created the heavens and the earth in true (proportions):
the day He saith, "Be," behold! it is. His word is the truth. His will
be the dominion the day the trumpet will be blown. He knoweth the
unseen as well as that which is open. For He is the Wise, well
acquainted (with all things).

P: He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in truth. In the day
when He saith: Be! it is. His Word is the Truth, and His will be the
Sovereignty on the day when the trumpet is blown. Knower of the
Invisible and the Visible, He is the Wise, the Aware.

S: And He it is Who has created the heavens and the earth with truth,
and on the day He says: Be, it is. His word is the truth, and His is
the kingdom on the day when the trumpet shall be blown; the Knower of
the unseen and the seen; and He is the Wise, the Aware.

006.074
Y: Lo! Abraham said to his father Azar: "Takest thou idols for gods? For
I see thee and thy people in manifest error."

P: (Remember) when Abraham said unto his father Azar: Takest thou idols
for gods? Lo! I see thee and thy folk in error manifest.

S: And when Ibrahim said to his sire, Azar: Do you take idols for gods?
Surely I see you and your people in manifest error.

006.075
Y: So also did We show Abraham the power and the laws of the heavens and
the earth, that he might (with understanding) have certitude.

P: Thus did We show Abraham the kingdom of the heavens and the earth
that he might be of those possessing certainty:

S: And thus did We show Ibrahim the kingdom of the heavens and the earth
and that he might be of those who are sure.

006.076
Y: When the night covered him over, He saw a star: He said: "This is my
Lord." But when it set, He said: "I love not those that set."

P: When the night grew dark upon him he beheld a star. He said: This is
my Lord. But when it set, he said: I love not things that set.

S: So when the night over-shadowed him, he saw a star; said he: Is this
my Lord? So when it set, he said: I do not love the setting ones.

006.077
Y: When he saw the moon rising in splendour, he said: "This is my Lord."
But when the moon set, He said: "unless my Lord guide me, I shall
surely be among those who go astray."

P: And when he saw the moon uprising, he exclaimed: This is my Lord. But
when it set, he said: Unless my Lord guide me, I surely shall become
one of the folk who are astray.

S: Then when he saw the moon rising, he said: Is this my Lord? So when
it set, he said: If my Lord had not guided me I should certainly be of
the erring people.

006.078
Y: When he saw the sun rising in splendour, he said: "This is my Lord;
this is the greatest (of all)." But when the sun set, he said: "O my
people! I am indeed free from your (guilt) of giving partners to Allah."

P: And when he saw the sun uprising, he cried: This is my Lord! This is
greater! And when it set he exclaimed: O my people! Lo! I am free from
all that ye associate (with Him).

S: Then when he saw the sun rising, he said: Is this my Lord? Is this
the greatest? So when it set, he said: O my people! surely I am clear
of what you set up (with Allah).

006.079
Y: "For me, I have set my face, firmly and truly, towards Him Who
created the heavens and the earth, and never shall I give partners to
Allah."

P: Lo! I have turned my face toward Him Who created the heavens and the
earth, as one by nature upright, and I am not of the idolaters.

S: Surely I have turned myself, being upright, wholly to Him Who
originated the heavens and the earth, and I am not of the polytheists.

006.080
Y: His people disputed with him. He said: "(Come) ye to dispute with me,
about Allah, when He (Himself) hath guided me? I fear not (the beings)
ye associate with Allah: Unless my Lord willeth, (nothing can happen).
My Lord comprehendeth in His knowledge all things. Will ye not
(yourselves) be admonished?"

P: His people argued with him. He said: Dispute ye with me concerning
Allah when He hath guided me? I fear not at all that which ye set up
beside Him unless my Lord willeth aught. My Lord includeth all things
in His knowledge. Will ye not then remember?

S: And his people disputed with him. He said: Do you dispute with me
respecting Allah? And He has guided me indeed; and I do not fear in any
way those that you set up with Him, unless my Lord pleases; my Lord
comprehends all things in His knowledge; will you not then mind?

006.081
Y: "How should I fear (the beings) ye associate with Allah, when ye fear
not to give partners to Allah without any warrant having been given to
you? Which of (us) two parties hath more right to security? (tell me)
if ye know."

P: How should I fear that which ye set up beside Him, when ye fear not
to set up beside Allah that for which He hath revealed unto you no
warrant? Which of the two factions hath more right to safety? (Answer
me that) if ye have knowledge.

S: And how should I fear what you have set up (with Him), while you do
not fear that you have set up with Allah that for which He has not sent
down to you any authority; which then of the two parties is surer of
security, if you know?

006.082
Y: "It is those who believe and confuse not their beliefs with wrong
- that are (truly) in security, for they are on (right) guidance."

P: Those who believe and obscure not their belief by wrongdoing, theirs
is safety; and they are rightly guided.

S: Those who believe and do not mix up their faith with iniquity, those
are they who shall have the security and they are those who go aright.

006.083
Y: That was the reasoning about Us, which We gave to Abraham (to use)
against his people: We raise whom We will, degree after degree: for thy
Lord is full of wisdom and knowledge.

P: That is Our argument. We gave it unto Abraham against his folk. We
raise unto degrees of wisdom whom We will. Lo! thy Lord is Wise, Aware.

S: And this was Our argument which we gave to Ibrahim against his
people; We exalt in dignity whom We please; surely your Lord is Wise,
Knowing.

006.084
Y: We gave him Isaac and Jacob: all (three) guided: and before him, We
guided Noah, and among his progeny, David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses,
and Aaron: thus do We reward those who do good:

P: And We bestowed upon him Isaac and Jacob; each of them We guided; and
Noah did We guide aforetime; and of his seed (We guided) David and
Solomon and Job and Joseph and Moses and Aaron. Thus do We reward the
good.

S: And We gave to him Ishaq and Yaqoub; each did We guide, and Nuh did
We guide before, and of his descendants, Dawood and Sulaiman and Ayub
and Yusuf and Haroun; and thus do We reward those who do good (to
others).

006.085
Y: And Zakariya and John, and Jesus and Elias: all in the ranks of the
righteous:

P: And Zachariah and John and Jesus and Elias. Each one (of them) was of
the righteous.

S: And Zakariya and Yahya and Isa and Ilyas; every one was of the good;

006.086
Y: And Isma'il and Elisha, and Jonas, and Lot: and to all We gave favour
above the nations:

P: And Ishmael and Elisha and Jonah and Lot. Each one (of them) did We
prefer above (Our) creatures,

S: And Ismail and Al-Yasha and Yunus and Lut; and every one We made to
excel (in) the worlds:

006.087
Y: (To them) and to their fathers, and progeny and brethren: We chose
them, and we guided them to a straight way.

P: With some of their forefathers and their offspring and their
brethren; and We chose them and guided them unto a straight path.

S: And from among their fathers and their descendants and their
brethren, and We chose them and guided them into the right way.

006.088
Y: This is the guidance of Allah: He giveth that guidance to whom He
pleaseth, of His worshippers. If they were to join other gods with Him,
all that they did would be vain for them.

P: Such is the guidance of Allah wherewith He guideth whom He will of
His bondmen. But if they had set up (for worship) aught beside Him,
(all) that they did would have been vain.

S: This is Allah's guidance, He guides thereby whom He pleases of His
servants; and if they had set up others (with Him), certainly what they
did would have become ineffectual for them.

006.089
Y: These were the men to whom We gave the Book, and authority, and
prophethood: if these (their descendants) reject them, Behold! We shall
entrust their charge to a new people who reject them not.

P: Those are they unto whom We gave the Scripture and command and
prophethood. But if these disbelieve therein, then indeed We shall
entrust it to a people who will not be disbelievers therein.

S: These are they to whom We gave the book and the wisdom and the
prophecy; therefore if these disbelieve in it We have already entrusted
with it a people who are not disbelievers in it.

006.090
Y: Those were the (prophets) who received Allah's guidance: Copy the
guidance they received; Say: "No reward for this do I ask of you: This
is no less than a message for the nations."

P: Those are they whom Allah guideth, so follow their guidance. Say (O
Muhammad, unto mankind): I ask of you no fee for it. Lo! it is naught
but a Reminder to (His) creatures.

S: These are they whom Allah guided, therefore follow their guidance.
Say: I do not ask you for any reward for it; it is nothing but a
reminder to the nations.

006.091
Y: No just estimate of Allah do they make when they say: "Nothing doth
Allah send down to man (by way of revelation)" Say: "Who then sent down
the Book which Moses brought?- a light and guidance to man: But ye make
it into (separate) sheets for show, while ye conceal much (of its
contents): therein were ye taught that which ye knew not- neither ye
nor your fathers." Say: "Allah (sent it down)": Then leave them to
plunge in vain discourse and trifling.

P: And they measure not the power of Allah its true measure when they
say: Allah hath naught revealed unto a human being. Say (unto the Jews
who speak thus): Who revealed the Book which Moses brought, a light and
guidance for mankind, which ye have put on parchments which ye show,
but ye hide much (thereof), and (by which) ye were taught that which ye
knew not yourselves nor (did) your fathers (know it)? Say: Allah. Then
leave them to their play of cavilling.

S: And they do not assign to Allah the attributes due to Him when they
say: Allah has not revealed anything to a mortal. Say: Who revealed the
Book which Musa brought, a light and a guidance to men, which you make
into scattered writings which you show while you conceal much? And you
were taught what you did not know, (neither) you nor your fathers. Say:
Allah then leave them sporting in their vain discourses.

006.092
Y: And this is a Book which We have sent down, bringing blessings, and
confirming (the revelations) which came before it: that thou mayest
warn the mother of cities and all around her. Those who believe in the
Hereafter believe in this (Book), and they are constant in guarding
their prayers.

P: And this is a blessed Scripture which We have revealed, confirming
that which (was revealed) before it, that thou mayst warn the Mother of
Villages and those around her. Those who believe in the Hereafter
believe herein, and they are careful of their worship.

S: And this is a Book We have revealed, blessed, verifying that which is
before it, and that you may warn the metropolis and those around her;
and those who believe in the hereafter believe in it, and they attend
to their prayers constantly.

006.093
Y: Who can be more wicked than one who inventeth a lie against Allah, or
saith, "I have received inspiration," when he hath received none, or
(again) who saith, "I can reveal the like of what Allah hath revealed"?
If thou couldst but see how the wicked (do fare) in the flood of
confusion at death! - the angels stretch forth their hands,
(saying), "Yield up your souls: this day shall ye receive your reward,-
a penalty of shame, for that ye used to tell lies against Allah, and
scornfully to reject of His signs!"

P: Who is guilty of more wrong than he who forgeth a lie against Allah,
or saith: I am inspired, when he is not inspired in aught; and who
saith: I will reveal the like of that which Allah hath revealed? If
thou couldst see, when the wrong-doers reach the pangs of death and the
angels stretch their hands out (saying): Deliver up your souls. This
day ye are awarded doom of degradation for that ye spake concerning
Allah other than the truth, and used to scorn His portents.

S: And who is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah, or
says: It has been revealed to me; while nothing has been revealed to
him, and he who says: I can reveal the like of what Allah has revealed?
and if you had seen when the unjust shall be in the agonies of death
and the angels shall spread forth their hands: Give up your souls;
today shall you be recompensed with an ignominious chastisement because
you spoke against Allah other than the truth and (because) you showed
pride against His communications.

006.094
Y: "And behold! ye come to us bare and alone as We created you for the
first time: ye have left behind you all (the favours) which We bestowed
on you: We see not with you your intercessors whom ye thought to be
partners in your affairs: so now all relations between you have been
cut off, and your (pet) fancies have left you in the lurch!"

P: Now have ye come unto Us solitary as We did create you at the first,
and ye have left behind you all that We bestowed upon you, and We
behold not with you those your intercessors, of whom ye claimed that
they possessed a share in you. Now is the bond between you severed, and
that which ye presumed hath failed you.

S: And certainly you have come to Us alone as We created you at first,
and you have left behind your backs the things which We gave you, and
We do not see with you your intercessors about whom you asserted that
they were (Allah's) associates in respect to you; certainly the ties
between you are now cut off and what you asserted is gone from you.

006.095
Y: It is Allah Who causeth the seed-grain and the date-stone to split
and sprout. He causeth the living to issue from the dead, and He is the
one to cause the dead to issue from the living. That is Allah: then how
are ye deluded away from the truth?

P: Lo! Allah (it is) Who splitteth the grain of corn and the date-stone
(for sprouting). He bringeth forth the living from the dead, and is the
bringer-forth of the dead from the living. Such is Allah. How then are
ye perverted?

S: Surely Allah causes the grain and the stone to germinate; He brings
forth the living from the dead and He is the bringer forth of the dead
from the living; that is Allah! how are you then turned away.

006.096
Y: He it is that cleaveth the day-break (from the dark): He makes the
night for rest and tranquillity, and the sun and moon for the reckoning
(of time): Such is the judgment and ordering of (Him), the Exalted in
Power, the Omniscient.

P: He is the Cleaver of the Daybreak, and He hath appointed the night
for stillness, and the sun and the moon for reckoning. That is the
measuring of the Mighty, the Wise.

S: He causes the dawn to break; and He has made the night for rest, and
the sun and the moon for reckoning; this is an arrangement of the
Mighty, the Knowing.

006.097
Y: It is He Who maketh the stars (as beacons) for you, that ye may guide
yourselves, with their help, through the dark spaces of land and sea:
We detail Our signs for people who know.

P: And He it is Who hath set for you the stars that ye may guide your
course by them amid the darkness of the land and the sea. We have
detailed Our revelations for a people who have knowledge.

S: And He it is Who has made the stars for you that you might follow the
right way thereby in the darkness of the land and the sea; truly We
have made plain the communications for a people who know.

006.098
Y: It is He Who hath produced you from a single person: here is a place
of sojourn and a place of departure: We detail Our signs for people who
understand.

P: And He it is Who hath produced you from a single being, and (hath
given you) a habitation and a repository. We have detailed Our
revelations for a people who have understanding.

S: And He it is Who has brought you into being from a single soul, then
there is (for you) a resting-place and a depository; indeed We have
made plain the communications for a people who understand.

006.099
Y: It is He Who sendeth down rain from the skies: with it We produce
vegetation of all kinds: from some We produce green (crops), out of
which We produce grain, heaped up (at harvest); out of the date-palm
and its sheaths (or spathes) (come) clusters of dates hanging low and
near: and (then there are) gardens of grapes, and olives, and
pomegranates, each similar (in kind) yet different (in variety): when
they begin to bear fruit, feast your eyes with the fruit and the
ripeness thereof. Behold! in these things there are signs for people
who believe.

P: He it is Who sendeth down water from the sky, and therewith We bring
forth buds of every kind; We bring forth the green blade from which We
bring forth the thick-clustered grain; and from the date-palm, from the
pollen thereof, spring pendant bunches; and (We bring forth) gardens of
grapes, and the olive and the pomegranate, alike and unlike. Look upon
the fruit thereof, when they bear fruit, and upon its ripening. Lo!
herein verily are portents for a people who believe.

S: And He it is Who sends down water from the cloud, then We bring forth
with it buds of all (plants), then We bring forth from it green
(foliage) from which We produce grain piled up (in the ear); and of the
palm-tree, of the sheaths of it, come forth clusters (of dates) within
reach, and gardens of grapes and olives and pomegranates, alike and
unlike; behold the fruit of it when it yields the fruit and the
ripening of it; most surely there are signs in this for a people who
believe.

006.100
Y: Yet they make the jinns equals with Allah, though Allah did create
the jinns; and they falsely, having no knowledge, attribute to Him sons
and daughters. Praise and glory be to Him! (for He is) above what they
attribute to Him!

P: Yet they ascribe as partners unto Him the jinn, although He did
create them, and impute falsely, without knowledge, sons and daughters
unto Him. Glorified be He and High Exalted above (all) that they
ascribe (unto Him).

S: And they make the jinn associates with Allah, while He created them,
and they falsely attribute to Him sons and daughters without knowledge;
glory be to Him, and highly exalted is He above what they ascribe (to
Him).

006.101
Y: To Him is due the primal origin of the heavens and the earth: How can
He have a son when He hath no consort? He created all things, and He
hath full knowledge of all things.

P: The Originator of the heavens and the earth! How can He have a child,
when there is for Him no consort, when He created all things and is
Aware of all things?

S: Wonderful Originator of the heavens and the earth! How could He have
a son when He has no consort, and He (Himself) created everything, and
He is the Knower of all things.

006.102
Y: That is Allah, your Lord! there is no god but He, the Creator of all
things: then worship ye Him: and He hath power to dispose of all
affairs.

P: Such is Allah, your Lord. There is no God save Him, the Creator of
all things, so worship Him. And He taketh care of all things.

S: That is Allah, your Lord, there is no god but He; the Creator of all
things, therefore serve Him, and He has charge of all things.

006.103
Y: No vision can grasp Him, but His grasp is over all vision: He is
above all comprehension, yet is acquainted with all things.

P: Vision comprehendeth Him not, but He comprehendeth (all) vision. He
is the Subtle, the Aware.

S: Vision comprehends Him not, and He comprehends (all) vision; and He
is the Knower of subtleties, the Aware.

006.104
Y: "Now have come to you, from your Lord, proofs (to open your eyes): if
any will see, it will be for (the good of) his own soul; if any will be
blind, it will be to his own (harm): I am not (here) to watch over your
doings."

P: Proofs have come unto you from your Lord, so whoso seeth, it is for
his own good, and whoso is blind is blind to his own hurt. And I am not
a keeper over you.

S: Indeed there have come to you clear proofs from your Lord; whoever
will therefore see, it is for his own soul and whoever will be blind,
it shall be against himself and I am not a keeper over you.

006.105
Y: Thus do we explain the signs by various (symbols): that they may say,
"Thou hast taught (us) diligently," and that We may make the matter
clear to those who know.

P: Thus do We display Our revelations that they may say (unto thee,
Muhammad): "Thou hast studied," and that We may make (it) clear for
people who have knowledge.

S: And thus do We repeat the communications and that they may say: You
have read; and that We may make it clear to a people who know.

006.106
Y: Follow what thou art taught by inspiration from thy Lord: there is no
god but He: and turn aside from those who join gods with Allah.

P: Follow that which is inspired in thee from thy Lord; there is no
Allah save Him; and turn away from the idolaters.

S: Follow what is revealed to you from your Lord; there is no god but
He; and withdraw from the polytheists.

006.107
Y: If it had been Allah's plan, they would not have taken false gods:
but We made thee not one to watch over their doings, nor art thou set
over them to dispose of their affairs.

P: Had Allah willed, they had not been idolatrous. We have not set thee
as a keeper over them, nor art thou responsible for them.

S: And if Allah had pleased, they would not have set up others (with
Him) and We have not appointed you a keeper over them, and you are not
placed in charge of them.

006.108
Y: Revile not ye those whom they call upon besides Allah, lest they out
of spite revile Allah in their ignorance. Thus have We made alluring to
each people its own doings. In the end will they return to their Lord,
and We shall then tell them the truth of all that they did.

P: Revile not those unto whom they pray beside Allah lest they
wrongfully revile Allah through ignorance. Thus unto every nation have
We made their deed seem fair. Then unto their Lord is their return, and
He will tell them what they used to do.

S: And do not abuse those whom they call upon besides Allah, lest
exceeding the limits they should abuse Allah out of ignorance. Thus
have We made fair seeming to every people their deeds; then to their
Lord shall be their return, so He will inform them of what they did.

006.109
Y: They swear their strongest oaths by Allah, that if a (special) sign
came to them, by it they would believe. Say: "Certainly (all) signs are
in the power of Allah: but what will make you (Muslims) realise that
(even) if (special) signs came, they will not believe."?

P: And they swear a solemn oath by Allah that if there come unto them a
portent they will believe therein. Say; Portents are with Allah and (so
is) that which telleth you that if such came unto them they would not
believe.

S: And they swear by Allah with the strongest of their oaths, that if a
sign came to them they would most certainly believe in it. Say: Signs
are only with Allah; and what should make you know that when it comes
they will not believe?

006.110
Y: We (too) shall turn to (confusion) their hearts and their eyes, even
as they refused to believe in this in the first instance: We shall
leave them in their trespasses, to wander in distraction.

P: We confound their hearts and their eyes. As they believed not therein
at the first, We let them wander blindly on in their contumacy.

S: And We will turn their hearts and their sights, even as they did not
believe in it the first time, and We will leave them in their
inordinacy, blindly wandering on.

006.111
Y: Even if We did send unto them angels, and the dead did speak unto
them, and We gathered together all things before their very eyes, they
are not the ones to believe, unless it is in Allah's plan. But most of
them ignore (the truth).

P: And though We should send down the angels unto them, and the dead
should speak unto them, and We should gather against them all things in
array, they would not believe unless Allah so willed. Howbeit, most of
them are ignorant.

S: And even if We had sent down to them the angels and the dead had
spoken to them and We had brought together all things before them, they
would not believe unless Allah pleases, but most of them are ignorant.

006.112
Y: Likewise did We make for every Messenger an enemy,- evil ones among
men and jinns, inspiring each other with flowery discourses by way of
deception. If thy Lord had so planned, they would not have done it: so
leave them and their inventions alone.

P: Thus have We appointed unto every prophet an adversary - devils of
humankind and jinn who inspire in one another plausible discourse
through guile. If thy Lord willed, they would not do so; so leave them
alone with their devising;

S: And thus did We make for every prophet an enemy, the Shaitans from
among men and jinn, some of them suggesting to others varnished
falsehood to deceive (them), and had your Lord pleased they would not
have done it, therefore leave them and that which they forge.

006.113
Y: To such (deceit) let the hearts of those incline, who have no faith
in the hereafter: let them delight in it, and let them earn from it
what they may.

P: That the hearts of those who believe not in the Hereafter may incline
thereto, and that they may take pleasure therein, and that they may
earn what they are earning.

S: And that the hearts of those who do not believe in the hereafter may
incline to it and that they may be well pleased with it and that they
may earn what they are going to earn (of evil).

006.114
Y: Say: "Shall I seek for judge other than Allah? - when He it is Who
hath sent unto you the Book, explained in detail." They know full well,
to whom We have given the Book, that it hath been sent down from thy
Lord in truth. Never be then of those who doubt.

P: Shall I seek other than Allah for judge, when He it is Who hath
revealed unto you (this) Scripture, fully explained? Those unto whom We
gave the Scripture (aforetime) know that it is revealed from thy Lord
in truth. So be not thou (O Muhammad) of the waverers.

S: Shall I then seek a judge other than Allah? And He it is Who has
revealed to you the Book (which is) made plain; and those whom We have
given the Book know that it is revealed by your Lord with truth,
therefore you should not be of the disputers.

006.115
Y: The word of thy Lord doth find its fulfilment in truth and in
justice: None can change His words: for He is the one who heareth and
knoweth all.

P: Perfected is the Word of thy Lord in truth and justice. There is
naught that can change His words. He is the Hearer, the Knower.

S: And the word of your Lord has been accomplished truly and justly;
there is none who can change His words, and He is the Hearing, the
Knowing.

006.116
Y: Wert thou to follow the common run of those on earth, they will lead
thee away from the way of Allah. They follow nothing but conjecture:
they do nothing but lie.

P: If thou obeyedst most of those on earth they would mislead thee far
from Allah's way. They follow naught but an opinion, and they do but
guess.

S: And if you obey most of those in the earth, they will lead you astray
from Allah's way; they follow but conjecture and they only lie.

006.117
Y: Thy Lord knoweth best who strayeth from His way: He knoweth best who
they are that receive His guidance.

P: Lo! thy Lord, He knoweth best who erreth from His way; and He knoweth
best (who are) the rightly guided.

S: Surely your Lord-- He best knows who goes astray from His way, and He
best knows those who follow the right course.

006.118
Y: So eat of (meats) on which Allah's name hath been pronounced, if ye
have faith in His signs.

P: Eat of that over which the name of Allah hath been mentioned, if ye
are believers in His revelations.

S: Therefore eat of that on which Allah's name has been mentioned if you
are believers in His communications.

006.119
Y: Why should ye not eat of (meats) on which Allah's name hath been
pronounced, when He hath explained to you in detail what is forbidden to
you - except under compulsion of necessity? But many do mislead (men) by
their appetites unchecked by knowledge. Thy Lord knoweth best those who
transgress.

P: How should ye not eat of that over which the name of Allah hath been
mentioned, when He hath explained unto you that which is forbidden unto
you unless ye are compelled thereto. But lo! many are led astray by
their own lusts through ignorance. Lo! thy Lord, He is Best Aware of
the transgressors.

S: And what reason have you that you should not eat of that on which
Allah's name has been mentioned, and He has already made plain to you
what He has forbidden to you-- excepting what you are compelled to; and
most surely many would lead (people) astray by their low desires out of
ignorance; surely your Lord-- He best knows those who exceed the
limits.

006.120
Y: Eschew all sin, open or secret: those who earn sin will get due
recompense for their "earnings."

P: Forsake the outwardness of sin and the inwardness thereof. Lo! those
who garner sin will be awarded that which they have earned.

S: And abandon open and secret sin; surely they who earn sin shall be
recompensed with what they earned.

006.121
Y: Eat not of (meats) on which Allah's name hath not been pronounced:
That would be impiety. But the evil ones ever inspire their friends to
contend with you if ye were to obey them, ye would indeed be Pagans.

P: And eat not of that whereon Allah's name hath not been mentioned, for
lo! it is abomination. Lo! the devils do inspire their minions to
dispute with you. But if ye obey them, ye will be in truth idolaters.

S: And do not eat of that on which Allah's name has not been mentioned,
and that is most surely a transgression; and most surely the Shaitans
suggest to their friends that they should contend with you; and if you
obey them, you shall most surely be polytheists.

006.122
Y: Can he who was dead, to whom We gave life, and a light whereby he can
walk amongst men, be like him who is in the depths of darkness, from
which he can never come out? Thus to those without faith their own
deeds seem pleasing.

P: Is he who was dead and We have raised him unto life, and set for him
a light wherein he walketh among men, as him whose similitude is in
utter darkness whence he cannot emerge? Thus is their conduct made
fairseeming for the disbelievers.

S: Is he who was dead then We raised him to life and made for him a
light by which he walks among the people, like him whose likeness is
that of one in utter darkness whence he cannot come forth? Thus what
they did was made fair seeming to the unbelievers.

006.123
Y: Thus have We placed leaders in every town, its wicked men, to plot
(and burrow) therein: but they only plot against their own souls, and
they perceive it not.

P: And thus have We made in every city great ones of its wicked ones,
that they should plot therein. They do but plot against themselves,
though they perceive not.

S: And thus have We made in every town the great ones to be its guilty
ones, that they may plan therein; and they do not plan but against
their own souls, and they do not perceive.

006.124
Y: When there comes to them a sign (from Allah), They say: "We shall not
believe until we receive one (exactly) like those received by Allah's
messengers." Allah knoweth best where (and how) to carry out His
mission. Soon will the wicked be overtaken by humiliation before Allah,
and a severe punishment, for all their plots.

P: And when a token cometh unto them, they say: We will not believe till
we are given that which Allah's messengers are given. Allah knoweth
best with whom to place His message. Humiliation from Allah and heavy
punishment will smite the guilty for their scheming.

S: And when a communication comes to them they say: We will not believe
till we are given the like of what Allah's messengers are given. Allah
best knows where He places His message. There shall befall those who
are guilty humiliation from Allah and severe chastisement because of
what they planned.

006.125
Y: Those whom Allah (in His plan) willeth to guide,- He openeth their
breast to Islam; those whom He willeth to leave straying,- He maketh
their breast close and constricted, as if they had to climb up to the
skies: thus doth Allah (heap) the penalty on those who refuse to
believe.

P: And whomsoever it is Allah's will to guide, He expandeth his bosom
unto the Surrender, and whomsoever it is His Will to send astray, He
maketh his bosom close and narrow as if he were engaged in sheer
ascent. Thus Allah layeth ignominy upon those who believe not.

S: Therefore (for) whomsoever Allah intends that He would guide him
aright, He expands his breast for Islam, and (for) whomsoever He
intends that He should cause him to err, He makes his breast strait and
narrow as though he were ascending upwards; thus does Allah lay
uncleanness on those who do not believe.

006.126
Y: This is the way of thy Lord, leading straight: We have detailed the
signs for those who receive admonition.

P: This is the path of thy Lord, a straight path. We have detailed Our
revelations for a people who take heed.

S: And this is the path of your Lord, (a) right (path); indeed We have
made the communications clear for a people who mind.

006.127
Y: For them will be a home of peace in the presence of their Lord: He
will be their friend, because they practised (righteousness).

P: For them is the abode of peace with their Lord. He will be their
Protecting Friend because of what they used to do.

S: They shall have the abode of peace with their Lord, and He is their
guardian because of what they did.

006.128
Y: One day will He gather them all together, (and say): "O ye assembly
of jinns! Much (toll) did ye take of men." Their friends amongst men
will say: "Our Lord! we made profit from each other: but (alas!) we
reached our term - which thou didst appoint for us." He will say: "The
Fire be your dwelling-place: you will dwell therein for ever, except as
Allah willeth." for thy Lord is full of wisdom and knowledge.

P: In the day when He will gather them together (He will say): O ye
assembly of the jinn! Many of humankind did ye seduce. And their
adherents among humankind will say: Our Lord! We enjoyed one another,
but now we have arrived at the appointed term which Thou appointedst
for us. He will say: Fire is your home. Abide therein for ever, save
him whom Allah willeth (to deliver). Lo! thy Lord is Wise, Aware.

S: And on the day when He shall gather them all together: O assembly of
jinn! you took away a great part of mankind. And their friends from
among the men shall say: Our Lord! some of us profited by others and we
have reached our appointed term which Thou didst appoint for us. He
shall say: The fire is your abode, to abide in it, except as Allah is
pleased; surely your Lord is Wise, Knowing.

006.129
Y: Thus do we make the wrong-doers turn to each other, because of what
they earn.

P: Thus We let some of the wrong-doers have power over others because of
what they are wont to earn.

S: And thus do We make some of the iniquitous to befriend others on
account of what they earned.

006.130
Y: "O ye assembly of jinns and men! came there not unto you messengers
from amongst you, setting forth unto you My signs, and warning you of
the meeting of this Day of yours?" They will say: "We bear witness
against ourselves." It was the life of this world that deceived them.
So against themselves will they bear witness that they rejected Faith.

P: O ye assembly of the jinn and humankind! Came there not unto you
messengers of your own who recounted unto you My tokens and warned you
of the meeting of this your Day? They will say: We testify against
ourselves. And the life of the world beguiled them. And they testify
against themselves that they were disbelievers.

S: O assembly of jinn and men! did there not come to you messengers from
among you, relating to you My communications and warning you of the
meeting of this day of yours? They shall say: We bear witness against
ourselves; and this world's life deceived them, and they shall bear
witness against their own souls that they were unbelievers.

006.131
Y: (The messengers were sent) thus, for thy Lord would not destroy for
their wrong-doing men's habitations whilst their occupants were
unwarned.

P: This is because thy Lord destroyeth not the townships arbitrarily
while their people are unconscious (of the wrong they do).

S: This is because your Lord would not destroy towns unjustly while
their people were negligent.

006.132
Y: To all are degrees (or ranks) according to their deeds: for thy Lord
is not unmindful of anything that they do.

P: For all there will be ranks from what they did. Thy Lord is not
unaware of what they do.

S: And all have degrees according to what they do; and your Lord is not
heedless of what they do.

006.133
Y: Thy Lord is self-sufficient, full of Mercy: if it were His will, He
could destroy you, and in your place appoint whom He will as your
successors, even as He raised you up from the posterity of other
people.

P: Thy Lord is the Absolute, the Lord of Mercy. If He will, He can
remove you and can cause what He will to follow after you, even as He
raised you from the seed of other folk.

S: And your Lord is the Self-sufficient one, the Lord of mercy; if He
pleases, He may take you off, and make whom He pleases successors after
you, even as He raised you up from the seed of another people.

006.134
Y: All that hath been promised unto you will come to pass: nor can ye
frustrate it (in the least bit).

P: Lo! that which ye are promised will surely come to pass, and ye
cannot escape.

S: Surely what you are threatened with must come to pass and you cannot
escape (it).

006.135
Y: Say: "O my people! Do whatever ye can: I will do (my part): soon will
ye know who it is whose end will be (best) in the Hereafter: certain it
is that the wrong-doers will not prosper."

P: Say (O Muhammad): O my people! Work according to your power. Lo! I
too am working. Thus ye will come to know for which of us will be the
happy sequel. Lo! the wrong-doers will not be successful.

S: Say: O my people! act according to your ability; I too am acting; so
you will soon come to know, for whom (of us) will be the (good) end of
the abode; surely the unjust shall not be successful.

006.136
Y: Out of what Allah hath produced in abundance in tilth and in cattle,
they assigned Him a share: they say, according to their fancies:
"This is for Allah, and this" - for our "partners"! but the share of
their "partners" reacheth not Allah, whilst the share of Allah reacheth
their "partners"! evil (and unjust) is their assignment!

P: They assign unto Allah, of the crops and cattle which He created, a
portion, and they say: "This is Allah's" - in their make-believe - "and
this is for (His) partners in regard to us." Thus that which (they
assign) unto His partners in them reacheth not Allah and that which
(they assign) unto Allah goeth to their (so-called) partners. Evil is
their ordinance.

S: And they set apart a portion for Allah out of what He has created of
tilth and cattle, and say: This is for Allah-- so they assert-- and
this for our associates; then what is for their associates, it reaches
not to Allah, and whatever is (set apart) for Allah, it reaches to
their associates; evil is that which they judge.

006.137
Y: Even so, in the eyes of most of the pagans, their "partners" made
alluring the slaughter of their children, in order to lead them to
their own destruction, and cause confusion in their religion. If Allah
had willed, they would not have done so: But leave alone them and their
inventions.

P: Thus have their (so-called) partners (of Allah) made the killing of
their children to seem fair unto many of the idolaters, that they may
ruin them and make their faith obscure for them. Had Allah willed (it
otherwise), they had not done so. So leave them alone with their
devices.

S: And thus their associates have made fair seeming to most of the
polytheists the killing of their children, that they may cause them to
perish and obscure for them their religion; and if Allah had pleased,
they would not have done it, therefore leave them and that which they
forge.

006.138
Y: And they say that such and such cattle and crops are taboo, and none
should eat of them except those whom - so they say - We wish; further,
there are cattle forbidden to yoke or burden, and cattle on which, (at
slaughter), the name of Allah is not pronounced; - inventions against
Allah's name: soon will He requite them for their inventions.

P: And they say: Such cattle and crops are forbidden. No-one is to eat
of them save whom we will - in their make-believe - cattle whose backs
are forbidden, cattle over which they mention not the name of Allah.
(All that is) a lie against Him. He will repay them for that which they
invent.

S: And they say: These are cattle and tilth prohibited, none shall eat
them except such as We please-- so they assert-- and cattle whose backs
are forbidden, and cattle on which they would not mention Allah's
name-- forging a lie against Him; He shall requite them for what they
forged.

006.139
Y: They say: "What is in the wombs of such and such cattle is specially
reserved (for food) for our men, and forbidden to our women; but if it
is still-born, then all have share therein." For their (false)
attribution (of superstitions to Allah), He will soon punish them: for
He is full of wisdom and knowledge.

P: And they say: That which is in the bellies of such cattle is reserved
for our males and is forbidden to our wives; but if it be born dead,
then they (all) may be partakers thereof. He will reward them for their
attribution (of such ordinances unto Him). Lo, He is Wise, Aware.

S: And they say: What is in the wombs of these cattle is specially for
our males, and forbidden to our wives, and if it be stillborn, then
they are all partners in it; He will reward them for their attributing
(falsehood to Allah); surely He is Wise, Knowing.

006.140
Y: Lost are those who slay their children, from folly, without
knowledge, and forbid food which Allah hath provided for them,
inventing (lies) against Allah. They have indeed gone astray and heeded
no guidance.

P: They are losers who besottedly have slain their children without
knowledge, and have forbidden that which Allah bestowed upon them,
inventing a lie against Allah. They indeed have gone astray and are not
guided.

S: They are lost indeed who kill their children foolishly without
knowledge, and forbid what Allah has given to them forging a lie
against Allah; they have indeed gone astray, and they are not the
followers of the right course.

006.141
Y: It is He Who produceth gardens, with trellises and without, and
dates, and tilth with produce of all kinds, and olives and
pomegranates, similar (in kind) and different (in variety): eat of
their fruit in their season, but render the dues that are proper on the
day that the harvest is gathered. But waste not by excess: for Allah
loveth not the wasters.

P: He it is Who produceth gardens trellised and untrellised, and the
date-palm, and crops of divers flavour, and the olive and the
pomegranate, like and unlike. Eat ye of the fruit thereof when it
fruiteth, and pay the due thereof upon the harvest day, and be not
prodigal. Lo! Allah loveth not the prodigals.

S: And He it is Who produces gardens (of vine), trellised and
untrellised, and palms and seed-produce of which the fruits are of
various sorts, and olives and pomegranates, like and unlike; eat of its
fruit when it bears fruit, and pay the due of it on the day of its
reaping, and do not act extravagantly; surely He does not love the
extravagant.

006.142
Y: Of the cattle are some for burden and some for meat: eat what Allah
hath provided for you, and follow not the footsteps of Satan: for he is
to you and avowed enemy.

P: And of the cattle (He produceth) some for burdens, some for food. Eat
of that which Allah hath bestowed upon you, and follow not the
footsteps of the devil, for lo! he is an open foe to you.

S: And of cattle (He created) beasts of burden and those which are fit
for slaughter only; eat of what Allah has given you and do not follow
the footsteps of the Shaitan; surely he is your open enemy.

006.143
Y: (Take) eight (head of cattle) in (four) pairs: of sheep a pair, and
of goats a pair; say, hath He forbidden the two males, or the two
females, or (the young) which the wombs of the two females enclose?
Tell me with knowledge if ye are truthful:

P: Eight pairs: Of the sheep twain, and of the goats twain. Say: Hath He
forbidden the two males or the two females, or that which the wombs of
the two females contain? Expound to me (the case) with knowledge, if ye
are truthful.

S: Eight in pairs-- two of sheep and two of goats. Say: Has He forbidden
the two males or the two females or that which the wombs of the two
females contain? Inform me with knowledge if you are truthful.

006.144
Y: Of camels a pair, and oxen a pair; say, hath He forbidden the two
males, or the two females, or (the young) which the wombs of the two
females enclose? - Were ye present when Allah ordered you such a thing?
But who doth more wrong than one who invents a lie against Allah, to
lead astray men without knowledge? For Allah guideth not people who do
wrong.

P: And of the camels twain and of the oxen twain. Say: Hath He forbidden
the two males or the two females, or that which the wombs of the two
females contain; or were ye by to witness when Allah commanded you
(all) this? Then who doth greater wrong than he who deviseth a lie
concerning Allah, that he may lead mankind astray without knowledge.
Lo! Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk.

S: And two of camels and two of cows. Say: Has He forbidden the two
males or the two females or that which the wombs of the two females
contain? Or were you witnesses when Allah enjoined you this? Who, then,
is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah that he should
lead astray men without knowledge? Surely Allah does not guide the
unjust people.

006.145
Y: Say: "I find not in the message received by me by inspiration any
(meat) forbidden to be eaten by one who wishes to eat it, unless it be
dead meat, or blood poured forth, or the flesh of swine,- for it is an
abomination - or, what is impious, (meat) on which a name has been
invoked, other than Allah's". But (even so), if a person is forced by
necessity, without wilful disobedience, nor transgressing due limits,-
thy Lord is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: Say: I find not in that which is revealed unto me aught prohibited to
an eater that he eat thereof, except it be carrion, or blood poured
forth, or swineflesh - for that verily is foul - or the abomination
which was immolated to the name of other than Allah. But whoso is
compelled (thereto), neither craving nor transgressing, (for him) lo!
thy Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: Say: I do not find in that which has been revealed to me anything
forbidden for an eater to eat of except that it be what has died of
itself, or blood poured forth, or flesh of swine-- for that surely is
unclean-- or that which is a transgression, other than (the name of)
Allah having been invoked on it; but whoever is driven to necessity,
not desiring nor exceeding the limit, then surely your Lord is
Forgiving, Merciful.

006.146
Y: For those who followed the Jewish Law, We forbade every (animal) with
undivided hoof, and We forbade them that fat of the ox and the sheep,
except what adheres to their backs or their entrails, or is mixed up
with a bone: this in recompense for their wilful disobedience: for We
are true (in Our ordinances).

P: Unto those who are Jews We forbade every animal with claws. And of
the oxen and the sheep forbade We unto them the fat thereof save that
upon the backs or the entrails, or that which is mixed with the bone.
That we awarded them for their rebellion. And lo! we verily are
truthful.

S: And to those who were Jews We made unlawful every animal having
claws, and of oxen and sheep We made unlawful to them the fat of both,
except such as was on their backs or the entrails or what was mixed
with bones: this was a punishment We gave them on account of their
rebellion, and We are surely Truthful.

006.147
Y: If they accuse thee of falsehood, say: "Your Lord is full of mercy
all-embracing; but from people in guilt never will His wrath be turned
back."

P: So if they give the lie to thee (Muhammad), say: Your Lord is a Lord
of all-embracing Mercy, and His wrath will never be withdrawn from
guilty folk.

S: But if they give you the lie, then say: Your Lord is the Lord of
All-encompassing mercy; and His punishment cannot be averted from the
guilty people.

006.148
Y: Those who give partners (to Allah) will say: "If Allah had wished, we
should not have given partners to Him nor would our fathers; nor should
we have had any taboos." So did their ancestors argue falsely, until
they tasted of Our wrath. Say: "Have ye any (certain) knowledge? If so,
produce it before us. Ye follow nothing but conjecture: ye do nothing
but lie."

P: They who are idolaters will say: Had Allah willed, we had not
ascribed (unto Him) partners neither had our fathers, nor had we
forbidden aught. Thus did those who were before them give the lie (to
Allah's messengers) till they tasted of the fear of Us. Say: Have ye
any knowledge that ye can adduce for Us? Lo! ye follow naught but an
opinion, Lo! ye do but guess.

S: Those who are polytheists will say: If Allah had pleased we would not
have associated (aught with Him) nor our fathers, nor would we have
forbidden (to ourselves) anything; even so did those before them reject
until they tasted Our punishment. Say: Have you any knowledge with you
so you should bring it forth to us? You only follow a conjecture and
you only tell lies.

006.149
Y: Say: "With Allah is the argument that reaches home: if it had been
His will, He could indeed have guided you all."

P: Say - For Allah's is the final argument - Had He willed He could
indeed have guided all of you.

S: Say: Then Allah's is the conclusive argument; so if He please, He
would certainly guide you all.

006.150
Y: Say: "Bring forward your witnesses to prove that Allah did forbid so
and so." If they bring such witnesses, be not thou amongst them: Nor
follow thou the vain desires of such as treat our signs as falsehoods,
and such as believe not in the Hereafter: for they hold others as equal
with their Guardian-Lord.

P: Say: Come, bring your witnesses who can bear witness that Allah
forbade (all) this. And if they bear witness, do not thou bear witness
with them. Follow thou not the whims of those who deny Our revelations,
those who believe not in the Hereafter and deem (others) equal with
their Lord.

S: Say: Bring your witnesses who should bear witness that Allah has
forbidden this, then if they bear witness, do not bear witness with
them; and follow not the low desires of those who reject Our
communications and of those who do not believe in the hereafter, and
they make (others) equal to their Lord.

006.151
Y: Say: "Come, I will rehearse what Allah hath (really) prohibited you
from": Join not anything as equal with Him; be good to your parents;
kill not your children on a plea of want;- We provide sustenance for
you and for them;- come not nigh to shameful deeds. Whether open or
secret; take not life, which Allah hath made sacred, except by way of
justice and law: thus doth He command you, that ye may learn wisdom.

P: Say: Come, I will recite unto you that which your Lord hath made a
sacred duty for you: That ye ascribe no thing as partner unto Him and
that ye do good to parents, and that ye slay not your children because
of penury - We provide for you and for them - and that ye draw not nigh
to lewd things whether open or concealed. And that ye slay not the life
which Allah hath made sacred, save in the course of justice. This He
hath command you, in order that ye may discern.

S: Say: Come I will recite what your Lord has forbidden to you--
(remember) that you do not associate anything with Him and show
kindness to your parents, and do not slay your children for (fear of)
poverty-- We provide for you and for them-- and do not draw nigh to
indecencies, those of them which are apparent and those which are
concealed, and do not kill the soul which Allah has forbidden except
for the requirements of justice; this He has enjoined you with that you
may understand.

006.152
Y: And come not nigh to the orphan's property, except to improve it,
until he attain the age of full strength; give measure and weight with
(full) justice;- no burden do We place on any soul, but that which it
can bear;- whenever ye speak, speak justly, even if a near relative is
concerned; and fulfil the covenant of Allah: thus doth He command you,
that ye may remember.

P: And approach not the wealth of the orphan save with that which is
better, till he reach maturity. Give full measure and full weight, in
justice. We task not any soul beyond its scope. And if ye give your
word, do justice thereunto, even though it be (against) a kinsman; and
fulfil the covenant of Allah. This He commandeth you that haply ye may
remember.

S: And do not approach the property of the orphan except in the best
manner until he attains his maturity, and give full measure and weight
with justice-- We do not impose on any soul a duty except to the extent
of its ability; and when you speak, then be just though it be (against)
a relative, and fulfill Allah's covenant; this He has enjoined you with
that you may be mindful;

006.153
Y: Verily, this is My way, leading straight: follow it: follow not
(other) paths: they will scatter you about from His (great) path: thus
doth He command you, that ye may be righteous.

P: And (He commandeth you, saying): This is My straight path, so follow
it. Follow not other ways, lest ye be parted from His way. This hath He
ordained for you, that ye may ward off (evil).

S: And (know) that this is My path, the right one therefore follow it,
and follow not (other) ways, for they will lead you away from His way;
this He has enjoined you with that you may guard (against evil).

006.154
Y: Moreover, We gave Moses the Book, completing (Our favour) to those
who would do right, and explaining all things in detail,- and a guide
and a mercy, that they might believe in the meeting with their Lord.

P: Again, We gave the Scripture unto Moses, complete for him who would
do good, an explanation of all things, a guidance and a mercy, that
they might believe in the meeting with their Lord.

S: Again, We gave the Book to Musa to complete (Our blessings) on him
who would do good (to others), and making plain all things and a
guidance and a mercy, so that they should believe in the meeting of
their Lord.

006.155
Y: And this is a Book which We have revealed as a blessing: so follow it
and be righteous, that ye may receive mercy:

P: And this is a blessed Scripture which We have revealed. So follow it
and ward off (evil), that ye may find mercy.

S: And this is a Book We have revealed, blessed; therefore follow it and
guard (against evil) that mercy may be shown to you.

006.156
Y: Lest ye should say: "The Book was sent down to two Peoples before us,
and for our part, we remained unacquainted with all that they learned
by assiduous study:"

P: Lest ye should say: The Scripture was revealed only to two sects
before us, and we in sooth were unaware of what they read;

S: Lest you say that the Book was only revealed to two parties before us
and We were truly unaware of what they read.

006.157
Y: Or lest ye should say: "If the Book had only been sent down to us, we
should have followed its guidance better than they." Now then hath come
unto you a clear (sign) from your Lord,- and a guide and a mercy: then
who could do more wrong than one who rejecteth Allah's signs, and
turneth away therefrom? In good time shall We requite those who turn
away from Our signs, with a dreadful penalty, for their turning away.

P: Or lest ye should say: If the Scripture had been revealed unto us, we
surely had been better guided than are they. Now hath there come unto
you a clear proof from your Lord, a guidance and mercy; and who doeth
greater wrong than he who denieth the revelations of Allah, and turneth
away from them? We award unto those who turn away from Our revelations
an evil doom because of their aversion.

S: Or lest you should say: If the Book had been revealed to us, we would
certainly have been better guided than they, so indeed there has come
to you clear proof from your Lord, and guidance and mercy. Who then is
more unjust than he who rejects Allah's communications and turns away
from them? We will reward those who turn away from Our communications
with an evil chastisement because they turned away.

006.158
Y: Are they waiting to see if the angels come to them, or thy Lord
(Himself), or certain of the signs of thy Lord! the day that certain of
the signs of thy Lord do come, no good will it do to a soul to believe
in them then if it believed not before nor earned righteousness through
its faith. Say: "Wait ye: we too are waiting."

P: Wait they, indeed, for nothing less than that the angels should come
unto them, or thy Lord should come, or there should come one of the
portents from thy Lord? In the day when one of the portents from thy
Lord cometh, its belief availeth naught a soul which theretofore
believed not, nor in its belief earned good (by works). Say: Wait ye!
Lo! We (too) are waiting.

S: They do not wait aught but that the angels should come to them, or
that your Lord should come, or that some of the signs of your Lord
should come. On the day when some of the signs of your Lord shall come,
its faith shall not profit a soul which did not believe before, or earn
good through its faith. Say: Wait; we too are waiting.

006.159
Y: As for those who divide their religion and break up into sects, thou
hast no part in them in the least: their affair is with Allah: He will
in the end tell them the truth of all that they did.

P: Lo! As for those who sunder their religion and become schismatics, no
concern at all hast thou with them. Their case will go to Allah, Who
then will tell them what they used to do.

S: Surely they who divided their religion into parts and became sects,
you have no concern with them; their affair is only with Allah, then He
will inform them of what they did.

006.160
Y: He that doeth good shall have ten times as much to his credit: He
that doeth evil shall only be recompensed according to his evil: no
wrong shall be done unto (any of) them.

P: Whoso bringeth a good deed will receive tenfold the like thereof,
while whoso bringeth an ill-deed will be awarded but the like thereof;
and they will not be wronged.

S: Whoever brings a good deed, he shall have ten like it, and whoever
brings an evil deed, he shall be recompensed only with the like of it,
and they shall not be dealt with unjustly.

006.161
Y: Say: "Verily, my Lord hath guided me to a way that is straight,- a
religion of right,- the path (trod) by Abraham the true in Faith, and
he (certainly) joined not gods with Allah."

P: Say: Lo! As for me, my Lord hath guided me unto a straight path, a
right religion, the community of Abraham, the upright, who was no
idolater.

S: Say: Surely, (as for) me, my Lord has guided me to the right path;
(to) a most right religion, the faith of Ibrahim the upright one, and
he was not of the polytheists.

006.162
Y: Say: "Truly, my prayer and my service of sacrifice, my life and my
death, are (all) for Allah, the Cherisher of the Worlds:"

P: Say: Lo! my worship and my sacrifice and my living and my dying are
for Allah, Lord of the Worlds.

S: Say. Surely my prayer and my sacrifice and my life and my death are
(all) for Allah, the Lord of the worlds;

006.163
Y: No partner hath He: this am I commanded, and I am the first of those
who bow to His will.

P: He hath no partner. This am I commanded, and I am first of those who
surrender (unto Him).

S: No associate has He; and this am I commanded, and I am the first of
those who submit.

006.164
Y: Say: "Shall I seek for (my) Cherisher other than Allah, when He is
the Cherisher of all things (that exist)? Every soul draws the meed of
its acts on none but itself: no bearer of burdens can bear of burdens
can bear the burden of another. Your goal in the end is towards Allah:
He will tell you the truth of the things wherein ye disputed."

P: Say: Shall I seek another than Allah for Lord, when He is Lord of all
things? Each soul earneth only on its own account, nor doth any laden
bear another's load. Then unto your Lord is your return and He will
tell you that wherein ye differed.

S: Say: What! shall I seek a Lord other than Allah? And He is the Lord
of all things; and no soul earns (evil) but against itself, and no
bearer of burden shall bear the burden of another; then to your Lord is
your return, so He will inform you of that in which you differed.

006.165
Y: It is He Who hath made you (His) agents, inheritors of the earth: He
hath raised you in ranks, some above others: that He may try you in the
gifts He hath given you: for thy Lord is quick in punishment: yet He is
indeed Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: He it is Who hath placed you as viceroys of the earth and hath
exalted some of you in rank above others, that He may try you by (the
test of) that which He hath given you. Lo! Thy Lord is swift in
prosecution, and Lo! He verily is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: And He it is Who has made you successors in the land and raised some
of you above others by (various) grades, that He might try you by what
He has given you; surely your Lord is quick to requite (evil), and He
is most surely the Forgiving, the Merciful.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 7:

                           AL-ARAF (THE HEIGHTS)
 Total Verses: 206 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

007.001
Y: Alif, Lam, Mim, Sad.

P: Alif. Lam. Mim. Sad.

S: Alif Lam Mim Suad.

007.002
Y: A Book revealed unto thee,- So let thy heart be oppressed no more by
any difficulty on that account,- that with it thou mightest warn (the
erring) and teach the Believers.

P: (It is) a Scripture that is revealed unto thee (Muhammad) - so let
there be no heaviness in thy heart therefrom - that thou mayst warn
thereby, and (it is) a Reminder unto believers.

S: A Book revealed to you-- so let there be no straitness in your breast
on account of it-- that you may warn thereby, and a reminder close to
the believers.

007.003
Y: Follow (O men!) the revelation given unto you from your Lord, and
follow not, as friends or protectors, other than Him. Little it is ye
remember of admonition.

P: (Saying): Follow that which is sent down unto you from your Lord, and
follow no protecting friends beside Him. Little do ye recollect!

S: Follow what has been revealed to you from your Lord and do not follow
guardians besides Him, how little do you mind.

007.004
Y: How many towns have We destroyed (for their sins)? Our punishment
took them on a sudden by night or while they slept for their afternoon
rest.

P: How many a township have We destroyed! As a raid by night, or while
they slept at noon, Our terror came unto them.

S: And how many a town that We destroyed, so Our punishment came to it
by night or while they slept at midday.

007.005
Y: When (thus) Our punishment took them, no cry did they utter but this:
"Indeed we did wrong."

P: No plea had they, when Our terror came unto them, save that they
said: Lo! We were wrong-doers.

S: Yet their cry, when Our punishment came to them, was nothing but that
they said: Surely we were unjust.

007.006
Y: Then shall we question those to whom Our message was sent and those
by whom We sent it.

P: Then verily We shall question those unto whom (Our message) hath been
sent, and verily We shall question the messengers.

S: Most certainly then We will question those to whom (the messengers)
were sent, and most certainly We will also question the messengers;

007.007
Y: And verily, We shall recount their whole story with knowledge, for We
were never absent (at any time or place).

P: Then verily We shall narrate unto them (the event) with knowledge,
for We were not absent (when it came to pass).

S: Then most certainly We will relate to them with knowledge, and We
were not absent.

007.008
Y: The balance that day will be true (to nicety): those whose scale (of
good) will be heavy, will prosper:

P: The weighing on that day is the true (weighing). As for those whose
scale is heavy, they are the successful.

S: And the measuring out on that day will be just; then as for him whose
measure (of good deeds) is heavy, those are they who shall be
successful;

007.009
Y: Those whose scale will be light, will be their souls in perdition,
for that they wrongfully treated Our signs.

P: And as for those whose scale is light: those are they who lose their
souls because they used to wrong Our revelations.

S: And as for him whose measure (of good deeds) is light those are they
who have made their souls suffer loss because they disbelieved in Our
communications.

007.010
Y: It is We Who have placed you with authority on earth, and provided
you therein with means for the fulfilment of your life: small are the
thanks that ye give!

P: And We have given you (mankind) power in the earth, and appointed for
you therein livelihoods. Little give ye thanks!

S: And certainly We have established you in the earth and made in it
means of livelihood for you; little it is that you give thanks.

007.011
Y: It is We Who created you and gave you shape; then We bade the angels
prostrate to Adam, and they prostrate; not so Iblis; He refused to be
of those who prostrate.

P: And We created you, then fashioned you, then told the angels: Fall ye
prostrate before Adam! And they fell prostrate, all save Iblis, who was
not of those who make prostration.

S: And certainly We created you, then We fashioned you, then We said to
the angels: Prostrate to Adam. So they did prostrate except Iblis; he
was not of those who prostrated.

007.012
Y: (Allah) said: "What prevented thee from prostrating when I commanded
thee?" He said: "I am better than he: Thou didst create me from fire,
and him from clay."

P: He said: What hindered thee that thou didst not fall prostrate when I
bade thee? (Iblis) said: I am better than him. Thou createdst me of
fire while him Thou didst create of mud.

S: He said: What hindered you so that you did not prostrate when I
commanded you? He said: I am better than he: Thou hast created me of
fire, while him Thou didst create of dust.

007.013
Y: (Allah) said: "Get thee down from this: it is not for thee to be
arrogant here: get out, for thou art of the meanest (of creatures)."

P: He said: Then go down hence! It is not for thee to show pride here,
so go forth! Lo! thou art of those degraded.

S: He said: Then get forth from this (state), for it does not befit you
to behave proudly therein. Go forth, therefore, surely you are of the
abject ones.

007.014
Y: He said: "Give me respite till the day they are raised up."

P: He said: Reprieve me till the day when they are raised (from the
dead).

S: He said: Respite me until the day when they are raised up.

007.015
Y: (Allah) said: "Be thou among those who have respite."

P: He said: Lo! thou art of those reprieved.

S: He said: Surely you are of the respited ones.
