has? Is this the way to keep the Church at Amoy sound and pure? It
seems to be supposed by some that the Missionaries desire to be
separated from the control of the Church at home. This is altogether a
mistake, and another result of withholding their views from the public.
They have no such desire. The contrary is altogether the fact. They do
not desire to be placed under the control of the native Chinese
churches. They did not derive their authority from those churches, they
are not sustained by them, and they are in no sense their agents, but
they derive their authority through, are sustained by, and are
altogether the agents of the Church in this country; therefore the
Church at home has and should retain control over them. They are
amenable to the Church at home, through their several Classes. These are
the only courts qualified to take cognizance of their doctrines and
morals. They desire to remain in this relation. We think they have a
right to demand this, until such time as they become agents of the
Church in China, instead of the Church in America.

Suppose by some means suspicion should arise at home concerning the
orthodoxy or morality of one or more of your Missionaries. On the plan
proposed, what can the Church do with them? May the Board of Missions,
on mere report or suspicion, recall them without giving them a proper
trial? Can the Board try them? No. It is not an ecclesiastical court.
Will the Church be satisfied with the decision of a court, a majority of
whose members have recently been converted from heathenism through the
instrumentality of these very Missionaries? But continue the plan of the
Missionaries and all will be simple. If any of the Missionaries give
occasion for suspicion, let them be tried by their proper Classes in
this country. This is all that the Church at home can do
_ecclesiastically_ towards keeping the Church pure in China. Whether
the proposed _nominal_ union be consummated or not, the only hold you
will have on the Chinese churches will be through your Missionaries. If
they will not receive the instructions, and listen to the advice of your
Missionaries and of the Synod through them, you would not expect them to
obey the injunctions of Synod. Your only other resort will be to
withhold from them help. Can you not do the same now?

But in all this discussion, I fear, we lose sight too much of our
dependence on the Head of the Church to keep His Church pure. Sure I am
that the Church in China cannot be kept pure by legislation on this, the
opposite side of the globe. But we expect Christ to reign over, and the
Holy Spirit to be given to the churches, and the proper ecclesiastical
bodies formed of them in China as well as in this land. Why not? Such
are the promises of God. The way to secure these things is by prayer,
and the preaching of the pure gospel, not by legislation. Let the Church
be careful in her selection of Missionaries. Send only such as she has
confidence in--men of God, sound in the faith, apt to teach--and then
trust them, or recall them. Don't attempt to control them contrary to
their judgment. Strange if this, which is so much insisted on as the
policy of our Church, be right, that she cannot get a single man, of all
she sends out to China, to think so. Can it be that the Missionary work
is so subversive of right reason, or of correct judgment, or of
conscientiousness, that all become perverted by engaging in it?

2. Another supposed advantage is the effect it will have in enlisting
the sympathies of the Church in behalf of the Mission at Amoy. It is
said, tell the Church that we have a flourishing Classis at Amoy, a part
of ourselves, connected with General Synod, just like all the other
Classes of our Church, the effect will be wonderful in enlisting
sympathy, money, and men in behalf of that Mission; otherwise the
opposite evil must be apprehended. If these things be so, they are
indeed of grave importance. The Mission in China cannot live without the
sympathy of the Church at home. But are these things so? It seems to us
that the supposition takes for granted that our Church in its Missionary
work is influenced by a desire for self-glory, or self-gratification;
or, at least, that she is not a Church of liberal views--that she is not
at all to be compared, in this respect, with the English Presbyterian
Church, or the Free Church of Scotland. Allusion has already been made
to the liberality of the English Presbyterian Church. I may now also
remark that a large amount of the funds for carrying on the work at Amoy
is raised in Scotland from members of the Free Church. They never had
any idea that the churches gathered in China were to be a part of their
own Church. They do not even ask that they be a part of their sister
Church in England. They only ask that they shall be sound in the faith
and hold to the essentials of Presbyterianism, even though they have
some characteristics peculiar to the Dutch and other Reformed Churches.
These Presbyterian brethren in England and Scotland are not only ready
to support their own Missionaries in their work of building up the
churches under their especial care, but they stand ready to assist the
Missionaries of our Church in building up the churches under our
especial care. Of their frequent offers to assist us, when they feared
we should be in want of funds, our Board can bear testimony. We are not
yet willing to believe that our people are a people of narrow views in a
matter like this. It is contrary to our history in time past. It is
contrary to the facts of the present day. It is contrary to all my
observation among our churches. Our people do not first ask whether it
be building _ourselves_ up, before they sympathize with a benevolent
object. We believe the contrary is the exact truth. It requires a
liberal policy to call forth liberal views and action. As regards the
enlisting of men, look at the facts. Every man who has gone out from
among you, to engage in this Missionary work, begs of you not to adopt a
narrow policy. So in regard to obtaining of funds. Usually, the men who
are most liberal in giving are most liberal in feeling. This must be so
in the very nature of things. The way to alienate the sympathies of the
Church from the Mission at Amoy is to divide the Church there by a
sectarian policy; and the way to enlist her sympathies is to continue
the former plan, and let the work go forward with the Divine blessing as
in days past. The people will be more encouraged, and praise God more
heartily, when you tell them of six organized churches like our own, and
many others growing up all around, than they will if you tell them of
only three churches, and only a few out-stations, under our care. They
will not object to hear that the English Presbyterian brethren are
laboring with us, and organizing churches so nearly like our own.
However powerful the motive addressed to the desire to build up our own
Church, there are motives infinitely more powerful. Such are the motives
to be depended on in endeavoring to elevate the standard of liberality
among our people.

Let brethren in the Ministry try the experiment, and tell their people
of the wonders of God's grace:--that he has led his servants from our
own Church in this land, and from the Presbyterian Church in Great
Britain, in their work of evangelizing the heathen, and laying the
foundation of the Church of Christ, to lay aside all national
animosities, and rise above all denominational prejudices and
jealousies--that he has given to the Presbyterian Church in England,
and the sister Church in Scotland, a spirit of catholicity and
liberality as exhibited in the previous part of this paper--and that, as
a consequence, he is causing his Church to grow up in the region of Amoy
in beautiful proportions, all the congregations under their care and
ours also manifesting the same spirit of catholicity and liberality,
submitting to each other according to the Divine command, working
together with the utmost harmony, and, as a consequence, with wonderful
effectiveness. Can you account for such things except by the energy of
the Spirit of God? Surely it is not the spirit of the world, neither is
it the spirit of the devil. Try the experiment, then, and see whether
the wonders of God's grace will alienate the hearts of his people. Your
Missionaries have no doubt--we can hardly understand how any who examine
the subject can doubt--we are sure that no one can personally behold the
work and yet doubt, that the wonderful blessing of God, which has
accompanied the work at Amoy, has been both the cause and the result of
this harmonious labor on the part of your Missionaries, and those from
the sister Churches in England and Scotland. Therefore, we feel assured
that the simple recital of the grace of God thus manifested, must
influence the hearts of his people most powerfully, and therefore it is
that we beseech the Church not to interfere with, and hinder the work of
God. May we not refer, without being charged with disrespect, to the
Synod of Jerusalem as a proper example for our General Synod? Peter
says, "Why tempt ye God to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples,
which neither we nor our fathers were able to bear?" And then the
decree, which the Synod sent to the Churches, runs thus: "It seemed good
to the Holy Ghost and to us, to lay upon you no greater burden than
these _necessary_ things." The ecclesiastical "power which the Lord
hath given" to his Church is "to _edification_, and not to
_destruction_."

If the Missionaries be allowed to proceed in building up a Church, like
our own, simply with reference to the evangelization of China, doubtless
brethren in the ministry, and other influential men, could take occasion
therefrom to prejudice the Churches against our work. They could do
this, if they were so disposed, without any such occasion. But will they
do it? We cannot believe that they will. They love the cause of Christ
too well, and desire to see the world converted to God too ardently, to
permit them to throw any obstacles in the way of our work, even though
that work be not carried forward in the manner which they consider
altogether the best. If we are right, these brethren will soon see that
we are right, and however powerful the motive to be addressed to the
desire of extending our own Church, they will find infinitely more
powerful motives to be addressed to a more noble desire of the Christian
heart. If our people have not yet learned, they should be taught to
engage in the work of evangelizing the world, not for the sake of our
Church in America, but for the sake of Christ and His Church, and when
the Church thus built up is like our own, they should be fully
satisfied. We believe they will be satisfied with this.

3. The only other supposed advantage I can now think of, is the
advantage of carrying out the _policy_ of our Church. This, in itself
considered, might be regarded worthy of but little attention.
Cannot--ought not--the Church change her policy if wrong, or if a better
can be adopted? Surely her laws are not like those of the Medes and
Persians. But the argument has been used with so much earnestness and
perseverance, both in the Reports of the Committees and in the
discussions in Synod, that it demands some investigation. Instead of
the course pursued by the Missionaries being, as it is contended,
contrary to, it is the true policy of our Church--the policy in
existence long before the decision of 1857. If the course now required
of them be the present policy of our Church, it is a _mistaken_ policy,
contrary to the very genius of our institutions, and ought to be
corrected. It is so contrary to our time-honored Constitution that
either it or the Constitution must be sacrificed. In order to save the
policy it was found necessary during the past year to amend the
Constitution by a clause so sweeping, that if the circumstances of a
Missionary Classis require it, "_all the ordinary requirements of the
Constitution_" may be dispensed with by the General Synod. Can it be
that a policy which requires _such constitutional changes_ can be the
old and proper policy of our Church? But if the policy be continued we
are not yet done with changes. The very _name_ of our Church must be
changed. It now is "The Reformed Protestant Dutch Church _in North
America_." We must expunge the words "_in North America_," or must add
India, China, and Japan, and every other country where the Church may
undertake Missionary work. We know it has been said of this policy, "it
is our _settled, irreversible_ policy." Is every thing then to be
regarded as _unsettled_ and _changeable_ but this policy of the Church?
We answer, No. The Church may change her name, if she please, as she has
changed her Constitution. Or she may change her policy. But there are
certain fundamental principles of Church government which she may not
change. Hence, even yet, the principles for which the Missionaries
contend must remain the true policy of our Church, for they lie at the
very foundation of Presbyterial order. A full discussion of this subject
will come up most naturally when we discuss the _evils_ of the course
now required of us. I will now allude to only one fact. The Board of
Foreign Missions was formed on this principle. If the Classes at Arcot
and Amoy are to be considered _integral_ parts of the Church in this
country, related to General Synod like the Classes in this country, then
the Missionaries at those stations properly should come under the Board
of Domestic Missions. Suppose, according to the new plan, the
Missionaries form themselves into the kind of Classis now required of
them; what will be the relation of the Classis of Amoy to the Board of
Foreign Missions? Is the Classis, in evangelizing the heathen around, to
operate through the Board, or the Board through the Classis? The Classis
at Amoy decide on a certain course of ecclesiastical procedure, or
evangelistic labor, and the Board decides on another course; how is such
a matter to be settled? Will it be said, there is no danger of such
difficulty? The Classis and Board will both be composed of men with
infirmities. Ask the Board whether there have not already been incipient
difficulties, in the supposed clashing of the powers of the Board and
the powers of the Classis of Arcot. But the Classis of Arcot as yet is
little more than an _American Missionary Classis_. What will be the
difficulties when it becomes an _Indian_ Classis? But we are told, "keep
the Mission and Classis distinct." Is the Mission, then, to attend to
all the evangelistic work, and the Classis to do nothing? Or are there
to be two distinct evangelistic policies carried on at Amoy, the one by
the Mission, and the other by the Classis? Or is the Classis first to
come over to the Synod, and so get to the Board in order to carry on the
work around? Instead of this new plan being the settled policy of our
Church, we believe it to be a solecism. When a Church is established
among the heathen after our order, then is the true policy of our Church
carried out. Let the present relations of the Missionaries to the Board
and to their several Classes remain, and there will be no occasion for
the clashing of the powers of the Board with those of any
ecclesiastical body.

So much for the _advantages_. They are really disadvantages, leading to
_serious evils_, which of themselves should be sufficient to deter the
Church from inaugurating the policy proposed, or, if it be already
inaugurated, to lead her to retrace her steps, and adopt a better and a
consistent policy.

Now let us consider the real or supposed _Evils_ (in addition to the
above) of carrying out the decision of Synod.

1. It will not be for the credit of our Church. She now has a name, with
other Churches, for putting forth efforts to evangelize the world. Shall
she mar this good name and acquire one for sectarianism, by putting
forth efforts to extend _herself_, not her doctrines and order;--they
are not sectarian, and her Missionaries esteem them as highly as do
their brethren at home--but _herself_, even at the cost of dividing
churches which the grace of God has made one?

The decision of the last Synod may not be the result of sectarianism
among the people of our Church. We do not think it is. But it will be
difficult to convince our Presbyterian brethren and others, that it is
not so. By way of illustration I will suppose a case. A. is engaged in a
very excellent work. B. comes to him, and the following dialogue ensues:

B. "Friend A., I am glad to see you engaged in so excellent a work. I
also have concluded to engage in it. I should be glad to work with you.
You know the proverbs, 'Union is strength,' and 'Two are better than
one.'"

A. "Yes, yes, friend B, I know these proverbs and believe them as
thoroughly as you do. But I have a few peculiarities about my way of
working. They are not many, and they are not essential, but I think
they are useful, and wish to work according to them. Therefore, I prefer
working alone."

B. "Yes, friend A., we all have our peculiarities, and, if they be not
carried too far, they may all be made useful. I have been making
inquiries about yours, and I am glad to find they are not nearly so
many, or so different from mine, as you seem to suppose, and as I once
supposed. The fact is, I rather like some of them, and, though I may not
esteem them all so highly as you do, still I am willing to conform to
them; for I am fully persuaded that, in work of this kind, two working
together can do vastly more than two working separately, and the work
will be much better done. Besides this, the social intercourse will be
delightful."

A. "I appreciate, friend B., your politeness, and am well aware that all
you say about the greater efficiency and excellence of united work, and
the delights of social intercourse is perfectly true. But--but--well, I
prefer to work alone."

2. It will be destroying a _real_ unity for the sake of creating one,
which, at the best, can be only _nominal_, and hence will really be a
violation of Presbyterial order. It seems strange to us that it should
be constantly asserted that we are striving to create a formal union
between two bodies which are essentially distinct. There is nothing of
