new birth, and also believe in the salvation of infants.

This being so, it will come to pass that half of the world will be
saved, inasmuch as about that number die in what may be, justly termed
an infant state. But of those, who come to years of accountability,
they believe but few will be saved. So the greater proportion of
those, who will finally surround the throne of God, will be those, who
have never been born again according to their views. It will not, I
presume, be contended, that infants who, they believe, are totally
depraved, ever exercise _faith_, or experience the _new birth_ in this
life.

From the above views, I shall take the liberty to dissent, and may
probably differ some from the expositions given by others. It is
evident that Jesus Christ in his instructions frequently brought
forward some natural facts plainly understood by those whom he
addressed, in order more clearly to illustrate his subject, and then
made his illustrations so nearly resemble that natural fact, that no
man could possible misunderstand him, unless he had been led into
tradition by blind guides. In the context, he makes allusion to
natural birth, of which every man knows the meaning, and says to
Nicodemus, "that which is born of the flesh is flesh, and that which
is born of the spirit is spirit."

Natural birth pre-supposes the perfect formation of the human body by
that secret energy of nature, God only can comprehend. But that
formation, itself, is not birth. Birth is that operation, that
introduced us into this world. We are now flesh and blood, which
cannot inherit the kingdom. What is born of the flesh is flesh. We
must now be born again from mortal to immortality, otherwise we could
not see the kingdom of God.

Must not man be born of a woman in order to see this world? Can he
look upon the beautiful objects of creation, or contemplate these
countless wonders of the Almighty before he is born into being? He
cannot. All without exception will admit, that it is impossible for
any man to enter this natural world, in which we live, without birth.
So it is equally impossible to enter the kingdom of God without being
born _again_ in the strictest sense of the word. A man cannot "be born
again" ten, or twenty years, nor even _one day_ before he sees the
kingdom of God, any more than he could be born twenty days before he
came forth out of the womb. As natural birth cannot take place any
given time before we enter this world, but is the _circumstance_ that
introduces us, so a _second birth_ cannot take place any given time
before we enter the kingdom of God in the next world but is the _very
thing_, that shall introduce us into it; and the moment we are born
again, we shall see it,--we shall be spirit, and beyond the dominion
of death and sin. He that is born of the flesh, _is flesh_, so long as
he lives; and he that is born of the spirit _is spirit_. As we now
"bear the image of the earthly" through a _natural_ birth, "so we
shall also bear the image of the heavenly" through a _spiritual_
birth. And as no man in this world is a spirit, so no man has in
reality passed the new birth. When we were born into this world, we
were brought from insensibility to an existence entirely new. So in
order to enter the kingdom of God, which is not of this world, we must
be born again from the insensibility of death into a new and happy
existence beyond the grave.

The question now arises, when does this new birth take place? We reply
when this mortal puts on immortality through a resurrection. When we
shall be aroused from the sleep of death to a precipient existence in
heaven--when we shall awake satisfied with the likeness of God. Paul,
in the xv. Chap. 1 Cor. Plainly states that the spiritual body is
prepared and put on after death. Birth then must _follow_, not
_precede_ that spiritual body. It is impossible that birth should take
place, till the body is first prepared. Man's natural body is
organized in the womb, and then born into this world. He drops to a
state of insensibility in death, a reorganization of the spiritual
body takes place to the natural eye imperceptible, and its nature
indestructible. It is gradually brought forward through a resurrection
similar to the grain of wheat to which Paul compares it, is awakened
to a conscious existence, and bears the image of the heavenly as it
once bore the image of the earthy. The resurrection is therefore every
moment progressing, and every man is raised in his own order of time.

But says the reader, if the resurrection be the new birth, then
Christ, himself must have been born again, in order to enter the
kingdom of God! Certainly. But inquires the reader, where do the
scriptures teach that Christ was ever born again? In Colossians chap.
i:15. are these words--"Who [Christ] is the image of the invisible
God, the _first born_ of every creature." This cannot mean that he was
the first born into this state of existence; but he was the first one
whom human eyes ever saw alive beyond the destruction of death to die
no more, and the only one that mortal eye will ever see, for he arose
in his natural body, (being the only true witness, appointed of God,)
to bring life and immortality to light through the gospel.

But that passage, says the reader, does not satisfy me, that Christ
was born again. Then listen once more--verse 18--"who is the
beginning, the _first born_ from the dead that in all things he might
have the pre-eminence." Rev. chap. i. 5. "Jesus Christ the faithful
witness, and the _first begotten_ from the dead." Here it is plainly
stated that he is the "first born from the dead" "the _first begotten_
from the dead" These scriptures in connexion with several others, that
might be quoted, prove that Christ was born again, and that the
resurrection is called birth.

It is evident that man falls to a state of insensibility in death, and
remains in sleep while the spiritual body is forming out of those
subtle materials, that at death pass into _hades_; and when the
reorganization is completed, the new being is born into the kingdom of
immortal glory. A drowning man, we know, falls to a state of
unconsciousness. Fainting--yes, even a night's sleep proves that the
mind is susceptible of falling into insensibility, or suspending its
mental operations, and disproves the notion of its entering a future
state, only through a resurrection of the dead. This fact is not only
substantiated by reason, but it is the doctrine of Revelation. The
wise man says, "the dead know not any thing." Paul, in the xv. Chap. 1
Cor. Predicates the truth of our resurrection on the fact that Christ
rose from the dead; and on this ground he reasons, that if there be no
resurrection, then preaching is vain, faith is also vain, the
christians were yet in their sins, and they that were fallen asleep in
Christ were perished, and concludes by saying, "let us eat, drink, for
tomorrow we die." Suppose a christian should this moment die, and,
according to common opinion, enter immediately on an immortal
existence. Could we now say--if there be no resurrection, he is fallen
asleep in Christ and perished? No, because, instead of being perished,
i.e. _Annihilated_, he would remain in infinite happiness and glory,
even if there should, never, be any resurrection. So you perceive that
Paul did not believe any one could enter eternity only through a
resurrection. He believed, they would fall asleep in Christ, and in
that sleep remain till in Christ they were made alive. He embraces the
whole in the following words--"Since by man came death, by man came
also the resurrection of the dead."

When the sentence of death was pronounced upon Adam, which was to pass
upon all men, the promise of a Saviour then made, was, it appears, not
understood. Their posterity looked forward for a temporal king, and
had no idea of an immortal existence beyond the "narrow house." Death
the king of terrors, was not yet disarmed of his sting by the
resurrection of our triumphant Redeemer. This truth was not yet
revealed to men. Here the human family were without hope, and
trembling at the darkness--the seven fold darkness of the tomb. No ray
of light and joy beamed from that cheerless mansion to ease the aching
heart, or dispel that melancholy gloom, which pervaded the parental
bosom when gazing for the last time upon the struggles of a dying
child.

Here was a world born into existence under the certain sentence of
death, and groaning in the bondage of corruption, without any hope of
being delivered from it, by an immortal birth, "into the glorious
liberty of the children of God." In this period of anxiety and
distress, the glad tidings were proclaimed to the shepherds on the
plains of Judea, announcing the birth of the Saviour of the world. A
new birth, which is not mentioned in the old Testament, was at length
proclaimed by a Saviour in the _new_. He died on the cross, and was
"the first born from the dead."

He is the head of every man, by the grace of God tasted death for
every man, and rose again for their justification. The scriptures
declare that "we shall be saved by his life" that he is "the bread of
God that cometh down from heaven and giveth life to the world." He is
our way, our truth and life, and "because he lives we shall live
also." "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made
alive," or born from the dead. And he that is made alive in Christ is
a new creature, old things are passed away--all things are become new.

But says the reader, though the resurrection of Jesus is set forth by
a birth from death, yet the resurrection of the human family is never
so represented. You mistake. Out of the many passage that might be
adduced, we have room, in this discourse, for only one. It shall,
however, be satisfactory. In Romans, 8th chapter, Paul says, "Because
the creature itself also, shall be delivered from the bondage of
corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God; for we
know that the whole creation groaneth and travaileth in pain together
until now." [We would remark, that the word _creature, is ktisis_ in
the Greek, and is the same that is rendered _creation_ in the next
verse.] In this quotation, you perceive, that Paul represents the
whole creation as groaning in travail pains, and declares that the
whole creation shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into
the glorious liberty of the sons of God. He compares them to a woman
in pain ready for delivery; and that they are delivered from
corruption to incorruption at the resurrection is certain. [See 1 Cor.
xv:42.]

You now understand what I mean by the new birth. It is to pass from
death to life and immortality, in Christ, beyond the grave, where
flesh and blood can never enter. For that which is born of the flesh
is flesh, and that which is born of the spirit is spirit.

We have now pointed out the new birth, and shown that it bears some
resemblance to the natural birth, with which Jesus compared it. And
how truly sublime and cheering the thought, that the great family of
man, who are all born into existence under the certain sentence of
death, are to receive a second birth into an existence entirely new,
and the whole of his dying family are to be made the children of Jesus
Christ by adoption.

In our next, we shall notice the change we experience in this life,
called in scripture the new birth, and explain the term, "kingdom of
God."

SERMON IX

"Jesus answered and said unto him, verily, verily, I say unto thee,
except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God." John
iii. 3.

In our last, we have shown, that the _spiritual_ birth bears some
resemblance to a natural birth with which Jesus compared it--and as
the _first_ introduces us into this world, so the _second_ will
introduce us into the future and immortal world at the resurrection,
where we shall be as the angels of God in heaven, and "be the
_children_ of God _being the children of the resurrection_." There we
shall be completely free from sin and pain. There the gushing tear of
sorrow shall cease to flow, and the brow of disconsolate humanity be
ruffled no more.

We will now attend to the present effects that the truth of this birth
has upon us here, and notice at the same the phrase, "_kingdom of
God_."

The question now arises; do not some experience the new birth in this
life? They do. But in what sense do they experience it? Ans. By
_faith_. In this world we pass from death to life: not that we have
actually been in the grave and brought to life beyond it; but the
believer experiences this by faith. And _this faith_ has a most
powerful and happifying influence on his affections, and consequently
on his life and conduct. All, that God has revealed for the salvation
of the world--our justification, our sanctification, our new birth,
our heaven, our all--yes, all these important and heavenly changes are
summed up, and embraced in our immortal resurrection, will actually
take place through death; and while in this world we can embrace them,
_only by faith_.

The scriptures declare that "we walk by faith and, not by sight." Paul
says, "the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of
the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me." Paul knew that
he had eternal life given him in Christ, before the world began, and
faith in that glorious truth produced a happiness--a divine life in
his heart, called the kingdom of God within. Let us notice these
several points.

1. First; "Christ rose again for our justification." Our justification
then exists in our resurrection state, and will _there_ in all its
reality take place. But cannot a man be justified _here_? Yes; he can
be justified _through faith_ in that truth.

2. Second; "By the which will, we are _sanctified_ through the
offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all." Our
_sanctification_ then, by the will of God, will take place through
death. But cannot a man be _sanctified_ while _here_? Yes; he can be
sanctified _through faith in that truth!_

3. Third; Christ was "put to death in the flesh, but quickened by the
spirit." So in his resurrection he passed from death to life, and thus
revealed the truth that we shall also pass from death to life by the
power of God, and be like him who is the "first fruits." But cannot a
man pass from death to life while on earth? Yes; he can pass from
death to life _through faith in that truth_. Jesus says--"He that
heareth my word and believeth on him that sent me hath everlasting
life and shall not come into condemnation but is passed from death
unto life."

4. Fourth; our eternal life will be realized beyond death. "The things
that are not seen are spiritual and eternal." But can we not enjoy it
_here_? Yes; "He that believeth on the Son _hath_ everlasting life;"--
that is, he enjoys it faith.

5. Fifth; Christ was the "first born from the dead." So we also shall
pass the reality of the new birth by faith. But can we not enjoy it
here? John says--"For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world,
and this is the victory that overcometh world _even our faith_."

Thus it is evident that a man may in this life be _justified,
sanctified_, pass from _death to life, may enjoy eternal life_, and be
_born again_ through faith in _these several correspondent facts_. His
faith, however, can make them no more _certain_; because they _must
exist_, and be solemn and unalterable facts before he can be called
upon to believe them. The truth of the above _five facts_, we
perceive, are embraced in our resurrection. If we are not, in our
resurrection, to be _justified, sanctified, born again_, and obtain
eternal life, then we cannot be _justified, sanctified or born again
here_ through faith in those truths;--because there would be no such
truths in existence for us to exercise faith in. If the objector will
not allow these facts unalterably to exist _previous_ to believing,
what then will he call upon us to believe? Will he call upon us to
believe that we have an eternal life in Christ when no such fact
exists, and contend that our believing this lie will create the fact?
This would be the most ridiculous absurdity.

But the truth exists, and the believer by faith enjoys it before hand.
He enjoys it by anticipation, not in _reality_. It can be brought to
his understanding or experience no other way, only through the gospel
medium of faith. I challenge the objector to show me between the lids
of the new Testament, any regeneration, new birth, justification, or
sanctification, that has already taken place in any other sense than
through faith. All these things in their _reality_ are to take place
in our resurrection, when we shall be like the angels of God and by
faith we bring them present to our minds and enjoy them _here_. Dr.
Watts says--"Faith brings distant prospects home, Of things a thousand
years ago, Or thousand years to come." Paul, therefore, exhorts us to
forget the things that are behind, and reach forward to those that are
before--to press to the mark &c. because the reality--the object of
our faith lies before us. But persons, who do not understand the
operations of faith on the mind in view of its correspondent truth,
and who honestly believe that the new birth has in reality already
taken place with them, are always looking back to the time they were
born again, and telling over their "old experiences" Now this is right
in them, if they have passed through the _reality_; for every man
ought to look to the substance in which he exercises faith and hope.
But certainly the scriptures exhort us to look forward, and anchor our
faith and hope within the vail, where our forerunner hath for us
