
The tune of "Meribah," in which this hymn has been sung for the last
sixty or more years, is one of Dr. Lowell Mason's masterpieces. An
earlier German harmony attributed to Heinrich Isaac and named
"Innsbruck" has in some few cases claimed association with the words,
though composed two hundred years before Lady Huntingdon was born. It is
strong and solemn, but its cold psalm-tune movement does not utter the
deep emotion of the author's lines. "Meribah" was inspired by the hymn
itself, and there is nothing invidious in saying it illustrates the
fact, memorable in all hymnology, of the natural obligation of a hymn to
its tune.

Apropos of both, it is related that Mason was once presiding at choir
service in a certain church where the minister gave out "When thou my
righteous Judge shalt come" and by mistake directed the singers to "omit
the second stanza." Mason sat at the organ, and while playing the last
strain, "Be found at thy right hand," glanced ahead in the hymnbook and
turned with a start just in time to command, "Sing the _next_ verse!"
The choir did so, and "O Lord, prevent it by Thy grace!" was saved from
being a horrible prayer to be kept out of heaven.


ZINZENDORF.

"Jesus, Thy Blood and Righteousness."

Nicolaus Ludwig, Count Von Zinzendorf, was born at Dresden, May 26,
1700, and educated at Halle and Wittenberg. From his youth he evinced
marked seriousness of mind, and deep religious sensibilities, and this
character appeared in his sympathy with the persecuted Moravians, to
whom he gave domicile and domain on his large estate. For eleven years
he was Councillor to the Elector of Saxony, but subsequently, uniting
with the Brethren's Church, he founded the settlement of Herrnhut, the
first home and refuge of the reorganized sect, and became a Moravian
minister and bishop.

Zinzendorf was a man of high culture, as well as profound and sincere
piety and in his hymns (of which he wrote more than two thousand) he
preached Christ as eloquently as with his voice. The real birth-moment
of his religious life is said to have been simultaneous with his study
of the "Ecce Homo" in the Dusseldorf Gallery, a wonderful painting of
Jesus crowned with thorns. Visiting the gallery one day when a young
man, he gazed on the sacred face and read the legend superscribed, "All
this I have done for thee; What doest thou for me?" Ever afterwards his
motto was "I have but one passion, and that is He, and only He"--a
version of Paul's "For me to live is Christ."

    Jesus, Thy blood and righteousness
    My beauty are, my glorious dress:
   'Midst flaming worlds, in these arrayed,
    With joy shall I lift up my head.

    Bold shall I stand in Thy great day,
    For who aught to my charge shall lay?
    Fully absolved through these I am--
    From sin and fear, from guilt and shame.

    Lord, I believe were sinners more
    Than sands upon the ocean shore,
    Thou hast for all a ransom paid,
    For all a full atonement made.

Nearly all the hymns of the great Moravian are now out of general use,
having accomplished their mission, like the forgotten ones of Gerhardt,
and been superseded by others. More sung in Europe, probably, now than
any of the survivors is, "Jesus, geh voran," ("Jesus, lead on,") which
has been translated into English by Jane Borthwick[8] (1854). Two
others, both translated by John Wesley, are with us, the one above
quoted, and "Glory to God, whose witness train." "Jesus, Thy blood,"
which is the best known, frequently appears with the alteration--

    Jesus, Thy _robe_ of righteousness
    My beauty _is_, my glorious dress.

[Footnote 8: Born in Edinburgh 1813.]


_THE TUNE._

"Malvern," and "Uxbridge" a pure Gregorian, both by Lowell Mason, are
common expressions of the hymn--the latter, perhaps, generally
preferred, being less plaintive and speaking with a surer and more
restful emphasis.


ROBERT SEAGRAVE.

"Rise, My Soul, and Stretch Thy Wings."

This hymn was written early in the 18th century, by the Rev. Robert
Seagrave, born at Twyford, Leicestershire, Eng., Nov. 22, 1693. Educated
at Cambridge, he took holy orders in the Established Church, but
espoused the cause of the great evangelistic movement, and became a
hearty co-worker with the Wesleys. Judging by the lyric fire he could
evidently put into his verses, one involuntarily asks if he would not
have written more, and been in fact the song-leader of the spiritual
reformation if there had been no Charles Wesley. There is not a hymn of
Wesley's in use on the same subject equal to the one immortal hymn of
Seagrave, and the only other near its time that approaches it in vigor
and appealing power is Doddridge's "Awake my soul, stretch every nerve."

But Providence gave Wesley the harp and appointed to the elder poet a
branch of possibly equal usefulness, where he was kept too busy to enter
the singers' ranks.

For eleven years he was the Sunday-evening lecturer at Lorimer's Hall,
London, and often preached in Whitefield's Tabernacle. His hymn is one
of the most soul-stirring in the English language:

[Illustration: S. Huntingdon]

    Rise, my soul, and stretch thy wings;
      Thy better portion trace;
    Rise from transitory things
      Toward Heaven, thy native place;
    Sun and moon and stars decay,
      Time shall soon this earth remove;
    Rise, my soul and haste away
      To seats prepared above.

    Rivers to the ocean run,
      Nor stay in all their course;
    Fire ascending seeks the sun;
      Both speed them to their source:
    So a soul that's born of God
      Pants to view His glorious face,
    Upward tends to His abode
      To rest in His embrace.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Cease, ye pilgrims, cease to mourn,
      Press onward to the prize;
    Soon your Saviour will return
      Triumphant in the skies.
    Yet a season, and you know
      Happy entrance will be given;
    All our sorrows left below,
      And earth exchanged for heaven.

This hymn must have found its predestinated organ when it found--


_THE TUNE._

"Amsterdam," the work of James Nares, had its birth and baptism soon
after the work of Seagrave; and they have been breath and bugle to the
church of God ever since they became one song. In _The Great Musicians_,
edited by Francis Huffer, is found this account of James Nares:

"He was born at Hanwell, Middlesex, in 1715; was admitted chorister at
the Chapel Royal, under Bernard Gates, and when he was able to play the
organ was appointed deputy for Pigott, of St. George's Chapel, Windsor,
and became organist at York Minster in 1734. He succeeded Greene as
organist and composer to the Chapel Royal in 1756, and in the same year
was made Doctor of Music at Cambridge. He was appointed master of the
children of the Chapel Royal in 1757, on the death of Gates. This post
he resigned in 1780, and he died in 1783, (February 10,) and was buried
in St. Margaret's Church, Westminster.

"He had the reputation of being an excellent trainer of boy's voices,
many of his anthems having been written to exhibit the accomplishments
of his young pupils. The degree of excellence the boys attained was not
won in those days without the infliction of much corporal punishment."

Judging from the high pulse and action in the music of "Amsterdam," one
would guess the energy of the man who made boy choirs--and made good
ones. In the old time the rule was, "Birds that can sing and won't sing,
must be made to sing"; and the rule was sometimes enforced with the
master's time-stick.

A tune entitled "Excelsius," written a hundred years later by John Henry
Cornell, so nearly resembles "Amsterdam" as to suggest an intention to
amend it. It changes the modal note from G to A, but while it marches
at the same pace it lacks the jubilant modulations and the choral glory
of the 18th-century piece.


SIR JOHN BOWRING.

"In the Cross of Christ I Glory."

In this hymn we see, sitting humbly at the feet of the great author of
our religion, a man who impressed himself perhaps more than any other
save Napoleon Bonaparte upon his own generation, and who was the wonder
of Europe for his immense attainments and the versatility of his powers.
Statesman, philanthropist, biographer, publicist, linguist, historian,
financier, naturalist, poet, political economist--there is hardly a
branch of knowledge or a field of research from which he did not enrich
himself and others, or a human condition that he did not study and
influence.

Sir John Bowring was born in 1792. When a youth he was Jeremy Bentham's
political pupil, but gained his first fame by his vast knowledge of
European literature, becoming acquainted with no less than thirteen[9]
continental languages and dialects. He served in consular appointments
at seven different capitals, carried important reform measures in
Parliament, was Minister Plenipotentiary to China and Governor of Hong
Kong, and concluded a commercial treaty with Siam, where every previous
commissioner had failed. But in all his crowded years the pen of this
tireless and successful man was busy. Besides his political, economic
and religious essays, which made him a member of nearly every learned
society in Europe, his translations were countless, and poems and hymns
of his own composing found their way to the public, among them the
tender spiritual song,--

    How sweetly flowed the Gospel sound
      From lips of gentleness and grace
    When listening thousands gathered round,
      And joy and gladness filled the place,

--and the more famous hymn indicated at the head of this sketch.
Knowledge of all religions only qualified him to worship the Crucified
with both faith and reason. Though nominally a Unitarian, to him, as to
Channing and Martineau and Edmund Sears, Christ was "all we know of
God."

[Footnote 9: Exaggerated in some accounts to _forty_.]

Bowring died Nov. 23, 1872. But his hymn to the Cross will never die:

    In the cross of Christ I glory,
      Towering o'er the wrecks of time;
    All the light of sacred story
      Gathers round its head sublime.

    When the woes of life o'ertake me
      Hopes deceive, and fears annoy,
    Never shall the cross forsake me;
      Lo! it glows with peace and joy.

    When the sun of bliss is beaming
      Light and love upon my way,
    From the cross the radiance streaming
      Adds new lustre to the day.

    Bane and blessing, pain and pleasure
      By the cross are sanctified,
    Peace is there that knows no measure,
      Joys that through all time abide.


_THE TUNE._

Ithamar Conkey's "Rathbun" fits the adoring words as if they had waited
for it. Its air, swelling through diatonic fourth and third to the
supreme syllable, bears on its waves the homage of the lines from bar to
bar till the four voices come home to rest full and satisfied in the
final chord--

    Gathers round its head sublime.

Ithamar Conkey, was born of Scotch ancestry, in Shutesbury, Mass., May
5th, 1815. He was a noted bass singer, and was for a long time connected
with the choir of the Calvary church, New York City, and sang the
oratorio solos. His tune of "Rathbun" was composed in 1847, and
published in Greatorex's collection in 1851. He died in Elizabeth, N.J.,
April 30, 1867.




CHAPTER III.

HYMNS OF CHRISTIAN DEVOTION AND EXPERIENCE.


"JESU DULCIS MEMORIA."

"Jesus the Very Thought of Thee."

The original of this delightful hymn is one of the devout meditations of
Bernard of Clairvaux, a Cistercian monk (1091-1153). He was born of a
noble family in or near Dijon, Burgundy, and when only twenty-three
years old established a monastery at Clairvaux, France, over which he
presided as its first abbot. Educated in the University of Paris, and
possessing great natural abilities, he soon made himself felt in both
the religious and political affairs of Europe. For more than thirty
years he was the personal power that directed belief, quieted
turbulence, and arbitrated disputes, and kings and even popes sought his
counsel. It was his eloquent preaching that inspired the second crusade.

His fine poem of feeling, in fifty Latin stanzas, has been a source of
pious song in several languages:

        Jesu, dulcis memoria
        Dans vera cordi gaudia,
        Sed super mel et omnium
        Ejus dulcis presentia.

Literally--

    Jesus! a sweet memory
    Giving true joys to the heart,
    But sweet above honey and all things
    His _presence_ [is].

The five stanzas (of Caswall's free translation) now in use are familiar
and dear to all English-speaking believers:

    Jesus, the very thought of Thee
      With sweetness fills my breast,
    But sweeter far Thy face to see,
      And in Thy presence rest.

    Nor voice can sing nor heart can frame
      Nor can the memory find,
    A sweeter sound than Thy blest name,
      O Saviour of mankind.

The Rev. Edward Caswall was born in Hampshire, Eng., July 15, 1814, the
son of a clergyman. He graduated with honors at Brazenose College,
Oxford, and after ten years of service in the ministry of the Church of
England joined Henry Newman's Oratory at Birmingham, was confirmed in
the Church of Rome, and devoted the rest of his life to works of piety
and charity. He died Jan. 2, 1878.


_THE TUNE._

No single melody has attached itself to this hymn, the scope of
selection being as large as the supply of appropriate common-metre
tunes. Barnby's "Holy Trinity," Wade's "Holy Cross" and Griggs' tune (of
his own name) are all good, but many, on the giving out of the hymn,
would associate it at once with the more familiar "Heber" by George
Kingsley and expect to hear it sung. It has the uplift and unction of
John Newton's--

    How sweet the name of Jesus sounds
      In the believer's ear.


"GOD CALLING YET! SHALL I NOT HEAR?"

Gerhard Tersteegen, the original author of the hymn, and one of the most
eminent religious poets of the Reformed German church in its early days,
was born in 1697, in the town of Mors, in Westphalia. He was left an
orphan in boyhood by the death of his father, and as his mother's means
were limited, he was put to work as an apprentice when very young, at
Muhlheim on the Ruhr, and became a ribbon weaver. Here, when about
fifteen years of age, he became deeply concerned for his soul, and
experienced a deep and abiding spiritual work. As a Christian, his
religion partook of the ascetic type, but his mysticism did not make him
useless to his fellow-men.

At the age of twenty-seven, he dedicated all his resources and energies
to the cause of Christ, writing the dedication in his own blood. "God
graciously called me," he says, "out of the world, and granted me the
desire to belong to Him, and to be willing to follow Him." He gave up
secular employments altogether, and devoted his whole time to religious
instruction and to the poor. His house became famous as the "Pilgrims'
Cottage," and was visited by people high and humble from all parts of
Germany. In his lifetime he is said to have written one hundred and
eleven hymns. Died April 3, 1769.

    God calling yet! shall I not hear?
    Earth's pleasures shall I still hold dear?
    Shall life's swift-passing years all fly,
    And still my soul in slumber lie?

       *       *       *       *       *

    God calling yet! I cannot stay;
    My heart I yield without delay.
    Vain world, farewell; from thee I part;
    The voice of God hath reached my heart.

The hymn was translated from the German by Miss Jane Borthwick, born in
Edinburgh, 1813. She and her younger sister, Mrs. Findlater, jointly
translated and published, in 1854, _Hymns From the Land of Luther_, and
contributed many poetical pieces to the _Family Treasury_. She died in
1897.

Another translation, imitating the German metre, is more euphonious,
though less literal and less easily fitted to music not specially
composed for it, on account of its "feminine" rhymes:

    God calling yet! and shall I never hearken?
    But still earth's witcheries my spirit darken;
    This passing life, these passing joys all flying,
    And still my soul in dreamy slumbers lying?


_THE TUNE._

Dr. Dykes' "Rivaulx" is a sober choral that articulates the
hymn-writer's sentiment with sincerity and with considerable
earnestness, but breathes too faintly the interrogative and expostulary
tone of the lines. To voice the devout solicitude and self-remonstrance
of the hymn there is no tune superior to "Federal St."

The Hon. Henry Kemble Oliver, author of "Federal St.," was born in
Salem, Mass., March, 1800, and was addicted to music from his childhood.
His father compelled him to relinquish it as a profession, but it
remained his favorite avocation, and after his graduation from Harvard
the cares of none of the various public positions he held, from
schoolmaster to treasurer of the state of Massachusetts, could ever wean
him from the study of music and its practice. At the age of thirty-one,
while sitting one day in his study, the last verse of Anne Steele's
hymn--

    So fades the lovely blooming flower,

--floated into his mind, and an unbidden melody came with it. As he
hummed it to himself the words shaped the air, and the air shaped the
words.

    Then gentle patience smiles on pain,
    Then dying hope revives again,

--became--

    See gentle patience smile on pain;
    See dying hope revive again;

--and with the change of a word and a tense the hymn created the melody,
and soon afterward the complete tune was made. Two years later it was
published by Lowell Mason, and Oliver gave it the name of the street in
Salem on which his wife was born, wooed, won, and married. It adds a
pathos to its history that "Federal St." was sung at her burial.

This first of Oliver's tunes was followed by "Harmony Grove," "Morning,"
"Walnut Grove," "Merton," "Hudson," "Bosworth," "Salisbury Plain,"
several anthems and motets, and a "Te Deum."

In his old age, at the great Peace Jubilee in Boston, 1872, the baton
was put into his hands, and the gray-haired composer conducted the
chorus of ten thousand voices as they sang the words and music of his
noble harmony. The incident made "Federal St." more than ever a feature
of New England history. Oliver died in 1885.


"MY GOD, HOW ENDLESS IS THY LOVE."

The spirited tune to this hymn of Watts, by Frederick Lampe, variously
named "Kent" and "Devonshire," historically reaches back so near to the
poet's time that it must have been one of the earliest expressions of
his fervent words.

Johan Friedrich Lampe, born 1693, in Saxony, was educated in music at
Helmstadt, and came to England in 1725 as a band musician and composer
to Covent Garden Theater. His best-known secular piece is the music
written to Henry Carey's burlesque, "The Dragon of Wantley."

Mrs. Rich, wife of the lessee of the theater, was converted under the
preaching of the Methodists, and after her husband's death her house
became the home of Lampe and his wife, where Charles Wesley often met
him.

The influence of Wesley won him to more serious work, and he became one
of the evangelist's helpers, supplying tunes to his singing campaigns.
Wesley became attached to him, and after his death--in Edinburgh,
1752--commemorated the musician in a funeral hymn.

In popular favor Bradbury's tune of "Rolland" has now superseded the old
music sung to Watts' lines--

    My God, how endless is Thy love,
      Thy gifts are every evening new,
    And morning mercies from above
      Gently distil like early dew.

       *       *       *       *       *

    I yield my powers to Thy command;
      To Thee I consecrate my days;
    Perpetual blessings from Thy hand
      Demand perpetual songs of praise.

William Batchelder Bradbury, a pupil of Dr. Lowell Mason, and the
pioneer in publishing Sunday-school music, was born 1816, in York, Me.
His father, a veteran of the Revolution, was a choir leader, and
William's love of music was inherited. He left his father's farm, and
came to Boston, where he first heard a church-organ. Encouraged by Mason
and others to follow music as a profession, he went abroad, studied at
Leipsic, and soon after his return became known as a composer of sacred
tunes. He died in Montclair, N.J., 1868.


"I'M NOT ASHAMED TO OWN MY LORD."

The favorite tune for this spiritual hymn, also by Watts, is old
"Arlington," one of the most useful church melodies in the whole realm
of English psalmody. Its name clings to a Boston street, and the
beautiful chimes of Arlington St. church (Unitarian) annually ring its
music on special occasions, as it has since the bells were tuned:

    I'm not ashamed to own my Lord
      Or to defend His cause,
    Maintain the honor of His Word,
      The glory of His cross.

    Jesus, my God!--I know His Name;
      His Name is all my trust,
    Nor will He put my soul to shame
      Nor let my hope be lost.

Dr. Thomas Augustine Arne, the creator of "Arlington," was born in
London, 1710, the son of a King St. upholsterer. He studied at Eton, and
though intended for the legal profession, gave his whole mind to music.
At twenty-three he began writing operas for his sister, Susanna (a
singer who afterwards became the famous tragic actress, Mrs. Cibber).

Arne's music to Milton's "Comus," and to "Rule Brittannia" established
his reputation. He was engaged as composer to Drury Lane Theater, and in
1759 received from Oxford his degree of Music Doctor. Later in life he
turned his attention to oratorios, and other forms of sacred music, and
was the first to introduce female voices in choir singing. He died March
5, 1778, chanting hallelujahs, it is said, with his last breath.


"IS THIS THE KIND RETURN?"

Dr. Watts in this hymn gave experimental piety its hour and language of
reflection and penitence:

    Is this the kind return?
      Are these the thanks we owe,
    Thus to abuse Eternal Love
      Whence all our blessings flow?

       *       *       *       *       *

    Let past ingratitude
      Provoke our weeping eyes.

United in loving wedlock with these words in former years was "Golden
Hill," a chime of sweet counterpoint too rare to bury its authorship
under the vague phrase "A Western Melody." It was caught evidently from
a forest bird[10] that flutes its clear solo in the sunsets of May and
June. There can be no mistaking the imitation--the same compass, the
same upward thrill, the same fall and warbled turn. Old-time folk used
to call for it, "Sing, my Fairweather Bird." It lingers in a few of the
twenty- or thirty-years-ago collections, but stronger voices have
drowned it out of the new.

[Footnote 10: The wood thrush.]

"Thacher," (set to the same hymn,) faintly recalls its melody.
Nevertheless "Thacher" is a good tune. Though commonly written in
sharps, contrasting the B flat of its softer and more liquid rival of
other days, it is one of Handel's strains, and lends the meaning and
pathos of the lyric text to voice and instrument.


"WHEN I SURVEY THE WONDROUS CROSS."

This crown of all the sacred odes of Dr. Watts for the song-service of
the church of God was called by Matthew Arnold the "greatest hymn in the
English language." The day the eminent critic died he heard it sung in
the Sefton Park Presbyterian Church, and repeated the opening lines
softly to himself again and again after the services. The hymn is
certainly _one_ of the greatest in the language. It appeared as No. 7 in
Watts' third edition (about 1710) containing five stanzas. The second
line--

    On which the Prince of Glory died,

--read originally--

    Where the young Prince of Glory died.

Only four stanzas are now generally used. The omitted one--

    His dying crimson like a robe
      Spreads o'er His body on the tree;
    Then am I dead to all the globe,
      And all the globe is dead to me.

--is a flash of tragic imagination, showing the sanguine intensity of
Christian vision in earlier time, when contemplating the Saviour's
passion; but it is too realistic for the spirit and genius of
song-worship. That the great hymn was designed by the writer for
communion seasons, and was inspired by Gal. 6:14, explains the two last
lines if not the whole of the highly colored verse.


_THE TUNE._

One has a wide field of choice in seeking the best musical
interpretation of this royal song of faith and self-effacement:

    When I survey the wondrous Cross
      On which the Prince of Glory died,
    My richest gain I count but loss,
      And pour contempt on all my pride.

    Forbid it, Lord, that I should boast
      Save in the death of Christ my God;
    All the vain things that charm me most,
      I sacrifice them to His blood.

    See from His head, His hands, His feet,
      Sorrow and love flow mingled down;
    Did e'er such love and sorrow meet;
      Or thorns compose so rich a crown?

    Were the whole realm of Nature mine,
      That were a present far too small;
    Love so amazing, so divine,
      Demands my soul, my life, my all.

To match the height and depth of these words with fitting glory of sound
might well have been an ambition of devout composers. Rev. G.C. Wells'
tune in the _Revivalist_, with its emotional chorus, I.B. Woodbury's
"Eucharist" in the _Methodist Hymnal_, Henry Smart's effective choral in
Barnby's _Hymnary_ (No. 170), and a score of others, have woven the
feeling lines into melody with varying success. Worshippers in spiritual
sympathy with the words may question if, after all, old "Hamburg," the
best of Mason's loved Gregorians, does not, alone, in tone and
elocution, rise to the level of the hymn.


"LOVE DIVINE, ALL LOVES EXCELLING."

This evergreen song-wreath to the Crucified, was contributed by Charles
Wesley, in 1746. It is found in his collection of 1756, _Hymns for Those
That Seek and Those That Have Redemption in the Blood of Jesus Christ_.

    Love Divine all loves excelling,
      Joy of Heaven to earth come down,
    Fix in us Thy humble dwelling,
      All Thy faithful mercies crown.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Come Almighty to deliver,
      Let us all Thy life receive,
    Suddenly return, and never,
      Nevermore Thy temples leave.

