or excitement. I had the pleasure of talking a while with the Bishop of
Tarbes, who introduced me again to the Capuchin, and retold his story.

But I was a little unhappy. The miracle was that I was not more so. I
had expected so much: I had seen nothing.

I talked to Dr. Cox also before leaving.

"No," he told me, "there is hardly one miracle to-day. We are doubtful,
too, about that leg that was seven centimetres too short."

"And is it true that Mademoiselle Bardou is not cured?" (A doctor had
been giving us certain evidence a few minutes before).

"I am afraid so. It was probably a case of intense subjective
excitement. But it may be an amelioration. We do not know yet. The real
work of investigating comes afterwards."

How arbitrary it all seemed, I thought, as I walked home to dinner. That
morning, on my way from the Bureau, I had seen a great company of white
banners moving together; and, on inquiry, had found that these were the
_miracules_ chiefly of previous years--about three hundred and fifty in
number.[6] They formed a considerably large procession. I had looked at
their faces: there were many more women than men (as there were upon
Calvary). But as I watched them I could not conceive upon what principle
the Supernatural had suddenly descended on this and not on that. "Two
men in one bed.... Two women grinding at the mill.... One is taken and
the other left." Here were persons of all ages--from six to eighty, I
should guess--of all characters, ranks, experiences; of both sexes. Some
were religious, some grocers, some of the nobility, a retired soldier or
two, and so on. They were not distinguished for holiness, it seemed. I
had heard heartbreaking little stories of the ten lepers over again--one
grateful, nine selfish. One or two of the girls, I heard, had had their
heads turned by flattery and congratulation; they had begun to give
themselves airs.

And, now again, here was this day, this almost obvious occasion. It was
the Jubilee Year; everything was about on a double scale. And nothing
had happened! Further, five of the sick had actually died at Lourdes
during their first night there. To come so far and to die!

On what principle, then, did God act? Then I suddenly understood, not
God's principles, but my own; and I went home both ashamed and
comforted.

FOOTNOTES:

[6] The official numbers of those at the afternoon procession were 341.




VI.


I said a midnight Mass that night in the same chapel of the Rosary
Church as on the previous morning. Again the crush was terrific. On the
steps of the church I saw a friar hearing a confession; and on entering
I found High Mass proceeding in the body of the church itself, with a
congregation so large and so worn-out that many were sleeping in
constrained attitudes among the seats. In fact, I was informed, since
the sleeping accommodation of Lourdes could not possibly provide for so
large a pilgrimage, there were many hundreds, at least, who slept where
they could--on the steps of churches, under trees and rocks, and by the
banks of the river.

I was served at my Mass by a Scottish priest, immediately afterwards I
served his at the same altar. While vesting, I noticed a priest at the
high altar of this little chapel reading out acts of prayer, to which
the congregation responded; and learned that two persons who had been
received into the Church on that day were to make their First Communion.
As midnight struck, simultaneously from the seven altars came seven
voices:

"_In nomine Patris, et Filii, et Spiritus Sancti. Amen._"

Once more, on returning home and going to bed a little after one o'clock
in the morning, the last sound that I heard was of the "_Gloria Patri_"
being sung by other pilgrims also returning to their lodging.

After coffee, a few hours later, I went down again to the square. It was
Sunday, and a Pontifical High Mass was being sung on the steps of the
Rosary Church. As usual, the crowd filled the square, and I could hardly
penetrate for a while beyond the fringe; but it was a new experience to
hear that vast congregation in the open air responding with one giant
voice to the plain-song of the Mass. It was astonishing what expression
showed itself in the singing. The _Sanctus_ was one of the most
impressive peals of worship and adoration that I have ever heard. At the
close of the Mass, all the bishops present near the altar--I counted six
or seven--turned and gave the blessing simultaneously. On the two great
curves that led up to the basilica were grouped the white banners of the
_miracules_.

Soon after arriving at the Bureau a very strange and quiet little
incident happened. A woman with a yellowish face, to which the colour
was slowly returning, came in and sat down to give her evidence. She
declared to us that during the procession yesterday she had been cured
of a tumour on the liver. She had suddenly experienced an overwhelming
sense of relief, and had walked home completely restored to health. On
being asked why she did not present herself at the Bureau, she answered
that she did not think of it: she had just gone home. I have not yet
heard whether this was a true cure or not; all I can say at present is I
was as much impressed by her simple and natural bearing, her entire
self-possession, and the absence of excitement, as by anything I saw at
Lourdes. I cannot conceive such a woman suffering from an illusion.

A few minutes later Dr. Cox called to me, and writing on a card, handed
it to me, telling me it would admit me to the _piscines_ for a bath. I
had asked for this previously; but had been told it was not certain,
owing to the crush of patients, whether it could be granted. I set out
immediately to the _piscines_.

There are, as I have said, three compartments in the building called the
_piscines_. That on the left is for women; in the middle, for children
and for those who do not undergo complete immersion; on the right, for
men. It was into this last, then, that I went, when I had forced my way
through the crowd, and passed the open court where the priests prayed.
It was a little paved place like a chapel, with a curtain hung
immediately before the door. When I had passed this, I saw at the
farther end, three or four yards away, was a deepish trough, wide and
long enough to hold one person. Steps went down on either side of it,
for the attendants. Immediately above the bath, on the wall, was a
statue of Our Lady; and beneath it a placard of prayers, large enough to
be read at a little distance.

There were about half a dozen people in the place--two or three priests
and three or four patients. One of the priests, I was relieved to see,
was the Scotsman whose Mass I had served the previous midnight. He was
in his soutane, with his sleeves rolled up to the elbow. He gave me my
directions, and while I made ready I watched the patients. There was one
lame man, just beside me, beginning to dress; two tiny boys, and a young
man who touched me more than I can say. He was standing by the head of
the bath, holding a basin in one hand and a little image of our Lady in
the other, and was splashing water ingeniously with his fingers into his
eyes; these were horribly inflamed, and I could see that he was blind. I
cannot describe the passion with which he did this, seeming to stare all
the while towards the image he held, and whispering out prayers in a
quick undertone--hoping, no doubt, that his first sight would be the
image of his Mother. Then I looked at the boys. One of them had horribly
prolonged and thin legs; I could not see what was wrong with the other,
except that he looked ill and worn out. Close beside me, on the wet,
muddy paving, lay an indescribable bandage that had been unrolled from
the lame man's leg.

When my turn came, I went wrapped in a soaking apron, down a step or so
into the water; and then, with a priest holding either hand, lay down at
full length so that my head only emerged. That water had better not be
described. It is enough to say that people suffering from most of the
diseases known to man had bathed in it without ceasing for at least five
or six hours. Yet I can say, with entire sincerity, that I did not have
even the faintest physical repulsion, though commonly I hate dirt at
least as much as sin. It is said, too, that never in the history of
Lourdes has there been one case of disease traceable to infection from
the baths. The water was cold, but not unpleasantly. I lay there, I
suppose, about one minute, while the two priests and myself repeated off
the placard the prayers inscribed there. These were, for the most part,
petitions to Mary to pray. "_O Marie,_" they ended, "_concue sans peche,
priez pour nous qui avons recours a vous!_"

As I dressed again after the bath, I had one more sight of the young
man. He was being led out by a kindly attendant, but his face was all
distorted with crying, and from his blind eyes ran down a stream of
terrible tears. It is unnecessary to say that I said a "Hail Mary" for
his soul at least.

As soon as I was ready, I went out and sat down for a while among the
recently bathed, and began to remind myself why _I_ had bathed.
Certainly I was not suffering from anything except a negligible ailment
or two. Neither did I do it out of curiosity, because I could have seen
without difficulty all the details without descending into that
appalling trough. I suppose it was just an act of devotion. Here was
water with a history behind it; water that was as undoubtedly used by
Almighty God for giving benefits to man as was the clay laid upon blind
eyes long ago near Siloe, or the water of Bethesda itself. And it is a
natural instinct to come as close as possible to things used by the
heavenly powers. I was extraordinarily glad I had bathed, and I have
been equally glad ever since. I am afraid it is of no use as evidence to
say that until I came to Lourdes I was tired out, body and mind; and
that since my return I have been unusually robust. Yet that is a fact,
and I leave it there.

As I sat there a procession went past to the Grotto, and I walked to
the railings to look at it. I do not know at all what it was all about,
but it was as impressive as all things are in Lourdes. The _miracules_
came first with their banners--file after file of them--then a number of
prelates, then _brancardiers_ with their shoulder-harness, then nuns,
then more _brancardiers_. I think perhaps they may have been taking a
recent _miracule_ to give thanks; for when I arrived presently at the
Bureau again, I heard that, after all, several appeared to have been
cured at the procession on the previous day.

I was sitting in the hall of the hotel a few minutes later when I heard
the roar of the _Magnificat_ from the street, and ran out to see what
was forward. As I came to the door, the heart of the procession went by.
A group of _brancardiers_ formed an irregular square, holding cords to
keep back the crowd; and in the middle walked a group of three, followed
by an empty litter. The three were a white-haired man on this side, a
stalwart _brancardier_ on the other, and between them a girl with a
radiant face, singing with all her heart. She had been carried down from
her lodging that morning to the _piscines_; she was returning on her own
feet, by the power of Him who said to the lame man, "Take up thy bed and
go into thy house." I followed them a little way, then I went back to
the hotel.




VII.


In the afternoon we went down to meet a priest who had promised a place
to one of our party in the window of which I have spoken before. But the
crowd was so great that we could not find him, so presently we dispersed
as best we could. Two other priests and myself went completely round the
outside of the churches, in order, if possible, to join in the
procession, since to cross the square was a simple impossibility. In the
terrible crush near the Bureau, I became separated from the others, and
fought my way back, and into the Bureau, as the best place open to me
now for seeing the Blessing of the Sick.

It was now at last that I had my supreme wish. Within a minute or two of
my coming to look through the window, the Blessed Sacrament entered the
reserved space among the countless litters. The crowd between me and the
open space was simply one pack of heads; but I could observe the
movements of what was going forward by the white top of the _ombrellino_
as it passed slowly down the farther side of the square.

The crowd was very still, answering as before the passionate voice in
the midst; but watching, watching, as I watched. Beside me sat Dr. Cox,
and our Rosaries were in our hands. The white spot moved on and on, and
all else was motionless. I knew that beyond it lay the sick. "Lord, if
it be possible--if it be possible! Nevertheless, not my will but Thine
be done." It had reached now the end of the first line.

"_Seigneur, guerissez nos malades!_" cried the priest.

