This man Jephthah has made a vow.  And now the hour is upon him in
which it is his duty to make the vow good.  His vow involves far more
than he ever expected.  But that fact does not cause him to be untrue.
He has given his promise.  Pay day has come.  His promise involves
measureless sacrifice.  To keep it is to put out every star in his sky.
It is to pluck up every flower in his garden.  It is to change life's
music into discord.  It is to take from him the one he loves far better
than he loves his own life.  But even though the price is big, he will
not refuse to pay it.  Even though his promise is hard, he will keep
it.  "I have opened my mouth unto the Lord and I cannot go back."

Jephthah has had many hard things said about him.  He has been wronged
since before he was born.  I do not think that justice has been done to
his memory.  Frankly, I think he is one of the most heroic souls of Old
Testament history.  It is true that he would not fully measure up to
all our modern ideals, but remember this, he lived in the morning of
human history.  He lived when the light was dim.  And he was true to
the light that he had.  He was true with a rugged fidelity that will
cause him to rise up in the day of judgment and condemn many of us.

Jephthah, I say, has been greatly wronged.  He never had a fair chance.
He was wronged in his very birth.  He was the son of a father who was
unfaithful to his marriage vows.  Jephthah was a child of shame.  His
father had chosen to sacrifice upon the wayside altar.  His father had
had his fling.  He had sown his wild oats, and of necessity there was a
harvest.  His father suffered, but sad to say, he was not the only
sufferer.

How we need to be reminded again and again that no man ever sins alone.
No man ever walks from the path of virtue without he walks upon bruised
and bleeding feet.  He himself suffers, but what is sadder still, he
causes somebody else to suffer.  I cannot go to hell alone.  I cannot
plunge out into the dark without involving another soul, at least in
some measure, in my tragedy.  This father sinned.  It meant suffering
for him.  It also meant suffering for one who was altogether blameless.
It meant suffering for his boy.

Not only did Jephthah have as part of his life tragedy an unclean
father, but he had an unclean mother as well.  Jephthah's mother was
not one of those unfortunate souls, more sinned against than sinning,
who had made one false step for the sake of the man she loved.  She was
a professional outcast.  She was a woman who made it her business day
by day to sell herself over the counters of iniquity.  She was one of
those whose feet in all ages take hold on hell.

So Jephthah had a bad chance.  He was the fragment of a home that never
was.  He had no father that dared to own him.  And the first eyes into
which he looked were the eyes of an unclean woman.  And the first lips
that kissed him were lips soiled and stained by years of sinful living.
Poor little baby.  Poor little foundling.  Poor little outcast.  How
much he missed.

What are the most precious memories in your life to-night?  What are
the scenes to which you look back with deepest love and tenderness?  I
know.  They are the scenes of your childhood's home.

  "How dear to my heart are the scenes of my childhood,
    When fond recollection, presents them to view;
  The orchard, the meadow, the deep tangled wildwood,
    And every loved spot that my infancy knew."

But the secret of the fascination of those dear scenes is this, that we
saw them by the glow of the light of love.  We think tenderly of our
early homes because they were presided over by a father and mother who
knew God.  And the one cord that has failed to snap between us and a
good life is the cord that ties us still to the faith of our fathers
and our mothers.

But Jephthah missed all this.  His father was unfaithful.  His mother
was an unclean woman.  There were no tender and holy associations that
made it easy for him to be good.  There were no memories to come in
after years and whisper old half forgotten prayers.  There were no fond
recollections to lay their hands upon him with angelic tenderness and
lead him away from his City of Destruction.  He was a child of sin, a
child of blackness and of night, a child bereft of the inspiration of a
good mother's life and the sweet uplift of a pious home.

And not only was this man wronged in what he missed, he was equally
wronged in what he suffered.  Early he was branded with a shame not his
own.  I know of few places where society has been so unjust and unkind
as it has in its condemnation of those innocent ones who are the
victims of another's sin.  We forget that every child comes into the
world with the Father's kiss upon its clean soul regardless of the
circumstances of its birth.  We forget also that that child is no more
to blame for those circumstances than it is to be blamed for the
currents of the sea or for the darkness of the night.

But Jephthah was blamed.  Ugly names were flung at him before he was
old enough to know their dark and sinister meaning.  He was forbidden
to go to the big house of his father before he knew why he was not
allowed to go.  He was excluded from the games of those more
fortunately born than he, when he could no more understand why he was
excluded than he could keep back the bitter tears of childish
disappointment.  I can see him as he watches his half brothers and
sisters play in the distance, and his little heart is lonely and he is
hungry for a playmate.  And the gate is shut in his face, the gate of a
shame not his own.

By and by youthhood comes, and early manhood.  The parental estate is
to be divided.  Jephthah is disinherited.  He is driven from among his
people.  He is forced to flee for his life.  And he goes to take refuge
in Tob with its mountain fastnesses and with its rude heathens who are
less unkind than those kinsmen of his who claim to be worshippers of
Jehovah.

So we have here the material out of which this young man is called on
to build a life.  He has no parentage.  He has no kindred.  He has no
friends.  Nobody believes in him.  Everybody expects him to go wrong.
It seems even at times as if everybody wanted him to go wrong.  They
said, "Oh, yes, I know him.  I used to know his mother.  She died in
the gutter.  You can't expect anything of him."

And it is not at all difficult to go down when everybody expects you to
go down.  It is a great thing to have somebody to trust you.  That is a
tremendous help.  As long as you feel that there is somebody who counts
on you, who believes in you, you are not without an anchor.  I read the
other day of a little newsboy who was given a quarter that he might get
change.  And on his way back he was run over and crushed by an auto.
And the last word he said was, "Be sure and hunt him up and give him
back the change.  He trusted me."  But here is a young fellow exiled,
robbed, persecuted and mistrusted.  And out of this charred and ugly
material he is called upon to build a life.

And what is the result?  Well, he refused to surrender.  He said, "If
nobody else will believe in me I will believe in myself.  Since nobody
else will help me, I will help myself.  If I am to be robbed of my
inheritance I will make a way of my own."  And so he set to work.  He
did not spend his time hunting up his neighbors to tell them of his
misfortunes.  He did not put in his time boasting of what he would do
if he were as well off as his half brothers down in Israel.  He went to
work to build his fortune in the here and now.  And little by little he
won.

And then one day a runner came to him in the field and said, "Jephthah,
you have company at your house."  And the man looked up in surprise and
said, "Company!  Who is it?"  "A committee of elders from Israel."  And
Jephthah is astonished.  He is filled with wonder.  He is trying to
guess why they came.  And with the problem unsolved he goes to meet his
guests.

These elders greet him like a long lost son.  They tell him how they
rejoice in his prosperity.  They informed him how they had always known
that he would make good.  They let him know that they would never have
sent him out of Israel if they had had their way about it.  And then at
last they gather courage to tell him their errand.  And they say,
"Israel is being besieged by the Ammonites and we want you to come and
be the commander-in-chief of our armies."

Well, now that was a shock.  Here was a young fellow who began with
nothing, and worse than nothing.  But instead of whining, instead of
quitting, instead of complaining that he had no chance, instead of
putting in his time wishing that he was somewhere else, he did his duty
where he was.  And folks found it out and came to kneel at his feet and
ask him for help.  And I am not saying, young man, that every man gets
his just deserts, but I do say that in the overwhelming majority of
cases, if a man is really any account, sooner or later somebody will
find it out.  It may be true that

  "Full many a gem of purest ray serene
    The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear.
  Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
    And waste its sweetness on the desert air."

But I doubt if any gem of real human worth ever lies permanently
concealed.  I seriously question if any radiant flower of human
character ever wastes its sweetness on the desert air.  Learn to do
something that the world needs to have done and men will make a path to
your door even if you live in a desert.

They came and asked Jephthah for help.  It is a humiliating experience.
Now, I suppose those half brothers of Jephthah's down in Israel, those
fellows who had scorned him in his childhood, those fellows who had
robbed him of his share in the estate,--I suppose they did some loud
talking about the general being a kinsman of theirs.  Oh, they are very
much like we are.  We seldom boast of our relationship to an outcast,
but if we are one hundred and first cousin to somebody who is prominent
we are mighty apt to go about telling it.

Jephthah heard their request and promised to help them.  I think that
was fine of him.  It would have been so easy for him to have said, "Oh,
yes, you kicked me out when I was a little helpless waif.  When I
needed help you would not give it.  When I needed help you laughed at
my childish tears.  Now you need help, I will laugh at you."  But there
was nothing of revenge in him.  Wronged as he had been, he would not
nurse his wrongs.  He would not allow his bitter treatment to make him
bitter.

I wish we all were so wise.  You were injured years ago by somebody.
That somebody perchance was in the church.  And so you have never had
any use for the church since.  You have never had any use much for
anybody since.  You have been snarling and snapping.  Do you remember
Miss Harrisham in "Great Expectations"?  She was to be married.  All
arrangements were made.  The wedding cake was on the table.  But at
twenty minutes to nine a cruel note came telling her that the groom was
not coming.  Therefore, the clocks were all stopped at twenty minutes
to nine.  The cake stood upon the table till it rotted.  The blinds
remained drawn and no sunlight was ever allowed in the house again.
And life for her stopped at twenty minutes to nine.  One disappointment
wrecked her, embittered her, made her throw her life away.  But
Jephthah refused to be embittered.

He consented to go.  But before he undertook the campaign he stood
beside the altar of God.  This man had lived for years among heathens,
but they had not heathenized him.  He still stood true by the altar.
Circumstances were against him, but religion is not simply for the easy
situations in which we find ourselves.  Your test, as one has said, is
not how good you can be if you have a devoted saint on either side of
you down at the office.  Your test is what your religion can do for you
in the midst of a godless crowd.  Daniel's God was tested not in the
pleasant situations of his early home life.  The test was among his
foes.  It is amidst the horrors of a lion's den that the king's
question echoes, "Oh, Daniel, servant of the living God, is thy God
whom thou servest continually, able to deliver thee?"

Jephthah went to battle from the altar of prayer.  As he went he made a
vow.  It is the vow for which he has been most severely criticized.  It
is a vow that has caused his name among some to be branded with shame.
He vowed that if God would give him the victory he would offer to Him
whatever first came out of the door of his house to meet him on his
return.  It was a rash vow, I am ready to admit.  Yet rash as it was, I
do not find it in my heart to be severely critical of him.  I rather
join with Dr. Peck in my admiration.  You know what is the matter with
a great many of us smug church members?  We are so prudent.  We have
such admirable possession of all our faculties.  We are in danger of
dying of self-control.  This man in the white heat of his enthusiasm
made a solemn pledge to the Lord of that which was destined to be
infinitely the most precious thing in his life.  But some of us in our
prudence will not even make a pledge of a few dollars.  We say we do
not know how well we will be fixed next week or next month or next year.

You have heard of the man who subscribed $50 and refused to pay it,
saying that he was too religious that day to look after his own
interests.  Some of us never get that religious.  But all the encomiums
throughout the Word of God are uttered upon those who are utterly rash
in their giving.  The widow foolishly gave away all that she had.  And
Mary squandered a whole box of ointment when a few drops would have
been amply sufficient.  But it was their mad recklessness that made
them immortal.

Jephthah made his vow and went to battle.  He went confidently.  He
went believing that inasmuch as he had put himself and what he had at
God's disposal, that God would put Himself at his disposal.  And God
did not disappoint him.  He won the fight.  And now the victorious army
is marching home.  The soldiers are rejoicing.  But there is a strange
tenseness and anxiety in the general's face that the soldiers do not
understand.  Nobody understands but God and Jephthah.  At last they
round the bend in the road and the general comes in sight of his own
home.  And then suddenly his bronze face goes deadly pale.  He reels
upon his horse.  For out from the door of his home has come a lovely
girl with dark hair and sunny face, and she is singing a song of
welcome.

Father and daughter come face to face.  The girl is perplexed, and the
general strains her hard to his heart.  He is father and mother to her
at once, and she is all he has.  And the cup is bitter almost beyond
the drinking.  And he says, "Alas, my daughter, you have brought me
very low."  And he tells her his story.  And the girl with sweet
resignation understands, and the great sacrifice is made.

Jephthah was a hard man, you say.  Do not judge him in the light of the
twentieth century.  Judge him in the light of the day in which he
lived.  And remember this, that he had the manhood to keep his promise.
Remember that he had the sturdy courage to pay his vow.  "I have opened
my mouth unto the Lord, and I cannot go back."  Oh, the world is saved
by the "cannot" men, by the men who have big impossibilities in their
souls.  Joseph says as he faces the temptation of his life, "I cannot
do it."  The apostles ordered to keep silent, say, "We cannot."  And
Jephthah with breaking heart and tear-wet face, tempted to break his
vow, says, "I cannot go back."

Oh, I know what we would probably have done.  We would have said to
ourselves, "Nobody knows that I made that vow anyway, nobody but God.
I made it in the secrecy of my own heart.  I never breathed a word into
any human ear.  If I go back on it, it will not matter so much.  It is
simply a promise that I made to God."  This man had not told his vow.
It was a secret between himself and his Lord.  He was not driven to the
performance of it by public opinion.  He was not urged to it, as flabby
Herod, "for the sake of those that sat with him."  He was urged to it
by his own unstained conscience and his sterling manhood.

Or he might have said, "I made the vow, it's true, but I made it under
pressure.  A great danger was threatening and a man is not to be held
responsible for a vow he makes in the presence of danger."  Did you
ever get frightened when a storm was on and promise God things, and
then go back on it?  Of course you have.  We have been false to one
another, some of us.  How many of us have been false to God!  How far
is this old hero ahead of ourselves!

Think of the vows that you have made as members of the church.  You
have not even fulfilled the vow you made to your groceryman.  Some of
you have not paid for the clothes that you have on, and never will.
Some of you have made pledges to the church and have forgotten them.
And just because the church won't sue you, you are going to break the
promise that you have made, not simply to men, but to God.

And what have you done with your church vows?  You have promised to
renounce the devil and all his works, the vain pomp and glory of the
world.  Have you kept your vow?  You have promised to obediently keep
God's holy will and commandments.  Have you been honest with God in
this matter?  You have promised to be subject to the rules of the
church and to attend upon its services, and some of you have trampled
on those rules flagrantly, openly, knowingly.  And remember that when
you took that vow it was not a pledge that you made to me.  You opened
your mouth that day unto the Lord.

And you that are here outside the church, may the lord help you to pay
your vows unto the Most High.  For there is hardly a single one of you
but that at some time has opened your mouth unto the Lord.  What about
that promise you made to God when you were sick?  I do not say you made
it into any human ear, but you breathed it in prayer into His ear.
What about the promise you made to God by the coffin of your baby?
What about the promise of consecration you made by the bedside of your
dying mother?  May the Lord help us to make this day a pay day.  May
the Lord give us the courage to say, "I have opened my mouth unto the
Lord, and I cannot go back."




X

A CASE OF BLUES--ELIJAH

_1 Kings 19:4_

One day you were reading in the New Testament and you came to that
surprising word from James: "Elijah was a man subject to like passions
as we are."  And if you were reading thoughtfully you stared at that
sentence in wide-eyed amazement.  And then in your heart you said, "It
isn't true.  Elijah's story doesn't read a bit like mine."

Then you thought of how he came and put his finger in Ahab's face and
made that face go white.  You thought of how he carried Heaven's key in
his pocket for three years and six months.  You thought of his lifting
the dead boy into life; of his victory on Carmel; of his quiet walk to
the little station beyond the Jordan where the Heavenly Limited met him
and took him home.  And again you felt like saying that James was
altogether mistaken.

To fortify yourself more fully you reread his story.  Then you came to
this passage and you read it with a gasp: "And he came and sat down
under a juniper tree," etc.  And down by the print of your foot you saw
the big footprint of the old prophet and you said, "After all, we are
very much alike.  After all, he got in the dumps, fretted and broke his
heart with the blues, even as I."

Now, what was the matter with Elijah?  He was not a natural and
deliberate pessimist.  There are some folks that are, you know.  There
are some people who study to be pessimistic.  They are the
"self-appointed inspectors of warts and carbuncles, the self-elected
supervisors of sewers and street gutters."  They pride themselves on
being guides to the Slough of Despond and on holding a pass key to the
cave of Giant Despair.

One such woman, being asked how she felt, said, "I feel good to-day.
But I always feel the worst when I feel the best because I know how bad
I am going to feel when I get to feeling bad again."  Two buckets went
to a well one day.  One sobbed and said, "Oh, me! it breaks my heart to
think that however full we go away from the well, we always come back
empty."  And its companion laughed outright and said, "Why, I was
congratulating myself on the fact that however empty we come to the
well, we always go away full."

One morning when the world was brimming with spring, two little girls
ran out into a garden where the dewdrops and the sunlight and God had
wrought the miracle of a hundred full-blown roses.  They looked at the
lovely scene and one went back and said tearfully, "Oh, mother, the
roses are blooming, but there is a thorn for every rose."  The other
looked and went back singing and said, "Mother, the roses are blooming
and there is a rose for every thorn."

No, this man was not a deliberate pessimist.  Had he been his name and
memory would have rotted long ago, for the men that bless us are the
hopeful men, the forward-looking men.  I read of a man who was put in
jail during the Boer War simply because he was always prophesying
disaster.  He was a discourager.  He refused to see anything hopeful.
And a man of that kind ought to be in jail because he is as harmful as
a man with the small-pox.  "He who steals my purse steals trash, but he
who filcheth from me" my sunny outlook, my expectation of the dawn of a
to-morrow, "takes that which not enriches him, but makes me poor
indeed."

What was the matter with Elijah?  Well, in the first place, he was
tired.  He was utterly spent.  He had just passed through a very trying
and exacting ordeal.  We can well imagine that the days just preceding
the test upon Carmel were toilsome days and the nights were sleepless
nights.  Then came the great day of contest and victory.  There was, of
course, no rest that day.  And, in the exhilaration of victory, you
know how he ran before the chariot of Ahab from Carmel to Jezreel, a
distance of seventeen miles.

Arrived there, he got a message from Jezebel threatening his life.  He
had expected, of course, that the men who had shouted "The Lord He is
God" would stand by him.  But they did not.  He had expected that even
Jezebel would be afraid to lift her voice in defense of the old
defeated heathenism of the past.  But here again he was much mistaken.
In fact, instead of tamely acknowledging defeat she sends him this
word: "So let the gods do to me, and more also, if I make not thy life
as the life of one of them by to-morrow about this time."

Jezebel's threat totally upset the prophet's sense of victory.  He came
to feel that he had not won after all.  For the first time he gave way
to fear.  Cowardice rushed upon him and drove him, without rest, down
the road that led into the wilderness.  The terminus of this road was,
quite naturally, the juniper tree.

So one source of his discouragement, one secret of his being in the
blues, was that he was utterly tired.  It is hard indeed for a man to
be hopeful when his nerves are on edge.  It is hard for him to keep out
of the blues when he is completely exhausted.  As a tired body yields
at such times far more readily to physical disease, so does it yield
more readily to the exquisite torture of discouragement and depression.

A second reason for his collapse was a lost sense of the divine
fellowship.  Up to this time Elijah's every step had been ordered of
the Lord.  He had a sense of the Divine Presence that was continuous.
But Jezebel's threat had made him believe that he must look out for
himself.  So he took his case into his own hands.  And that is the road
that must always lead to the juniper tree.

Such a collapse is next to impossible as long as we keep on intimate
terms with God.  Yonder is man named Paul on a ship that is going to
pieces.  The sea "curls its lips and lies in wait with lifted teeth as
if to bite."  The sailors' faces are ghastly with hunger and panic.
But while despair grips every other heart and while death laughs with
hollow laughter amidst the popping timbers of this wrecking ship, this
man steadies himself and shouts, "Be of good cheer."  What is the
secret of his cheer?  "There stood by me this night the angel of God
whose I am."  He was saved by an intimate and personal sense of the
Divine Presence.  Elijah had lost this sense of the Divine.  Hence the
deep, dark night of utter discouragement was upon him.

Thus utterly wearied and his old intimacy with the Lord gone, the worst
naturally followed.  All his hopes seemed to fall about him.  There
came to him a heart-breaking sense of personal failure.  He sobbed out
the complaint: "I am no better than my fathers.  They allowed Israel to
drift into idolatry.  I have not been able to bring it back.  I have
accomplished nothing.  I toiled long and hard, dreaming that at the end
I would clasp the warm, radiant hand of success and victory, but in
reality I only clasp the skeleton hand of failure."

Have you ever had a feeling that you were of no account and never would
be; that in spite of all that God had done for you, you were a failure?
There are few things more fraught with heartache and bitterness and
discouragement than that.  That is something that makes you want to sob
and give over the fight utterly.  And there are a lot of folks that
allow themselves to come to that dismal conviction.  They work, and
nobody seems to appreciate it.  They toil, and nobody compliments them.
Then they decide that they do not amount to anything, and they feel
like giving over the fight.

I read the other day a fascinating essay from Frank Boreham.  In this
essay the author spoke of a certain discouraged friend of his.  He
declared it his purpose to help this friend by sending him a present.
And the strange present that he was going to send him was an onion.
Yes, he was going to wrap this onion in lovely tissue paper and put it
in a beautiful candy box and tie it with pink ribbon and post it to his
friend at once.

Now, why send him an onion?  Well, for the simple reason that though an
onion is one of the most valuable of all vegetables, though it is the
finest of relishes, though it has added piquancy to a thousand feasts,
yet nobody praises the onion.  Of course you know the author is right
here.  You may have read some great poetry in your time, poems on
daffodils, violets, roses, daisies.  Even you have known a great poet
who could write about a louse and a field mouse, but where do you find
a poem about an onion?  What orator waxes eloquent in its praise?  What
bride ever carries a bouquet of onions as a bridal bouquet?

This is true, of course, but why is it true?  Not because the onion is
useless.  The real reason is because it is so strong.  It is harder to
grow sentimental over great strong things,--though tears have been shed
over onions, as our essayist has pointed out.  There are some we
praise, you know, because we think that they need it to keep them
going.  They are weak.  There are others we do not praise because they
are so strong, or because, being strong, we expect strong things of
them.  The football hero receives an ovation when he makes a touchdown,
but no greater than the baby receives when it takes its first step.
There was more noise in the former case, but only because there was a
larger crowd of spectators.  So it is not wise to conclude that because
nobody is praising you, you are of no account in the world.

Not only did Elijah for the moment lose faith in himself, but he lost
faith in others as well.  He thought there was not a good man in all
Israel.  And if you want a short cut to wretchedness, get to a place
where you do not believe in anybody.  Some people seem to cultivate
this disposition as if it were an asset.  It is not an asset.  It is
the worst possible liability.  If you want to make a hell for yourself
in the here and now, cultivate the habit of seeing a selfish motive
back of every seemingly unselfish act.  School yourself to believe that
all men and all women have their price.  Say not in haste, but
deliberately, that "All men are liars."

That is the leading characteristic of the devil.  "Hast thou considered
my servant, Job," the Lord asked, "that there is none like him?"
"Yes," replied the devil, "I have considered him.  I know him through
and through.  I know him better than you do.  He is deceiving you.  He
is putting it over on you.  You think he loves you for yourself,--I
know that he loves you simply, because you are feeding him bonbons.
Let me touch him and he will curse you to your face."  That is the
devil's habit.  That is what makes him such a success as a devil.

If you do not believe in people no wonder you are miserable.  If you do
not believe that a fluctuating Simon can be changed into a rock; if you
do not believe that a Magdalene can, through the grace of God, become a
herald of the resurrection; if you do not believe that this world of
men is a salvable world; then it is not to be wondered at that you are
blue.  If you do not believe in the honesty and goodness and purity of
at least a few, I do not see how you can be in any other place than a
veritable perdition.

There are bad men, vicious men, godless men, but they are not all so.
Do not believe that they are.

  "There are loyal hearts, there are spirits brave;
  There are souls that are good and true,
  Then give the world the best you have
  And the best will come back to you.

  "Give love, and love to your heart will flow
  And strength for your utmost need.
  Give faith and a score of hearts will show
  Their faith in your worldly deed.

  "Give truth and truth will be paid in kind,
  And honor will honor meet;
  And a smile that is sweet is sure to find
  A smile that is just as sweet.

  "For life is the mirror of king and slave;
  It's just what we are and do.
  Then give the world the best you have
  And the best will come back to you."


But if you frown at the world the world is going to frown at you, and
if you mistrust it, it will mistrust you.  I used to stand as a boy on
the river bank on my father's farm and shout at the great rugged cliff
across the silver Buffalo River.  If I spoke kindly to the grim old
cliff, its answer would be in the same kindly tone.  If there was
harshness and menace in my voice, it came back the same way.  And life
is a big echo.  It speaks to us in the tone of our own voice.  It gives
us the faith or the unbelief that we ourselves give.

And with faith in self gone and also faith in men, it is not to be
wondered at that Elijah requested for himself that he might die.  But
though he made this request, it is not the real sentiment of his heart.
It is not the real Elijah speaking.  A man ought never to make an
important decision when he is in the blues.  He is not himself any more
than is a man under the influence of drink.  Elijah is not himself
here.  How do we know?  He really doesn't mean what he is saying.  How
do we know that?

Well, he is requesting for himself here that he, might die.  Now, if he
was really in earnest about dying, Jezebel would have attended to that
for him without any prayer on his part, if he had just stayed round
Jezreel for a while.  The truth of the matter is that the love of life
is strong in him.  The truth of the matter also is that he still
believes somewhat in himself and in God and in men.  He is just in the
blues now and is not saying what he really believes when he is at his
best.

When you get in the dumps and fret and fume and wish you were dead,
just stop right there and tell yourself that you are a liar.  You do
not wish anything of the kind.  I heard of a man once who was always
threatening to commit suicide.  He had a good friend who was a pious
man and who was grieved by such threats.  But he heard them till he
knew they meant nothing, so one day he stepped into this man's room at
the hotel, laid an ugly looking revolver down on the dresser and said,
"John, old man, you have been threatening to take your own life for
some time.  I do not want you to do it.  It is murder and you will have
no chance to repent.  I love you as I love myself.  For this reason I
have decided to kill you.  I will live long enough to repent.  So get
over there at the table and make your will."  And the man's face went
white and he wanted to wait till to-morrow.

How did God cure this man who was in the blues?  First, He used a very
commonplace remedy.  He put him to sleep.  He let him rest.  Rest is a
