

51. 1. All things are produced by the Tao, and nourished by its
outflowing operation.  They receive their forms according to the
nature of each, and are completed according to the circumstances of
their condition.  Therefore all things without exception honour the
Tao, and exalt its outflowing operation.

2. This honouring of the Tao and exalting of its operation is not the
result of any ordination, but always a spontaneous tribute.

3. Thus it is that the Tao produces (all things), nourishes them,
brings them to their full growth, nurses them, completes them, matures
them, maintains them, and overspreads them.

4. It produces them and makes no claim to the possession of them; it
carries them through their processes and does not vaunt its ability in
doing so; it brings them to maturity and exercises no control over
them;--this is called its mysterious operation.


52. 1. (The Tao) which originated all under the sky is to be
considered as the mother of them all.

2. When the mother is found, we know what her children should be.
When one knows that he is his mother's child, and proceeds to guard
(the qualities of) the mother that belong to him, to the end of his
life he will be free from all peril.

3. Let him keep his mouth closed, and shut up the portals (of his
nostrils), and all his life he will be exempt from laborious exertion.
Let him keep his mouth open, and (spend his breath) in the promotion
of his affairs, and all his life there will be no safety for him.

4. The perception of what is small is (the secret of) clear-sightedness;
the guarding of what is soft and tender is (the secret of) strength.

5.

   Who uses well his light,
   Reverting to its (source so) bright,
   Will from his body ward all blight,
   And hides the unchanging from men's sight.


53. 1. If I were suddenly to become known, and (put into a position
to) conduct (a government) according to the Great Tao, what I should
be most afraid of would be a boastful display.

2. The great Tao (or way) is very level and easy; but people love the
by-ways.

3. Their court(-yards and buildings) shall be well kept, but their
fields shall be ill-cultivated, and their granaries very empty.  They
shall wear elegant and ornamented robes, carry a sharp sword at their
girdle, pamper themselves in eating and drinking, and have a
superabundance of property and wealth;--such (princes) may be called
robbers and boasters.  This is contrary to the Tao surely!


54.

1.

   What (Tao's) skilful planter plants
     Can never be uptorn;
   What his skilful arms enfold,
     From him can ne'er be borne.
   Sons shall bring in lengthening line,
   Sacrifices to his shrine.

2.

   Tao when nursed within one's self,
     His vigour will make true;
   And where the family it rules
     What riches will accrue!
   The neighbourhood where it prevails
     In thriving will abound;
   And when 'tis seen throughout the state,
     Good fortune will be found.
   Employ it the kingdom o'er,
     And men thrive all around.

3. In this way the effect will be seen in the person, by the
observation of different cases; in the family; in the neighbourhood;
in the state; and in the kingdom.

4. How do I know that this effect is sure to hold thus all under the
sky?  By this (method of observation).


55. 1. He who has in himself abundantly the attributes (of the Tao) is
like an infant.  Poisonous insects will not sting him; fierce beasts
will not seize him; birds of prey will not strike him.

2. (The infant's) bones are weak and its sinews soft, but yet its
grasp is firm.  It knows not yet the union of male and female, and yet
its virile member may be excited;--showing the perfection of its
physical essence.  All day long it will cry without its throat
becoming hoarse;--showing the harmony (in its constitution).

3.

   To him by whom this harmony is known,
   (The secret of) the unchanging (Tao) is shown,
   And in the knowledge wisdom finds its throne.
   All life-increasing arts to evil turn;
   Where the mind makes the vital breath to burn,
   (False) is the strength, (and o'er it we should mourn.)

4. When things have become strong, they (then) become old, which may
be said to be contrary to the Tao.  Whatever is  contrary to the Tao
soon ends.


56. 1. He who knows (the Tao) does not (care to) speak (about it); he
who is (ever ready to) speak about it does not know it.

2. He (who knows it) will keep his mouth shut and close the portals
(of his nostrils).  He will blunt his sharp points and unravel the
complications of things; he will attemper his brightness, and bring
himself into agreement with the obscurity (of others).  This is called
'the Mysterious Agreement.'

3. (Such an one) cannot be treated familiarly or distantly; he is
beyond all consideration of profit or injury; of nobility or
meanness:--he is the noblest man under heaven.


57. 1. A state may be ruled by (measures of) correction; weapons of
war may be used with crafty dexterity; (but) the kingdom is made one's
own (only) by freedom from action and purpose.

2. How do I know that it is so?  By these facts:--In the kingdom the
multiplication of prohibitive enactments increases the poverty of the
people; the more implements to add to their profit that the people
have, the greater disorder is there in the state and clan; the more
acts of crafty dexterity that men possess, the more do strange
contrivances appear; the more display there is of legislation, the
more thieves and robbers there are.

3. Therefore a sage has said, 'I will do nothing (of purpose), and the
people will be transformed of themselves; I will be fond of keeping
still, and the people will of themselves become correct.  I will take
no trouble about it, and the people will of themselves become rich; I
will manifest no ambition, and the people will of themselves attain to
the primitive simplicity.'


58.

1.

   The government that seems the most unwise,
   Oft goodness to the people best supplies;
   That which is meddling, touching everything,
   Will work but ill, and disappointment bring.

Misery!--happiness is to be found by its side!  Happiness!--misery
lurks beneath it!  Who knows what either will come to in the end?

2. Shall we then dispense with correction?  The (method of) correction
shall by a turn become distortion, and the good in it shall by a turn
become evil.  The delusion of the people (on this point) has indeed
subsisted for a long time.

3. Therefore the sage is (like) a square which cuts no one (with its
angles); (like) a corner which injures no one (with its sharpness).
He is straightforward, but allows himself no license; he is bright,
but does not dazzle.


59. 1. For regulating the human (in our constitution) and rendering
the (proper) service to the heavenly, there is nothing like
moderation.

2. It is only by this moderation that there is effected an early
return (to man's normal state).  That early return is what I call the
repeated accumulation of the attributes (of the Tao).  With that
repeated accumulation of those attributes, there comes the subjugation
(of every obstacle to such return).  Of this subjugation we know not
what shall be the limit; and when one knows not what the limit shall
be, he may be the ruler of a state.
