these are destitute of a father's protection and a mother's anxious
love. Be ye then their comfort and their stay. As you look upon your own
offspring, and reflect with gratitude that you are yet preserved to
watch over their tender infancy and dependant youth, and as you pray
that you may still shelter them until they can withstand the storms and
adversities of life, think how you may repay your Almighty Benefactor in
the persons of those, who are also his children; think also, how deep
will be your ingratitude, if while so blessed, you can "despise these
little ones." Your children are yet around you, and you watch over them,
but you cannot pierce into the solemn darkness of futurity--they may yet
be helpless, parentless, friendless,--_as ye would that men should do to
you, do ye also to them likewise_.[16]

Ye also, who have experienced, and perhaps still enjoy, the watchful
care and affectionate caresses of devoted parents, forget not that there
are those, who have never rejoiced in the sound of a father's voice, or
a mother's gentle embraces. And can you, who have known such delights
refuse your sympathy to these children of the most cruel privation? No.
You will remember those, who have been for ever cut off from the
sweetest pleasures of life; whose lips have never learned to
say--"father"--"mother,"--and to behold the countenances of these
dearest friends lighten up with joy at the sound, and their arms
extended for the fond embrace. You will,--yes my brethren,--will you not
all,--all here present,--remember them? The _bountiful eye_, which looks
upon their sad condition, and relieves them, shall be blessed--blessed
of men in their full applause--blessed in its own soothing approbation,
and more than all, and above all, blessed of the God of all blessing,
now and for ever more. Amen.


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Proverbs xxiii. 6, 7.

[2] Proverbs xxviii. 22.

[3] Deuteronomy xv. 7-10.

[4] 1 Timothy vi. 18.

[5] The Board of Visitors of the Poor, as established in this city, is
one of the most practically useful institutions which the modern spirit
of enlightened charity has devised. Its object is not merely to search
out the sick and needy and to relieve them, but also to investigate the
claims of any applicants for charity that may be recommended to it, and
thus to prevent impositions as far as practicable. Every family that has
not time to disburse its charities under the superintendence of its own
members, should be in communication with this Board. Measures are now in
progress to organize a system, which shall render this Institution more
effective even than it has yet been, in accomplishing the important
purposes for which it was established. When completed, public notice
will be given. Let every benevolent individual in our community then
come forward and give this system his countenance and pecuniary support;
and let all resolve by a united effort to do away the baleful influence
of a tolerated pauperism, by detecting and discountenancing every
vicious and unworthy applicant for charity, and by industriously
searching out and promptly relieving every real and deserving object of
distress.

[6] Proverbs xxix. 7.

[7] The custom recommended by St. Paul to the Galatians and Corinthians,
as we learn from 1 Corinthians xvi. 1, 2. has recently been brought into
prominent notice, and begins to be practiced in the Episcopal Church,
especially as applicable to the cause of missions. Why should it not be
adopted in all Christian families, and thus let the principle--the sound
and effective principle--of _systematic_ charity be extensively
established amongst us.

[8] Dr. Chalmers.

[9] Proverbs, xi. 17.

[10] Same, xix. 17.

[11] Isaiah, lviii. 10, 11.

[12] Matthew, v. 7.

[13] Matthew, xxv. 40.

[14] Psalms, xli. 1.

[15] Mrs. SARAH PARKMAN, the relict of Samuel Parkman, Esq., one of the
most distinguished of the merchants of this city. Those who knew her,
and have seen how faithfully, affectionately, and judiciously she
discharged the duties of a daughter, a wife, a parent to her own
offspring, and a mother to many others, who with her own children, have
abundant reason to "rise up and call her blessed;" or who have learned
from report the leading events of her virtuous, benevolent and active
life, will esteem the humble tribute thus paid to her memory, as
proceeding from an estimate of her excellencies by no means exaggerated.
As an evidence of the value of her services to the Asylum, the following
extract has, by permission, been taken from the Minutes of the Board of
Managers:--

_At a meeting of the Board of Managers of the Boston Female Asylum, held
on the last Tuesday of July, 1835,--_

VOTED, That the Managers are deeply sensible of the loss sustained since
