envy, in dancing, dicing, idleness, and gluttony.  He seeth all this, and
threateneth punishment for it.  He seeth it, which neither is deceived in
seeing, nor deceiveth when he threateneth.

Thus men serve the devil; for God is not thus served, albeit ye say ye
serve God.  No, the devil hath more service done unto him on one holiday,
than on many working days.  Let all these abuses be counted as nothing,
who is he that is not sorry, to see in so many holidays rich and wealthy
persons to flow in delicates, and men that live by their travail, poor
men, to lack necessary meat and drink for their wives and their children,
and that they cannot labour upon the holidays, except they will be cited,
and brought before our Officials?  Were it not the office of good
prelates to consult upon these matters, and to seek some remedy for them?
Ye shall see, my brethren, ye shall see once, what will come of this our
winking.

What think ye of these images that are had more than their fellows in
reputation; that are gone unto with such labour and weariness of the
body, frequented with such our cost, sought out and visited with such
confidence?  What say ye by these images, that are so famous, so noble,
so noted, being of them so many and so divers in England?  Do you think
that this preferring of picture to picture, image to image, is the right
use, and not rather the abuse, of images?  But you will say to me, Why
make ye all these interrogations? and why, in these your demands, do you
let and withdraw the good devotion of the people?  Be not all things well
done, that are done with good intent, when they be profitable to us?  So,
surely, covetousness both thinketh and speaketh.  Were it not better for
us, more for estimation, more meeter for men in our places, to cut away a
piece of this our profit, if we will not cut away all, than to wink at
such ungodliness, and so long to wink for a little lucre; specially if it
be ungodliness, and also seem unto you ungodliness?  These be two things,
so oft to seek mere images, and sometime to visit the relicks of saints.
And yet, as in those there may be much ungodliness committed, so there
may here some superstition be hid, if that sometime we chance to visit
pigs' bones instead of saints' relicks, as in time past it hath chanced,
I had almost said, in England.  Then this is too great a blindness, a
darkness too sensible, that these should be so commended in sermons of
some men, and preached to be done after such manner, as though they could
not be evil done; which, notwithstanding, are such, that neither God nor
man commandeth them to be done.  No, rather, men commanded them either
not to be done at all, or else more slowlier and seldomer to be done,
forasmuch as our ancestors made this constitution: "We command the
priests that they oft admonish the people, and in especial women, that
they make no vows but after long deliberation, consent of their husbands
and counsel of the priest."  The church of England in time past made this
constitution.  What saw they that made this decree?  They saw the
intolerable abuses of images.  They saw the perils that might ensue of
going on pilgrimage.  They saw the superstitious difference that men made
between image and image.  Surely, somewhat they saw.  The constitution is
so made, that in manner it taketh away all such pilgrimages.  For it so
plucketh away the abuse of them, that it leaveth either none or else
seldom use of them.  For they that restrain making vows for going of
pilgrimage, restrain also pilgrimage; seeing that for the most part it is
seen that few go on pilgrimage but vow-makers, and such as by promise
bind themselves to go.  And when, I pray you, should a man's wife go on
pilgrimage, if she went not before she had well debated the matter with
herself, and obtained the consent of her husband, being a wise man, and
were also counselled by a learned priest so to do?  When should she go
far off to these famous images?  For this the common people of England
think to be going on pilgrimage; to go to some dead and notable image out
of town, that is to say, far from their house.  Now if your forefathers
made this constitution, and yet thereby did nothing, the abuses every day
more and more increased, what is left for you to do?  Brethren and
fathers, if ye purpose to do any thing, what should ye sooner do, than to
take utterly away these deceitful and juggling images; or else, if ye
know any other mean to put away abuses, to shew it, if ye intend to
remove abuses?  Methink it should be grateful and pleasant to you to mark
the earnest mind of your forefathers, and to look upon their desire where
they say in their constitution, "We _command_ you," and not, "We
_counsel_ you."  How have we been so long a-cold, so long slack in
setting forth so wholesome a precept of the church of England, where we
be so hot in all things that have any gains in them, albeit they be
neither commanded us, nor yet given us by counsel; as though we had lever
the abuse of things should tarry still than, it taken away, lose our
profit?  To let pass the solemn and nocturnal bacchanals, the prescript
miracles, that are done upon certain days in the west part of England,
who hath not heard?  I think ye have heard of St. Blesis's heart which is
at Malverne, and of St. Algar's bones, how long they deluded the people:
I am afraid, to the loss of many souls.  Whereby men may well conjecture,
that all about in this realm there is plenty of such juggling deceits.
And yet hitherto ye have sought no remedy.  But even still the miserable
people are suffered to take the false miracles for the true, and to lie
still asleep in all kind of superstition.  God have mercy upon us!

Last of all, how think you of matrimony?  Is all well here?  What of
baptism?  Shall we evermore in ministering of it speak Latin, and not in
English rather, that the people may know what is said and done?

What think ye of these mass-priests, and of the masses themselves?  What
say ye?  Be all things here so without abuses, that nothing ought to be
amended?  Your forefathers saw somewhat, which made this constitution
against the venality and sale of masses, that, under pain of suspending,
no priest should sell his saying of tricennals or annals.  What saw they,
that made this constitution?  What priests saw they?  What manner of
masses saw they, trow ye?  But at the last, what became of so good a
constitution?  God have mercy upon us!  If there be nothing to be amended
abroad, concerning the whole, let every one of us make one better: if
there be neither abroad nor at home any thing to be amended and
redressed, my lords, be ye of good cheer, be merry; and at the least,
because we have nothing else to do, let us reason the matter how we may
be richer.  Let us fall to some pleasant communication; after let us go
home, even as good as we came hither, that is, right-begotten children of
the world, and utterly worldlings.  And while we live here, let us all
make bone cheer.  For after this life there is small pleasure, little
mirth for us to hope for; if now there be nothing to be changed in our
fashions.  Let us say, not as St. Peter did, "Our end approacheth nigh,"
this is an heavy hearing; but let us say as the evil servant said, "It
will be long ere my master come."  This is pleasant.  Let us beat our
fellows: let us eat and drink with drunkards.  Surely, as oft as we do
not take away the abuse of things, so oft we beat our fellows.  As oft as
we give not the people their true food, so oft we beat our fellows.  As
oft as we let them die in superstition, so oft we beat them.  To be
short, as oft as we blind lead them blind, so oft we beat, and grievously
beat our fellows.  When we welter in pleasures and idleness, then we eat
and drink with drunkards.  But God will come, God will come, he will not
tarry long away.  He will come upon such a day as we nothing look for
him, and at such hour as we know not.  He will come and cut us in pieces.
He will reward us as he doth the hypocrites.  He will set us where
wailing shall be, my brethren; where gnashing of teeth shall be, my
brethren.  And let here be the end of our tragedy, if ye will.  These be
the delicate dishes prepared for the world's well-beloved children.  These
be the wafers and junkets provided for worldly prelates--wailing and
gnashing of teeth.  Can there be any mirth, where these two courses last
all the feast?  Here we laugh, there we shall weep.  Our teeth make merry
here, ever dashing in delicates; there we shall be torn with teeth, and
do nothing but gnash and grind our own.  To what end have we now excelled
other in policy?  What have we brought forth at the last?  Ye see,
brethren, what sorrow, what punishment is provided for you, if ye be
worldlings.  If ye will not thus be vexed, be ye not the children of the
world.  If ye will not be the children of the world, be not stricken with
the love of worldly things; lean not upon them.  If ye will not die
eternally, live not worldly.  Come, go to; leave the love of your profit;
study for the glory and profit of Christ; seek in your consultations such
things as pertain to Christ, and bring forth at the last somewhat that
may please Christ.  Feed ye tenderly, with all diligence, the flock of
Christ.  Preach truly the word of God.  Love the light, walk in the
light, and so be ye the children of light while ye are in this world,
that ye may shine in the world that is to come bright as the sun, with
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; to whom be all honour, praise,
and glory.  Amen.




A SERMON OF THE REVEREND FATHER MASTER HUGH LATIMER, PREACHED IN THE
SHROUDS AT ST. PAUL'S CHURCH IN LONDON, ON THE EIGHTEENTH DAY OF JANUARY,
ANNO 1548.


   _Quaeunque scripta sunt ad nostram doctrinam scripta sunt_.--Rom. xv.
   4.

   "All things which are written, are written for our erudition and
   knowledge.  All things that are written in God's book, in the Bible
   book, in the book of the holy scripture, are written to be our
   doctrine."

I told you in my first sermon, honourable audience, that I purposed to
declare unto you two things.  The one, what seed should be sown in God's
field, in God's plough land; and the other, who should be the sowers:
that is to say, what doctrine is to be taught in Christ's church and
congregation, and what men should be the teachers and preachers of it.
The first part I have told you in the three sermons past, in which I have
assayed to set forth my plough, to prove what I could do.  And now I
shall tell you who be the ploughers: for God's word is a seed to be sown
in God's field, that is, the faithful congregation, and the preacher is
the sower.  And it is in the gospel: _Exivit qui seminat seminare semen
suum_; "He that soweth, the husbandman, the ploughman, went forth to sow
his seed."  So that a preacher is resembled to a ploughman, as it is in
another place: _Nemo admota aratro manu, et a tergo respiciens, aptus est
regno Dei_.  "No man that putteth his hand to the plough, and looketh
back, is apt for the kingdom of God."  That is to say, let no preacher be
negligent in doing his office.  Albeit this is one of the places that
hath been racked, as I told you of racking scriptures.  And I have been
one of them myself that hath racked it, I cry God mercy for it; and have
been one of them that have believed and expounded it against religious
persons that would forsake their order which they had professed, and
would go out of their cloister: whereas indeed it toucheth not monkery,
nor maketh any thing at all for any such matter; but it is directly
spoken of diligent preaching of the word of God.

For preaching of the gospel is one of God's plough-works, and the
preacher is one of God's ploughmen.  Ye may not be offended with my
similitude, in that I compare preaching to the labour and work of
ploughing, and the preacher to a ploughman: ye may not be offended with
this my similitude; for I have been slandered of some persons for such
things.  It hath been said of me, "Oh, Latimer! nay, as for him, I will
never believe him while I live, nor never trust him; for he likened our
blessed lady to a saffron-bag:" where indeed I never used that
similitude.  But it was, as I have said unto you before now, according to
that which Peter saw before in the spirit of prophecy, and said, that
there should come after men _per quos via veritatis maledictis
afficeretur_; there should come fellows "by whom the way of truth should
be evil spoken of, and slandered."  But in case I had used this
similitude, it had not been to be reproved, but might have been without
reproach.  For I might have said thus: as the saffron-bag that hath been
full of saffron, or hath had saffron in it, doth ever after savour and
smell of the sweet saffron that it contained; so our blessed lady, which
conceived and bare Christ in her womb, did ever after resemble the
manners and virtues of that precious babe that she bare.  And what had
our blessed lady been the worse for this? or what dishonour was this to
our blessed lady?  But as preachers must be wary and circumspect, that
they give not any just occasion to be slandered and ill spoken of by the
hearers, so must not the auditors be offended without cause.  For heaven
is in the gospel likened to a mustard-seed: it is compared also to a
piece of leaven; and as Christ saith, that at the last day he will come
like a thief: and what dishonour is this to God? or what derogation is
this to heaven?  Ye may not then, I say, be offended with my similitude,
for because I liken preaching to a ploughman's labour, and a prelate to a
ploughman.  But now you will ask me, whom I call a prelate?  A prelate is
that man, whatsoever he be, that hath a flock to be taught of him;
whosoever hath any spiritual charge in the faithful congregation, and
whosoever he be that hath cure of souls.  And well may the preacher and
the ploughman be likened together: first, for their labour of all seasons
of the year; for there is no time of the year in which the ploughman hath
not some special work to do: as in my country in Leicestershire, the
ploughman hath a time to set forth, and to assay his plough, and other
times for other necessary works to be done.  And then they also maybe
likened together for the diversity of works and variety of offices that
they have to do.  For as the ploughman first setteth forth his plough,
and then tilleth his land, and breaketh it in furrows, and sometime
ridgeth it up again; and at another time harroweth it and clotteth it,
and sometime dungeth it and hedgeth it, diggeth it and weedeth it,
purgeth and maketh it clean: so the prelate, the preacher, hath many
diverse offices to do.  He hath first a busy work to bring his
parishioners to a right faith, as Paul calleth it, and not a swerving
faith; but to a faith that embraceth Christ, and trusteth to his merits;
a lively faith, a justifying faith; a faith that maketh a man righteous,
without respect of works: as ye have it very well declared and set forth
in the Homily.  He hath then a busy work, I say, to bring his flock to a
right faith, and then to confirm them in the same faith: now casting them
down with the law, and with threatenings of God for sin; now ridging them
up again with the gospel, and with the promises of God's favour: now
weeding them, by telling them their faults, and making them forsake sin;
now clotting them, by breaking their stony hearts, and by making them
supplehearted, and making them to have hearts of flesh; that is, soft
hearts, and apt for doctrine to enter in: now teaching to know God
rightly, and to know their duty to God and their neighbours: now
exhorting them, when they know their duty, that they do it, and be
diligent in it; so that they have a continual work to do.  Great is their
business, and therefore great should be their hire.  They have great
labours, and therefore they ought to have good livings, that they may
commodiously feed their flock; for the preaching of the word of God unto
the people is called meat: scripture calleth it meat; not strawberries,
that come but once a year, and tarry not long, but are soon gone: but it
is meat, it is no dainties.  The people must have meat that must be
familiar and continual, and daily given unto them to feed upon.  Many
make a strawberry of it, ministering it but once a year; but such do not
the office of good prelates.  For Christ saith, _Quis putas est servus
prudens et fidelis_?  _Qui dat cibum in tempore_.  "Who think you is a
wise and faithful servant?  He that giveth meat in due time."  So that he
must at all times convenient preach diligently: therefore saith he, "Who
trow ye is a faithful servant?"  He speaketh it as though it were a rare
thing to find such a one, and as though he should say, there be but a few
of them to find in the world.  And how few of them there be throughout
this realm that give meat to their flock as they should do, the Visitors
can best tell.  Too few, too few; the more is the pity, and never so few
as now.

By this, then, it appeareth that a prelate, or any that hath cure of
soul, must diligently and substantially work and labour.  Therefore saith
Paul to Timothy, _Qui episcopatum desiderat, hic bonum opus desiderat_:
"He that desireth to have the office of a bishop, or a prelate, that man
desireth a good work."  Then if it be a good work, it is work; ye can
make but a work of it.  It is God's work, God's plough, and that plough
God would have still going.  Such then as loiter and live idly, are not
good prelates, or ministers.  And of such as do not preach and teach, nor
do their duties, God saith by his prophet Jeremy, _Maledictus qui facit
opus Dei fraudulenter_; "Cursed be the man that doth the work of God
fraudulently, guilefully or deceitfully:" some books have it
_negligenter_, "negligently or slackly."  How many such prelates, how
many such bishops, Lord, for thy mercy, are there now in England!  And
what shall we in this case do? shall we company with them?  O Lord, for
thy mercy! shall we not company with them?  O Lord, whither shall we flee
from them?  But "cursed be he that doth the work of God negligently or
guilefully."  A sore word for them that are negligent in discharging
their office, or have done it fraudulently; for that is the thing that
maketh the people ill.

But true it must be that Christ saith, _Multi sunt vocati, pauci vero
electi_: "Many are called, but few are chosen."  Here have I an occasion
by the way somewhat to say unto you; yea, for the place I alleged unto
you before out of Jeremy, the forty-eighth chapter.  And it was spoken of
a spiritual work of God, a work that was commanded to be done; and it was
of shedding blood, and of destroying the cities of Moab.  For, saith he,
"Cursed be he that keepeth back his sword from shedding of blood."  As
Saul, when he kept back the sword from shedding of blood at what time he
was sent against Amaleck, was refused of God for being disobedient to
God's commandment, in that he spared Agag the king.  So that that place
of the prophet was spoken of them that went to the destruction of the
cities of Moab, among the which there was one called Nebo, which was much
reproved for idolatry, superstition, pride, avarice, cruelty, tyranny,
and for hardness of heart; and for these sins was plagued of God and
destroyed.

Now what shall we say of these rich citizens of London?  What shall I say
of them?  Shall I call them proud men of London, malicious men of London,
merciless men of London?  No, no, I may not say so; they will be offended
with me then.  Yet must I speak.  For is there not reigning in London as
much pride, as much covetousness, as much cruelty, as much oppression,
and as much superstition, as was in Nebo?  Yes, I think, and much more
too.  Therefore I say, repent, O London; repent, repent.  Thou hearest
thy faults told thee, amend them, amend them.  I think, if Nebo had had
the preaching that thou hast, they would have converted.  And, you rulers
and officers, be wise and circumspect, look to your charge, and see you
do your duties; and rather be glad to amend your ill living than to be
angry when you are warned or told of your fault.  What ado was there made
in London at a certain man, because he said, (and indeed at that time on
a just cause,) "Burgesses!" quoth he, "nay, Butterflies."  Lord, what ado
there was for that word!  And yet would God they were no worse than
butterflies!  Butterflies do but their nature: the butterfly is not
covetous, is not greedy, of other men's goods; is not full of envy and
hatred, is not malicious, is not cruel, is not merciless.  The butterfly
glorieth not in her own deeds, nor preferreth the traditions of men
before God's word; it committeth not idolatry, nor worshippeth false
gods.  But London cannot abide to be rebuked; such is the nature of man.
If they be pricked, they will kick; if they be rubbed on the gall, they
will wince; but yet they will not amend their faults, they will not be
ill spoken of.  But how shall I speak well of them?  If you could be
content to receive and follow the word of God, and favour good preachers,
if you could bear to be told of your faults, if you could amend when you
hear of them, if you would be glad to reform that is amiss; if I might
see any such inclination in you, that you would leave to be merciless,
and begin to be charitable, I would then hope well of you, I would then
speak well of you.  But London was never so ill as it is now.  In times
past men were full of pity and compassion, but now there is no pity; for
in London their brother shall die in the streets for cold, he shall lie
sick at the door between stock and stock, I cannot tell what to call it,
and perish there for hunger: was there ever more unmercifulness in Nebo?
I think not.  In times past, when any rich man died in London, they were
wont to help the poor scholars of the Universities with exhibition.  When
any man died, they would bequeath great sums of money toward the relief
of the poor.  When I was a scholar in Cambridge myself; I heard very good
report of London, and knew many that had relief of the rich men of
London: but now I can hear no such good report, and yet I inquire of it,
and hearken for it; but now charity is waxen cold, none helpeth the
scholar, nor yet the poor.  And in those days, what did they when they
helped the scholars?  Marry, they maintained and gave them livings that
were very papists, and professed the pope's doctrine: and now that the
knowledge of God's word is brought to light, and many earnestly study and
labour to set it forth, now almost no man helpeth to maintain them.

Oh London, London! repent, repent; for I think God is more displeased
with London than ever he was with the city of Nebo.  Repent therefore,
repent, London, and remember that the same God liveth now that punished
Nebo, even the same God, and none other; and he will punish sin as well
now as he did then: and he will punish the iniquity of London, as well as
he did then of Nebo.  Amend therefore.  And ye that be prelates, look
well to your office, for right prelating is busy labouring, and not
