latter is that of a private document compiled from the public records with
a view to fixing the attention upon the particular person whose name
stands at the head of the list. This is quite in accord with the literary
art of Luke, who desires at this point in the narrative to center the
thought upon the supreme importance of Jesus, the Saviour, of whose
redeeming work he is now to write.

3. In the third place, while the names given by Luke, from Abraham to
David, correspond with those given by Matthew, the names from David to
Jesus differ. Some have attempted to explain the differences on the ground
that Matthew gives the genealogy of Joseph, while Luke gives that of Mary.
It is probably wiser to conclude that both give the genealogy of Joseph,
but Matthew traces the line of royal succession showing Jesus to be the
heir of David; while Luke gives the line of actual descent. This surely
accords with the purpose of Matthew who ever depicts Christ as the King,
and also with the purpose of Luke who is painting for us Christ as the
true, the ideal Man.

4. Then, too, the genealogy in Matthew begins with Abraham, while Luke
traces the line back to Adam. The former proves Jesus to be a Jew, the
true son of Abraham, in whom the covenant was fulfilled. The latter
reminds us that Jesus belongs to the whole human race. It makes us look
beyond all national lines and remember that this ideal Man on whom Luke is
fixing our thoughts is the Saviour of mankind.

5. When the genealogy closes with the statement that Adam was "the son of
God," it does indicate that Jesus was reckoned as one in the great
brotherhood of man, and like all his brothers, owed his origin to God; but
it does not mean to deny that he also sustained to God a relationship that
is absolutely unique. The genealogy opens with the statement that Jesus
was the reputed Son of Joseph; he was the legal heir of Joseph and so the
promised Son of David because of the marriage of Joseph to Mary; but he
was not really the son of Joseph; he was the "only begotten Son" of God.




D. The Temptation Of Jesus. Ch. 4:1-13


    1 And Jesus, full of the Holy Spirit, returned from the Jordan,
    and was led in the Spirit in the wilderness 2 during forty days,
    being tempted of the devil. And he did eat nothing in those days:
    and when they were completed, he hungered. 3 And the devil said
    unto him, If thou art the Son of God, command this stone that it
    become bread. 4 And Jesus answered unto him, It is written, Man
    shall not live by bread alone. 5 And he led him up, and showed him
    all the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time. 6 And the devil
    said unto him, To thee will I give all this authority, and the
    glory of them: for it hath been delivered unto me; and to
    whomsoever I will I give it. 7 If thou therefore wilt worship
    before me, it shall all be thine. 8 And Jesus answered and said
    unto him, It is written, Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and
    him only shalt thou serve. 9 And he led him to Jerusalem, and set
    him on the pinnacle of the temple, and said unto him, If thou art
    the Son of God, cast thyself down from hence: 10 for it is
    written,

      He shall give his angels charge concerning thee, to guard thee:

    11 and,

      On their hands they shall bear thee up,
      Lest haply thou dash thy foot against a stone.


    12 And Jesus answering said unto him, It is said, Thou shalt not
    make trial of the Lord thy God. 13 And when the devil had
    completed every temptation, he departed from him for a season.


The temptation of Jesus was the last step in the preparation for his
public ministry, and for many of his followers the final discipline for
service consists in such a trial as results in a new determination to live
not for self but for God.

The time of the temptation was significant. It was just after Jesus had
been filled with the Holy Spirit and had been assured anew of his divine
sonship. Under the influence of the Spirit he was brought to the place of
trial, and the temptation consisted, in large part, of the suggestion to
use for selfish ends the divine powers of which he was conscious, and to
forget his filial relation to his Father. While God never tempts us, in
the sense of enticing us to sin, it does seem to be a part of his gracious
purpose to allow us to be tested; these experiences come while we are
guided by his Spirit, and the essence of these temptations usually
consists in some inclination to please self in forgetfulness of our true
relation to God. The place of temptation was the wilderness, and there is
a sense in which the experience of moral struggle is always one of intense
loneliness. On the other hand, to live in a literal desert does not free
one from solicitation to sin. Wherever one may be, he can be certain of
the presence and sympathy of Christ; and victory is possible through faith
in him. This seems to be the supreme message of the story.

In both Matthew and Luke, three temptations are mentioned. They are
probably intended to be symbolic and inclusive; and under one or the other
of these enticements to evil can be grouped all the moral trials of
mankind. It is to be noted, however, that the order of the temptations
given by Luke differs from that of Matthew. In both accounts the first
temptation is to make bread of stone; but Luke mentions as the second
temptation that which is last in the account of Matthew, the temptation
which offered to Jesus all the kingdoms of the world. This was a fitting
climax to the testing of the King. Luke, however, mentions last the
temptation of Jesus to cast himself from the pinnacle of the Temple and
thus to test God. It is the temptation in the sphere of intellectual
desire and comes in the subtle form of presumptuous trust. It forms a true
climax in the testing of the ideal Man. The order given by Matthew is
suggested by the apostle John who mentions "the lust of the flesh and the
lust of the eyes and the vainglory of life." The order of Luke takes us
back to the story of Eden and to the first human sin, which was due to a
love for that which was "good for food" and "a delight to the eyes" and
"to be desired to make one wise." As in Eden also, the first temptation is
to doubt the goodness of God, the second to doubt his power, and the third
to distrust his wisdom. The victory of Jesus, however, was secured by the
triumph of his faith, and faith is still "the victory which overcomes the
world."

The first temptation, then, was in the sphere of bodily appetite; Jesus
was urged by Satan to transform a stone into bread. Why not? His appetite
was innocent; he possessed the ability to gratify it. The sin, however,
would lie in his using divine power to satisfy his human needs. If this
should have been his way of life, there would have been for him no hunger,
no pain, no sorrow, no cross. He would have defeated the very purpose for
which he came into the world; and anyone who makes the gratification of
appetite his supreme purpose is wasting his life. The essence of the
temptation, however, was to doubt the goodness of God, as Jesus showed by
his reply, "Man shall not live by bread alone." He was quoting from the
Old Testament; he was declaring that as by a miracle God preserved his
people of old, so now he would sustain the life of his Son. Jesus would
not be driven into a panic of fear. He believed that God would supply his
need and that, however strong the demand of appetite might be, the way and
the will of God are certain to secure satisfaction and the truest
enjoyment in life.

The second temptation was in the sphere of earthly ambition. It consisted
in an offer of unlimited human power. Satan would give to Jesus all the
kingdoms of the world on the condition that Jesus should bow down and
worship him. The force of the temptation consisted in the fact that Jesus
expected some day to rule the world. The Tempter suggested that he himself
possessed such power, and that if Jesus would submit to him he would
attain the desired goal of universal rule. It was a temptation to doubt
the power of God and to be disloyal to him, as is shown by the reply of
Jesus, "Thou shalt worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou
serve."

This is a familiar form of temptation to-day. The Devil does not ask us to
give up our purposes of ultimate helpfulness to others and service to the
world; he only asks us to compromise with the evil to attain our goal; he
insists that the end will justify the means; he intimates that in the
world of commerce, or society, or politics, evil methods are so much in
vogue that success can be attained only by complicity with evil. He tells
us that this is his world and that we can rule only in so far as we make
terms with him. For Christ the issue was clearly drawn. It was submission
to Satan or loyalty to God. The latter would involve opposition to the
ruler of this world and therefore would mean conflict and toil and tears
and a cross; but the ultimate issue would be universal rule. The same
choice opens for the followers of Christ. Unswerving loyalty is the way of
the cross, but this is the way of the crown.

The last temptation was in the sphere of intellectual curiosity. It
suggested to Jesus that he should see for himself what would be the
experience of one who should cast himself from a great height and then, by
angel hands, be kept from harm. This is the temptation to place oneself
needlessly in a situation of moral peril and then to expect to be
delivered by God's miraculous power. This is not faith, but presumption.
Satan still seeks by this device to destroy human souls. He urges men to
see for themselves, to increase their knowledge by experiences which
needlessly endanger their credit, their health, and their honor, to place
themselves in moral peril, to live beyond their means, to undertake tasks
beyond their strength. Jesus replied, "Thou shalt not make trial of the
Lord thy God." In the path of actual duty one need not fear the most
threatening danger; but one who puts himself in unnecessary peril need not
expect divine help. In his own time and way, and in the path of our
appointed service, God will open our eyes and give us such knowledge as we
need. To seek in presumption for such knowledge while endangering our
souls is to doubt the wisdom of God. Real trust preserves us from sinful
presumption.

The story closes with the statement that when Jesus had secured his
victory the Devil "departed from him for a season." The life of faith is a
life of repeated moral conflicts, but victory is assured to those who
trust in the goodness and power and wisdom of God.





IV. THE MINISTRY IN GALILEE. CHS. 4:14 TO 9:50




A. The First Period. Ch. 4:14-44



1. Jesus Preaching at Nazareth. Ch. 4:14-30


    14 And Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee: and
    a fame went out concerning him through all the region round about.
    15 And he taught in their synagogues, being glorified of all.


    16 And he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up: and he
    entered, as his custom was, into the synagogue on the sabbath day,
    and stood up to read. 17 And there was delivered unto him the book
    of the prophet Isaiah. And he opened the book, and found the place
    where it was written,

    18 The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
      Because he anointed me to preach good tidings to the poor:
      He hath sent me to proclaim release to the captives,
      And recovering of sight to the blind,
      To set at liberty them that are bruised,
    19 To proclaim the acceptable year of the Lord.


    20 And he closed the book, and gave it back to the attendant, and
    sat down: and the eyes of all in the synagogue were fastened on
    him. 21 And he began to say unto them, To-day hath this scripture
    been fulfilled in your ears. 22 And all bare him witness, and
    wondered at the words of grace which proceeded out of his mouth:
    and they said, Is not this Joseph's son? 23 And he said unto them,
    Doubtless ye will say unto me this parable, Physician, heal
    thyself: whatsoever we have heard done at Capernaum, do also here
    in thine own country. 24 And he said, Verily I say unto you, No
    prophet is acceptable in his own country. 25 But of a truth I say
    unto you, There were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah,
    when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when there
    came a great famine over all the land; 26 and unto none of them
    was Elijah sent, but only to Zarephath, in the land of Sidon, unto
    a woman that was a widow. 27 And there were many lepers in Israel
    in the time of Elisha the prophet; and none of them was cleansed,
    but only Naaman the Syrian. 28 And they were all filled with wrath
    in the synagogue, as they heard these things; 29 and they rose up,
    and cast him forth out of the city, and led him unto the brow of
    the hill whereon their city was built, that they might throw him
    down headlong. 30 But he passing through the midst of them went
    his way.


After his baptism and temptation Jesus remained for a time in Jerusalem
and in Judea and then returned to Galilee where he began that ministry to
which Luke devotes the next six chapters of his Gospel. Of this ministry
he mentions three features: First, it was wrought in the power of the Holy
Spirit; secondly, its fame extended through the entire country; and
thirdly, its essence consisted in the most arresting and impressive public
teaching.

The first recorded sermon of Jesus was preached in the synagogue at
Nazareth, the town in which he had spent his youth and early manhood. Luke
places this sermon at the very opening of his record of the public
ministry of Jesus, probably because he regarded it as containing the
program of that ministry, or as forming the proclamation of the saving
work of our Lord.

It was a Sabbath Day. The place of worship was crowded with the relatives
and friends and townsmen of Jesus. All were eager to hear one whom they
knew so well, and who had attained so sudden a renown. Either at his
request, or providentially, Jesus was handed the book of Isaiah to lead in
the reading of the Scripture. He found the place in the prophecy where, in
terms of the joy of Jubilee, the writer is describing the gladness of
those who are to return from their long captivity in Babylon. When Jesus
had finished the lesson he sat down, thereby taking the attitude of a
public teacher. As all gazed upon him intently, he undertook to show that
the prophecy was to be fulfilled by himself, claiming thereby to be the
promised Messiah. The very phrase with which the prophecy begins, "The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me," indicates, when applied to himself, that
he had been anointed, not with oil as a prophet or a priest or a king, but
with the Holy Spirit as the Anointed One, or the Christ of God. As such he
was "to preach good tidings to the poor," that is, to those in spiritual
as well as in physical poverty. He was to proclaim deliverance for those
enslaved by sin and to establish those principles which will result in
political freedom for mankind. He was "to set at liberty them that are
bruised," that is, to remove the consequences and the cruelties of
selfishness and of crime. He was to proclaim the era of universal
blessedness which will result from his perfected reign. Thus in these
words, which combine the figures of deliverance from captivity with those
of the joy of jubilee, Jesus expressed the gracious and beneficent
character of his ministry.

His auditors listened in amazement, unable to resist the charm of his
address or to deny the fascinating beauty of his words, but unable also to
admit his claim; they received his predictions with stubborn unbelief.
They expressed their incredulity and at the same time explained it by
their question, "Is not this Joseph's son?" They were saying in effect:
"Is not this man our neighbor, the carpenter, with whom we have all been
acquainted; do we not know him and his family? Surely he cannot be the
Messiah."

The reply of Jesus was to the effect that their unwillingness to accept
him was due in part to the fact that he had not wrought in their presence
the miracles which marked his ministry in other places. This is what he
meant by quoting the proverb, "Physician, heal thyself," that is,
"Establish your claim here as you have done elsewhere, if you expect to be
received as the Christ." Jesus also quoted another proverb to explain more
fully their jealous doubts: "No prophet is acceptable in his own country."
Those most familiar with great men usually are least able to appreciate
their greatness; "Familiarity breeds contempt," because men are so apt to
judge one another by false standards and by that which is accidental and
external and because so frequently men do not know those whom they think
they know the best. This same stupid lack of appreciation shadows human
lives to-day, and makes us fail to realize the worth of our friends and
the value of our opportunities, until it is too late. It even has its
tragic bearing upon the present ministry of Christ; some reject him for
reasons altogether superficial and foolish, thinking that they know him
perfectly because they long have been familiar with his name, while in
reality they fail to understand the real beauty of his person and the
