climbed the mountain once more to the glacier, and found again the
doorway for which he had often vainly searched. He entered the icy
portal, and was never seen or heard of again, for, according to the
legend, the goddess took him under her care, and bade him live in
her cave, where his every wish was gratified.



Tannhaeuser

According to a mediaeval tradition, Holda dwelt in a cave in the
Hoerselberg, in Thuringia, where she was known as Frau Venus, and
was considered as an enchantress who lured mortals into her realm,
where she detained them for ever, steeping their senses in all
manner of sensual pleasures. The most famous of her victims was
Tannhaeuser, who, after he had lived under her spell for a season,
experienced a revulsion of feeling which loosened her bonds over his
spirit and induced anxious thoughts concerning his soul. He escaped
from her power and hastened to Rome to confess his sins and seek
absolution. But when the Pope heard of his association with one of
the pagan goddesses whom the priests taught were nothing but demons,
he declared that the knight could no more hope for pardon than to
see his staff bear buds and bloom.


    "Hast thou within the nets of Satan lain?
    Hast thou thy soul to her perdition pledged?
    Hast thou thy lip to Hell's Enchantress lent,
    To drain damnation from her reeking cup?
    Then know that sooner from the withered staff
    That in my hand I hold green leaves shall spring,
    Than from the brand in hell-fire scorched rebloom
    The blossoms of salvation."

            Tannhaeuser (Owen Meredith).


Crushed with grief at this pronouncement, Tannhaeuser fled, and,
despite the entreaties of his faithful friend, Eckhardt, no great
time elapsed ere he returned to the Hoerselberg, where he vanished
within the cave. He had no sooner disappeared, however, than the Pope's
messengers arrived, proclaiming that he was pardoned, for the withered
staff had miraculously bloomed, thus proving to all that there was
no sin too heinous to be pardoned, providing repentance were sincere.


    "Dashed to the hip with travel, dewed with haste,
    A flying post, and in his hand he bore
    A withered staff o'erflourished with green leaves;
    Who,--followed by a crowd of youth and eld,
    That sang to stun with sound the lark in heaven,
    'A miracle! a miracle from Rome!
    Glory to God that makes the bare bough green!'--
    Sprang in the midst, and, hot for answer, asked
    News of the Knight Tannhaeuser."

            Tannhaeuser (Owen Meredith).


Holda was also the owner of a magic fountain called Quickborn, which
rivalled the famed fountain of youth, and of a chariot in which she
rode from place to place when she inspected her domain. This vehicle
having once suffered damage, the goddess bade a wheelwright repair it,
and when he had finished told him to keep some chips as his pay. The
man was indignant at such a meagre reward, and kept only a very few of
the number; but to his surprise he found these on the morrow changed
to gold.


      "Fricka, thy wife--
    This way she reins her harness of rams.
    Hey! how she whirls
    The golden whip;
    The luckless beasts
    Unboundedly bleat;
    Her wheels wildly she rattles;
    Wrath is lit in her look."

            Wagner (Forman's tr.).



Eastre, the Goddess of Spring

The Saxon goddess Eastre, or Ostara, goddess of spring, whose name has
survived in the English word Easter, is also identical with Frigga,
for she too is considered goddess of the earth, or rather of Nature's
resurrection after the long death of winter. This gracious goddess
was so dearly loved by the old Teutons, that even after Christianity
had been introduced they retained so pleasant a recollection of her,
that they refused to have her degraded to the rank of a demon, like
many of their other divinities, and transferred her name to their great
Christian feast. It had long been customary to celebrate this day by
the exchange of presents of coloured eggs, for the egg is the type of
the beginning of life; so the early Christians continued to observe
this rule, declaring, however, that the egg is also symbolical of the
Resurrection. In various parts of Germany, stone altars can still be
seen, which are known as Easter-stones, because they were dedicated
to the fair goddess Ostara. They were crowned with flowers by the
young people, who danced gaily around them by the light of great
bonfires,--a species of popular games practised until the middle of
the present century, in spite of the priests' denunciations and of
the repeatedly published edicts against them.



Bertha, the White Lady

In other parts of Germany, Frigga, Holda, or Ostara is known by
the name of Brechta, Bertha, or the White Lady. She is best known
under this title in Thuringia, where she was supposed to dwell in
a hollow mountain, keeping watch over the Heimchen, souls of unborn
children, and of those who died unbaptized. Here Bertha watched over
agriculture, caring for the plants, which her infant troop watered
carefully, for each babe was supposed to carry a little jar for that
express purpose. While the goddess was duly respected and her retreat
unmolested, she remained where she was; but tradition relates that
she once left the country with her infant train dragging her plough,
and settled elsewhere to continue her kind ministrations. Bertha
is the legendary ancestress of several noble families, and she is
supposed to be the same as the industrious queen of the same name,
the mythical mother of Charlemagne, whose era has become proverbial,
for in speaking of the Golden Age in France and Germany it is customary
to say, "in the days when Bertha spun."

As this Bertha is supposed to have developed a very large and flat
foot, from continually pressing the treadle of her wheel, she is
often represented in mediaeval art as a woman with a splay foot,
and hence known as la reine pedauque.

As ancestress of the imperial house of Germany, the White Lady is
supposed to appear in the palace before a death or misfortune in
the family, and this superstition is still so rife in Germany, that
the newspapers in 1884 contained the official report of a sentinel,
who declared that he had seen her flit past him in one of the palace
corridors.

As Bertha was renowned for her spinning, she naturally was regarded
as the special patroness of that branch of female industry, and was
said to flit through the streets of every village, at nightfall,
during the twelve nights between Christmas and January 6, peering
into every window to inspect the spinning of the household.

The maidens whose work had been carefully performed were rewarded by
a present of one of her own golden threads or a distaff full of extra
fine flax; but wherever a careless spinner was found, her wheel was
broken, her flax soiled, and if she had failed to honour the goddess
by eating plenty of the cakes baked at that period of the year,
she was cruelly punished.

In Mecklenburg, this same goddess is known as Frau Gode, or Wode, the
female form of Wuotan or Odin, and her appearance is always considered
the harbinger of great prosperity. She is also supposed to be a great
huntress, and to lead the Wild Hunt, mounted upon a white horse,
her attendants being changed into hounds and all manner of wild beasts.

In Holland she was called Vrou-elde, and from her the Milky Way is
known by the Dutch as Vrou-elden-straat; while in parts of Northern
Germany she was called Nerthus (Mother Earth). Her sacred car was
kept on an island, presumably Ruegen, where the priests guarded it
carefully until she appeared to take a yearly journey throughout
her realm to bless the land. The goddess, her face completely hidden
by a thick veil, then sat in this car, which was drawn by two cows,
and she was respectfully escorted by her priests. When she passed,
the people did homage by ceasing all warfare, and laying aside their
weapons. They donned festive attire, and began no quarrel until
the goddess had again retired to her sanctuary. Then both car and
goddess were bathed in a secret lake (the Schwartze See, in Ruegen),
which swallowed up the slaves who had assisted at the bathing, and
once more the priests resumed their watch over the sanctuary and
grove of Nerthus or Hlodyn, to await her next appearance.

In Scandinavia, this goddess was also known as Huldra, and boasted of
a train of attendant wood-nymphs, who sometimes sought the society of
mortals, to enjoy a dance upon the village green. They could always
be detected, however, by the tip of a cow's tail which trailed from
beneath their long snow-white garments. These Huldra folk were the
special protectors of the cattle on the mountain-sides, and were said
to surprise the lonely traveller, at times, by the marvellous beauty
of the melodies they sang to beguile the hours at their tasks.






CHAPTER IV: THOR


The Thunderer

According to some mythologists, Thor, or Donar, is the son of Joerd
(Erda) and of Odin, but others state that his mother was Frigga,
queen of the gods. This child was very remarkable for his great size
and strength, and very soon after his birth amazed the assembled
gods by playfully lifting and throwing about ten great bales of bear
skins. Although generally good-tempered, Thor would occasionally fly
into a terrible rage, and as he was very dangerous at these times, his
mother, unable to control him, sent him away from home and entrusted
him to the care of Vingnir (the winged), and of Hlora (heat). These
foster-parents, who are also considered as the personification of
sheet-lightning, soon managed to control their troublesome charge, and
brought him up so wisely, that the gods entertained a very grateful
recollection of their kind offices. Thor himself, recognising all he
owed them, assumed the names of Vingthor and Hlorridi, by which he
is also known.


                            "Cry on, Vingi-Thor,
    With the dancing of the ring-mail and the smitten shields of war."

            Sigurd the Volsung (William Morris).


Having attained his full growth and the age of reason, Thor was
admitted to Asgard among the other gods, where he occupied one of the
twelve seats in the great judgment hall. He was also given the realm
of Thrud-vang or Thrud-heim, where he built a wonderful palace called
Bilskirnir (lightning), the most spacious in all Asgard. It contained
five hundred and forty halls for the accommodation of the thralls,
who after death were welcomed to his home, where they received equal
treatment with their masters in Valhalla, for Thor was the patron
god of the peasants and lower classes.


    "Five hundred halls
    And forty more,
    Methinketh, hath
    Bowed Bilskirnir.
    Of houses roofed
    There's none I know
    My son's surpassing."

            Saemund's Edda (Percy's tr.).


As he was god of thunder, Thor alone was never allowed to pass over
the wonderful bridge Bifroest, lest he should set it aflame by the
heat of his presence; and when he wished to join his fellow gods by
the Urdar fountain, under the shade of the sacred tree Yggdrasil, he
was forced to make his way thither on foot, wading through the rivers
Kormt and Ormt, and the two streams Kerlaug, to the trysting place.

Thor, who was honoured as the highest god in Norway, came second in
the trilogy of all the other countries, and was called "old Thor,"
because he is supposed by some mythologists to have belonged to an
older dynasty of gods, and not on account of his actual age, for he
was represented and described as a man in his prime, tall and well
formed, with muscular limbs and bristling red hair and beard, from
which, in moments of anger, the sparks flew in showers.


    "First, Thor with the bent brow,
      In red beard muttering low,
      Darting fierce lightnings from eyeballs that glow,
    Comes, while each chariot wheel
    Echoes in thunder peal,
      As his dread hammer shock
      Makes Earth and Heaven rock,
    Clouds rifting above, while Earth quakes below."

            Valhalla (J. C. Jones).


The Northern races further adorned him with a crown, on each point
of which was either a glittering star, or a steadily burning flame,
so that his head was ever surrounded by a kind of halo of fire,
his own element.



Thor's Hammer

Thor was the proud possessor of a magic hammer called Mioelnir
(the crusher) which he hurled at his enemies, the frost-giants,
with destructive power, and which possessed the wonderful property
of always returning to his hand, however far away he might hurl it.


    "I am the Thunderer!
    Here in my Northland,
    My fastness and fortress,
    Reign I forever!

    "Here amid icebergs
    Rule I the nations;
    This is my hammer,
    Mioelnir the mighty;
    Giants and sorcerers
    Cannot withstand it!"

            Saga of King Olaf (Longfellow).


As this huge hammer, the emblem of the thunderbolts, was generally
red-hot, the god had an iron gauntlet called Iarn-greiper, which
enabled him to grasp it firmly. He could hurl Mioelnir a great distance,
and his strength, which was always remarkable, was doubled when he
wore his magic belt called Megin-gioerd.


    "This is my girdle:
    Whenever I brace it,
    Strength is redoubled!"

            Saga of King Olaf (Longfellow).


Thor's hammer was considered so very sacred by the ancient Northern
people, that they were wont to make the sign of the hammer, as the
Christians later taught them to make the sign of the cross, to ward
off all evil influences, and to secure blessings. The same sign
was also made over the newly born infant when water was poured over
its head and a name given. The hammer was used to drive in boundary
stakes, which it was considered sacrilegious to remove, to hallow
the threshold of a new house, to solemnise a marriage, and, lastly,
it played a part in the consecration of the funeral pyre upon which
the bodies of heroes, together with their weapons and steeds, and,
in some cases, with their wives and dependents, were burned.

In Sweden, Thor, like Odin, was supposed to wear a broad-brimmed hat,
and hence the storm-clouds in that country are known as Thor's hat, a
name also given to one of the principal mountains in Norway. The rumble
and roar of the thunder were said to be the roll of his chariot, for
he alone among the gods never rode on horseback, but walked, or drove
in a brazen chariot drawn by two goats, Tanngniostr (tooth-cracker),
and Tanngrisnr (tooth-gnasher), from whose teeth and hoofs the sparks
constantly flew.


    "Thou camest near the next, O warrior Thor!
    Shouldering thy hammer, in thy chariot drawn,
    Swaying the long-hair'd goats with silver'd rein."

            Balder Dead (Matthew Arnold).


When the god thus drove from place to place, he was called Aku-thor,
or Thor the charioteer, and in Southern Germany the people, fancying
a brazen chariot alone inadequate to furnish all the noise they heard,
declared it was loaded with copper kettles, which rattled and clashed,
and therefore often called him, with disrespectful familiarity,
the kettle-vendor.



Thor's Family

Thor was twice married; first to the giantess Iarnsaxa (iron stone),
who bore him two sons, Magni (strength) and Modi (courage), both
destined to survive their father and the twilight of the gods,
and rule over the new world which was to rise like a phoenix from
the ashes of the first. His second wife was Sif, the golden-haired,
who also bore him two children, Lorride, and a daughter named Thrud,
a young giantess renowned for her size and strength. True to the
well-known affinity of contrast, Thrud was wooed by the dwarf Alvis,
whom she rather favoured; and one evening, when this suitor, who,
being a dwarf, could not face the light of day, presented himself in
Asgard to sue for her hand, the assembled gods did not refuse their
consent. They had scarcely signified their approbation, however, when
Thor, who had been absent, suddenly appeared, and casting a glance of
contempt upon the puny lover, declared he would have to prove that his
knowledge atoned for his small stature, before he could win his bride.

To test Alvis's mental powers, Thor then questioned him in the
language of the gods, Vanas, elves, and dwarfs, artfully prolonging
his examination until sunrise, when the first beam of light, falling
upon the unhappy dwarf, petrified him. There he stood, an enduring
example of the gods' power, to serve as a warning to all other dwarfs
who might dare to test it.


    "Ne'er in human bosom
    Have I found so many
    Words of the old time.
    Thee with subtlest cunning
    Have I yet befooled.
    Above ground standeth thou, dwarf
    By day art overtaken,
    Bright sunshine fills the hall."

            Saemund's Edda (Howitt's version).



Sif, the Golden-haired

Sif, Thor's wife, was very vain of a magnificent head of long golden
hair which covered her from head to foot like a brilliant veil; and
as she too was a symbol of the earth, her hair was said to represent
the long grass, or the golden grain covering the Northern harvest
fields. Thor was very proud of his wife's beautiful hair; imagine
his dismay, therefore, upon waking one morning, to find her shorn,
and as bald and denuded of ornament as the earth when the grain has
been garnered, and nothing but the stubble remains! In his anger,
Thor sprang to his feet, vowing he would punish the perpetrator
of this outrage, whom he immediately and rightly conjectured to be
Loki, the arch-plotter, ever on the look-out for some evil deed to
perform. Seizing his hammer, Thor went in search of Loki, who attempted
to evade the irate god by changing his form. But it was all to no
purpose; Thor soon overtook him, and without more ado caught him by
the throat, and almost strangled him ere he yielded to his imploring
signs and relaxed his powerful grip. When he could draw his breath,
Loki begged forgiveness, but all his entreaties were vain, until he
promised to procure for Sif a new head of hair, as beautiful as the
first, and as luxuriant in growth.


    "And thence for Sif new tresses I'll bring
      Of gold, ere the daylight's gone,
    So that she shall liken a field in spring,
      With its yellow-flowered garment on."

            The Dwarfs, Oehlenschlaeger (Pigott's tr.).


Then Thor consented to let the traitor go; so Loki rapidly crept down
into the bowels of the earth, where Svart-alfa-heim was situated,
to beg the dwarf Dvalin to fashion not only the precious hair, but
a present for Odin and Frey, whose anger he wished to disarm.

His request was favourably received and the dwarf fashioned the spear
Gungnir, which never failed in its aim, and the ship Skidbladnir,
which, always wafted by favourable winds, could sail through the air
as well as on the water, and which had this further magic property,
that although it could contain the gods and all their steeds, it
could be folded up into the very smallest compass and thrust in
one's pocket. Lastly, he spun the finest golden thread, from which
he fashioned the hair required for Sif, declaring that as soon as it
touched her head it would grow fast there and become as her own.


    "Though they now seem dead, let them touch but her head,
      Each hair shall the life-moisture fill;
    Nor shall malice nor spell henceforward prevail
      Sif's tresses to work aught of ill."

            The Dwarfs, Oehlenschlaeger (Pigott's tr.).


Loki was so pleased with these proofs of the dwarfs' skill that he
declared the son of Ivald to be the most clever of smiths--words which
were overheard by Brock, another dwarf, who exclaimed that he was sure
his brother Sindri could produce three objects which would surpass
those which Loki held, not only in intrinsic value, but also in magical
properties. Loki immediately challenged the dwarf to show his skill,
wagering his head against Brock's on the result of the undertaking.

Sindri, apprised of the wager, accepted Brock's offer to blow the
bellows, warning him, however, that he must work persistently and
not for a moment relax his efforts if he wished him to succeed; then
he threw some gold in the fire, and went out to bespeak the favour
of the hidden powers. During his absence Brock diligently plied the
bellows, while Loki, hoping to make him pause, changed himself into
a gadfly and cruelly stung his hand. In spite of the pain, the dwarf
kept on blowing, and when Sindri returned, he drew out of the fire
an enormous wild boar, called Gullin-bursti, because of its golden
bristles, which had the power of radiating light as it flitted across
the sky, for it could travel through the air with marvellous velocity.


    "And now, strange to tell, from the roaring fire
      Came the golden-haired Gullinboerst,
