        supremacy of Spirit.

                       Christianity still rejected

        Christianity is again demonstrating the Life that is
97:30   Truth, and the Truth that is Life, by the apos-
        tolic work of casting out error and healing the
        sick. Earth has no repayment for the persecutions which
98:1    attend a new step in Christianity; but the spiritual recom-
        pense of the persecuted is assured in the elevation of ex-
98:3    istence above mortal discord and in the gift of divine Love.

                        Spiritual foreshadowings

        The prophet of to-day beholds in the mental horizon
        the signs of these times, the reappearance of the Chris-
98:6    tianity which heals the sick and destroys error,
        and no other sign shall be given. Body can-
        not be saved except through Mind. The Science of Chris-
98:9    tianity is misinterpreted by a material age, for it is the
        healing influence of Spirit (not /spirits/) which the material
        senses cannot comprehend, which can only be spiritu-
98:12   ally discerned. Creeds, doctrines, and human hypotheses
        do not express Christian Science; much less can they
        demonstrate it.

                          Revelation of Science

98:15   Beyond the frail premises of human beliefs, above the
        loosening grasp of creeds, the demonstration of Christian
        Mind-healing stands a revealed and practical
98:18   Science. It is imperious throughout all ages
        as Christ's revelation of Truth, of Life, and of Love, which
        remains inviolate for every man to understand and to
98:21   practise.

                   Science as foreign to all religion

        For centuries - yea, always - natural science has not
        been considered a part of any religion, Christianity not
98:24   excepted. Even now multitudes consider that
        which they call /science/ has no proper con-
        nection with faith and piety. Mystery does
98:27   not enshroud Christ's teachings, and they are not theo-
        retical and fragmentary, but practical and complete; and
        being practical and complete, they are not deprived of
98:30   their essential vitality.

                           Key to the kingdom

        The way through which immortality and life are learned
        is not ecclesiastical but Christian, not human but divine,
99:1    not physical but metaphysical, not material but scien-
        tifically spiritual. Human philosophy, ethics, and super-
99:3    stition afford no demonstrable divine Principle
        by which mortals can escape from sin; yet
        to escape from sin, is what the Bible demands. "Work
99:6    out your own salvation with fear and trembling," says
        the apostle, and he straightway adds: "for it is God
        which worketh in you both to will and to do of His good
99:9    pleasure" (Philippians ii. 12, 13). Truth has furnished
        the key to the kingdom, and with this key Christian Sci-
        ence has opened the door of the human understanding.
99:12   None may pick the lock nor enter by some other door.
        The ordinary teachings are material and not spiritual.
        Christian Science teaches only that which is spiritual and
99:15   divine, and not human. Christian Science is unerring
        and Divine; the human sense of things errs because it
        is human.

99:18   Those individuals, who adopt theosophy, spiritualism,
        or hypnotism, may possess natures above some others
        who eschew their false beliefs. Therefore my contest is
99:21   not with the individual, but with the false system. I
        love mankind, and shall continue to labor and to endure.

        The calm, strong currents of true spirituality, the
99:24   manifestations of which are health, purity, and self-
        immolation, must deepen human experience, until the
        beliefs of material existence are seen to be a bald imposi-
99:27   tion, and sin, disease, and death give everlasting place
        to the scientific demonstration of divine Spirit and to
        God's spiritual, perfect man.




        CHAPTER V - ANIMAL MAGNETISM UNMASKED

        For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders,
        adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness,
        blasphemies: these are the things which defile a man.
         - JESUS.

                         Earliest investigations

100:1   MESMERISM or animal magnetism was first brought
        into notice by Mesmer in Germany in 1775. Ac-
100:3   cording to the American Cyclopaedia, he regarded this
        so-called force, which he said could be ex-
        erted by one living organism over another, as
100:6   a means of alleviating disease. His propositions were
        as follows:

        "There exists a mutual influence between the celestial
100:9   bodies, the earth, and animated things. Animal bodies
        are susceptible to the influence of this agent, disseminat-
        ing itself through the substance of the nerves."
100:12  In 1784, the French government ordered the medical
        faculty of Paris to investigate Mesmer's theory and to
        report upon it. Under this order a commission was
100:15  appointed, and Benjamin Franklin was one of the com-
        missioners. This commission reported to the govern-
        ment as follows:

100:18  "In regard to the existence and utility of animal mag-
        netism, we have come to the unanimous conclusions that
        there is no proof of the existence of the animal magnetic
101:1   fluid; that the violent effects, which are observed in
        the public practice of magnetism, are due to manipula-
101:3   tions, or to the excitement of the imagination and the
        impressions made upon the senses; and that there is one
        more fact to be recorded in the history of the errors of
101:6   the human mind, and an important experiment upon
        the power of the imagination."

                         Clairvoyance, magnetism

        In 1837, a committee of nine persons was appointed,
101:9   among whom were Roux, Bouillaud, and Clo-
        quet, which tested during several sessions the
        phenomena exhibited by a reputed clairvoyant. Their
101:12  report stated the results as follows:

        "The facts which had been promised by Monsieur
        Berna [the magnetizer] as conclusive, and as adapted to
101:15  throw light on physiological and therapeutical questions,
        are certainly not conclusive in favor of the doctrine of
        animal magnetism, and have nothing in common with
101:18  either physiology or therapeutics."

        This report was adopted by the Royal Academy of
        Medicine in Paris.

                          Personal conclusions

101:21  The author's own observations of the workings of
        animal magnetism convince her that it is not
        a remedial agent, and that its effects upon
101:24  those who practise it, and upon their subjects who do
        not resist it, lead to moral and to physical death.

        If animal magnetism seems to alleviate or to cure dis-
101:27  ease, this appearance is deceptive, since error cannot
        remove the effects of error. Discomfort under error is
        preferable to comfort. In no instance is the effect of
101:30  animal magnetism, recently called hypnotism, other
        than the effect of illusion. Any seeming benefit derived
        from it is proportional to one's faith in esoteric magic.

                              Mere negation

102:1   Animal magnetism has no scientific foundation, for
        God governs all that is real, harmonious, and eternal, and
102:3   His power is neither animal nor human. Its
        basis being a belief and this belief animal, in
        Science animal magnetism, mesmerism, or hypnotism is
102:6   a mere negation, possessing neither intelligence, power,
        nor reality, and in sense it is an unreal concept of the so-
        called mortal mind.

102:9   There is but one real attraction, that of Spirit. The
        pointing of the needle to the pole symbolizes this all-
        embracing power or the attraction of God, divine Mind.

102:12  The planets have no more power over man than over
        his Maker, since God governs the universe; but man,
        reflecting God's power, has dominion over all the earth
102:15  and its hosts.

                              Hidden agents

        The mild forms of animal magnetism are disappear-
        ing, and its aggressive features are coming to the front.
102:18  The looms of crime, hidden in the dark re-
        cesses of mortal thought, are every hour weav-
        ing webs more complicated and subtle. So secret are the
102:21  present methods of animal magnetism that they ensnare
        the age into indolence, and produce the very apathy on
        the subject which the criminal desires. The following
102:24  is an extract from the Boston Herald:

        "Mesmerism is a problem not lending itself to an easy
        explanation and development. It implies the exercise
102:27  of despotic control, and is much more likely to be abused
        by its possessor, than otherwise employed, for the in-
        dividual or society."

                            Mental despotism

102:30  Mankind must learn that evil is not power. Its so-
        called despotism is but a phase of nothingness. Christian
        Science despoils the kingdom of evil, and pre-eminently
103:1   promotes affection and virtue in families and therefore
        in the community. The Apostle Paul refers to the
103:3   personification of evil as "the god of this
        world," and further defines it as dishonesty
        and craftiness. Sin was the Assyrian moon-god.

                       Liberation of mental powers

103:6   The destruction of the claims of mortal mind through
        Science, by which man can escape from sin
        and mortality, blesses the whole human fam-
103:9   ily. As in the beginning, however, this libera-
        tion does not scientifically show itself in a knowledge of
        both good and evil, for the latter is unreal.
103:12  On the other hand, Mind-science is wholly separate
        from any half-way impertinent knowledge, because Mind-
        science is of God and demonstrates the divine Principle,
103:15  working out the purposes of good only. The maximum
        of good is the infinite God and His idea, the All-in-all.
        Evil is a suppositional lie.

                           The genus of error

103:18  As named in Christian Science, animal magnetism or
        hypnotism is the specific term for error, or mortal mind.
        It is the false belief that mind is in matter, and
103:21  is both evil and good; that evil is as real as
        good and more powerful. This belief has not one qual-
        ity of Truth. It is either ignorant or malicious. The
103:24  malicious form of hypnotism ultimates in moral idiocy.
        The truths of immortal Mind sustain man, and they anni-
        hilate the fables of mortal mind, whose flimsy and gaudy
103:27  pretensions, like silly moths, singe their own wings and
        fall into dust.

                          Thought-transference

        In reality there is no /mortal/ mind, and conse-
103:30  quently no transference of mortal thought
        and will-power. Life and being are of
        God. In Christian Science, man can do no harm, for
104:1   scientific thoughts are true thoughts, passing from God
        to man.


104:3   When Christian Science and animal magnetism are
        both comprehended, as they will be at no distant date,
        it will be seen why the author of this book has been
104:6   so unjustly persecuted and belied by wolves in sheep's
        clothing.

        Agassiz, the celebrated naturalist and author, has
104:9   wisely said: "Every great scientific truth goes through
        three stages. First, people say it conflicts with the Bible.
        Next, they say it has been discovered before. Lastly,
104:12  they say they have always believed it."

                     Perfection of divine government

        Christian Science goes to the bottom of mental action,
        and reveals the theodicy which indicates the rightness of
104:15  all divine action, as the emanation of divine
        Mind, and the consequent wrongness of the
        opposite so-called action, - evil, occultism,
104:18  necromancy, mesmerism, animal magnetism, hypnotism.

                          Adulteration of Truth

        The medicine of Science is divine Mind; and dishonesty,
        sensuality, falsehood, revenge, malice, are animal pro-
104:21  pensities and by no means the mental quali-
        ties which heal the sick. The hypnotizer
        employs one error to destroy another. If he heals sick-
104:24  ness through a belief, and a belief originally caused the
        sickness, it is a case of the greater error overcoming the
        lesser. This greater error thereafter occupies the ground,
104:27  leaving the case worse than before it was grasped by the
        stronger error.

                           Motives considered

        Our courts recognize evidence to prove the motive as
104:30  well as the commission of a crime. Is it not
        clear that the human mind must move the
        body to a wicked act? Is not mortal mind the mur-
105:1   derer? The hands, without mortal mind to direct them,
        could not commit a murder.

                              Mental crimes

105:3   Courts and juries judge and sentence mortals in order
        to restrain crime, to prevent deeds of violence or to punish
        them. To say that these tribunals have no
105:6   jurisdiction over the carnal or mortal mind,
        would be to contradict precedent and to admit that the
        power of human law is restricted to matter, while mortal
105:9   mind, evil, which is the real outlaw, defies justice and is
        recommended to mercy. Can matter commit a crime?
        Can matter be punished? Can you separate the men-
105:12  tality from the body over which courts hold jurisdiction?
        Mortal mind, not matter, is the criminal in every case;
        and human law rightly estimates crime, and courts rea-
105:15  sonably pass sentence, according to the motive.

                           Important decision

        When our laws eventually take cognizance of mental
        crime and no longer apply legal rulings wholly to physical
105:18  offences, these words of Judge Parmenter of
        Boston will become historic: "I see no reason
        why metaphysics is not as important to medicine as to
105:21  mechanics or mathematics."

                             Evil let loose

        Whoever uses his developed mental powers like an es-
        caped felon to commit fresh atrocities as opportunity oc-
105:24  curs is never safe. God will arrest him. Di-
        vine justice will manacle him. His sins will
        be millstones about his neck, weighing him down to the
105:27  depths of ignominy and death. The aggravation of er-
        ror foretells its doom, and confirms the ancient axiom:
        "Whom the gods would destroy, they first make mad."

                       The misuse of mental power

105:30  The distance from ordinary medical prac-
        tice to Christian Science is full many a league
        in the line of light; but to go in healing from the use of
106:1   inanimate drugs to the criminal misuse of human will-
        power, is to drop from the platform of common manhood
106:3   into the very mire of iniquity, to work against the free
        course of honesty and justice, and to push vainly against
        the current running heavenward.

                         Proper self-government

106:6   Like our nation, Christian Science has its Declaration
        of Independence. God has endowed man with inalien-
        able rights, among which are self-government,
106:9   reason, and conscience. Man is properly self-
        governed only when he is guided rightly and governed by
        his Maker, divine Truth and Love.

106:12  Man's rights are invaded when the divine order is in-
        terfered with, and the mental trespasser incurs the divine
        penalty due this crime.

                              Right methods

106:15  Let this age, which sits in judgment on Christian
        Science, sanction only such methods as are demonstrable
        in Truth and known by their fruit, and classify
106:18  all others as did St. Paul in his great epistle
        to the Galatians, when he wrote as follows:

        "Now the works of the flesh are manifest, which are
106:21  these; Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,
        idolatry, /witchcraft/, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath,
        strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness,
106:24  revellings and such like: of the which I tell you before,
        as I have also told you in time past, that they which do
        such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God. But
106:27  the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering,
        gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against
        such there is no law."




        CHAPTER VI - SCIENCE, THEOLOGY, MEDICINE

        But I certify you, brethren, that the gospel which was preached
        of me is not after man. For I neither received it of man, neither
        was I taught it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ. - PAUL.

        The kingdom of heaven is like unto leaven, which a woman
        took, and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole
        was leavened. - JESUS.

                      Christian Science discovered

107:1   In the year 1866, I discovered the Christ Science or
        divine laws of Life, Truth, and Love, and
107:3   named my discovery Christian Science. God
        had been graciously preparing me during many
        years for the reception of this final revelation of the ab-
107:6   solute divine Principle of scientific mental healing.

                      Mission of Christian Science

        This apodictical Principle points to the revelation of
        Immanuel, "God with us," - the sovereign ever-pres-
107:9   ence, delivering the children of men from
        every ill "that flesh is heir to." Through
        Christian Science, religion and medicine are
107:12  inspired with a diviner nature and essence; fresh pinions
        are given to faith and understanding, and thoughts ac-
        quaint themselves intelligently with God.

                          Discontent with life

107:15  Feeling so perpetually the false consciousness that life
        inheres in the body, yet remembering that in
        reality God is our Life, we may well tremble
107:18  in the prospect of those days in which we must say, "I
        have no pleasure in them."

108:1   Whence came to me this heavenly conviction, - a con-
        viction antagonistic to the testimony of the physical senses?
108:3   According to St. Paul, it was "the gift of the grace of
        God given unto me by the effectual working of His power."
        It was the divine law of Life and Love, unfolding to me
108:6   the demonstrable fact that matter possesses neither sen-
        sation nor life; that human experiences show the falsity
        of all material things; and that immortal cravings, "the
108:9   price of learning love," establish the truism that the
        only sufferer is mortal mind, for the divine Mind cannot
        suffer.

                          Demonstrable evidence

108:12  My conclusions were reached by allowing the evidence
        of this revelation to multiply with mathematical certainty
        and the lesser demonstration to prove the
108:15  greater, as the product of three multiplied by
        three, equalling nine, proves conclusively that three times
        three duodecillions must be nine duodecillions, - not
108:18  a fraction more, not a unit less.

                        Light shining in darkness

        When apparently near the confines of mortal existence,
        standing already within the shadow of the death-valley,
108:21  I learned these truths in divine Science: that
        all real being is in God, the divine Mind, and
        that Life, Truth, and Love are all-powerful and ever-
108:24  present; that the opposite of Truth, - called error, sin,
        sickness, disease, death, - is the false testimony of false
        material sense, of mind in matter; that this false sense
108:27  evolves, in belief, a subjective state of mortal mind which
        this same so-called mind names /matter/ thereby shutting
        out the true sense of Spirit.

                          New lines of thought

108:30  My discovery, that erring, mortal, misnamed
        /mind/ produces all the organism and action of
        the mortal body, set my thoughts to work in new channels,
109:1   and led up to my demonstration of the proposition that
        Mind is All and matter is naught as the leading factor in
109:3   Mind-science.

                           Scientific evidence

        Christian Science reveals incontrovertibly that Mind
        is All-in-all, that the only realities are the divine Mind
109:6   and idea. This great fact is not, however, seen
        to be supported by sensible evidence, until its
        divine Principle is demonstrated by healing the sick and
109:9   thus proved absolute and divine. This proof once seen,
        no other conclusion can be reached.

                            Solitary research

        For three years after my discovery, I sought the solu-
109:12  tion of this problem of Mind-healing, searched the Scrip-
        tures and read little else, kept aloof from so-
        ciety, and devoted time and energies to dis-
109:15  covering a positive rule. The search was sweet, calm, and
        buoyant with hope, not selfish nor depressing. I knew
        the Principle of all harmonious Mind-action to be God,
109:18  and that cures were produced in primitive Christian
        healing by holy, uplifting faith; but I must know the
        Science of this healing, and I won my way to absolute
109:21  conclusions through divine revelation, reason, and dem-
        onstration. The revelation of Truth in the understand-
        ing came to me gradually and apparently through divine
109:24  power. When a new spiritual idea is borne to earth, the
        prophetic Scripture of Isaiah is renewedly fulfilled:
        "Unto us a child is born, . . . and his name shall be
109:27  called Wonderful."

        Jesus once said of his lessons: "My doctrine is not
        mine, but His that sent me. If any man will do His will,
109:30  he shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God, or
        whether I speak of myself." (John vii. 16,17.)

                          God's allness learned

        The three great verities of Spirit, omnipotence, omni-
110:1   presence, omniscience, - Spirit possessing all power,
        filling all space, constituting all Science, - contradict
110:3   forever the belief that matter can be actual.
        These eternal verities reveal primeval exist-
        ence as the radiant reality of God's creation,
110:6   in which all that He has made is pronounced by His wis-
        dom good.

        Thus it was that I beheld, as never before, the awful
110:9   unreality called evil. The equipollence of God brought
        to light another glorious proposition, - man's perfecti-
        bility and the establishment of the kingdom of heaven on
110:12  earth.

                         Scriptural foundations

        In following these leadings of scientific revelation,
        the Bible was my only textbook. The Scriptures were
110:15  illumined; reason and revelation were recon-
        ciled, and afterwards the truth of Christian
        Science was demonstrated. No human pen nor tongue
110:18  taught me the Science contained in this book, SCIENCE
        AND HEALTH; and neither tongue nor pen can over-
        throw it. This book may be distorted by shallow criti-
110:21  cism or by careless or malicious students, and its ideas
        may be temporarily abused and misrepresented; but the
        Science and truth therein will forever remain to be dis-
110:24  cerned and demonstrated.

                    The demonstration lost and found

        Jesus demonstrated the power of Christian Science to
        heal mortal minds and bodies. But this power was lost
110:27  sight of, and must again be spiritually dis-
        cerned, taught, and demonstrated according
        to Christ's command, with "signs following."
110:30  Its Science must be apprehended by as many as believe
        on Christ and spiritually understand Truth.

                          Mystical antagonists

        No analogy exists between the vague hypotheses of
111:1   agnosticism, pantheism, theosophy, spiritualism, or
        millenarianism and the demonstrable truths of Chris-
111:3   tian Science; and I find the will, or sensuous
        reason of the human mind, to be opposed to
        the divine Mind as expressed through divine Science.

                     Optical illustration of Science

111:6   Christian Science is natural, but not physical. The
        Science of God and man is no more supernatural than
        is the science of numbers, though departing
111:9   from the realm of the physical, as the Science
        of God, Spirit, must, some may deny its right to
        the name of Science. The Principle of divine metaphysics
111:12  is God; the practice of divine metaphysics is the utiliza-
        tion of the power of Truth over error; its rules demon-
        strate its Science. Divine metaphysics reverses perverted
111:15  and physical hypotheses as to Deity, even as the ex-
        planation of optics rejects the incidental or inverted
        image and shows what this inverted image is meant to
111:18  represent.

                           Pertinent proposal

        A prize of one hundred pounds, offered in Oxford Uni-
        versity, England, for the best essay on Natural Science,
111:21  - an essay calculated to offset the tendency of
        the age to attribute physical effects to physical
        causes rather than to a final spiritual cause, - is one of
111:24  many incidents which show that Christian Science meets
        a yearning of the human race for spirituality.

                           Confirmatory tests

        After a lengthy examination of my discovery and its
111:27  demonstration in healing the sick, this fact became evi-
        dent to me, - that Mind governs the body,
        not partially but wholly. I submitted my
111:30  metaphysical system of treating disease to the broad-
        est practical tests. Since then this system has gradually
        gained ground, and has proved itself, whenever scien-
112:1   tifically employed, to be the most effective curative agent
        in medical practice.

                           One school of Truth

112:3   Is there more than one school of Christian Science?
        Christian Science is demonstrable. There can, there-
        fore, be but one method in its teaching. Those who de-
112:6   part from this method forfeit their claims to
        belong to its school, and they become adher-
        ents of the Socratic, the Platonic, the Spencerian, or some
112:9   other school. By this is meant that they adopt and ad-
        here to some particular system of human opinions. Al-
        though these opinions may have occasional gleams of
112:12  divinity, borrowed from that truly divine Science which
        eschews man-made systems, they nevertheless remain
        wholly human in their origin and tendency and are not
112:15  scientifically Christian.

                          Unchanging Principle

        From the infinite One in Christian Science comes one
        Principle and its infinite idea, and with this infinitude
112:18  come spiritual rules, laws, and their demon-
        stration, which, like the great Giver, are "the
        same yesterday, and to-day, and forever;" for thus are
112:21  the divine Principle of healing and the Christ-idea charac-
        terized in the epistle to the Hebrews.

                          On sandy foundations

        Any theory of Christian Science, which departs from
112:24  what has already been stated and proved to be true, af-
        fords no foundation upon which to establish
        a genuine school of this Science. Also, if any
112:27  so-called new school claims to be Christian Science, and
        yet uses another author's discoveries without giving that
        author proper credit, such a school is erroneous, for it
112:30  inculcates a breach of that divine commandment in the
        Hebrew Decalogue, "Thou shalt not steal."

                         Principle and practice

        God is the Principle of divine metaphysics. As there
113:1   is but one God, there can be but one divine Principle of
        all Science; and there must be fixed rules for the demon-
113:3   stration of this divine Principle. The letter
        of Science plentifully reaches humanity to-day,
        but its spirit comes only in small degrees. The vital part,
113:6   the heart and soul of Christian Science, is Love. With-
        out this, the letter is but the dead body of Science, -
        pulseless, cold, inanimate.

                         Reversible propositions

113:9   The fundamental propositions of divine metaphysics
        are summarized in the four following, to me, /self-evident/
        propositions. Even if reversed, these proposi-
113:12  tions will be found to agree in statement and
        proof, showing mathematically their exact relation to
        Truth. De Quincey says mathematics has not a foot to
113:15  stand upon which is not purely metaphysical.

        1. God is All-in-all.
        2. God is good. Good is Mind.
113:18  3. God, Spirit, being all, nothing is matter.
        4. Life, God, omnipotent good, deny death, evil, sin,
        disease. - Disease, sin, evil, death, deny good, omnipo-
113:21  tent God, Life.

        Which of the denials in proposition four is true? Both
        are not, cannot be, true. According to the Scripture,
113:24  I find that God is true, "but every [mortal] man a
        liar."

                         Metaphysical inversions

        The divine metaphysics of Christian Science, like the
113:27  method in mathematics, proves the rule by inversion.
        For example: There is no pain in Truth, and
        no truth in pain; no nerve in Mind, and no
113:30  mind in nerve; no matter in Mind, and no mind in mat-
        ter; no matter in Life, and no life in matter; no matter
        in good, and no good in matter.

                        Definition of mortal mind

114:1   Usage classes both evil and good together as /mind/;
        therefore, to be understood, the author calls sick and sin-
114:3   ful humanity /mortal mind/, - meaning by this
        term the flesh opposed to Spirit, the human
        mind and evil in contradistinction to the divine Mind, or
114:6   Truth and good. The spiritually unscientific definition
        of mind is based on the evidence of the physical senses,
        which makes minds many and calls /mind/ both human and
114:9   divine.

        In Science, Mind is /one/, including noumenon and phe-
        nomena, God and His thoughts.

                          Imperfect terminology

114:12  Mortal mind is a solecism in language, and involves an
        improper use of the word /mind/. As Mind is immortal,
        the phrase /mortal mind/ implies something un-
114:15  true and therefore unreal; and as the phrase
        is used in teaching Christian Science, it is meant to
        designate that which has no real existence. Indeed, if
114:18  a better word or phrase could be suggested, it would
        be used; but in expressing the new tongue we must
        sometimes recur to the old and imperfect, and the new
114:21  wine of the Spirit has to be poured into the old bottles of
        the letter.

                            Causation mental

        Christian Science explains all cause and effect as men-
114:24  tal, not physical. It lifts the veil of mystery from Soul and
        body. It shows the scientific relation of man
        to God, disentangles the interlaced ambiguities
114:27  of being, and sets free the imprisoned thought. In divine
        Science, the universe, including man, is spiritual, harmoni-
        ous, and eternal. Science shows that what is termed /mat-
114:30  ter/ is but the subjective state of what is termed by the
        author /mortal mind/.

                         Philological inadequacy

        Apart from the usual opposition to everything new,
115:1   the one great obstacle to the reception of that spiritual-
        ity, through which the understanding of Mind-science
115:3   comes, is the inadequacy of material terms for
        metaphysical statements, and the consequent
        difficulty of so expressing metaphysical ideas as to make
115:6   them comprehensible to any reader, who has not person-
        ally demonstrated Christian Science as brought forth in
        my discovery. Job says: "The ear trieth words, as the
115:9   mouth tasteth meat." The great difficulty is to give the
        right impression, when translating material terms back
        into the original spiritual tongue.

115:12       SCIENTIFIC TRANSLATION OF IMMORTAL MIND

                             Divine synonyms

        GOD: Divine Principle, Life, Truth, Love,
        Soul, Spirit, Mind.

                              Divine image

115:15  MAN: God's spiritual idea, individual, per-
        fect, eternal.

                            Divine reflection

        IDEA: An image in Mind; the immediate
115:18  object of understanding. - /Webster/.

             SCIENTIFIC TRANSLATION OF MORTAL MIND

                  /First Degree:/ Depravity.

                                Unreality

115:21  PHYSICAL. Evil beliefs, passions and appetites, fear,
        depraved will, self-justification, pride, envy, de-
        ceit, hatred, revenge, sin, sickness, disease,
115:24  death.

             /Second Degree:/ Evil beliefs disappearing.

                         Transitional qualities

        MORAL. Humanity, honesty, affection, com-
        passion, hope, faith, meekness, temperance.
116:1   /Third Degree:/ Understanding.

                                 Reality

        SPIRITUAL. Wisdom, purity, spiritual understanding,
116:3   spiritual power, love, health, holiness.

                           Spiritual universe

        In the third degree mortal mind disappears, and man as
        God's image appears. Science so reverses the evidence
116:6   before the corporeal human senses, as to make
        this Scriptural testimony true in our hearts,
        "The last shall be first, and the first last," so that God
116:9   and His idea may be to us what divinity really is and
        must of necessity be, - all-inclusive.

                             Aim of Science

        A correct view of Christian Science and of its adapta-
116:12  tion to healing includes vastly more than is at first seen.
        Works on metaphysics leave the grand point
        untouched. They never crown the power of
116:15  Mind as the Messiah, nor do they carry the day against
        physical enemies, - even to the extinction of all belief in
        matter, evil, disease, and death, - nor insist upon the fact
116:18  that God is all, therefore that matter is nothing beyond an
        image in mortal mind.

                           Divine personality

        Christian Science strongly emphasizes the thought that
116:21  God is not /corporeal/, but /incorporeal/, - that is,
        bodiless. Mortals are corporeal, but God is
        incorporeal.

116:24  As the words /person/ and /personal/ are commonly and
        ignorantly employed, they often lead, when applied to
        Deity, to confused and erroneous conceptions of divinity
116:27  and its distinction from humanity. If the term personality,
        as applied to God, means infinite personality, then God is
        infinite /Person/, - in the sense of infinite personality, but
116:30  not in the lower sense. An infinite Mind in a finite form
        is an absolute impossibility.

117:1   The term /individuality/ is also open to objections, be-
        cause an individual may be one of a series, one of many,
117:3   as an individual man, an individual horse; whereas God
        is /One/, - not one of a series, but one alone and without
        an equal.

                           Spiritual language

117:6   God is Spirit; therefore the language of Spirit must
        be, and is, spiritual. Christian Science attaches no physi-
        cal nature and significance to the Supreme
117:9   Being or His manifestation; mortals alone do
        this. God's essential language is spoken of in the last
        chapter of Mark's Gospel as the new tongue, the spir-
117:12  itual meaning of which is attained through "signs
        following."

                          The miracles of Jesus

        Ear hath not heard, nor hath lip spoken, the pure lan-
117:15  guage of Spirit. Our Master taught spirituality by simili-
        tudes and parables. As a divine student he
        unfolded God to man, illustrating and demon-
117:18  strating Life and Truth in himself and by his power over
        the sick and sinning. Human theories are inadequate to
        interpret the divine Principle involved in the miracles
117:21  (marvels) wrought by Jesus and especially in his mighty,
        crowning, unparalleled, and triumphant exit from the
        flesh.

                          Opacity of the senses

117:24  Evidence drawn from the five physical senses relates
        solely to human reason; and because of opaci-
        ty to the true light, human reason dimly re-
117:27  flects and feebly transmits Jesus' works and words. Truth
        is a revelation.

                             Leaven of Truth

        Jesus bade his disciples beware of the leaven of the
117:30  Pharisees and of the Sadducees, which he de-
        fined as human doctrines. His parable of the
        "leaven, which a woman took, and hid in three measures
118:1   of meal, till the whole was leavened," impels the infer-
        ence that the spiritual leaven signifies the Science of Christ
118:3   and its spiritual interpretation, - an inference far above
        the merely ecclesiastical and formal applications of the
        illustration.
118:6   Did not this parable point a moral with a prophecy,
        foretelling the second appearing in the flesh of the
        Christ, Truth, hidden in sacred secrecy from the visi-
118:9   ble world?

        Ages pass, but this leaven of Truth is ever at work. It
        must destroy the entire mass of error, and so be eternally
118:12  glorified in man's spiritual freedom.

                     The divine and human contrasted

        In their spiritual significance, Science, Theology, and
        Medicine are means of divine thought, which include spirit-
118:15  ual laws emanating from the invisible and in-
        finite power and grace. The parable may
        import that these spiritual laws, perverted by
118:18  a perverse material sense of law, are metaphysically pre-
        sented as three measures of meal, - that is, three modes
        of mortal thought. In all mortal forms of thought, dust
118:21  is dignified as the natural status of men and things, and
        modes of material motion are honored with the name of
        /laws/. This continues until the leaven of Spirit changes
118:24  the whole of mortal thought, as yeast changes the chemical
        properties of meal.

                         Certain contradictions

        The definitions of material law, as given by natural
118:27  science, represent a kingdom necessarily divided against
        itself, because these definitions portray law as
        physical, not spiritual. Therefore they con-
118:30  tradict the divine decrees and violate the law of Love, in
        which nature and God are one and the natural order of
        heaven comes down to earth.

                           Unescapable dilemma

119:1   When we endow matter with vague spiritual power,
        that is, when we do so in our theories, for of course we
119:3   cannot really endow matter with what it does
        not and cannot possess, - we disown the Al-
        mighty, for such theories lead to one of two things. They
119:6   either presuppose the self-evolution and self-government
        of matter, or else they assume that matter is the product
        of Spirit. To seize the first horn of this dilemma and con-
119:9   sider matter as a power in and of itself, is to leave the cre-
        ator out of His own universe; while to grasp the other
        horn of the dilemma and regard God as the creator of
119:12  matter, is not only to make Him responsible for all disas-
        ters, physical and moral, but to announce Him as their
        source, thereby making Him guilty of maintaining perpet-
119:15  ual misrule in the form and under the name of natural
        law.

                             God and nature

        In one sense God is identical with nature, but this na-
119:18  ture is spiritual and is not expressed in matter. The law-
        giver, whose lightning palsies or prostrates in
        death the child at prayer, is not the divine ideal
119:21  of omnipresent Love. God is natural good, and is repre-
        sented only by the idea of goodness; while evil should be
        regarded as unnatural, because it is opposed to the nature
119:24  of Spirit, God.
