interview, imply a local, personal, visible presence of Jehovah.

The next instance, chap. xviii., is that in which "Jehovah _appeared_ to
Abraham in the plains of Mamre," in the likeness of man; was entertained
by him, walked and conversed with, and heard his requests in behalf of
the righteous in Sodom: which undoubtedly was a local, visible, personal
appearance of Jehovah the Word.

In the 26th chapter we read that Isaac went to Gerar, "And Jehovah
_appeared_ unto him, and said, Go not down into Egypt," &c. Afterwards
he removed to Beersheba, "And Jehovah _appeared_ unto him, and said, I
am the Elohe of Abraham thy father: fear not, for I am with thee," &c.
"And he builded an altar there, and called upon the name of Jehovah, and
pitched his tent there." At these interviews the same promises
substantially respecting his descendants were made to him, that had been
made to Abraham, with the same introductory formula concerning the
appearance of the Divine speaker; and considering that Isaac built an
altar and fixed his residence at Beersheba, worshipped, doubtless
presenting typical offerings on the altar, and consecrating that as the
place of his future worship in the confidence of its being thereafter a
place of Divine manifestation, there seems to be very ample ground to
conclude that these were local, personal, and visible appearances,
similar in their form, as they were in their object, to those vouchsafed
to Abraham.

The first instance to be noticed in the history of Jacob, is referred to
in chap. xlviii. 3: "And Jacob said unto Joseph, El-Shadai _appeared_
unto me at Luz, and blessed me," &c. The occasion was that of his vision
of a ladder: "And Jehovah stood above it and said, I am Jehovah Elohe of
Abraham;" see chap. xxviii. Subsequently, chap. xxxv., he was directed
to return and reside at that place. "Elohim said unto Jacob, Arise, go
up to Bethel, and make there an altar unto El, that _appeared_ unto thee
when thou fleddest from the face of Esau. And he built there an altar,
and called the place El-Beth-El; because there (the) Elohim _appeared_
unto him, when he fled," &c. The repetition of the word _appeared_ in
these passages, its implied significance as a reason for building an
altar, the occasion referred to, and the object of speaking of it to
Joseph, indicate a memorable personal, visible appearance at the place
specified.

"And Elohim _appeared_ unto Jacob again, and said unto him, I am
El-Shadai; and Elohim _went up_ from him in the place where he talked
with him," chap. 35: which can hardly be taken for any other than a
local and visible presence.




CHAPTER VIII.

    Of the Doctrines, Worship, and Faith of those earliest mentioned
    in Scripture--Reference to the History of Moses, Noah, Joshua.


Waiving for the present a notice of many analogous instances in other
parts of Scripture, it may be observed that there are, in the history of
the patriarchs, a variety of statements and expressions which, from the
occasions to which they relate, the connections in which they occur, or
the things specified, naturally imply the local personal presence of the
Divine speaker, especially when considered in connection with the
instances in which it is clearly shown that he was visibly present. In
the course of that history there are numerous intimations that the
worshippers of Jehovah had places appropriated to their religious
services, where they offered prayers and sacrifices, and where, by an
audible voice, he held immediate and familiar converse with them. Thus
in the first recorded instance of worship, Gen. iv., we read that Cain,
and Abel also, "brought an offering unto Jehovah. And Jehovah had
respect unto Abel and to his offering: but unto Cain and his offering he
had not respect; and Cain was very wroth, and his countenance fell. And
Jehovah said unto Cain, Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance
fallen?" It is apparent from this narrative, and from their dissimilar
occupations, that they prepared their offerings not in concert, but
separately from each other; that they brought them to the same place at
the same time; that they respectively offered them to Jehovah; and that
he was present in such a way as to be recognized by them, for he
immediately indicated to their apprehension and conviction his
acceptance of one and rejection of the other, and spoke directly and
pointedly to Cain. After his slaughter of Abel, and probably on his
resorting again to the place of worship and Divine manifestation,
Jehovah spoke again to him, and pronounced a curse upon him for his
crime; to which Cain replied, as though not unaccustomed to speak to
Jehovah, and said, among other things, as though conscious that he was
excommunicated and banished from the consecrated place: "From thy _face_
shall I be hid, and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the
earth.... And Cain went out from the _presence_ of Jehovah." Strongly
implying that he had been accustomed to the visible presence, and had
seen Jehovah, and that banishment from that place forbade the hope of
such vision of him again.

It is evident from the details and circumstances of this scene, and
from references to it in other parts of Scripture, that there was no
want of intelligence in either of the parties, as to the nature and
import of their offerings, the ritual and reference which they implied,
or the righteous discrimination and the moral bearing and significance
of the verdicts and consequences in their respective cases. "Cain was of
the wicked one," a disciple and servant of the great adversary, and slew
his brother "because his own works were evil and his brother's
righteous." He knew, as the questions which Jehovah addressed to him
imply, that if he did well, if with the like faith he made an offering
like that of Abel, he would in like manner be accepted; and that he had
no just ground to be angry, or even to be disappointed on being rejected
for taking a contrary course. But he brought--not like Abel a sin
offering, implying a conviction and acknowledgment of his personal
sinfulness, and of his faith in that great expiatory sacrifice to which
his typical offering owed all its significance--but an offering of
fruits, an expression of acknowledgment to the Creator, which implied no
acknowledgment on his part of his being a sinner and needing a Saviour,
or of his having any faith in the prefigured atonement, or any
disposition to conform to the ritual of worship. The faith of Abel
exhibited on this occasion was, like that of Abraham, effectual to his
justification; a faith in the person, sacrifice, and righteousness of
the Divine Redeemer; and is the first on the illustrious roll recorded,
Heb. xi. And from the nature of the case, as well as from the
particulars of the narrative, we must conclude that his offering was in
all respects an example of conformity to the ritual of worship
instituted by Jehovah, that it comprised not merely firstlings of his
flock, but such as had all the characteristics which are specified in
subsequent records; that it was made by fire on an altar, at a place
appropriated to that object; that it was a medium of his faith and an
expression of his homage and obedience, solely by reason of its
reference to the person and prefiguration of the atoning sacrifice of
Christ; and that it was rendered to that Person then locally present, in
the form which he was at length permanently to assume, and in which his
sacrifice of himself was to be made. So far at least as these
particulars are concerned, the ritual and rationale of the worship
prescribed does not appear to have been changed during the patriarchial
dispensation, nor in that which ensued, though in the Mosaic ritual many
details were added on the basis of those originally prescribed. The
method of acceptable worship, the immediate object of homage, and the
faith which was unto salvation, continued the same; and it is clear from
the narratives in various instances, that burnt offerings, typical
sacrifices, were made to the delegated one, personating the promised
Seed, under the designation of Jehovah, or Melach Jehovah, when he was
locally and visibly present.

It is to be considered that Moses wrote about 2500 years after the
creation; that the children of Israel had retained the language and
customs of their ancestors, so as to render it superfluous to
particularize either the religious or civil institutions of earlier
times, any farther than was necessary to the personal narratives or
historical notices of individuals and families. They understood and
practised what had been handed down from the beginning through Noah,
Abraham, Jacob, and others, and though to some extent infected with the
idolatrous spirit of the Egyptians, were familiar with the ritual, the
sacrifices and offerings, and other institutions of the revealed system
of religion. Moreover, all that concerned their religious doctrines and
rites was, under his ministry, renewed, and with new revelations and
ordinances set forth in writing for their instruction, and that of their
successors. Hence the scanty, and for the most part merely incidental,
mention of things of that nature in his retrospective history. It by no
means follows from the brevity and infrequency of his notices, that such
men as Abel, Enoch, Lamech, Noah, Shem, Job, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
whose united lives extended from the first institution of religious
rites down to the settlement of Israel in Egypt, had not a clear and
comprehensive knowledge of all the leading truths and essential
doctrines of revealed religion, which were known to Moses or any of his
successors prior to the advent of Christ. On the contrary, judging from
the characters and relations which they sustained, the personal converse
with Jehovah which most of them are recorded to have had, and the
references made to several of them in the prophets and in the New
Testament, we must conclude that they had such knowledge. They received
instruction directly from the Great Revealer. Most of them were, at
times, inspired, and prophesied. And one might as well conclude that
Solomon did not understand even the simplest forms of numerical
computation, because mathematics are not mentioned among the subjects
upon which he spoke or wrote, as to conclude, because so little is
recorded of them in detail by Moses, that these men of world-wide
celebrity for their religious faith and practice, and their eminence as
princes and heads of nations, did not understand the doctrines and the
faith which they professed, and for which they are set forth as examples
to Christian believers under the present dispensation.

The possession of such knowledge on their part, and the reality of the
local presence and often the visible appearance of the Messiah, the
Messenger Jehovah, may be illustrated by reference to the personal
history of Moses, Noah, and Joshua, and to the use of terms by them and
by other sacred writers.

After the children of Israel had sojourned in Egypt about four hundred
years, Moses was called to conduct them to the land of promise. By
oppressive laws and rigorous exactions under a new dynasty of kings
towards the close of the period of their bondage, they were greatly
depressed. At the birth of Moses, however, there were those who had
faith, and the knowledge of the true religion was by no means generally
effaced. In the exercise of faith his parents concealed him three
months. "The children of Israel sighed by reason of their bondage, and
they cried, and their cry came up unto _the_ Elohim by reason of the
bondage. And Elohim heard their groaning, and Elohim remembered his
covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob; and Elohim looked
upon the children of Israel, and Elohim had respect unto them." Exod.
ii. The people generally, it would seem, cried to the Elohe of their
fathers for relief, and were heard and regarded.

Though from childhood to the age of forty Moses was one of the family
and court of Pharaoh, and probably, therefore, could have had no
peculiar advantages of instruction in the true religion, he nevertheless
had such knowledge and experience of it, that "by faith, when he was
come to years, he refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter;
choosing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God than to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season; esteeming the reproach of
Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt: for he had respect
unto the recompense of the reward." Heb. xi.

In this brief testimony concerning him, we clearly recognize the faith
of Abraham, and of the prophets and martyrs of later times. He made no
compromises with the honors, riches, or pleasures of the world, but
renounced them. He sought not to serve two masters. He clearly discerned
what distinguished the people of God from idolaters and unbelievers, and
was well aware of the afflictions and trials which were consequent on
their faith, and their allegiance and obedience to the Messiah, the
Divine Mediator, the Messenger Jehovah, the Christ. In the certain
prospect of affliction, reproaches, and sufferings, he chose publicly to
manifest his faith and allegiance by his conduct. He forsook the court
of Pharaoh, renounced the pleasures of sin and the riches of Egypt, and
welcomed the cross.

In the family of Jethro, the priest of Midian, he probably found true
worshippers, and met with nothing detrimental to his sentiments; and by
the scene in which the Messenger Jehovah visibly appeared to him,
doubtless his faith was so confirmed, and his knowledge increased, as to
qualify him for the extraordinary services to which he was called. Hence
we further read of him that, after the miracles and plagues by which
Pharaoh was at length made to yield, "By faith he forsook Egypt, not
fearing the wrath of the king.... And by faith he kept the passover and
the sprinkling of blood." Heb. xi.

Now it is in the light of his character as thus referred to--of his
knowledge and experience of the true religion as held by the people of
God then and in earlier times--of his faith in the person and
mediatorial work of the Messiah--that we are to regard him as the writer
of the primeval and patriarchal history; and if it is evident that he
recognized the Messiah in the person of the Messenger Jehovah, and that
in all his subsequent narratives he designated the same official person
by the terms Jehovah, Elohim, and Elohe, as well as by the terms
Messenger, Adon, and Adonai, then it is safe to conclude that he
intended to designate the same Person by the same terms in the earlier
history.

At the period of the legation of Moses, the word Elohim was in familiar
use in Egypt and among the Israelites as the designation of the object
of religious homage; very probably it was the only name of God known to
the people generally. Moses accordingly, in the first two chapters of
Exodus, which probably were written before the book of Genesis, employs
that name only. The third chapter opens with the announcement of the
Messenger Jehovah appearing in the bush, and in its progress applies to
him indifferently the names Elohim and Jehovah; and in the fourth and
ensuing chapters, the same, and Adonai and El-Shadai, but most
frequently Jehovah.

If now we suppose the book of Genesis to have been written by him after
the events in Egypt, at the Red Sea, and at mount Sinai, and the setting
up of the tabernacle, (which occurred about twelve months after the
exodus,) where the people, though generally familiar only with the name
Elohim, must have become in some degree used to the name Jehovah, we may
perhaps discern a fitness and beauty in the first announcements of the
Creator in Genesis; where, in the first chapter and the first three
verses of the second, the name Elohim only is used; in the second, from
the fourth verse, the name Jehovah Elohim, and in the ensuing chapters
these names separately and conjointly, and various other designations,
as Melach Jehovah, Adonai, and El-Shadai. In numerous instances the
_article_ is prefixed to the name Elohim, as if emphatically to
designate the God of Israel, the Creator, as _the_ true Elohim, in
distinction from the false god of idolaters.

By this method he recalled, and reestablished in the minds of the
people, all the Divine designations known to the patriarchs of preceding
ages, and their reference and applicability as designations to the one
mediatorial Person; rendering it plain that _the_ Elohim of the
Israelites in Egypt, and of the first chapter of Genesis, was identical
with Jehovah, Melach the Messenger, Adonai, &c. In this view the
resemblance of the first verses of the Gospel of John is noticeable,
considering that it was his object to identify the Christ, as he
appeared visibly incarnate, with Elohim the Creator announced in the
first verses of Genesis.

Let it then be observed that in the narrative, Exod. iii. and iv., it is
evident that one Divine personage only is referred to and designated by
the several titles which are employed. That Divine personage appeared to
Moses in the established or visible glory, the bright cloud-like
envelope so familiar afterwards on mount Sinai and in the tabernacle.
Moses, recording this appearance, says, "The Messenger Jehovah appeared
to him." This was a person bearing an official title--one sent--the
Messenger of the Covenant, for whose appearance incarnate John Baptist
was to prepare the way, Mal. iii. Moses turned to behold the sight. And
when Jehovah, he who appeared in the visible glory, the Messenger, saw
that he turned aside to see, Elohim, that is, the person in the visible
Shaking, "called unto him out of the midst of the bush, ... and said, I
am the Elohe of thy father, the Elohe of Abraham, the Elohe of Isaac,
and the Elohe of Jacob. And Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to
look upon Elohim;" that is, upon the ineffable glory of the Person, the
Messenger Jehovah, the Elohim, who thus visibly appeared to him. "And
Jehovah said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people which are
in Egypt, and have heard their cry, ... and _I am come down_ to deliver
them:" come down as a Person, so as to be locally and visibly present.
The Elohim to whom the children of Israel cried, (chap. ii.,) and who
heard their cry, is, on his first appearing visibly, called the
Messenger Jehovah, and here announces himself to be Jehovah who had
heard their cry and come down to deliver them. So surely therefore as
these acts of seeing the affliction of the people, hearing their cry,
coming down, and speaking to Moses, are the acts of a Person, this
narrative and these several designations relate to one and the same
Person; and this Person is shown to be the Messiah by his official
title.

It being thus manifest that, as a Person locally and visibly appearing,
these several designations were equally applicable to him, Moses in the
next ensuing verses calls him Elohim, and asks by what name he shall
designate him to the children of Israel. It is to be observed that there
is no record of any visible appearance of the Messenger Jehovah prior to
this since the days of Jacob; and it is probable that the names Jehovah
and Messenger Jehovah, though known to the true worshippers, were not
familiar to the people generally. But these designations being peculiar,
and more distinguishing than that of Elohim, which was in common use
among idolaters, were now to be proclaimed and brought into familiar
use. "And Elohim said unto Moses, I am that I am; and he said, Thus
shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath sent me unto you:"
expressions equivalent to those of John, "In him was life," "I am he
that liveth;" that is, the self-existent. "And Elohim said moreover
unto Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, Jehovah
Elohe of your fathers, the Elohe of Abraham, the Elohe of Isaac, and the
