_miaran na mna sithe_, 'the thimble of the fairy woman,' the fox-glove;
_lion na mna sithe_, 'lint of the fairy woman,' fairy flax, said to be
beneficial in certain illnesses; and _curachan na mna sithe_, 'coracle
of the fairy woman,' the shell of the blue valilla. In place-names
_sith_, 'fairy,' is common. Glenshee, in Perthshire, is said to have
been full of fairies, but the screech of the steam-whistle frightened
them underground. There is scarcely a district of the Highlands without
its fairy knoll, generally the greenest hillock in the place. 'The black
chanter of Clan Chattan' is said to have been given to a famous
Macpherson piper by a fairy woman who loved him; and the Mackays have a
flag said to have been given to a Mackay by a fairy sweetheart. The
well-known fairy flag of Dunvegan is said to have been given to a
Macleod of Macleod by a fairy woman; and the Macrimmons of Bororaig,
pipers to the Macleods of Macleod, had a chanter called '_Sionnsair
airgid na mna sithe_', 'the silver chanter of the fairy woman.' A family
in North Uist is known as _Dubh-sith_, 'Black fairy,' from a tradition
that the family had been familiar with the fairies in their secret
flights and nightly migrations.

Donald Macalastair, seventy-nine years of age, crofter, Druim-a-ghinnir,
Arran, told me, in the year 1895, the following story in Gaelic:--'The
fairies were dwelling in the knoll, and they had a near neighbour who
used to visit them in their home. The man used to observe the ways of
the fairies and to do as they did. The fairies took a journey upon them
to go to Ireland, and the man took upon him to go with them. Every
single fairy of them caught a ragwort and went astride it, and they were
pell-mell, every knee of them across the Irish Ocean in an instant, and
across the Irish Ocean was the man after them, astride a ragwort like
one of themselves. A little wee tiny fairy shouted and asked were they
all ready, and all the others replied that they were, and the little
fairy called out:--

  My king at my head,
  Going across in my haste,
  On the crests of the waves,
  To Ireland.

"Follow me," said the king of the fairies, and away they went across the
Irish Ocean, every mother's son of them astride his ragwort. Macuga
(Cook) did not know on earth how he would return to his native land, but
he leapt upon the ragwort as he saw the fairies do, and he called as he
heard them call, and in an instant he was back in Arran. But he had got
enough of the fairies on this trip itself, and he never went with them
again.'

The fairies were wont to take away infants and their mothers, and many
precautions were taken to safeguard them till purification and baptism
took place, when the fairy power became ineffective. Placing iron about
the bed, burning leather in the room, giving mother and child the milk
of a cow which had eaten of the _mothan_, pearl-wort (_Pinguicula
vulgaris_), a plant of virtue, and similar means were taken to ensure
their safety. If the watching-women neglected these precautions, the
mother or child or both were spirited away to the fairy bower. Many
stories are current on this subject.

Sometimes the fairies helped human beings with their work, coming in at
night to finish the spinning or the house-work, or to thresh the
farmer's corn or fan his grain. On such occasions they must not be
molested nor interfered with, even in gratitude. If presented with a
garment they will go away and work no more. This method of getting rid
of them is often resorted to, as it is not easy always to find work for
them to do.

_Bean chaol a chot uaine 's na gruaige buidhe_, 'the slender woman of
the green kirtle and of the yellow hair,' is wise of head and deft of
hand. She can convert the white water of the rill into rich red wine and
the threads of the spiders into a tartan plaid. From the stalk of the
fairy reed she can bring the music of the lull of the peace and of the
repose, however active the brain and lithe the limb; and she can rouse
to mirth and merriment, and to the dance, men and women, however
dolorous their condition. From the bower could be heard the pipe and the
song and the voice of laughter as the fairies 'sett' and reeled in the
mazes of the dance. Sometimes a man hearing the merry music and seeing
the wonderful light within would be tempted to go in and join them, but
woe to him if he omitted to leave a piece of iron at the door of the
bower on entering, for the cunning fairies would close the door and the
man would find no egress. There he would dance for years--but to him the
years were as one day--while his wife and family mourned him as dead.

The flint arrow-heads so much prized by antiquarians are called in the
Highlands _Saighead sith_, fairy arrows. They are said to have been
thrown by the fairies at the sons and daughters of men. The writer
possesses one which was thrown at his own maid-servant one night when
she went to the peatstack for peats. She was aware of something whizzing
through the silent air, passing through her hair, grazing her ear and
falling at her feet. Stooping in the bright moonlight the girl picked up
a fairy arrow!

'But faith is dead--such things do not happen now,' said a courteous
informant. If not quite dead it is almost dead, hastened by the
shifting of population, the establishment of means of communication, the
influx of tourists, and the scorn of the more materialistic of the
incomers and of the people themselves.

  EDINBURGH,
    _October_ 1910.


ABERFOYLE, THE COUNTRY OF ROBERT KIRK

My first hunt for fairies in Scotland began at Aberfoyle, where the
Highlands and the Lowlands meet, and in the very place where Robert
Kirk, the minister of Aberfoyle, was _taken_ by them, in the year 1692.
The minister spent a large part of his time studying the ways of the
'good people', and he must have been able to see them, for he was a
seventh son. Mrs. J. MacGregor, who keeps the key to the old churchyard
where there is a tomb to Kirk, though many say there is nothing in it
but a coffin filled with stones, told me that Kirk was taken into the
Fairy Knoll, which she pointed to just across a little valley in front
of us, and is there yet, for the hill is full of caverns, and in them
the 'good people' have their homes. And she added that Kirk appeared to
a relative of his after he was _taken_, and said that he was in the
power of the 'good people', and couldn't get away. 'But,' says he, 'I
can be set free if you will have my cousin do what I tell him when I
appear again at the christening of my child in the parsonage.' According
to Mr. Andrew Lang, who reports the same tradition in more detail in his
admirable Introduction to _The Secret Commonwealth_, the cousin was
Grahame of Duchray, and the thing he was to do was to throw a dagger
over Kirk's head. Grahame was at hand at the christening of the
posthumous child, but was so astonished to see Kirk appear as Kirk said
he would, that he did not throw the dagger, and so Kirk became a
perpetual prisoner of the 'good people'.

After having visited Kirk's tomb, I called on the Rev. William M.
Taylor, the present successor of Kirk, and, as we sat together in the
very room where Kirk must have written his _Secret Commonwealth_, he
told me that tradition reports Kirk as having been _taken_ by the
fairies while he was walking on their hill, which is but a short way
from the parsonage. 'At the time of his disappearance, people said he
was _taken_ because the fairies were displeased with him for prying into
their secrets. At all events, it seems likely that Kirk was taken ill
very suddenly with something like apoplexy while on the Fairy Knoll, and
died there. I have searched the presbytery books, and find no record of
how Kirk's death really took place; but of course there is not the least
doubt of his body being in the grave.' So thus, according to Mr. Taylor,
we are to conclude that if the fairies carried off anything, it must
have been the spirit or soul of Kirk. I talked with others round
Aberfoyle about Kirk, and some would have it that his body and soul were
both _taken_, and that what was buried was no corpse at all. Mrs.
Margaret MacGregor, one of the few Gaelic speakers of the old school
left in Aberfoyle, holds another opinion, for she said to me, 'Nothing
could be surer than that the _good people_ took Kirk's spirit only.'

In the Aberfoyle country, the Fairy-Faith, save for the stories about
Kirk, which will probably persist for a long time yet, is rapidly
passing. In fact it is almost forgotten now. Up to thirty years ago, as
Mr. Taylor explained, before the railway reached Aberfoyle, belief in
fairies was much more common. Nowadays, he says, there is no real
fairy-lore among the peasants; fifty to sixty years ago there was. And
in his opinion, 'the fairy people of three hundred years ago in Scotland
were a distinct race by themselves. They had never been human beings.
The belief in them was a survival of paganism, and not at all an
outgrowth of Christian belief in angelic hosts.'


A SCOTCH MINISTER'S TESTIMONY

A Protestant minister of Scotland will be our next witness. He is a
native of Ross-shire, though he draws many of his stories from the
Western Hebrides, where his calling has placed him. Because he speaks
from personal knowledge of the living Fairy-Faith as it was in his
boyhood and is now, and chiefly because he has had the rare privilege
of conscious contact with the fairy world, his testimony is of the
highest value.

_Reality of Fairies._--'When I was a boy I was a firm believer in
fairies; and now as a Christian minister I believe in the possibility
and also the reality of these spiritual orders, but I wish only to know
those orders which belong to the realm of grace. It is very certain that
they exist. I have been in a state of ecstasy, and have seen spiritual
beings which form these orders.[30]

'I believe in the actuality of evil spirits; but people in the Highlands
having put aside paganism, evil spirits are not seen now.'

This explanation was offered of how fairies may exist and yet be
invisible:--'Our Saviour became invisible though in the body; and, as
the Scriptures suggest, I suppose we are obliged to concede a similar
power of invisibility to spirits as well, good and evil ones alike.'

_Precautions against Fairies._--'I remember how an old woman pulled me
out of a fairy ring to save me from being _taken_.

'If a mother takes some bindweed and places it burnt at the ends over
her babe's cradle, the fairies have no power over the child. The
bindweed is a common roadside convolvulus.

'As a boy, I saw two old women passing a babe over red-hot coals, and
then drop some of the cinders in a cup of water and give the water to
the babe to drink, in order to cure it of a fairy stroke.'

_Fairy Fights on Halloween._--'It is a common belief now that on
Halloween the fairies, or the fairy hosts, have fights. Lichens on
rocks after there has been a frost get yellowish-red, and then when they
thaw and the moisture spreads out from them the rocks are a bright red;
and this bright red is said to be the blood of the fairies after one of
their battles.'

_Fairies and the Hump-back._--The following story by the present witness
is curious, for it is the same story of a hump-back which is so
widespread. The fact that in Scotland the hump is removed or added by
fairies as it is in Ireland, in Cornwall by pixies, and in Brittany by
_corrigans_, goes far to prove the essential identity of these three
orders of beings. The story comes from one of the remote Western
Hebrides, Benbecula:--'A man who was a hump-back once met the fairies
dancing, and danced with their queen; and he sang with them, "Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday," so well that they took off his hump, and he
returned home a straight-bodied man. Then a tailor went past the same
place, and was also admitted by the fairies to their dance. He caught
the fairy queen by the waist, and she resented his familiarity. And in
singing he added "Thursday" to their song and spoilt it. To pay the
tailor for his rudeness and ill manners, the dancers took up the hump
they had just removed from the first man and clapped it on his back, and
the conceited fellow went home a hump-back.'

_Libations to Fairies._--'An elder in my church knew a woman who was
accustomed, in milking her cows, to offer libations to the fairies.[31]
The woman was later converted to Christ and gave up the practice, and as
a result one of her cows was _taken_ by the fairies. Then she revived
the practice.

'The fairy queen who watches over cows is called _Gruagach_ in the
Islands, and she is often seen. In pouring libations to her and her
fairies various kinds of stones, usually with hollows in them, are
used.[32]

'In Lewis libations are poured to the goddess [or god] of the sea,
called _Shoney_,[33] in order to bring in seaweed. Until modern times in
Iona similar libations were poured to a god corresponding to Neptune.'


IN THE HIGHLANDS

I had the pleasure as well as the great privilege of setting out from
Inverness on a bright crisp September morning in company with Dr.
Alexander Carmichael, the well-known folk-lorist of Scotland, to study
the Fairy-Faith as it exists now in the Highlands round Tomatin, a small
country village about twenty miles distant. We departed by an early
train; and soon reaching the Tomatin country began our search--Dr.
Carmichael for evidence regarding rare and curious Scotch beliefs
connected with folk-magic, such as blood-stopping at a distance and
removing motes in the eye at a distance, and I for Highland ghosts and
fairies.

Our first experience was with an old man whom we met on the road between
the railway station and the post office, who could speak only Gaelic.
Dr. Carmichael talked with him awhile, and then asked him about fairies,
and he said there were some living in a cave some way off, but as the
distance was rather too far we decided not to call on them. Then we went
on to see the postmaster, Mr. John MacDougall, and he told us that in
his boyhood the country-folk round Tomatin believed thoroughly in
fairies. He said they thought of them as a race of spirits capable of
making themselves visible to mortals, as living in underground places,
as _taking_ fine healthy babes and leaving changelings in their place.
These changelings would waste away and die in a short time after being
left. So firmly did the old people believe in fairies then that they
would ridicule a person for not believing. And now quite the reverse
state has come about.[34]


THE TESTIMONY OF JOHN DUNBAR OF INVEREEN

We talked with other Highlanders in the country round Tomatin, and heard
only echoes, mostly fragmentary, of what their forefathers used to
believe about fairies. But at Invereen we discovered John Dunbar, a
Highlander, who really knows the Fairy-Faith and is not ashamed to
explain it. Speaking partly from experience and partly from what he has
heard his parents relate concerning the 'good people', he said:--

_The Sheep and the Fairy-Hunting._--'I believe people saw fairies, but I
think one reason no one sees them now is because every place in this
parish where they used to appear has been put into sheep, and deer, and
grouse, and shooting. According to tradition, Coig na Fearn is the place
where the last fairy was seen in this country. Before the big sheep
came, the fairies are supposed to have had a premonition that their
domains were to be violated by them. A story is told of a fight between
the sheep and fairies, or else of the fairies hunting the sheep:--James
MacQueen, who could traffic with the fairies, whom he regarded as ghosts
or spirits, one night on his old place, which now is in sheep, was lying
down all alone and heard a small and big barking of dogs, and a small
and big bleating of sheep, though no sheep were there then. It was the
fairy-hunting he heard. "I put an axe under my head and I had no fear
therefore," he always repeated when telling the story. I believe the man
saw and heard something. And MacQueen used to aid the fairies, and on
that account, as he was in the habit of saying, he always found more
meal in his chest than he thought he had.'

_Fairies._--'My grandmother believed firmly in fairies, and I have heard
her tell a good many stories about them. They were a small people
dressed in green, and had dwellings underground in dry spots. Fairies
were often heard in the hills over there (pointing), and I believe
something was there. They were awful for music, and used to be heard
very often playing the bagpipes. A woman wouldn't go out in the dark
after giving birth to a child before the child was christened, so as not
to give the fairies power over her or the child. And I have heard people
say that if fairies were refused milk and meat they would _take_ a horse
or a cow; and that if well treated they would repay all gifts.'

_Time in Fairyland._--'People would be twenty years in Fairyland and it
wouldn't seem more than a night. A bridegroom who was _taken_ on his
wedding-day was in Fairyland for many generations, and, coming back,
thought it was next morning. He asked where all the wedding-guests were,
and found only one old woman who remembered the wedding.'

_Highland Legend of the Dead._--As I have found to be the case in all
Celtic countries equally, fairy stories nearly always, in accordance
with the law of psychology known as 'the association of ideas', give
place to or are blended with legends of the dead. This is an important
factor for the Psychological Theory. And what follows proves the same
ideas to be present to the mind of Mr. Dunbar:--'Some people after death
are seen in their old haunts; no mistake about it. A bailiff had false
corn and meal measures, and so after he died he came back to his
daughter and told her he could have no peace until the measures were
burned. She complied with her father's wish, and his spirit was never
seen again. I have known also of phantom funerals of people who died
soon afterwards being seen on the road at night.'


TO THE WESTERN HEBRIDES

From Inverness I began my journey to the Western Hebrides. While I
waited for the steamer to take me from Kyle to the Isle of Skye, an old
man with whom I talked on the docks said this about Neill Mackintosh, of
Black Island:--'You can't argue with the old man that he hasn't seen
fairies. He can tell you all about them.'


EVIDENCE FROM THE ISLE OF SKYE

Miss Frances Tolmie, who was born at Uignish, Isle of Skye, and has
lived many years in the isle in close touch with some of its oldest
folk, contributes, from Edinburgh, the evidence which follows. The first
two tales were told in the parish of Minginish a number of years ago by
Mary Macdonald, a goat-herd, and have their setting in the region of the
Koolian[35] range of mountains on the west side of Skye.

_The Fatal Peat Ember._--'An aged nurse who had fallen fast asleep as
she sat by the fire, was holding on her knees a newly-born babe. The
mother, who lay in bed gazing dreamily, was astonished to see three
strange little women enter the dwelling. They approached the unconscious
child, and she who seemed to be their leader was on the point of lifting
it off the nurse's lap, when the third exclaimed:--"Oh! let us leave
this one with her as we have already taken so many!" "So be it," replied
the senior of the party in a tone of displeasure, "but when that peat
now burning on the hearth shall be consumed, her life will surely come
to an end." Then the three little figures passed out. The good wife,
recognizing them to be fairies, sprang from her bed and poured over the
fire all the water she could find, and extinguished the half-burnt
ember. This she wrapped carefully in a piece of cloth and deposited at
the very bottom of a large chest, which afterwards she always kept
locked.

'Years passed, and the babe grew into a beautiful young woman. In the
course of time she was betrothed; and, according to custom, not
appearing in public at church on the Sunday preceding the day appointed
for her marriage, remained at home alone. To amuse herself, she began to
search the contents of all the keeping-places in the house, and came at
last to the chest containing the peat ember. In her haste, the good
mother had that day forgotten the key of the chest, which was now in the
lock. At the bottom of the chest the girl found a curious packet
containing nothing but a morsel of peat, and this apparently useless
thing she tossed away into the fire. When the peat was well kindled the
young girl began to feel very ill, and when her mother returned was
dying. The open chest and the blazing peat explained the cause of the
calamity. The fairy's prediction was fulfilled.'

_Results of Refusing Fairy Hospitality._--'Two women were walking toward
the Point when one of them, hearing churning going on under a hillock,
expressed aloud a wish for some butter-milk. No sooner had she spoken
than a very small figure of a woman came out with a bowlful and offered
it to her, but the thirsty woman, ignorant of fairy customs and the
penalty attending their infringement, declined the kind offer of
refreshment, and immediately found herself a prisoner in the hillock.
She was led to an apartment containing a chest full of meal and a great
bag of wool, and was told by the fairy that when she had eaten all the
meal and spun all the wool she would be free to return to her home. The
prisoner at once set herself to eating and spinning assiduously, but
without apparent result, and despairing of completing the task consulted
an old man of very sad countenance who had long been a captive in the
hillock. He willingly gave her his advice, which was to wet her left eye
with saliva each morning before she settled down to her task. She
followed this advice, and gradually the wool and the meal were
exhausted. Then the fairy granted her freedom, but in doing so cursed
the old man, and said that she had it in her power to keep him in the
hillock for ever.'

_The Fairies' 'Waulking' (Fulling)._--'At Ebost, in Bracadale, an old
woman was living in a little hut, with no companion save a wise cat. As
we talked, she expressed her wonder that no fairies are ever seen or
heard nowadays. She could remember hearing her father tell how he, when
a herd-boy, had heard the fairies singing a "waulking" song in
Dun-Osdale, an ancient and ruined round tower in the parish of
Duirinish, and not far from Heleval _mhor_ (great) and Heleval _bheag_
(less)--two hills occasionally alluded to as "Macleod's Tables". The
youth was lying on the grass-grown summit of the ruin, and heard them
distinctly. As if with exultation, one voice took the verse and then the
whole company joined in the following chorus: "_Ho! fir-e! fair-e,
foirm! Ho! Fair-eag-an an clo!_ (Ho! well done! Grand! Ho! bravo the web
[of homespun]!)"'

_Crodh Chailean._--'This tale was related by Mr. Neil Macleod, the bard
of Skye:--"Colin was a gentleman of Clan Campbell in Perthshire, who was
married to a beautiful maiden whom the fairies carried off on her
marriage-day, and on whom they cast a spell which rendered her invisible
for a day and a year. She came regularly every day to milk the cows of
her sorrowing husband, and sang sweetly to them while she milked, but he
never once had the pleasure of beholding her, though he could hear
perfectly what she sang. At the expiry of the year she was, to his great
joy, restored to him."'[36]

_Fairy Legend of the Macleod Family._--'There is a legend told of the
Macleod family:--Soon after the heir of the Macleods was born, a
beautiful woman in wonderful raiment, who was a fairy woman or banshee
(there were joyous as well as mourning banshees) appeared at the castle,
and went directly to the babe's cradle. She took up the babe and chanted
over it a series of verses, and each verse had its own melody. The
verses foretold the future manhood of the young child, and acted as a
protective charm over its life. Then she put the babe back into its
cradle, and, going out, disappeared across the moorlands.

'For many generations it was a custom in the Macleod family that whoever
was the nurse of the heir must sing those verses as the fairy woman had
sung them. After a time the song was forgotten, but at a later period it
was partially recovered, and to-day it is one of the proud folk-lore
heritages of the Macleod family.'[37]

_Origin and Nature of the Fairy-Faith._--Finally, with respect to the
origin and nature of the Scotch Fairy-Faith, Miss Tolmie states:--'As a
child I was not permitted to hear about fairies. At twenty I was seeking
and trying to understand the beliefs of my fathers in the light of
modern ideas. I was very determined not to lose the past.

'The fairy-lore originated in a cultured class in very ancient times.
The peasants inherited it; they did not invent it. With the loss of
Gaelic in our times came the loss of folk-ideals. The classical and
English influences combined had a killing effect; so that the
instinctive religious feeling which used to be among our people when
they kept alive the fairy-traditions is dead. We have
intellectually-constructed creeds and doctrines which take its place.

'We always thought of fairies as mysterious little beings living in
hills. They were capricious and irritable, but not wicked. They could do
a good turn as well as a bad one. They were not aerial, but had bodies
which they could make invisible; and they could make human bodies
invisible in the same way. Besides their hollow knolls and mounds there
seemed to be a subterranean world in which they also lived, where things
are like what they are in this world.'


THE ISLE OF BARRA,[38] WESTERN HEBRIDES

We pass from Cuchulainn's beautiful island to what is now the most
Celtic part of Scotland--the Western Hebrides, where the ancient life is
lived yet, and where the people have more than a faith in spirits and
fairies. And no one of the Western Hebrides, perhaps excepting the tiny
island of Erisgey, has changed less during the last five hundred years
than Barra.

Our Barra guide and interpreter, Michael Buchanan, a native and a
life-long resident of Barra, is seventy years old, yet as strong and
active as a city man at fifty. He knows intimately every old man on the
island, and as he was able to draw them out on the subject of the 'good
people' as no stranger could do, I was quite willing, as well as obliged
on account of the Scotch Gaelic, to let him act on my behalf in all my
collecting on Barra. Mr. Buchanan is the author of a little book called
_The MacNeils of Barra Genealogy_, published in the year 1902. He was
the official interpreter before the Commission of Inquiry which was
appointed by the British Parliament in 1883 to search into the
oppression of landlordism in the Highlands and Islands, and he acted in
the same capacity before the Crofters' Commission and the Deer-Forest
Commission. We therefore feel perfectly safe in allowing him to present,
before our jury trying the Fairy-Faith, the evidence of the
Gaelic-speaking witnesses from Barra.


JOHN MACNEIL'S TESTIMONY

We met the first of the Barra witnesses on the top of a rocky hill,
where the road from Castlebay passes. He was carrying on his back a sack
of sand heavy enough for a college athlete, and he an old man between
seventy and eighty years of age. Michael Buchanan has known John MacNeil
all his life, for they were boys together on the island; and there is
not much difference between them in age, our interpreter being the
younger. Then the three of us sat down on a grassy knoll, all the world
like a fairy knoll, though it was not; and when pipes were lit and the
weather had been discussed, there was introduced the subject of the
'good people'--all in Gaelic, for our witness now about to testify knows
no English--and what John MacNeil said is thus interpreted by Michael
Buchanan:--

_A Fairy's Visit._--'Yes, I have' (in answer to a question if he had
heard of people being _taken_ by the 'good people' or fairies). 'A fairy
woman visited the house of a young wife here in Barra, and the young
wife had her baby on her breast at the time. The first words uttered by
the fairy woman were, "Heavy is your child;" and the wife answered,
"Light is everybody who lives the longest." "Were it not that you have
answered my question," said the fairy woman, "and understood my meaning,
you should have been less your child." And then the fairy woman
departed.'

_Fairy-Singing._--'My mother, and two other women well known here in
Barra, went to a hill one day to look after their sheep, and, a thick
fog coming on, they had to rest awhile. They then sat down upon a knoll
and began to sing a _walking_ (cloth-working) song, as follows:--"It is
early to-day that I have risen;" and, as they sang, a fairy woman in the
rocks responded to their song with one of her own.'

_Nature of Fairies._--Then the question was asked if fairies were men or
spirits, and this is the reply:--'I never saw any myself, and so cannot
tell, but they must be spirits from all that the old people tell about
them, or else how could they appear and disappear so suddenly? The old
people said they didn't know if fairies were flesh and blood, or
spirits. They saw them as men of more diminutive stature than our race.
I heard my father say that fairies used to come and speak to natural
people, and then vanish while one was looking at them. Fairy women used
to go into houses and talk and then vanish. The general belief was that
the fairies were spirits who could make themselves seen or not seen at
will. And when they _took_ people they _took_ body and soul together.'


THE TESTIMONY OF JOHN CAMPBELL, NINETY-FOUR YEARS OLD

Our next witness from Barra is John Campbell, who is ninety-four years
old, yet clear-headed. He was born on Barra at Sgalary, and lives near
there now at Breuvaig. We were on our way to call at his home, when we
met him coming on the road, with a cane in each hand and a small sack
hanging from one of them. Michael saluted him as an old acquaintance,
and then we all sat down on a big boulder in the warm sunshine beside
the road to talk. The first thing John wanted was tobacco, and when this
was supplied we gradually led from one subject to another until he was
talking about fairies. And this is what he said about them:--

_The Fairy and the Fountain._--'I had a companion by the name of James
Galbraith, who was drowned about forty years ago, and one time he was
crossing from the west side of the island to the east side, to the
township called Sgalary, and feeling thirsty took a drink out of a
spring well on the mountain-side. After he had taken a drink, he looked
about him and saw a woman clad in green, and imagined that no woman
would be clad in such a colour except a fairy woman. He went on his way,
and when he hadn't gone far, looked back, and, as he looked, saw the
woman vanish out of his sight. He afterwards reported the incident at
his father's house in Sgalary, and his father said he also had seen a
woman clad in clothes of green at the same place some nights before.'

_A Step-son Pitied by the Fairies._--'I heard my father say that a
neighbour of his father, that is of my grandfather, was married twice,
and had three children from the first marriage, and when married for the
second time, a son and daughter. His second wife did not seem to be kind
enough to the children of the first wife, neglecting their food and
clothing and keeping them constantly at hard work in the fields and at
herding.

'One morning when the man and his second wife were returning from mass
they passed the pasture where their cows were grazing and heard the
enjoyable _skirrels_ of the bagpipes. The father said, "What may this
be?" and going off the road found the eldest son of the first wife
playing the bagpipes to his heart's pleasure; and asked him earnestly,
"How did you come to play the bagpipes so suddenly, or where did you get
this splendid pair of bagpipes?" The boy replied, "An old man came to me
while I was in the action of roasting pots in a pit-fire and said, 'Your
step-mother is bad to you and in ill-will towards you.' I told the old
man I was sensible that that was the case, and then he said to me, 'If I
give you a trade will you be inclined to follow it?' I said yes, and the
old man then continued, 'How would you like to be a piper by trade?' 'I
would gladly become a piper,' says I, 'but what am I to do without the
bagpipes and the tunes to play?' 'I'll supply the bagpipes,' he said,
'and as long as you have them you'll never want for the most delightful
tunes.'" The male descendants of the boy in question were all famous
pipers thereafter, and the last of them was a piper to the late Cluny
MacPherson of Cluny.'

_Nature of Fairies._--At this point, Michael turned the trend of John's
thoughts to the nature of fairies, with the following result:--'The
general belief of the people here during my father's lifetime was that
the fairies were more of the nature of spirits than of men made of flesh
and blood, but that they so appeared to the naked eye that no difference
could be marked in their forms from that of any human being, except that
they were more diminutive. I have heard my father say it was the case
that fairy women used to take away children from their cradles and leave
different children in their places, and that these children who were
left would turn out to be old men.

'At Barra Head, a fairy woman used to come to a man's window almost
every night as though looking to see if the family was home. The man
grew suspicious, and decided the fairy woman was watching her chance to
steal his wife, so he proposed a plan. It was then and still is the
custom after thatching a house to rope it across with heather-spun
ropes, and, at the time, the man was busy spinning some of them; and he
told his wife to take his place that night to spin the heather-rope, and
said he would take her spinning-wheel. They were thus placed when the
fairy woman made the usual look in at the window, and she seeing that
her intention was understood, said to the man, "You are yourself at the
spinning-wheel and your wife is spinning the heather-rope."

'I have heard it said that the fairies live in knolls on a higher level
than that of the ground in general, and that fairy songs are heard from
the faces of high rocks. The fairies of the air (the fairy or spirit
hosts) are different from those in the rocks. A man whom I've seen,
Roderick MacNeil, was lifted by the hosts and left three miles from
where he was taken up. The hosts went at about midnight. A man awake at
midnight is in danger. Cows and horses are sometimes shot in place of
men' (and why, will be explained by later witnesses).

_Father MacDonald's Opinions._--We then asked about the late Rev. Donald
MacDonald, who had the reputation of knowing all about fairies and
spirits when he lived here in these islands, and John said:--'I have
heard my wife say that she questioned Father MacDonald, who was then a
parish priest here in Barra, and for whom she was a housekeeper, if it
was possible that such beings or spirits as fairies were in existence.
He said "Yes", and that they were those who left Heaven after the fallen
angels; and that those going out after the fallen angels had gone out
were so numerous and kept going so long that St. Michael notified Christ
that the throne was fast emptying, and when Christ saw the state of
affairs he ordered the doors of Heaven to be closed at once, saying as
he gave the order, "Who is out is out and who is in is in." And the
fairies are as numerous now as ever they were before the beginning of
the world.' (Cf. pp. 47, 53, 67, 76, 85, 109, 113, 116, 129, 154, 205,
212.)

Here we left John, and he, continuing on his way up the mountain road in
an opposite direction from us and round a turn, disappeared almost as a
fairy might.


AN AGED PIPER'S TESTIMONY

We introduce now as a witness Donald McKinnon, ninety-six years old, a
piper by profession; and not only is he the oldest man on Barra, but
also the oldest man among all our witnesses. He was born on the Island
of South Uist, one of the Western Hebrides north of Barra, and came to
Barra in 1836, where he has lived ever since. In spite of being four
years less than a hundred in age, he greeted us very heartily, and as he
did not wish us to sit inside, for his chimney happened not to be
drawing very well, and was filling the straw-thatched cottage with peat
smoke, we sat down outside on the grass and began talking; and as we
came to fairies this is what he said:--

_Nature of Fairies._--'I believe that fairies exist as a tribe of
spirits, and appear to us in the form of men and women. People who saw
fairies can yet describe them as they appeared dressed in green. No
doubt there are fairies in other countries as well as here.

'In my experience there was always a good deal of difference between the
fairies and the hosts. The fairies were supposed to be living without
material food, whereas the hosts were supposed to be living upon their
own booty. Generally, the hosts were evil and the fairies good, though I
have heard that the fairies used to _take_ cattle and leave their old
men rolled up in the hides. One night an old witch was heard to say to
the fairies outside the fold, "We cannot get anything to-night." The old
men who were left behind in the hides of the animals _taken_, usually
disappeared very suddenly. I saw two men who used to be lifted by the
hosts. They would be carried from South Uist as far south as Barra Head,
and as far north as Harris. Sometimes when these men were ordered by the
hosts to kill men on the road they would kill instead either a horse or
a cow; for in that way, so long as an animal was killed, the injunction
of the hosts was fulfilled.' To illustrate at this point the idea of
fairies, Donald repeated the same legend told by our former witness,
John Campbell, about the emptying of Heaven and the doors being closed
to keep the remainder of its population in. Then he told the following
story about fairies:--

_The Fairy-Belt._--'I heard of an apprentice to carpentry who was
working with his master at the building of a boat, a little distance
from his house, and near the sea. He went to work one morning and forgot
a certain tool which he needed in the boat-building. He returned to his
carpenter-shed to get it, and found the shed filled with fairy men and
women. On seeing him they ran away so greatly confused that one of the
women forgot her gird (belt), and he picked it up. In a little while she
came back for the gird, and asked him to give it her, but he refused to
do so. Thereupon she promised him that he should be made master of his
trade wherever his lot should fall without serving further
apprenticeship. On that condition he gave her the gird; and rising early
next morning he went to the yard where the boat was a-building and put
in two planks so perfectly that when the master arrived and saw them, he
said to him, "Are you aware of anybody being in the building-yard last
night, for I see by the work done that I am more likely to be an
apprentice than the person who put in those two planks, whoever he is.
Was it you that did it?" The reply was in the affirmative, and the
apprentice told his master the circumstances under which he gained the
rapid mastership of his trade.'


ACROSS THE MOUNTAINS

It was nearing sunset now, and a long mountain-climb was ahead of us,
and one more visit that evening, before we should begin our return to
Castlebay, and so after this story we said a hearty good-bye to Donald,
with regret at leaving him. When we reached the mountain-side, one of
the rarest of Barra's sights greeted us. To the north and south in the
golden glow of a September twilight we saw the long line of the Outer
Hebrides like the rocky backbone of some submerged continent. The scene
and colours on the land and ocean and in the sky seemed more like some
magic vision, reflected from Faerie by the 'good people' for our
delight, than a thing of our own world. Never was air clearer or sea
calmer, nor could there be air sweeter than that in the mystic
mountain-stillness holding the perfume of millions of tiny blossoms of
purple and white heather; and as the last honey-bees were leaving the
beautiful blossoms their humming came to our ears like low, strange
music from Fairyland.


MARIAN MACLEAN OF BARRA, AND HER TESTIMONY

Our next witness to testify is a direct descendant of the ancient
MacNeils of Barra. Her name now is Marian MacLean; and she lives in the
mountainous centre of Barra at Upper Borve. She is many years younger
than the men who have testified, and one of the most industrious women
on the island. It was already dark and past dinner-time when we entered
her cottage, and so, as we sat down before a blazing peat-fire, she at
once offered us some hot milk and biscuits, which we were only too glad
to accept. And, as we ate, we talked first about our hard climb in the
darkness across the mountains, and through the thick heather-bushes, and
then about the big rock which has a key-hole in it, for it contains a
secret entrance to a fairy palace. We had examined it in the twilight as
we came through the mountain pass which it guards, and my guide Michael
had assured me that more than one islander, crossing at the hour we
were, had seen some of the fairies near it. We waited in front of the
big rock in hopes one might appear for our benefit, but, in spite of our
strong belief that there are fairies there, not a single one would come
out. Perhaps they came and we couldn't see them; who knows?

_Fairies and Fairy Hosts ('Sluagh')._[39]--'O yes,' Marian said, as she
heard Michael and myself talking over our hot milk, 'there are fairies
there, for I was told that the Pass was a notable fairy haunt.' Then I
said through Michael, 'Can you tell us something about what these
fairies are?' And from that time, save for a few interruptions natural
in conversation, we listened and Marian talked, and told stories as
follows:--

'Generally, the fairies are to be seen after or about sunset, and walk
on the ground as we do, whereas the hosts travel in the air above places
inhabited by people. The hosts used to go after the fall of night, and
more particularly about midnight. You'd hear them going in fine weather
against a wind like a covey of birds. And they were in the habit of
lifting men in South Uist, for the hosts need men to help in shooting
their javelins from their bows against women in the action of milking
cows, or against any person working at night in a house over which they
pass. And I have heard of good sensible men whom the hosts took,
shooting a horse or cow in place of the person ordered to be shot.

'There was a man who had only one cow and one daughter. The daughter was
milking the cow at night when the hosts were passing, and that human
being whom the hosts had lifted with them was her father's neighbour.
And this neighbour was ordered by the hosts to shoot the daughter as she
was milking, but, knowing the father and daughter, he shot the cow
instead. The next morning he went where the father was and said to him,
"You are missing the cow." "Yes," said the father, "I am." And the man
who had shot the cow said, "Are you not glad your cow and not your
daughter was _taken_? For I was ordered to shoot your daughter and I
shot your cow, in order to show blood on my arrow." "I am very glad of
what you have done if that was the case," the father replied. "It was
the case," the neighbour said.

'My father and grandfather knew a man who was carried by the hosts from
South Uist here to Barra. I understand when the hosts take away earthly
men they require another man to help them. But the hosts must be
spirits. My opinion is that they are both spirits of the dead and other
spirits not the dead. A child was taken by the hosts and returned after
one night and one day, and found at the back of the house with the palms
