    without meaning."

The German philosopher Kant put the same thought in beautiful form
when he said, in substance: The dove, as she speeds her way through
the air, may marvel at the resistance to her flight by the atmosphere,
but we know that but for that resistance she could not fly at all. So
far Kant. Applied, the conclusion would be: As the resistance of the
air to the flight of the dove, so is evil to the progress of
Intelligences.

[In the December number, 1908, of the "Cosmopolitan Magazine," I find
the following reflections, by Mr. Ambrose Bierce, on the point here
discussed; and while not accepting, without modification, every
thought expressed, I consider the passage too pertinent, and too rich
to be denied admittance into these pages:

"Let us for a moment suppose this country's reformers to have achieved
their amiable purpose--their purposes, rather, for these are as the
leaves of the forest, and no two alike. We have, then, a country in
which are no poverty, no contention, no tyranny nor oppression, no
peril to life or limb, no disease--and so forth. How delightful! What
a good and happy people! Alas, no! With poverty have vanished
benevolence, providence, and the foresight which, born of the fear of
individual want, stands guard at a thousand gates to defend the
general good. The charitable impulse is dead in every breast, and
gratitude, atrophied by disuse, has no longer a place among human
sentiments and emotions. With no more fighting among ourselves we have
lost the power of resentment and resistance: a car-load of Mexicans or
a shipful of Japanese can invade our fool's paradise and enslave us,
as the Spaniards overran Peru and the British subdued India. (Hailers
of "the dawn of the new era" will, I trust, provide that it dawns
everywhere at once or here last of all.) Having no oppression to
resist and no perils to apprehend, we no longer need the courage to
defy, nor the fortitude to endure. Heroism is a failing memory and
magnanimity a dream of the past; for not only are the virtues known by
contrast with the vices, they spring from the same seed, grow in the
same soil, ripen in the same sunshine, and perish in the same frost. A
fine race of mollycoddles we should be without our sins and
sufferings! In a world without evils there would be one supreme
evil--existence. We need not fear any such condition. Progress is
infected with the germs of reversion; on the grave of the civilization
of today will squat the barbarian of tomorrow, "with a glory in his
bosom" that will transfigure him the day after. The alternation is one
that we can neither hasten nor retard, for our success baffles us. If,
for example, we could abolish war, disease, and famine, the race would
multiply to the point of "standing room only"--a condition prophesying
war, disease, and famine. Wherefore the wisest prayer is this, "O
Lord, make thy servant strong to fight and impotent to prevail."]

"Moral evil," then, is not a created thing. It is one of the eternal
existences, just as duration is and space. It is as old as law--old as
Truth, old as this eternal universe. Intelligences must adjust
themselves to these eternal existences; this, the measure of their
duty.


THE INTELLIGENT ENTITY: Of man's spirit, called often by other
names--"mind," "intelligence," "ego," "self;" but by whatever name it
is called, and all nice distinctions set aside, here I mean that
conscious, self-determining entity, which thinks, reasons, wills,
loves, aspires--I mean the real man. Let us in our discourse call him
spirit. Of man, then, thus understood, our Prophet taught:

    "The soul--the mind of man--the immortal spirit--where did it come
    from? All learned men and doctors of divinity say that God created
    it in the beginning; but it is not so; the very idea lessens man
    in my estimation. I do not believe the doctrine. I know better. *
    * * We say that God himself is a self-existent Being. Who told you
    so? It is correct enough, but how did it get into your heads? Who
    told you that man did not exist in like manner, upon the same
    principles? * * * Is it logical to say that the intelligence of
    spirits is immortal, and yet that it had a beginning? The
    intelligence of spirits had no beginning, neither will it have an
    end. * * * There never was a time when there were not spirits; for
    they are co-eternal with our Father in heaven. * * * The spirit of
    man is not a created being; it existed from eternity, and will
    exist to eternity."

Man, then, in the Prophet's philosophy, is not a created, but a
self-existent entity, one of the eternal things; not created, really
uncreatable, as also indestructible. Not of earth origin, but existing
in heavens without number, brother to all Intelligences--brother to
the Christ with the rest. "I was in the beginning with the Father,"
our Prophet represents the Christ as saying--"I was in the beginning
with the Father. * * * Ye [the brethren present when the revelation
was given] were also in the beginning with the Father, that which is
spirit. * * * Man [the race] was also in the beginning with God.
Intelligence was not created or made, neither indeed can be."

But while these spirits or intelligent entities may be equal as to
their eternity, they differ in the degree of intelligence--so our
Prophet teaches: Where two things exist, one higher than another,
there may be another thing higher yet. Where two things exist, one
superior to another, there may be another still superior, and so on.
So where two spirits exist, one being more intelligent than the other,
there may be another more intelligent than the first. Yet,
notwithstanding this difference in degree of intelligence, they are
equal as to their eternity. "They existed before," said our Prophet,
"they shall have no end; they shall exist after, for they are
_gnolaum_, or eternal." It is this difference in Intelligences that
leads to order in this universe of ours. The more advanced
Intelligences governing, controlling, devising, organizing, forming
societies, making governments--all which shall tend to increase the
glory and power and joy of Intelligences; to this end bringing into
existence what we call worlds, world-systems, guiding them through
immense cycles of time, and through processes that lead from chaos to
cosmos, from telestial to celestial, and when attaining a point beyond
which they may not be exalted in their present forms, breaking those
forms, disintegrating them, throwing them back--these baser material
things, not Intelligences--back to chaos, to be brought forth again to
reach a grander cosmos--worlds without number have thus passed away,
by the word of God's power, and many now stand, innumerable unto man;
and as one earth and its heavens shall pass away, so shall another
come, and there is no end to these works, this evolution and this
devolution. And so the eternal drama proceeds. Intelligences meanwhile
standing unhurt amidst this organization and disorganization of
worlds; these integrating and disintegrating elements, this movement
from lower to higher forms, from little to greater excellences; yet
this without attaining to "highest" or "perfect," because advancing in
the infinite, which knows no ultimates. Meanwhile Intelligences, amid
these changes, under the law of eternal progress, are ever-increasing
in power, glory, might, dominion, love, benevolence, charity, justice,
and all else that can make for the increase of their power and glory.
In which strivings and achievements eternal evil is present; makes
necessary and possible, in fact, the very strivings and achievements;
and is the "foil on which good produces itself, and becomes known."


THE RELATIONSHIP OF INTELLIGENCES: It is seen that our Prophet taught
the eternity of Intelligences; and that they are not only not created,
but uncreatable; that though they differ in degree of intelligence, of
knowledge, of love, hence differ also in power, in influence, in
glory--in all that comes from soul power. The presiding Intelligence
to that order of things and beings to which we belong, is represented
as standing among the Intelligences destined to our earth, "and among
these there were many of the noble and great ones." And the Presiding
Intelligence said: "These I will make my Rulers; for He stood among
those that were spirits, and He saw that they were good." "The noble
and great ones" are made Rulers; and doubtless the principle here
operating in respect of those Intelligences destined to our earth,
operates in all worlds and world systems. Some of the "Noble and Great
Ones" stand at the head of worlds and groups of worlds, forming Grand
Presidencies, in order and gradation based upon their power and
appointment. All which is dependent upon their intelligence, their
character, their nobility and greatness--measured by their capacity to
serve. Each one of such "Rulers"--and each Intelligence, in
fact--independent in the sphere in which he is appointed to act, yet
acting in harmony, through attainment of the knowledge of Truth, with
all other exalted and sanctified souls--these are Gods, or the Rulers
in this Universe. These make up David's "congregation of the Mighty,"
in which God, "More intelligent than them all," standeth and judgeth
"among the Gods." (Psalms 82: 1.) And to these, in their several
stations, other Intelligences owe loyalty, submission--call it worship
if you like; at any rate it must be unshaken loyalty, in order to
attain the ends proposed in all "plans of salvation," "gospels,"
"societies," "kingdoms of God," and the like, in which "plans,"
"gospels" and the rest, each spirit agreed and covenanted to accept,
as also to obey and honor those appointed to direct and bring to pass
that which was ordained in the councils of Divine Intelligences. "At
the first organization in heaven," said the Prophet, speaking with
reference to matters pertaining to our earth, and the probation of
spirits upon it in earth-life--"at the first organization in heaven we
were all present, and saw the Savior chosen and appointed, and the
plan of salvation made, and we sanctioned it." This the meaning of
"man [the race] was also in the beginning with God." And as to the
"Rulers," "Presidencies"--they are not "Rulers" in the worldly sense
of those words. "Government" here, "office" in the "kingdom of God,"
means opportunity for service, not of mastery. "Ye know that the
princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion over them, and they that are
great exercise authority upon them. But it shall not be so among you.
But whosoever would be great among you, let him be your minister; and
whosoever will be chief among you, let him be your servant; even as
the Son of Man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and to
give His life a ransom for many." So Joseph Smith: "The powers of
heaven can only be controlled upon the principles of righteousness.
When men undertake to cover their sins or to gratify their pride or
vain ambition or exercise control or dominion or compulsion upon the
souls of the children of men in any degree of unrighteousness, the
heavens withdraw themselves, the spirit of the Lord is grieved, and
when it is withdrawn, amen to the authority of that man. No power or
influence can or ought to be maintained by virtue of the Priesthood,
only by persuasion, by long suffering, by gentleness, and meekness,
and by love unfeigned; by kindness, and pure knowledge, which shall
greatly enlarge the soul, without hypocrisy, and without guile."

This, the principle of heavenly rule.


MAN'S FREEDOM: Through all that is here set forth as Joseph Smith's
doctrines, it will be seen that the free moral agency of man is
regarded as a reality. First, the recognition of man, as a spirit,
being a self-existent entity--not a created thing; "man [i.e., all
men, the race] was in the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the
light of truth, was not created or made, neither indeed can be." Then
second, "All truth is independent in that sphere in which God has
placed it, to act for itself, as all Intelligence also, otherwise
there is no existence. Behold, here is the agency of man, and here is
the condemnation of man, because that which was from the beginning is
plainly manifest unto them, and they receive not the light. And every
man, whose spirit receiveth not the light, is under condemnation, for
man is spirit."

The fact of free moral agency runs through all the Prophet's
revelations in similar spirit. Indeed, in one scripture he represents
the chief sin of Lucifer as being an attempt to "destroy the agency of
man;" and for which he was driven forth from heaven. The effect of
these two doctrines, the recognition of the spirit of man as an
eternal being, and his being a free moral agent, is tremendous in
accounting for things. Elsewhere, contrasting this view of things with
some modern Christian views, I have said: "As matters now stand, the
usually accepted Christian doctrine on the matter of man's origin is
