present age; such the result of fourteen years of the ministry of an
unlettered youth, crying in the wilderness the proclamation of
repentance, baptizing for the remission of sins, and holding the keys
of this divine, eternal power.

His unparalleled success, and still increasing influence, now alarmed
his former persecutors, and raised their jealousy and envy to the
highest pitch of frenzy and madness.

Several counties of Illinois combined with the former enemies, who had
robbed and destroyed the Saints in Missouri, and, calling public
meetings, passed resolutions to destroy the city of Nauvoo, and to
force the Saints, once more, to abandon their homes and farms to the
possession of the land pirates. They also entered into covenant, to
take the life of the young Joseph.

To resist this overwhelming storm, our hero and Prophet marshalled his
legion of six thousand men, in his beloved city of Nauvoo, prepared
for the most vigorous defence, and awaited the onset. The cowardly
enemy soon discovered the impropriety of an open attack, and resolved
on stratagem. They caused a magistrate of their own number to issue a
writ; and sent a constable to bring the person of Joseph into the
midst of those who had sworn to kill him. To yield to this mockery
would be to lose his life. To resist it would be construed into
treason and would bring on him the whole forces of the State. This
stratagem succeeded--Nauvoo, its legion and its general, were declared
in rebellion. His Excellency, Thomas Ford, Governor of the State of
Illinois, mustered an army, marched to the scene of conflict, took
sides with the enemy, and in fact incorporated their entire forces
with his own troops.

With this formidable force he marched to Carthage, a small town
eighteen miles from Nauvoo. He then sent a captain, named Singleton,
to take command of the Nauvoo legion, and demanded its
Lieutenant-General to repair to Carthage, and place himself in the
hands of those who had publicly combined to take his life. Sooner than
have submitted to these insults and humiliating demands, the legion
would have joyfully marched to Carthage, and cut to pieces this
cowardly band of rebels against American institutions and all the
rights of man.

But the Saints were located between two powerful States, who were now
combined against the laws, constitutions and liberties of their
country. To destroy one army, or even resist its most extravagant
demands, would be to draw upon themselves and families, the
overwhelming forces of the ferocious, ignorant, and worse than savage
beings, who had long thirsted for their plunder and their blood.

The young Prophet had no confidence in the Governor's pledge to
protect his person. He felt the hour had come, when his own blood
alone could appease the enemy, and preserve the lives of his flock. He
restrained the ardour of the legion; called upon them, by the love
they had ever borne to him as a Prophet and Apostle; and conjured
them, by the respect and confidence they had shown him as their
General, to submit to the extravagant demands of his Excellency, and
leave the event with God. He now took an affectionate leave of his
beloved legion, who were dissolved in tears; tore himself from the
embraces of his aged and widowed mother, and frantic wife and
children, and repaired to Carthage. He was accompanied by his brother
Hyrum, and the two of the Twelve, that were not abroad on foreign
missions, who would not forsake him. On the way he was cheerful but
solemn. He spoke little, but observed to those about him, _"I am going
like a lamb to the slaughter; but I am calm as a summer's morning; I
have a conscience void of offence towards God, and towards all men. I
shall die innocent: and it shall yet be said of me--He was murdered in
cold blood_."

Arriving at Carthage, he delivered himself to his enemies; answered to
the charge in the original writ, to enforce which all the Governor's
forces had been mustered, and was then committed to prison to answer
the charge of treason.

In this dungeon he was still accompanied by the two Apostles and his
brother Hyrum, who were determined to die with him.

Here as the four friends sat in the upper room, singing hymns, on the
afternoon of the 27th day of June, 1844, the prison was suddenly
surrounded with demons in the flesh, armed with muskets and bayonets,
and their faces as black as Cain--the original murderer. These
commenced firing through the doors and windows of the prison, while a
portion assaulted and broke open the door. Hyrum suddenly fell, and
died without a groan, being pierced with four balls. Taylor fled,
wounded and bleeding, to the window, and was about to throw himself
out, when a ball aimed at his heart, hit his watch in his vest pocket,
and threw him back into the room. The other Apostle, Willard Richards,
stood and parried the guns with his hand staff, receiving slight
injury.

In the midst of all this scene, the Prophet's presence of mind did not
forsake him. He saw his brother Hyrum fall, stiffen and die. He then
exclaimed, in the anguish of his soul--"O my brother!" and sprang for
the window, amid showers of ball as thick as hail. He instantly threw
himself from the upper story into the midst of the bristling bayonets
of the enemy, and, on alighting, was pierced with a shower of balls,
and instantly died without a struggle or a groan.

His presence of mind, and prompt action, in thus throwing himself
among the enemy, drew them from the prison in time to save the lives
of the two Apostles, which was, no doubt, the object of this, the last
glorious act of his life.

Thus ended the mortal career of a youth who had revealed the ancient
history of a continent; restored to man the keys and powers of the
divine science of Theology; organized the Church and kingdom of God,
and revealed, and re-established those principles, which will
eventually prevail, and govern the sons of earth, in countless ages
yet unborn. "The good shepherd," said Jesus, "layeth down his life for
the sheep."

When the news of this horrid tragedy spread abroad, the fear of
vengeance from the Nauvoo legion seized the Governor, his troops, and
the whole gang of pirates; all fled, and even the inhabitants of the
guilty villages in the vicinity, vacated their habitations, and fled
in terror and dismay.

As the news reached Nauvoo, a thrill of horror and of anguish
unutterable ran, as with electricity, through every pulse. The legion
sprang to arms, and would have desolated the whole rebel counties, now
left unprotected, had not their judgments balanced the burning
attribute of justice which swelled their bosoms.

As it was, they smothered their resentment, and prepared for the
burial of the illustrious dead. The bodies of the two martyrs were
borne to the city; being met by the entire populace, bowed with
sorrow, bathed in tears, and their bosoms upheaved with a sense of
sorrow and outraged humanity, such as, perhaps, an entire populace at
once never felt, since man was doomed to mourn.

The Twelve, who were abroad, soon returned, soothed and comforted the
sheep, and exhorted them to union and perseverance. The work on the
temple was resumed, and finally completed, at an expense of many
hundred thousand dollars. In this holy edifice, after its dedication
to the Lord, a portion of the Priesthood received those holy washings,
anointings, keys, ordinances, oracles and instructions, which were yet
wanting to perfect them in the fulness of the Priesthood.

In the autumn of 1845, the enemy again rallied, and commenced to
desolate the borders of the Nauvoo settlements by fire and sword.

Wearied with long continued vexation and persecution, the council of
the Apostles now determined to seek peace for the Saints, amid the
far-off and almost unexplored deserts and mountains of the interior.
In February, 1846, this emigration was commenced, headed by the
Apostles and their families.

On the 24th of July, 1847, the first pioneers of this vast emigration,
headed by the President of the whole Church, Brigham Young, entered
the Valley of Great Salt Lake.

In the meantime, the beautiful Nauvoo, and its surrounding farms and
villas fell a prey to the enemy, after a vigorous defence. Its temple,
the pride and glory of America, was laid in ashes. Its last remnant
plundered, robbed of their all, sick, destitute, wounded, bleeding,
dying, at length disappeared beyond the horizon of the illimitable
plains of the west, and, for a moment, the curtain of oblivion closed
over this strange drama, and the kingdom of God seemed lost to mortal
view.

Again it rises, and what do we behold!

The banner of freedom unfurled a thousand miles from the frontiers of
the persecuting foe; its waving folds, amid the snow-clad peaks of the
Rocky mountains, inviting to liberty and light, the oppressed of every
clime; and a free and sovereign State rising, in majesty and smiling
splendour, amid the fastnesses of nature's eternal ramparts; while the
exhaustless treasures of the golden mountains of California, revealed
by the providence-guiding keys of modern Theology, are poured like a
flowing stream into the treasury of the Lord, to aid in the gathering
and subsistence of the Saints.

Can the student of Theology contemplate all these grand events and
their results, all verging to one focus, all combining to prepare the
way for the consummation of the entire volume of unfulfilled prophecy,
and still be so much at a loss as to query, like one of old, "Art thou
he that should come; or, look we for another?" If so, we can only
recommend, to one so slow of heart, to search the Scriptures, and all
good books extant on the subject. And, while he searches, let him turn
from his sins, and live in newness of life, and call upon God, the
Father of all, in the name of Messiah, that his understanding may be
enlightened, and his stubborn heart subdued, and constrained to yield
to the force of Truth.




CHAPTER X.

KEYS OF INITIATION IN PRACTICAL THEOLOGY.


    Is't possible! A sinful man like me,
    A candidate for heaven's mystery!
    May I approach the gate and enter in,
    Be wash'd and cleans'd from all my former sin,
    Renew'd in spirit, and partake the power
    Of bless'd Theology from this good hour.

The student of this deeply interesting science, who has traced, with
us, the thrilling incidents of its history on earth, till he finds it
restored in all its beauties, and its powers taking root in the earth,
to bear eternal fruit, will, doubtless, feel a desire to be instructed
in the first principles--the ordinances or means by which he may
personally partake of its benefits, and exercise its gifts.

There are certain qualifications, or personal preparations
indispensably necessary, without which, no person can be a proper
candidate for blessings so divine.

First. He must believe in Jesus Christ, and in the testimony of the
Apostle, or commissioned officer, to whom he looks for the
administration of these blessings.

Secondly. He must forsake a sinful course of life; must deny himself
of every impure or unlawful indulgence; must do right with his fellow
creatures, and determine to keep the commandments of Jesus Christ.

With these qualifications he comes to the Apostle, Elder, or Priest of
the Church of the Saints, who, after a covenant on the part of the
candidate to forsake his sins, and keep the commandments of Jesus
Christ, goes down into the water with him, and there buries him, in
the name of the Father, Son and Holy Spirit, for remission of sins,
and then raises him from his watery grave.

This ordinance is to represent the death, burial and resurrection of
Jesus Christ, and is called Baptism.

Having passed through this ordinance, the hands of some one, or more,
of the authorised Priesthood, are next laid upon the head of the
candidate, in the same sacred names, and the gift of the Holy Spirit
is confirmed upon him. This baptism of water and of the Spirit is
called a new birth; and it is in reality a repetition of the natural
birth, or entrance into the elements of a new existence.

To realise this, the student must be indoctrinated in the philosophy
of his natural birth, which involves three principles; viz.--"_The
spirit, the water and the blood_."

The embryo formation of the human body, is commenced and sustained by
blood and spirit, in the womb of nature, where, until the period of
birth, it floats in the element of water. At birth, then, it is
literally born of water, that is, it emerges from that element in
which it has been so long immersed, into a different element, called
the atmosphere, which then becomes a necessary element of existence.

To be born again, then, is to enter into the same element, suspend the
breath in the watery womb, and emerge from that element into the
atmosphere, and again gasp the first breath in the new creation;
while, at the same time, the blood of Atonement is applied to the
individual, for remission of sins, and is followed by the outpouring
of the Holy Spirit of promise. As it is written--"_There are three
that bear record on the earth; the spirit, the water, and the blood_."

The things of this visible creation, are the patterns of things in the
invisible world; and are so arranged as to exactly correspond--the one
answering to the other, as face to face in a mirror.

The immersion in water, in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit, for remission of sins; and the baptism of the Holy Spirit,
which follows according to promise, by the laying on of the hands of
the holy Priesthood; were instituted from before the foundation of the
world, as a pattern of the birth, death, resurrection and new life of
man.

The candidate is now initiated into the first principles of the
science of Divine Theology. His mind is quickened, his intellectual
faculties are aroused to intense activity. He is, as it were,
illuminated. He learns more of divine truth in a few days, than he
could have learned in a life time in the best merely human
institutions in the world.

His affections are also purified, exalted, and increased in
proportion. He loves his heavenly Father, and Jesus Christ, with a
perfect love. He also loves the members of the Church, or the body of
Christ, as he loves his own soul; while his bosom swells with the
tenderest sympathies, and emotions of good will and benevolence, for
all mankind. He would make any sacrifice which might be expedient, to
do good. He would lay down his life most cheerfully, without one
moment's hesitation, or regret, if required of him by the cause of
truth.

He also feels the spirit of prayer and watchfulness continually, and
pours out his soul in the same, and finds he is answered in all things
which are expedient. He is now in a fit capacity to exercise some one
or more of the spiritual gifts.

He may perhaps speak in power, in the word of wisdom, in the word of
knowledge, in prophecy, or in other tongues. He may see a vision,
dream an inspired dream, or possess the gift to be healed, or to heal
others, by the laying on of hands in the name of Jesus Christ.

To impart a portion of the Holy Spirit by the touch, or by the laying
on of hands; or to impart a portion of the element of life, from one
animal body to another, by an authorized agent who acts in the name of
God, and who is filled therewith, is as much in accordance with the
laws of nature, as for water to seek its own level; air, its
equilibrium; or heat, and electricity, their own mediums of
conveyance.

This law of spiritual fluid, its communicative properties, and the
channel by which it is imparted from one person to another, bear some
resemblance, or analogy, to the laws and operations of electricity.
Like electricity, it is imparted by the contact of two bodies, through
the channel of the nerves.

But the two fluids differ very widely. The one is a property nearly
allied to the grosser elements of matter; not extensively endowed with
the attributes of intelligence, wisdom, affection, or moral
discrimination. It can therefore be imparted from one animal body to
another, irrespective of the intellectual or moral qualities of the
subject or recipient. The other is a substance endowed with the
attributes of intelligence, affection, moral discrimination, love,
charity, and benevolence pure as the emotions which swell the bosom,
thrill the nerves, or vibrate the pulse of the Father of all.

An agent filled with this heavenly fluid cannot impart of the same to
another, unless that other is justified, washed, cleansed from all his
impurities of heart, affections, habits or practices, by the blood of
atonement, which is generally applied in connexion with the baptism of
remission.

A man who continues in his sins, and who has no living faith in the
Son of God, cannot receive the gift of the Holy Spirit through the
ministration of any agent, however holy he may be. The impure spirit
of such a one will repulse the pure element, upon the natural laws of
sympathetic affinity, or of attraction and repulsion.

An intelligent being, in the image of God, possesses every organ,
attribute, sense, sympathy, affection, of will, wisdom, love, power
and gift, which is possessed by God Himself.

But these are possessed by man, in his rudimental state, in a
subordinate sense of the word. Or, in other words, these attributes
are in embryo; and are to be gradually developed. They resemble a
bud--a germ, which gradually developes into bloom, and then, by
progress, produces the mature fruit, after its own kind.

The gift of the Holy Spirit adapts itself to all these organs or
attributes. It quickens all the intellectual faculties, increases,
enlarges, expands and purifies all the natural passions and
affections; and adapts them, by the gift of wisdom, to their lawful
use. It inspires, developes, cultivates and matures all the fine toned
sympathies, joys, tastes, kindred feelings and affections of our
nature. It inspires virtue, kindness, goodness, tenderness, gentleness
and charity. It developes beauty of person, form and features. It
tends to health, vigour, animation and social feeling. It developes
and invigorates all the faculties of the physical and intellectual
man. It strengthens, invigorates, and gives tone to the nerves. In
short, it is, as it were, marrow to the bone, joy to the heart, light
to the eyes, music to the ears, and life to the whole being.

In the presence of such persons, one feels to enjoy the light of their
countenances, as the genial rays of a sunbeam. Their very atmosphere
diffuses a thrill, a warm glow of pure gladness and sympathy, to the
heart and nerves of others who have kindred feelings, er sympathy of
spirit. No matter if the parties are strangers, entirely unknown to
each other in person or character; no matter if they have never spoken
to each other, each will be apt to remark in his own mind, and perhaps
exclaim, when referring to the interview--"O what an atmosphere
encircles that stranger! How my heart thrilled with pure and holy
feelings in his presence! What confidence and sympathy he inspired!
His countenance and spirit gave me more assurance, than a thousand
written recommendations, or introductory letters." Such is the gift of
the Holy Spirit, and such are its operations, when received through
the lawful channel--the divine, eternal Priesthood.




CHAPTER XI.

PHILOSOPHY OF MIRACLES.


    Trembling with awe and fear, the mind inquires--
    "What master spirit, now, the bard inspires;
    What bold philosophy shall dare assign
    A law to govern miracles divine--
    Tell how effects transpire without a cause,
    And how kind nature breaks kind nature's laws?"

Among the popular errors of modern times, an opinion prevails that
miracles are events which transpire contrary to the laws of nature,
that they are effects without a cause.

If such is the fact, then, there never has been a miracle, and there
never will be one. The laws of nature are the laws of _truth_. Truth
is unchangeable, and independent in its own sphere. A law of nature
never has been broken. And it is an absolute impossibility that such
law ever should be broken.

That which, at first sight, appears to be contrary to the known laws
of nature, will always be found, on investigation, to be in perfect
accordance with those laws. For instance, had a sailor of the last
century been running before the wind, and met with a vessel running at
a good rate of speed, directly in opposition to the wind and current,
this sight would have presented, to his understanding, a miracle in
the highest possible sense of the term, that is, an event entirely
contrary to the laws of nature, as known to him. Or if a train of
cars, loaded with hundreds of passengers, or scores of tons of
freight, had been seen passing over the surface of the earth, at the
rate of sixty miles per hour, and propelled, seemingly, by its own
inherent powers of locomotion, our fathers would have beheld a
miracle--an event which would have appeared, to them, to break those
very laws of nature with which they were the most familiar.

If the last generation had witnessed the conveyance of news from
London to Paris, in an instant, while they knew nothing of the late
invention of the electric telegraph, they would have testified, in all
candour, and with the utmost assurance, that a miracle had been
performed, in open violation of the well known laws of nature, and
contrary to all human knowledge of cause and effect.

But, once familiar with the arts of the living age, all those miracles
cease to be such, and the laws of nature, and of cause and effect, are
found to be still moving, unimpaired, in all the harmony of primeval
existence and operation.

The same views will apply, with equal force, to all the spiritual
phenomena of the universe.

The terms _miracle_ and _mystery_ must become obsolete, and finally
disappear from the vocabulary of intelligences, as they advance in the
higher spheres of intellectual consistency. Even now they should be
used only in a relative or limited sense, as applicable to those
things which are not yet within reach of our powers, or means of
comprehension.

We will here remind the student of two principles, or laws of
existence, developed in a former chapter of this work, which will
account for all the miraculous powers of the universe--all the mighty
works ever manifested by God, or by His servants.

First. All the elements of the material universe are eternal.

Second. There is a divine substance, fluid or essence, called Spirit,
widely diffused among these eternal elements.

This spiritual substance is the most refined, subtle, and powerful
element in the universe. It is endowed with all wisdom, all knowledge,
all intelligence and power. In short, it is the light, life, power and
principle of all things, by which they move; and of all intelligences,
by which they think.

This divine element, or Spirit, is the immediate, active, or
controlling agent, in all holy, miraculous powers.

Angels, and all holy men, perform all their miracles, simply, to use a
modern magnetic term, by being in "_communication_" with this divine
substance. Two beings, or two millions--any number thus placed in
"_communication_"--all possess one mind. The mind of the one is the
mind of the other, the will of the one is the will of the other, the
word of the one is the word of the other. And the holy fluid, or
Spirit, being in communication with them all, goes forth to control
the elements, and to execute all their mandates which are legally
issued, and in accordance with the mind and wisdom of the Great
Eloheim.

God the Father is the Head. The mandates of Jesus Christ must be in
the name of the Father.

The mandates of angels, or of holy men, in order to be legal, or of
due force and power, must be issued in the name of Jesus Christ, or of
the three who compose the Head Council; and must be in accordance with
their united mind and will. The Holy Spirit then goes forth and
executes their mandates. This agency being _invisible_, and the effect
_visible_, the act performed appears to those who are unacquainted
with spiritual agency, as a miracle, or an _effect_ without a _cause_.

When Jesus Christ was clothed upon with a mortal tabernacle, he had
not the fulness of this divine substance at the first, but grew and
increased in the same, till, being raised from the dead, he received a
fulness and, therefore, had all power, in heaven and on earth.

His Apostles received a portion of this Spirit, but not a fulness,
while they were mortal; therefore, they could know and perform some
things, but not all.

The members of the Church also partook of this Spirit, through the
ministry of the Apostles, by which miraculous gifts were imparted unto
them, some to one, and some to another: some to speak in tongues; some
to interpret, or translate from one language into another; some to
prophesy, see visions, or converse with angels; and others to control,
or cast out devils, or heal the sick; and others, again, to teach and
edify the Church, or the world, by the word of wisdom, and by the word
of knowledge.

All these gifts and miracles were the workings of that one, and the
self same Spirit given to the members of the Church of the Saints,
while the world did not partake of a sufficient measure of the Spirit
to possess these gifts. The reason of this is, that they did not
repent, and believe in Jesus Christ, and be baptized in his name, and
receive the gift of the Holy Spirit, by the laying on of the hands of
the Priesthood--these duties and ordinances, being the legal or
appointed channel by which the gift of the Holy Spirit was imparted.
The reason why these gifts of the Spirit have not been enjoyed in all
ages of the so called "_Christian Church_" is because it is not the
true Church; nor, is the true ministry or Apostleship to be found
among the Church, or Churches, where these gifts are denied. Every
minister and member of such institutions have need to repent, and be
baptized, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins; and to
receive the gift of the Holy Spirit, by the laying on of hands of
those who have authority, in order to enter into the kingdom of God.

These ordinances, ministered by a legal Priesthood, being divinely
appointed, are the only legitimate means by which man may receive and
exercise these divine powers; or, in other words, they are the means
ordained of God, by which one being may communicate or impart a
portion of this divine substance to another, so as to place that other
in communication with the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and with
angels, and the spirits of just men in the world of spirits, and with
the members of the true Church on the earth.

To heal a person by the touch, or by the laying on of hands in the
name of Jesus Christ, or to impart the Holy Spirit by the laying on of
hands, is as much in accordance with the laws of nature, as for water
to seek its own level, an apple to fall to the ground when loosened
from the tree where it grew, quicksilver to attract its own
affinities, or the magnet to obey its own laws.

As the electric fluid obeys its own laws upon the wire, so, also, does
the spiritual or holy fluid convey itself, through certain channels,
from one body to another, in accordance with certain legitimate laws.

