Cor. xiii. 8, "Charity never faileth; but whether there be tongues,
they shall cease; or whether there be knowledge, it shall vanish
away."  And ver. 13, "And now abideth faith, hope, charity; but the
greatest of these is charity."  And Col. iii. 14, "Above all these
things, put on charity, which is the bond of perfectness;" because
charity is the end of the commandment, 1 Tim. i. 5.  Charity is
therefore called "the royal law;" as though it had a superintendency
over other laws, and doubtless is a law to which other laws must
give place, when they come in competition with it; "above all
things, therefore, have fervent charity among yourselves; for
charity shall cover the multitude of sins;" 1 Pet. iv. 8.  Let us
therefore live in unity and peace, and the God of love and peace
will be with us.

That you may so do, let me remind you (in the words of a learned
man), that the unity of the church is a unity of love and affection,
and not a bare uniformity of practice and opinion.

III.  Having shewn you wherein this unity consists, I now come to
the third general thing propounded:  and that is, to shew you the
fruits and benefits of unity and peace, together with the mischiefs
and inconveniences that attend those churches where unity and peace
are wanting.

1.  Unity and peace is a duty well-pleasing to God, who is styled
the author of peace and not of confusion.  In all the churches God's
Spirit rejoiceth in the unity of our spirits; but on the other hand,
where strife and divisions are, there the Spirit of God is grieved.
Hence it is that the apostle no sooner calls upon the Ephesians not
to grieve the Spirit of God, but he presently subjoins us a remedy
against that evil, that they put away bitterness and evil-speaking,
and be kind one to another, and tender-hearted, forgiving one
another, even as God for Christ's sake hath forgiven them; Eph. iv.
30, 32.

2.  As unity and peace is pleasing to God, and rejoiceth his Spirit,
so it rejoiceth the hearts and spirits of God's people.  Unity and
peace brings heaven down upon earth among us:  hence it is that the
apostle tells us, Rom. iv. 17, that "the kingdom of God is not meat
and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost."
Where unity and peace is, there is heaven upon earth; by this we
taste the first fruits of that blessed estate we shall one day live
in the fruition of; when we shall come "to the general assembly and
church of the first-born, whose names are written in heaven, and to
God the judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect;"
Heb. xii. 23.

This outward peace of the church (as a learned man observes) distils
into peace of conscience, and turns writings and readings of
controversy into treatises of mortification and devotion.

And the Psalmist tells us, that it is not only good, but pleasant
for brethren to dwell together in unity, Psalm cxxxiii.  But where
unity and peace is wanting, there are storms and troubles; "where
envy and strife is, there is confusion and every evil work;" James
iii. 16.  It is the outward peace of the church that increaseth our
inward joy; and the peace of God's house gives us occasion to eat
our meat with gladness in our own houses, Acts ii. 46.

3.  The unity and peace of the church makes communion of saints
desirable.  What is it that embitters church-communion, and makes it
burdensome, but divisions?  Have you not heard many complain, that
they are weary of church-communion, because of church-contention?
but now where unity and peace is, there Christians long for
communion.

David saith, that he was glad when they said unto him, "Let us go to
the house of God;" Psalm cxxii. 1.  Why was this, but because (as
the third verse tells us) Jerusalem was a city compact together,
where the tribes went up, the tribes of the Lord, to give thanks to
his name?  And David, speaking of the man that was once his friend,
doth thereby let us know the benefit of peace and unity; Psalm lv.
14.  "We," saith he, "took sweet counsel together, and walked to the
house of God in company."  Where unity is strongest, communion is
sweetest and most desirable.  You see then that peace and union
fills the people of God with desires after communion:  but, on the
other hand, hear how David complains, Psalm cxx., "Wo is me, that I
sojourn in Mesech, and that I dwell in the tents of Kedar."  The
Psalmist here is thought to allude to a sort of men that dwelt in
the deserts of Arabia, that got their livings by contention; and
therefore he adds, ver. 6, that his soul had long dwelt with them
that hated peace.  This was that which made him long for the courts
of God, and esteem one day in his house better than a thousand.
This made his soul even faint for the house of God, because of the
peace of it; "Blessed are they," saith he, "that dwell in thy house,
they will be still praising thee."  There is a certain note of
concord, as appears, Acts ii., where we read of primitive
Christians, meeting with one accord, praising God.

4.  Where unity and peace is, there many mischiefs and
inconveniences are prevented, which attend those people where peace
and unity are wanting:  and of those many that might be mentioned, I
shall briefly insist upon these nine.

1.  Where unity and peace is wanting, there is much precious time
spent to no purpose.  How many days are spent, and how many
fruitless journeys made to no profit, where the people are not in
peace? how often have many redeemed time (even in seed-time and
harvest) when they could scarce afford it, to go to church, and, by
reason of their divisions, come home worse than they went, repenting
they have spent so much precious time to so little benefit?  How sad
is it to see men spend their precious time, in which they should
work out their salvation, in labouring, as in the fire, to prove an
uncertain and doubtful proposition, and to trifle away their time,
in which they should make their calling and election sure, to make
sure of an opinion, which, when they have done all, they are not
infallibly sure whether it be true or no, because all things
necessary to salvation and church-communion are plainly laid down in
scripture, in which we may be infallibly sure of the truth of them;
but for other things that we have no plain texts for, but the truth
of them depends upon our interpretations, here we must be cautioned,
that we do not spend much time in imposing those upon others, or
venting those among others, unless we can assume infallibility,
otherwise we spend time upon uncertainty.  And whoever casts their
eyes abroad, and do open their ears to intelligence, shall both see,
and to their sorrow hear, that many churches spend most of their
time in jangling and contending about those things which are neither
essential to salvation nor church-communion; and that which is
worse, about such doubtful questions which they are never able to
give an infallible solution of.  But now where unity and peace is,
there our time is spent in praising God; and in those great
questions, What we should do to be saved? and, How we may be more
holy and more humble towards God, and more charitable and more
serviceable to one another?

2.  Where unity and peace is wanting, there is evil surmising and
evil speaking, to the damage and disgrace, if not to the ruining, of
one another; Gal. v. 14, 15.  The whole law is fulfilled in one
word, "Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.  But if you bite
and devour one another, take heed you be not consumed one of
another."  No sooner the bond of charity is broken, which is as a
wall about Christians, but soon they begin to make havock and spoil
of one another; then there is raising evil reports, and taking up
evil reports, against each other.  Hence it is that whispering and
backbiting proceeds, and going from house to house to blazon the
faults and infirmities of others:  hence it is that we watch for the
haltings of one another, and do inwardly rejoice at the miscarriages
of others, saying in our hearts, "ha! ha! so we would have it:" but
now where unity and peace is, there is charity; and where charity
is, there we are willing to hide the faults, and cover the
nakedness, of our brethren.  "Charity thinketh no evil;" 1 Cor.
xiii. 5; and therefore it cannot surmise, neither will it speak
evil.

3.  Where unity and peace is wanting, there can be no great matters
enterprised--we cannot do much for God, nor much for one another;
when the devil would hinder the bringing to pass of good in nations
and churches, he divides their counsels (and as one well observes),
he divides their heads, that he may divide their hands; when Jacob
had prophesied of the cruelty of Simon and Levi, who were brethren,
