6 He then said to his hosts, "Take up this stone, and throw it flat on
them, so that it doesn't roll off them to somewhere else.  And when you
have hurled it, get away from there quickly."

7 And they did as he told them.  But as the rock fell down from the
mountain toward Adam and Eve, God commanded the rock to become a dome
over them*, that did them no harm.  And so it was by God's order.

8 But when the rock fell, the whole earth quaked with it**, and was
shaken from the size of the rock.

9 And as it quaked and shook, Adam and Eve awoke from sleep, and found
themselves under a dome of rock.  But they didn't know what had
happened; because when the fell asleep they were under the sky, and not
under a dome; and when they saw it, they were afraid.

10 Then Adam said to Eve, "Wherefore has the mountain bent itself, and
the earth quaked and shaken on our account?  And why has this rock
spread itself over us like a tent?

11 Does God intend to plague us and to shut us up in this prison? Or
will He close the earth over us?

12 He is angry with us for our having come out of the cave, without His
order; and for our having done so of our own accord, without consulting
Him, when we left the cave and came to this place."

13 Then Eve said, "If, indeed, the earth quaked for our sake, and this
rock forms a tent over us because of our transgression, then we will be
sorry, O Adam, because our punishment will be long.

14 But get up and pray to God to let us know concerning this, and what
this rock is that is spread over us like a tent."

15 Then Adam stood up and prayed before the Lord, to let him know what
had brought about this difficult time.  And Adam stood praying like
that until the morning.


* The word "dome" is used here but the text does not specifically
suggest that the covering was round--only that it covered them on all
sides, however a dome is the most likely shape that would have be able
to withstand the impact with the ground.  From verse 9 that says "when
they saw it" and verse 11 that says "shut us up in this prison", we can
conclude that the dome had holes in its sides that were big enough to
let in light and air but were too small to allow Adam and Eve to
escape.  Another conclusion would be that the holes were large but too
high up for Adam and Eve to reach, however the former is more likely.

** In verse 7 of the next chapter (XLIX), God tells Adam and Eve that
the ground was also lowered under them--"I commanded . . . the rock
under you to lower itself".




Chapter XLIX - The first prophecy of the Resurrection.

1 Then the Word of God came and said:--

2 "O Adam, who counselled you, when you came out of the cave, to come
to this place?"

3 And Adam said to God, "O Lord, we came to this place because of the
heat of the fire, that came over us inside the cave."

4 Then the Lord God said to Adam, "O Adam, you dread the heat of fire
for one night, but how will it be when you live in hell?

5 Yet, O Adam, don't be afraid, and don't believe that I have placed
this dome of rock over you to plague you with it.

6 It came from Satan, who had promised you the Godhead and majesty.  It
is he who threw down this rock to kill you under it, and Eve with you,
and thus to prevent you from living on the earth.

7 But, in mercy for you, just as that rock was falling down on you, I
commanded it to form an dome over you; and the rock under you to lower
itself.

8 And this sign, O Adam, will happen to Me at My coming on earth: Satan
will raise the people of the Jews to put Me to death; and they will lay
Me in a rock, and seal a large stone over Me, and I shall remain within
that rock three days and three nights.

9 But on the third day I shall rise again, and it shall be salvation to
you, O Adam, and to your descendants, to believe in Me.  But, O Adam, I
will not bring you from under this rock until three days and three
nights have passed."

10 And God withdrew His Word from Adam.

11 But Adam and Eve lived under the rock three days and three nights,
as God had told them.

12 And God did so to them because they had left their cave and had come
to  this same place without God's order.

13 But, after three days and three nights, God created an opening in
the dome of rock and allowed them to get out from under it.  Their
flesh was dried up, and their eyes and hearts were troubled from crying
and sorrow.




Chapter L - Adam and Eve seek to cover their nakedness.

1 Then Adam and Eve went forth and came into the Cave of Treasures, and
they stood praying in it the whole of that day, until the evening.

2 And this took place at the end of the fifty days after they had left
the garden.

3 But Adam and Eve rose again and prayed to God in the cave the whole
of that night, and begged for mercy from Him.

4 And when the day dawned, Adam said to Eve, "Come!  Let us go and do
some work for our bodies."

5 So they went out of the cave, and came to the northern border of the
garden, and they looked for something to cover their bodies with*.  But
they found nothing, and knew not how to do the work.  Yet their bodies
were stained, and they were speechless from cold and heat.

6 Then Adam stood and asked God to show him something with which to
cover their bodies.

7 Then came the Word of God and said to him, "O Adam, take Eve and come
to the seashore where you fasted before.  There you will find skins of
sheep that were left after lions ate the carcasses.  Take them and make
garments for yourselves, and clothe yourselves with them.


* Chapter XLVI, verse 1, says "Satan blew into the fire ... so that
their bodies were singed".  At this time, the garments that the Lord
had given them in Genesis 3:21 were burned off so that Adam and Eve
were again naked.




Chapter LI - "What is his beauty that you should have followed him?"

1 When Adam heard these words from God, he took Eve and went from the
northern end of the garden to the south of it, by the river of water
where they once fasted.

2 But as they were going on their way, and before they got there,
Satan, the wicked one, had heard the Word of God communing with Adam
respecting his covering.

3 It grieved him, and he hastened to the place where the sheep-skins
were, with the intention of taking them and throwing them into the sea,
or of burning them with fire, so that Adam and Eve would not find them.

4 But as he was about to take them, the Word of God came from heaven,
and bound him by the side of those skins until Adam and Eve came near
him.  But as they got closer to him they were afraid of him, and of his
hideous look.

5 Then came the Word of God to Adam and Eve, and said to them, "This is
he who was hidden in the serpent, and who deceived you, and stripped
you of the garment of light and glory in which you were.

6 This is he who promised you majesty and divinity.  Where, then, is
the beauty that was on him?  Where is his divinity?  Where is his
light?  Where is the glory that rested on him?

7 Now his figure is hideous; he is become abominable among angels; and
he has come to be called Satan.

8 O Adam, he wished to take from you this earthly garment of
sheep-skins, and to destroy it, and not let you be covered with it.

9 What, then, is his beauty that you should have followed him?  And
what have you gained by obeying him?  See his evil works and then look
at Me; at Me, your Creator, and at the good deeds I do you.

10 See, I bound him until you came and saw him and beheld his weakness,
that no power is left with him."

11 And God released him from his bonds.




Chapter LII - Adam and Eve sew the first shirt.

1 After this Adam and Eve said no more, but cried before God on account
of their creation, and of their bodies that required an earthly
covering.

2 Then Adam said to Eve, "O Eve, this is the skin of beasts with which
we shall be covered,  but when we put it on, behold, we shall be
wearing a token of death on our bodies. Just  as the owners of these
skins have died and have wasted away,  so also shall we die and pass
away."

3 Then Adam and Eve took the skins, and went back to the Cave of
Treasures; and when in it, they stood and prayed as they were
accustomed.

4 And they thought how they could make garments of those skins; for
they had no skill for it.

5 Then God sent to them His angel to show them how to work it out.  And
the angel said to Adam, "Go forth, and bring some palm-thorns."  Then
Adam went out, and brought some, as the angel had commanded him.

6 Then the angel began before them to work out the skins, after the
manner of one who prepares a shirt.  And he took the thorns and stuck
them into the skins, before their eyes.

7 Then the angel again stood up and prayed God that the thorns in those
skins should be hidden, so as to be, as it were, sewn with one thread.

8 And so it was, by God's order; they became garments for Adam and Eve,
and He clothed them therewith.

9 From that time the nakedness of their bodies was covered from the
sight of each other's eyes.

10 And this happened at the end of the fifty-first day.

11 Then when Adam's and Eve's bodies were covered, they stood and
prayed, and sought mercy of the Lord, and forgiveness, and gave Him
thanks for that He had had mercy on them, and had covered their
nakedness.  And they ceased not from prayer the whole of that night.

12 Then when the morning dawned at the rising of the sun, they said
their prayers after their custom; and then went out of the cave.

13 And Adam said to Eve, "Since we don't know what there is to the west
of this cave, let us go out and see it today." Then they came forth and
went toward the western border.




Chapter LIII - The prophecy of the Western Lands and of the great flood.

1 They were not very far from the cave, when Satan came towards them,
and hid himself between them and the cave, under the form of two
ravenous lions three days without food, that came towards Adam and Eve,
as if to break them in pieces and devour them.

2 Then Adam and Eve cried, and prayed God to deliver them from their
paws.

3 Then the Word of God came to them, and drove away the lions from them.

4 And God said to Adam, "O Adam, what do you seek on the western
border?  And why have you left of thine own accord the eastern border,
in which was your living place?

5 Now then, turn back to your cave, and remain in it, so that Satan
won't deceive you or work his purpose over you.

6 For in this western border, O Adam, there will go from you a
descendant, that shall replenish it; and that will defile themselves
with their sins, and with their yielding to the commands of Satan, and
by following his works.

7 Therefore will I bring over them the waters of a flood, and overwhelm
them all.  But I will deliver what is left of the righteous among them;
and I will bring them to a distant land, and the land in which you live
now shall remain desolate and without one inhabitant in it.

8 After God had thus spoken to them, they went back to the Cave of
Treasures.  But their flesh was dried up, and they were weak from
fasting and praying, and from the sorrow they felt at having trespassed
against God.




Chapter LIV - Adam and Eve go exploring.

1 Then Adam and Eve stood up in the cave and prayed the whole of that
night until the morning dawned.  And when the sun was risen they both
went out of the cave; their heads were wandering from heaviness of
sorrow and they didn't know where they were going.

2 And they walked in that condition to the southern border of the
garden.  And they began to go up that border until they came to the
eastern border beyond which there was no more land.

3 And the cherub who guarded the garden was standing at the western
gate, and guarding it against Adam and Eve, lest they should suddenly
come into the garden.  And the cherub turned around, as if to put them
to death; according to the commandment God had given him.

4 When Adam and Eve came to the eastern border of the garden--thinking
in their hearts that the cherub was not watching--as they were standing
by the gate as if wishing to go in, suddenly came the cherub with a
flashing sword of fire in his hand; and when he saw them, he went forth
to kill them.  For he was afraid that God would destroy him if they
went into the garden without His order.

5 And the sword of the cherub seemed to shoot flames a distance away
from it.  But when he raised it over Adam and Eve, the flame of the
sword did not flash forth.

6 Therefore the cherub thought that God was favorable to them, and was
bringing them back into the garden.  And the cherub stood wondering.

7 He could not go up to Heaven to determine God's order regarding their
getting into the garden; he therefore continued to stand by them,
unable as he was to part from them; for he was afraid that if  they
should enter the garden without permission, God would destroy him.

8 When Adam and Eve saw the cherub coming towards them with a flaming
sword of fire in his hand, they fell on their faces from fear, and were
as dead.

9 At that time the heavens and the earth shook; and another cherubim
came down from heaven to the cherub who guarded the garden, and saw him
amazed and silent.

10 Then, again, other angels came down close to the place where Adam
and Eve were.  They were divided between joy and sorrow.

11 They were glad, because they thought that God was favorable to Adam,
and wished him to return to the garden; and wished to restore him to
the gladness he once enjoyed.

12 But they sorrowed over Adam, because he was fallen like a dead man,
he and Eve; and they said in their thoughts, "Adam has not died in this
place; but God has put him to death, for his having come to this place,
and wishing to get into the garden without His permission."




Chapter LV - The Conflict between God and Satan.

1 Then came the Word of God to Adam and Eve, and raised them from their
dead state, saying to them, "Why did you come up here?  Do you intend
to go into the garden, from which I brought you out?  It cannot be
today; but only when the covenant I have made with you is fulfilled."

2 Then Adam, when he heard the Word of God, and the fluttering of the
angels whom he did not see, but only heard the sound of them with his
ears, he and Eve cried, and said to the angels:--

3 "O Spirits, who wait on God, look at me, and at my being unable to
see you!  For when I was in my former bright nature, then I could see
you.  I sang praises as you do; and my heart was far above you.

4 But now, that I have transgressed, that bright nature is gone from
me, and I am come to this miserable state.  And now I have come to
this, that I cannot see you, and you do not serve me like you used to
do.  For I have become animal flesh.

5 Yet now, O angels of God, ask God with me, to restore me to that
wherein I was formerly; to rescue me from this misery, and to remove
from me the sentence of death He passed on me, for having trespassed
against Him."

6 Then, when the angels heard these words, they all grieved over him;
and cursed Satan who had misled Adam, until he came from the garden to
misery; from life to death; from peace to trouble; and from gladness to
a strange land.

7 Then the angels said to Adam, "You obeyed Satan, and ignored the Word
of God who created you; and you believed that Satan would fulfil all he
had promised you.

8 But now, O Adam, we will make known to you, what came over us though
him, before his fall from heaven.

9 He gathered together his hosts, and deceived them, promising to give
them a great kingdom, a divine nature; and other promises he made them.

10 His hosts believed that his word was true, so they yielded to him,
and renounced the glory of God.

11 He then sent for us--according to the orders in which we were--to
come under his command, and to accept his vein promise.  But we would
not, and we did not take his advice.

12 Then after he had fought with God, and had dealt forwardly with Him,
he gathered together his hosts, and made war with us.  And if it had
not been for God's strength that was with us, we could not have
prevailed against him to hurl him from heaven.

13 But when he fell from among us, there was great joy in heaven,
because of his going down from us.  For if he had remained in heaven,
nothing, not even one angel would have remained in it.

14 But God in His mercy, drove him from among us to this dark earth;
for he had become darkness itself and a worker of unrighteousness.

15 And he has continued, O Adam, to make war against you, until he
tricked you and made you come out of the garden, to this strange land,
where all these trials have come to you.  And death, which God brought
to him, he has also brought to you, O Adam, because you obeyed him, and
trespassed against God."

16 Then all the angels rejoiced and praised God, and asked Him not to
destroy Adam this time, for his having sought to enter the garden; but
to bear with him until the fulfillment of the promise; and to help him
in this world until he was free from Satan's hand.




Chapter LVI - A chapter of divine comfort.

1 Then came the Word of God to Adam, and said to him:--

2 "O Adam, look at that garden of joy and at this earth of toil, and
behold the garden is full of angels, but look at yourself alone on this
earth with Satan whom you obeyed.

3 Yet, if you had submitted, and been obedient to Me, and had kept My
Word, you would be with My angels in My garden.

4 But when you transgressed and obeyed Satan, you became his guests
among his angels, that are full of wickedness; and you came to this
earth, that brings forth to you thorns and thistles.

5 O Adam, ask him who deceived you, to give you the divine nature he
promised you, or to make you a garden as I had made for you; or to fill
you with that same bright nature with which I had filled you.

6 Ask him to make you a body like the one I made you, or to give you a
day of rest as I gave you; or to create within you a reasonable soul,
as I created for you; or to take you from here to some other earth than
this one which I gave you.  But, O Adam, he will not fulfil even one of
the things he told you.

7 Acknowledge, then, My favor towards you, and My mercy on you, My
creature; that I have not avenged you for your transgression against
Me, but in My pity for you I have promised you that at the end of the
great five and a half days I will come and save you."

8 Then God said again to Adam and Eve, "Get up, go down from here,
before the cherub with a sword of fire in his hand destroys you."

9 But Adam's heart was comforted by God's words to him, and he
worshipped before Him.

10 And God commanded His angels to escort Adam and Eve to the cave with
joy, instead of the fear that had come over them.

11 Then the angels took up Adam and Eve, and brought them down from the
mountain by the garden, with songs and psalms, until they arrived at
the cave.  There the angels began to comfort and to strengthen them,
and then departed from them towards heaven, to their Creator, who had
sent them.

12 But after the angels had departed from Adam and Eve, Satan came with
shamefacedness, and stood at the entrance of the cave in which were
Adam and Eve.  He then called to Adam, and said, "O Adam, come, let me
speak to you."

13 Then Adam came out of the cave, thinking he was one of God's angels
that was come to give him some good counsel.




Chapter LVII - "Therefore I fell. . . . "

1 But when Adam came out and saw his hideous figure, he was afraid of
him, and said to him, "Who are you?"

2 Then Satan answered and said to him, "It is I, who hid myself within
the serpent, and who spoke to Eve, and who enticed her until she obeyed
my command.  I am he who sent her, using my deceitful speech, to
deceive you,  until you both ate of the fruit of the tree and abandoned
the command of God."

3 But when Adam heard these words from him, he said to him, "Can you
make me a garden as God made for me?  Or can you clothe me in the same
