Grandmamma of Francis, and their domestics, who, with them served the
Lord, and lived in that peace, which His Spirit gives to such as
delight in His Word.

This dear Grandpapa then, since he was pious, was charitable, and took
particular pleasure in visiting his aged neighbors, especially the poor
peasants, to whom he always carried comfort and encouragement from that
gracious God, with whom he himself daily endeavored more and more to
live. He used generally to pay these charitable visits in the middle of
the day; after having read the Holy Bible for the second time, in a
retired summer-house in the garden, near which a little gate opened
upon a footpath, which, passing through the orchard, led to the village.

Francis, who was already acquainted with his Grandpapa's habits, never
came to disturb him while he was in the summer-house, and whenever he
saw his Grandpapa going out of the little gate he took good care not to
follow him.

But in about an hour or two, he would go to meet him, sometimes towards
the road, at others, as far as the bridge over the stream;--his
Grandmamma was never uneasy, because she knew that Francis was a
prudent boy, and that God watched over him, as one of the lambs of the
good shepherd.

Grandpapa then, had just finished reading; he had put on his hat and
taken his cane, and had gone out through the gate.

Francis, who was sitting before the house, under the pretty green
verandah, saw him pass behind the garden hedge, and was already
thinking of going to meet him at the end of an hour, when to his great
surprise he saw his Grandpapa pass again behind the hedge, and then
enter the garden through the little gate, walking apparently with much
difficulty.

"What is the matter, dear Grandpapa?" cried Francis, springing towards
the garden.--"Oh! how you are covered with mud! It must be that rude
Driver who wanted to fawn upon you. He has always such dirty paws."

"You must not scold Driver, but _me_," mildly replied his Grandpapa,
"for I incautiously, and most imprudently, walked upon that part of the
path which has been inundated by the water from the fountain."

"Grandpapa, did you fall?" asked Francis, quite alarmed.

"Yes my boy, your Grandfather fell like a heedless man.... But thanks
to our gracious God, who ever takes care of us! it was nothing; I was
only a little frightened. You see, Francis, you must not forget that we
only stand, because God supports us."

So saying, his Grandfather entered the house, and with the same
serenity related his accident to his wife, who bestowed every attention
upon him.

Whilst his Grandfather was resting himself, and Francis had ascertained
that he had not suffered much, he hastened to look at the spot where
his kind Grandpapa had slipped and fallen. It was a little bit of the
path, perhaps about three paces long, covered with the water which was
issuing from the fountain, and which being of clay, had become very
slippery.

The trench round the fountain had been already deepened more than once,
in order to turn its course from that part of the orchard, but as the
ground was rather low, the water always returned.

Francis examined all this, and tried to find out what could be done to
remedy the evil, in a more durable manner.

"_I know!_" he cried at last. "I must make a pavement here, a little
higher than the path is at present!"

"Come! cheer up! 'Where there's a will,' says Grandpapa, 'with God's
help there's a way.' To work, to work! 'For he who does nothing makes
little progress,' says also, my dear Grandpapa."

It may be here well asked, how a little child, eight years of age,
could even conceive such a project, and much more how he could have had
sufficient strength to accomplish it.

But Francis was not a thoughtless or inattentive child; on the contrary
he observed on his way _to_, and _from_ School, and when he walked out
with his Papa, everything that workmen did.

It was thus that he had often noticed how the Paviors first laid down
the stones, and then pressed them together, and as we shall soon see,
he found no difficulty in what he was going to attempt.

"First and foremost," said he, "the tools!" and immediately he ran off
to look for a little wheel-barrow which his Grandpapa had made for him;
with the spade, the trowel, and the iron rake, which were at his
disposal.

When the tools were collected, Francis, having taken off his jacket,
traced out the portion to be paved.

"Now," said he, "I must take away two or three inches of earth, that
the stones may fit in."

He then took away the earth, and piled it up on the upper side of the
path, in order to compel the water to pass by the drain.

"Now," he said, "I must find some sand; where is there any? Oh! behind
the hen-house; the masons, who plastered the walls of the yard over
again, have left a large heap of it there"--and then he quickly ran
with his wheelbarrow, once, twice, and even three times, and soon had
as much as was necessary. He spread it out, and arranged it, and then
pronounced the great word of all his work, "_Stones!_ No stones, no
pavement! I must have at least fifty of them!" He ran about, searched
and gathered, near the fountain, round the house, and along the wall of
the yard, and soon brought back four wheelbarrows full of nice stones,
well shaped, and not too large.

But there were not enough, for he was obliged to put five or six
abreast. Where are there any more to be found?

"In the brook," cried he! "It is rather far off, but I shall soon be
there!" And indeed in about a quarter of an hour, he had collected all
the proper materials.

Then should he have been seen at work! The trowel in his right hand, a
stone in his left; the sand which he placed between each stone, and the
blows which forced it down, these things succeeded each other rapidly,
and were often repeated; till at length, at the end of the third hour,
the slippery bit of foot-path was no longer in existence, but in its
stead was to be seen a pavement slightly raised, which could never be
wetted by the overflowing of the fountain.

"That will not do well," said Francis, when he had finished, and was
walking over the pavement; "it is uneven, Grandpapa will hurt his feet
upon it." And so saying, he ran to the woodhouse in the yard, and
returned, bending under the weight of the mallet, with which Thomas
used to strike the axe and wedges, when he split the large pieces of
oak.

"Here is _my_ rammer," said Francis, laughing, as he thought of those
used by the paviors; and holding the mallet perpendicularly, he struck
with the butt-end, first one stone, and then another, until at length
the pavement was completed! It was solid, even and clean, and Francis,
repeating in truth, "Where there's a will, with God's help, there's a
way," gave thanks in his heart to that good heavenly Father, who gave
him both the idea and the will to do this act of filial love, and
enabled him to accomplish it.

Some sand and a few stones remained; Francis took them up and carried
them back near to the house. Then he cleared away the rubbish, and
having put on his coat again, returned joyfully to replace his tools in
the green-house.

All this was done after dinner, between the hours of three and six. The
evening passed quietly away. Grandpapa had not received any bruises,
and he could not sufficiently thank the Good shepherd, the Lord Jesus,
who had, as it were, "carried him in his arms," and "kept all his
bones."

Grandmamma joined in his praises and thanksgivings, and these two
faithful servants blessed the Lord together, whose mercies are over all
his works.

"To-morrow, please God," said Grandpapa to Francis, "I shall go and see
old George. He must have expected me to-day! But be assured, my dear
Francis, that your Grandpapa will walk no more like a giddy child; and
if the path is still slippery, I shall place my foot prudently upon it."

Francis said he hoped the path would be better; and however that might
be, that the Lord would preserve him thenceforth from slipping, and
above all, from falling.

Grandpapa made Francis read the Bible as usual to the whole household.
He spoke piously of God's paternal care for our bodies as well as for
our souls, and in his prayer he gave abundant thanks to the Saviour who
had so graciously preserved him.

The morrow came. Grandpapa had quite recovered his accident of the
preceding day, and after reading in the summer-house, he got up to go
and see old George.

Francis, who was observing him from beneath the verandah, no sooner saw
him come near the little gate, than he ran round the house to hide
himself behind a hazel bush, a short distance from the pavement, in
order to see what his Grandpapa would do.

Grandpapa walked on towards the orchard, and as soon as he set his foot
on the path, he prepared to proceed very carefully. He took three or
four steps, and then suddenly stopped, and raising his hands,
exclaimed, a "pavement! a pavement here already! How does this happen?
Who could have done this? It must be my faithful Thomas!"--he
continued--"I must thank him for it;" and he called out loudly,
"Thomas! Thomas!" Thomas, who was in the cow-house, heard his voice,
and ran to him in alarm.

"Have you tumbled again, sir," he asked anxiously?

"On the contrary," said Grandpapa, "thanks to _you_, Thomas, for having
made this good substantial pavement so quickly and so well; it is
really excellent," said he, stamping upon it with his foot, and walking
over it in every direction. "It is solid, and even, and slopes on
either side! I am very much obliged to you, Thomas."

"Alas! sir," said the man, "it is not I who did it--how vexed I am that
I did not think of it what stupidity!"...

"Who is it then?" asked Grandpapa, "for this has been done since
yesterday, and surely these stones are not mushrooms! Who could have
thought of this?"

"I think I know who it is, sir," answered Thomas, "for yesterday in the
afternoon I saw master Francis going down to the brook with his
wheelbarrow. I could not think what it was for, but now I understand."

"Francis! did you say," exclaimed Grandpapa; "how could that child have
done it even if he had wished? Are these stones only nuts, that _that_
dear boy's little hands could have been able to knock them into the
ground?"

"Do you wish, sir, that I should look for him and bring him here?"
asked Thomas.

Francis could no longer remain concealed. He ran from behind the bush,
and threw himself into his Grandpapa's arms; saying, "Dear Grandpapa,
how happy I am to have been able to succeed."

"It is _you_ then, indeed, my son!" cried Grandpapa, as he shed tears
of joy. "God bless your filial piety towards me! May He return you
two-fold all the good you have done my heart. But how did you manage?"

"You have often told me, dear Grandpapa, that 'Where there's a will,
with the help of God, there's a way,' and I prayed to God, and was able
to do it."

"Well then, dear Francis," said Grandpapa, solemnly, "I promise you,
that every day of my life, as long as I shall walk here below, when I
pass over this pavement, which your affection has made for me, I will
say to God 'O Lord, prevent Francis from falling in his way! May thy
goodness _pave_ for him the path of life, whenever it becomes
slippery.'"

Francis understood, and respectfully received this blessing; and whilst
his Grand father paid his visit, the little pavior went and told his
Grandmamma, what he had been able to do, and how God had already
blessed him for it.




II.


The Silver Knife.


"Then said Jesus unto him: Go and do thou likewise."--LUKE, x. 37.

_Mary_.--(After having searched about the dining-room,) "Who has seen
my silver knife? William, John, Lucy, you who are amusing yourselves in
the garden, have you seen my silver knife?"

_William_.--(Going up to the window, and in a sententious tone of
voice,) "'Disorder,' says an ancient writer, 'occasions sorrow, and
negligence, blame.'"

_Mary_.--"Admirable! But that does not apply to _me_, for it is
scarcely an hour since I laid my knife on this very table, which
certainly belongs to us."

_Lucy_.--"Are you quite sure of it, Mary!"

_Mary_--"Yes, indeed, there is no doubt of it, for Sophy asked me to
give her a pretty little red apple, as usual, before going to school. I
went immediately to the fruit-room for it, and as it was a little
spoiled, I cleaned it with my silver knife, which I laid on this table,
whilst I was kissing her. I am therefore quite sure of it."

_John_.--(Frowning,)--"For my part, I confess, I don't like all these
strangers who come about the house. For instance, that little _Jane_,
who sells lilies of the valley, and strawberries, and so on--I very
much distrust her sullen look; and who knows, if perhaps...?"

_Lucy_--"Fie, fie, brother, to suspect that poor little modest gentle
child, who supports her sick mother by her own industry! Oh! it is very
wrong, John!"

"What is the matter?" said their Father, who had heard this dispute
from the garden, where he was reading under the shade of a tree.

Mary related her story, and finished by saying,--"Well, if it be God's
will, So-be-it! My beautiful knife is lost!"

"Yes, my dear girl," answered her father, "What God wills, is always
best. But it is His will that I should watch over, my household. I must
therefore know what has become of your knife. Did you ask Elizabeth if
she had taken care of it, when she cleaned the room?"

Mary ran to the kitchen, and enquired of Elizabeth.

"Your silver knife! Miss," said the servant, coloring. "Have you lost
that beautiful knife, which was given you on your birthday?"

"I ask you, if you have taken care of it," answered Mary. "I laid it
this morning upon the table in the dining-room, near the window."

_Elizabeth_.--(with astonishment,)--"Near the window! Oh!--I know where
it is, now. About half an hour ago, when I went into the dining-room,
to ... put ... down ... some plates, I saw the great magpie, which
builds its nest up in the large elm-tree, at the end of the garden,
sitting on the window-ledge. It flew away as soon as it saw me; but it
had something white and shining in its beak. Oh! yes, I remember now!
it was the silver knife!"

"The magpie," exclaimed Mary, "with my knife in its beak!"

"Oh! Miss," replied Elizabeth, "there is no thief like a magpie. When I
was at home, one of their nests was once pulled down, and nine pieces
of silver were found in it, and a whole necklace of pearls! Oh! magpies
are terrible birds, and you may be sure that your knife is in their
nest."

Mary returned to her father in the garden, and related to him all that
Elizabeth had said, but added, "For my part, I don't believe a word of
it!"

"And why not?" exclaimed John, sharply, "Elizabeth is quite right!
Nothing steals like a magpie. Everybody says so. Come! let us to work!
A ladder, a cord, and a long stick! Down with the nest!--Papa, will you
allow me to climb the tree!"

_Lucy._--(Holding John by the arm.)--"Brother, how _can_ you think of
it? The elm is more than eighty feet high! Papa, I beg of you, not to
allow it."

_Father_.--(Calmly.)--"No one shall get up the tree and risk his life,
for a thing which certainly is not there."

"There is no thief like a magpie," repeated John, looking at the nest,
which might be seen through the higher branches of the tree; "but I
confess it would not be easy to reach it. These branches are very long
and very slender!"

William, who had said nothing as yet, but had been walking backwards
and forwards, with his head down, and his hands in his pockets, turned
suddenly round to Mary, and said, "I have been thinking we can soon
know if your knife is in the nest. We only want a polemoscope for that.
Hurrah! long live optics!"

"A lemoscope!" said Lucy, "What is that? Is it a long hook?"

_William_.--(Smiling rather contemptuously.) "Poor sister! What
ignorance!"

_Father_--"William, speak kindly--tell your sister what this instrument
is, and what you want to do with it."

_William._--(Scientifically.)--"In war, when a besieged garrison wishes
to know all the movements of the enemy, without being seen, they erect
behind the walls, or the ramparts, a mirror, placed at the end of a
long pole, and inclining towards the country. You understand, then,
that everything that takes place outside, is reflected in the mirror,
and can be seen from within, or in another mirror placed at the bottom
of the pole, and sloping inwards. This, Lucy, is what is called a
