
I bent down and kissed her, and she looked so wretched. I said: "Jennie,
you will not have to go alone; Jesus will take you."

She answered: "I know it. I wish that He would come this minute. Kiss me
again, Mama."

I did so; then she wished us to sing. Again, without giving one thought,
I commenced singing the same words that I sang the Tuesday before. She
raised her right hand arm's length, and began to wave it and bow her
head. Oh! she was so happy. Then she said: "Play." They brought the
guitar, and she continued to wave her little hand, while I played and
sang the whole piece. One of her aunts, standing near the bed took hold
of her hand to stop it, but it moved just the same; and I said: "Ollie,
let go of her hand, that is the Lord's doings." After I finished, she
kissed her father, mother, and sister and bade them goodbye; then called
four other very dear friends and told them goodbye after kissing them.
She then called for a book and wanted the music teacher, who was present,
to play and sing a piece which she dearly loved.

Before she was sick she would have little prayer meetings, and her sweet
little face would shine with happiness. She would say: "Oh, Mama, how
the Lord has blessed me."

[Illustration: "They brought the guitar, and she continued to wave her
little hand, while I played and sang the whole piece."]

While the dear teacher was playing and singing her favorite she was
waving her little hand. We sang three or four other pieces around her
bed. We all thought that Jesus would take her then. Oh, what joy! it was
heaven below. Jesus was there and the room was filled with glory on
account of of His presence. Two of her aunts said that it seemed as
though they were in heaven.

She never spoke after that, but would try to make us understand by
motioning when she wanted anything. Sometimes it would take us a long
time, but she would be so patient. She was ready and waiting. She had
peace that the world cannot give, and, praise God! that the world cannot
take away. The dear little one lived until the next Tuesday afternoon,
and went to Jesus about three o'clock. That was the time she saw the
vision the Tuesday before. Tuesday morning before daylight she tried to
tell me something. I said "Sing?" She looked so happy and bowed her head.
I began singing: "I am Jesus' little lamb." She bowed her head again.
In the forenoon she kept looking at her aunts, Ollie and Belle, and
pointing up. Oh! it meant so much. It seemed to me that she was saying,
that it meant: "Meet me in heaven." Finally she motioned for me to raise
the window curtain. I did so and she looked out the window so eagerly,
as though she was expecting to see the little children. Then the little
blue eyes closed to open no more in this world, but in heaven.

--Mrs. L. Jones.



SHE DIED FOR HIM

[Illustration]

A poor emigrant had gone to Australia to "make his fortune," leaving a
wife and little son in England. When he had made some money, he wrote
home to his wife: "Come out to me here; I send the money for your passage;
I want to see you and my boy." The wife took ship as soon as she could,
and started for her new home. One night, as they were all asleep there
sounded the dreaded cry of "Fire, fire!" Everyone rushed on deck and the
boats were soon filled. The last one was just pushing off then a cry of
"there are two more on deck," arose. They were the mother and her son.
Alas! "Only room for one," the sailors shouted. Which was to go? The
mother thought of her far away home, her husband looking out lovingly
and longingly for his wife. Then she glanced at the boy, clinging
frightened to her skirts. She could not let him die. There was no time
to lose. Quick! quick! The flames were getting around. Snatching the
child, she held him to her a moment. "Willie, tell Father I died for
you!" Then the boy as lowered into the sailor's willing arms. She died
for him.

--Selected.

"I DON'T LOVE YOU NOW, MOTHER"

A great many years ago, I knew a lady who had been sick for two years,
as you have seen many a one, all the while slowly dying with consumption.
She had one child--a little boy named Henry.

One afternoon I was sitting by her side and it seemed as if she would
cough her life away. Her little boy stood by the post of the bed, his
blue eyes filled with tears to see her suffer so. By and by the terrible
cough ceased. Henry came and put his arms around his mother's neck,
nestled his head in his mother's bosom, and said, "Mother, I do love
you; I wish you wasn't sick."

An hour later, the same loving, blue-eyed boy came in all aglow, stamping
the snow off his feet.

"Oh, Mother, may I go skating? it is so nice--Ed and Charlie are going."


"Henry," feebly said the mother, "the ice is not hard enough yet."

"But, Mother," very pettishly said the boy, "you are sick all the time--
how do you know?"

"My child, you must obey me," gently said his mother.

"It is too bad," angrily sobbed the boy, who an hour ago had so loved
his mother.

"I would not like to have my little boy go," said the mother, looking
sadly at the little boy's face, all covered with frowns; "you said you
loved me--be good."

"No, I don't love you now, Mother," said the boy, going out and slamming
the door.

Again that dreadful coughing came upon her, and _we_ thought no
more of the boy. After the coughing had commenced, I noticed tears falling
thick upon her pillow, but she sank from exhaustion into a light sleep.


In a little while muffled steps of men's feet were heard coming into the
house, as though carrying something; and they were carrying the almost
lifeless body of Henry.

Angrily had he left his mother and gone to skate--disobeying her; and
then broken through the ice, sunk under the water, and now saved by a
great effort, was brought home barely alive to his sick mother.

I closed the doors feeling more danger for her life than the child's and
coming softly in, drew back the curtains from the bed. She spoke, "I
heard them--it is Henry; oh, I knew he went--is he dead?" But she never
seemed to hear the answer I gave her. She commenced coughing--she died
in agony--strangled to death. The poor mother! The boy's disobedience
killed her.

After a couple of hours I sought the boy's room.

[Illustration]

"Oh, I wish I had not told mother I did not love her. Tomorrow I will
tell her I do," said the child sobbing painfully. My heart ached; tomorrow
I knew we must tell him she was dead. We did not till the child came
fully into the room, crying, "Mother, I do love you."

Oh! may I never see agony like that child's, as the lips he kissed gave
back no kiss, as the hands he took fell lifeless from his hand, instead
of shaking his hand as it always had, and the boy knew she was dead.

"Mother, I do love you now," all the day he sobbed and cried, "O Mother,
Mother, forgive me." Then he would not leave his mother. "Speak to me,
Mother!" but she could never speak again, and he--the last words she had
ever heard him say, were, "Mother, I don't love you now."

That boy's whole life was changed; sober and sad he was ever after. He
is now a gray haired old man, with one sorrow over his one act of
disobedience, one wrong word embittering all his life--with those words
ever ringing in his ears, "Mother, I don't love you now."

Will the little ones who read this remember, if they disobey their mother,
if they are cross and naughty, they say every single time they do so,
to a tender mother's heart, by their actions if not in the words of
Henry, the very same thing, "I don't love you now, Mother."



"LITTLE MOTHER"

She was a clear-eyed, fresh-cheeked little maiden, living on the banks
of the great Mississippi, the oldest of four children, and mother's
"little woman" always. They called her so because of her quiet, matronly
care of the younger Mayfields--that was the father's name. Her own name
was the beautiful one of Elizabeth, but they shortened it to Bess.

She was thirteen when one day Mr. Mayfield and his wife were called to
the nearest town, six miles away. "Be mother's little woman, dear," said
Mrs. Mayfield as she kissed the rosy face. Her husband added: "I leave
the children in your care, Bess; be a little mother to them."

Bess waved her old sun-bonnet vigorously, and held up the baby Rose,
that she might watch them to the last. Old Daddy Jim and Mammy had been
detailed by Mr. Mayfield to keep an unsuspected watch on the little
nestlings, and were to sleep at the house. Thus two days went by, when
Daddy Jim and Mammy begged to be allowed to go to the quarters where the
Negroes lived, to see their daughter, "Jennie, who was pow'ful bad wid
the toothache." They declared they would be back by evening, so Bess was
willing. She put the little girls to bed and persuaded Rob to go; then
seated herself by the table with her mother's work-basket, in quaint
imitation of Mrs. Mayfield's industry in the evening time. But what was
this? Her feet touched something cold! She bent down and felt around
with her hand. A pool of water was spreading over the floor. She knew
what it was; the Mississippi had broken through the levee. What should
she do? Mammy's stories of how homes had been washed away and broken in
pieces were in her mind. "Oh, if I had a boat!" she exclaimed. "But there
isn't anything of the sort on the place." She ran wildly out to look for
Mammy; and stumbled over something sitting near the edge of the porch.
A sudden inspiration took her. Here was her boat! a very large,
old-fashioned, oblong tub. The water was now several inches deep on the
porch and she contrived to half-float, half-row the tub into the room.

Without frightening the children she got them dressed in the warmest
clothes they had. She lined the oblong tub with a blanket, and made ready
bread and cold meat left from supper. With Rob's assistance she dragged
the tub upstairs. There was a single large window in the room, and they
set the tub directly by it, so that when the water rose the tub would
float out. There was no way for the children to reach the roof, which
was a very steep, inclined one. It did not seem long before the water
had very nearly risen to the top of the stairs leading from below.

Bess flung the window open, and made Rob get into their novel boat; then
she lifted in Kate, and finally baby Rose, who began to cry, was given
into Rob's arms, and now the little mother, taking the basket of food,
made ready to enter, too; but, lo! there was no room for her with safety
to the rest. Bess paused a moment, drew a long breath, and kissed the
children quietly. She explained to Rob that he must guard the basket,
and that they must sit still. "Goodbye, dears. Say a prayer for sister,
Rob. If you ever see father and mother, tell them I took care of you."
Then the water seized the insecure vessel, and out into the dark night
it floated.

[Illustration: ]

The next day Mr. Mayfield, who, with his neighbors, scoured the broad
lake of eddying water that represented the Mississippi, discovered the
tub lodged in the branches of a sycamore with the children weeping and
chilled, but safe.

And Bess? Ah, where was Bess, the "little mother," who in that brief
moment resigned herself to death? They found her later, floating on the
water with her brave childish face turned to the sky; and as strong arms
lifted her into the boat, the tears from every eye paid worthy tribute
to the "little mother."

--_Detroit Free Press_



ROBBIE GOODMAN'S PRAYER

"What can be the matter with Walter," thought Mama Ellis as she sat
sewing in her pleasant sitting-room. "He came in so very quietly, closed
the door gently and I think I even heard him go to the closet to hang
up his books. Oh! dear. I hope he isn't going to have another attack of
'Grippe,'" and Mrs. Ellis shivered as she glanced out at the snow-covered
landscape. As her eyes turned once more to the warm, luxurious room in
which she was seated, the portieres were pushed aside and a little boy of
ten years of age entered. Little Walter was all that remained of four
beautiful children, who, only a year ago, romped gaily through the large
halls. That dread disease, diphtheria, had stolen the older brother and
laughing little sisters in one short week's time, so that now, as the sad
anniversary came near to hand, Mrs. Ellis' heart ached for her lost
birdlings and yearned more jealously than ever over her remaining little
one. Today his usually merry face was very grave and he looked very
thoughtful as he gave his mother her kiss and allowed himself to be drawn
upon her lap.

"What ails mother's Pet? Is he sick?" she asked anxiously.

"No, Mother dear, I'm not sick, but I feel so sad at heart. You see,"
he continued in answer to her questioning look, "Robbie Goodman and I
always walk together going and coming from school, and I have noticed
that he has never worn any overcoat this winter, but you know its been
unusually warm and I thought perhaps his mother did not make him wrap
up like you did me, but this morning it was so cold and he was just
shivering, but he never had on any overcoat--just his mittens and muffler
and cap were his wraps. Of course I noticed it, for nearly everyone else
was all bundled up; but I didn't say anything as I did not want to be
impolite. After awhile he said, 'My, I am so cold,' and I said: 'Where's
your overcoat?' Then he told me it was too small and his papa can't buy
him any this winter so he is afraid he will have to stop school. His
mama says she would cut his papa's up for him, only then he would not
have any; and of course he must have one to wear when he goes to the
chapel and to see sick people. Even that one is thin and patched. He
says he and his little sisters have been praying so hard for an overcoat
for him and shoes for them, but they did not come at Christmas like they
thought they would, and they are real discouraged.

"Tonight, Mother," continued Walter, "he had an awful cold and coughed
just like our Harry did last year," and the long pent up tears flowed
from the child's eyes. As mother and son dried their tears, the child
looked up with perfect confidence as he said, "The Lord will answer
Robbie's prayer, won't he. Mama?"

[Illustration]

"Yes darling," said Mrs. Ellis; and sent the child off to the play room.


"By the way, my dear," remarked Mrs. Ellis as they sat chatting at the
tea-table after Walter had retired, "what has become of that preacher
Goodman who preached for us once on trial?"

"Oh, he has a mission down on the other side of the city, but he lives
on this side as Moore gives him the house rent free. I met him the other
day. He looked very needy. The man had wonderful talents and might have
a rich congregation and improve himself; but he is persistent in his
ideas concerning this holiness movement, and of course a large church
like ours wants something to attract and interest instead of such
egotistical discourses. I, for one, go to sleep under them." And Mr.
Ellis drew himself up with a pompous air as he went into the library,
whither his wife presently followed.

He had picked up a newspaper and was apparently absorbed, but Mrs. Ellis
had not had her say, so she continued "Walter was telling me about the
little boy. He--"

"Oh, yes," interrupted her husband, "he met me in the hall and poured
out the whole story. The child's nerves were all wrought up, too. He
should not be allowed to worry over such things. He wants me to give up
buying him the fur-trimmed overcoat and get a coat and shoes for Goodman's
children, as they were praying so hard for them, but I have enough to
do without clothing other people's children. If Goodman would quit his
cranky notions and use his talents for people who could understand him,
instead of preaching to those ragamuffins he might now be receiving a
magnificent salary and clothing himself and family decently."

"But Paul," said Mrs. Ellis, "Surely you would not have Mr. Goodman
sacrifice his convictions simply for money and praise, when you yourself,
are convinced that his doctrines are sound? Besides he must be doing a
good work down among the poor classes of the city as it appears the rich
don't want him."

"Then let the poor give enough to keep him."

"They do give far beyond their means but the Lord calls on such as us
to give. I know it has been an unusually hard year but the Lord has
blessed us and He will hold us to an account. I feel very sad as the
anniversary of our darlings' departure draws near and I dread to think
of any little ones suffering while we could so easily help them."

"I don't see how you can feel that we have been so blessed. When the
house is so quiet and I think of those white graves in the cemetery I
confess I feel very bitter."

"Paul, my dear husband, don't feel that way. Just think of our three
treasures in heaven, an added claim to that glorious realm, away from
this cold and suffering. Remember also that we have one left, to live
for, to train. And, Paul, let us train him for the Master and in such a
way that we may never have the feeling that it were better if he, too,
had departed when he was pure and innocent. Let us encourage benevolence
and gentleness and if he wishes to go without the fur-trimmed coat, why
not do as he asks?" Mrs. Ellis kissed her husband and quietly left the
room.

Long and late, Paul Ellis sat there and many things, ghosts of the past,
rose before him. As the midnight chimes rang out he knelt and prayed.
"Oh, Lord, forgive me. I have gone astray and turned to my own way. I
have been prejudiced. It was my influence which turned the tide against
Robert Goodman. Thou knowest. Now, if Thou wilt only forgive and help
me I will walk in the light as Thou sendest it, even consenting to be
