FAITH AND RIGHTEOUSNESS


    'And he believed in the Lord; and He counted it to him
    for righteousness.'
    GENESIS XV. 6.

It is remarkable to find this anticipation of New Testament teaching so
far back. It is like finding one full-blown flower in a garden where
all else is but swelling into bud. No wonder that Paul fastened on it
to prove that justification by faith was older than Moses, than law or
circumcision, that his teaching was the real original, and that faith
lay at the foundation of the Old Testament religion.

1. The Nature of Faith.--The metaphor in the Hebrew word is that of a
man leaning all his weight on some strong stay. Surely that metaphor
says more than many definitions. It teaches that the essence of faith
is absolute reliance, and that unites us with Him on whom we rely. Its
result will be steadfastness. We are weak, mobile, apt to be driven
hither and thither, but light things lashed to fixed things become
fixed. So 'reeds shaken with wind' are changed into iron pillars.

2. The Object of Faith.--'Lord.' It is a Person, not the promise but
the Promiser. Of course, reliance on the Person results in acceptance
of His word, and here it is God's word as to the future. Our faith has
to do with the future, but also with the past. Its object is Christ,
the historic Christ, the living Christ, the Christ who will come again.
How clear the nature of faith becomes when its object is clear! It
cannot be mere assent, but trust. How clear becomes its identity in all
ages! The creeds may be different in completeness, but the object of
faith is the same, and the emotion is the same.

3. The effect of Faith.--Righteous is conformity to the will of God.
Abram was not righteous, but he yielded himself to God and trusted Him,
and God accepted that as the equivalent of righteousness. The
acceptance was shown by the Covenant, and by the fulfilment of the
promises.

So here is the great truth that faith is accepted for righteous. It is
rightly regarded and treated as righteous, by the estimate of God, who
estimates things as they really are. It _is_ righteousness, for--

(_a_) Faith is itself a supreme act of righteousness, as being
accordant with God's supreme desire for man.

(_b_) Faith unites with Christ the righteous.

(_c_) Faith will blossom out into all righteousness.




WAITING FAITH REWARDED AND STRENGTHENED BY NEW REVELATIONS


    'And when Abram was ninety years old and nine, the Lord
    appeared to Abram, and said unto him, I am the Almighty
    God; walk before Me, and be thou perfect. And I will
    make My covenant between Me and thee, and will multiply
    thee exceedingly. And Abram fell on his face: and God
    talked with him, saying, As for Me, behold, My covenant
    is with thee, and thou shalt be a father of many nations.
    Neither shall thy name any more be called Abram, but thy
    name shall be Abraham; for a father of many nations have
    I made thee. And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and
    I will make nations of thee, and kings shall come out of
    thee. And I will establish My covenant between Me and
    thee and thy seed after thee in their generations for an
    everlasting covenant, to be a God unto thee, and to thy
    seed after thee. And I will give unto thee, and to thy
    seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger,
    all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession;
    and I will be their God. And God said unto Abraham, Thou
    shalt keep My covenant therefore, thou, and thy seed
    after thee In their generations.'
    GENESIS xvii. 1-9.

Abram was seventy-five years old when he left Haran. He was ninety-nine
when God appeared to him, as recorded in this chapter. There had been
three divine communications in these twenty-five years--one at Bethel
on entering the land, one after the hiving off of Lot, and one after
the battle with the Eastern kings. The last-named vision had taken
place before Ishmael's birth, and therefore more than thirteen years
prior to the date of the lesson.

We are apt to think of Abraham's life as being crowded with
supernatural revelations. We forget the foreshortening necessary in so
brief a sketch of so long a career, which brings distant points close
together. Revelations were really but thinly sown in Abram's life. For
something over thirteen years he had been left to walk by faith, and,
no doubt, had felt the pressure of things seen, silently pushing the
unseen out of his life.

Especially would this be the case as Ishmael grew up, and his father's
heart began to cling to him. The promise was beginning to grow dimmer,
as years passed without the birth of the promised heir. As verse 18 of
this chapter shows, Abram's thoughts were turning to Ishmael as a
possible substitute. His wavering confidence was steadied and quickened
by this new revelation. We, too, are often tempted to think that, in
the highest matters, 'a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush,' and
to wish that God would be content with our Ishmaels, which satisfy us,
and would not withdraw us from possessed good, to make us live by hope
of good unseen. We need to reflect on this vision when we are thus
tempted.

1. Note the revelation of God's character, and of our consequent duty,
which preceded the repetition of the covenant. 'I am the Almighty God.'
The aspect of the divine nature, made prominent in each revelation of
Himself, stands in close connection with the circumstances or mental
state of the recipient. So when God appeared to Abram after the
slaughter of the kings, He revealed Himself as 'thy Shield' with
reference to the danger of renewed attack from the formidable powers
which He had bearded and beaten. In the present case the stress is laid
on God's omnipotence, which points to doubts whispering in Abram's
heart, by reason of God's delay in fulfilling His word, and of his own
advancing years and failing strength. Paul brings out the meaning of
the revelation when he glorifies the faith which it kindled anew in
Abram, 'being fully assured that, what He had promised, He was able
also to perform' (Rom. iv. 21). Whenever our 'faith has fallen asleep'
and we are ready to let go our hold of God's ideal and settle down on
the low levels of the actual, or to be somewhat ashamed of our
aspirations after what seems so slow of realisation, or to elevate
prudent calculations of probability above the daring enthusiasms of
Christian hope, the ancient word, that breathed itself into Abram's
hushed heart, should speak new vigour into ours. 'I am the Almighty
God--take My power into all thy calculations, and reckon certainties
with it for the chief factor. The one impossibility is that any word of
Mine should fail. The one imprudence is to doubt My word.'

What follows in regard to our duty from that revelation? 'Walk before
Me, and be thou perfect.' Enoch walked _with_ God; that is, his whole
active life was passed in communion with Him. The idea conveyed by
'walking _before_ God' is not precisely the same. It is rather that of
an active life, spent in continual consciousness of being 'naked and
opened before the eyes of Him to whom we have to give account.' That
thrilling consciousness will not paralyse nor terrify, if we feel that
we are not only 'ever in the great Task-Master's eye,' but that God's
omniscience is all-knowing love, and is brought closer to our hearts
and clothed in gracious tenderness in Christ whose 'eyes were as a
flame of fire,' but whose love is more ardent still, who knows us
altogether, and pities and loves as perfectly as He knows.

What sort of life will spring from the double realisation of God's
almightiness, and of our being ever before Him? 'Be thou perfect.'
Nothing short of immaculate conformity with His will can satisfy His
gaze. His desire for us should be our aim and desire for ourselves. The
standard of aspiration and effort cannot be lowered to meet weakness.
This is nobility of life--to aim at the unattainable, and to be ever
approximating towards our aim. It is more blessed to be smitten with
the longing to win the unwon than to stagnate in ignoble contentment
with partial attainments. Better to climb, with faces turned upwards to
the inaccessible peak, than to lie at ease in the fat valleys! It is
the salt of life to have our aims set fixedly towards ideal perfection,
and to say, 'I count not myself to have apprehended: but ... I press
toward the mark.' _Toward_ that mark is better than _to_ any lower. Our
moral perfection is, as it were, the reflection in humanity of the
divine almightiness.

The wide landscape may be mirrored in an inch of glass. Infinity may
be, in some manner, presented in miniature in finite natures. Our power
cannot represent God's omnipotence, but our moral perfection may,
especially since that omnipotence is pledged to make us perfect if we
will walk before Him.

2. Note the sign of the renewed covenant. Compliance with these
injunctions is clearly laid down as the human condition of the divine
fulfilment of it. 'Be thou perfect' comes first; 'My covenant is with
thee' follows. There was contingency recognised from the beginning. If
Israel broke the covenant, God was not unfaithful if He should not
adhere to it. But the present point is that a new confirmation is given
before the terms are repeated. The main purpose, then, of this
revelation, did not lie in that repetition, but in the seal given to
Abram by the change of name.

Another sign was also given, which had a wider reference. The change of
name was God's seal to His part. Circumcision was the seal of the other
party, by which Abram, his family, and afterwards the nation, took on
themselves the obligations of the compact.

The name bestowed is taken to mean 'Father of a Multitude.' It was the
condensation into a word, of the divine promise. What a trial of
Abram's faith it was to bid him take a name which would sound in men's
ears liker irony than promise! He, close on a hundred years old, with
but one child, who was known not to be the heir, to be called the
father of many! How often Canaanites and his own household would smile
as they used it! What a piece of senile presumption it would seem to
them! How often Abram himself would be tempted to think his new name a
farce rather than a sign! But he took it humbly from God, and he wore
it, whether it brought ridicule from others or assurance in his own
heart. It takes some courage for any of us to call ourselves by names
which rest on God's promise and seem to have little vindication in
present facts. The world is fond of laughing at 'saints,' but
Christians should familiarise themselves with the lofty designations
which God gives His children, and see in them not only a summons to
life corresponding, but a pledge and prophecy of the final possession
of all which these imply. God calls 'things that are not, as though
they were'; and it is wisdom, faith, and humility--not
presumption--which accepts the names as omens of what shall one day be.

The substance of the covenant is mainly identical with previous
revelations. The land is to belong to Abram's seed. That seed is to be
very numerous. But there is new emphasis placed on God's relation to
Abram's descendants. God promises to be 'a God unto thee, and to thy
seed after thee,' and, again, 'I will be their God' (verses 7, 8). That
article of the old covenant is repeated in the new (Jer. xxxi. 33),
with the addition, 'And they shall be My people,' which is really
involved in it. We do not read later more spiritual ideas into the
words, when we find in them here, at the very beginning of Hebrew
monotheism, an insight into the deep truth of the reciprocal possession
of God by us, and of us by God. What a glimpse into the depths of that
divine heart is given, when we see that we are His possession, precious
to Him above all the riches of earth and the magnificences of heaven!
What a lesson as to the inmost blessedness of religion, when we learn
that it takes God for its very own, and is rich in possessing Him,
whatever else may be owned or lacking!

To possess God is only possible on condition of yielding ourselves to
Him. When we give ourselves up, in heart, mind, and will, to be His, He
is ours. When we cease to be our own, we get God for ours. The
self-centred man is poor; he neither owns himself nor anything besides,
in any deep sense. When we lose ourselves in God, we find ourselves,
and being content to have nothing, and not even to be our own masters
or owners, we possess ourselves more truly than ever, and have God for
our portion, and in Him 'all things are ours.'




A PETULANT WISH


    'And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live
    before Thee!
    GENESIS xvii. 18.

These words sound very devout, and they have often been used by
Christian parents yearning for the best interests of their children,
and sometimes of their wayward and prodigal children. But consecrated
as they are by that usage, I am afraid that their meaning, as they were
uttered, was nothing so devout and good as that which is often attached
to them.

1. Note the temper in which Abraham speaks here. The very existence of
Ishmael was a memorial of Abraham's failure in faith and patience. For
he thought that the promised heir was long in coming, and so he thought
that he would help God. For thirteen years the child had been living
beside him, winding a son's way into a father's heart, with much in his
character, as was afterwards seen, that would make a frank, daring boy
his old father's darling. Then all at once comes the divine message,
'This is not the son of the Covenant; this is not the heir of the
Promise. Sarah shall have a child, and from him shall come the
blessings that have been foretold.' And what does Abraham do? Fall down
in thankfulness before God? leap up in heart at the conviction that now
at last the long-looked-for fulfilment of the oath of God was
impending? Not he. 'O that _Ishmael_ might live before Thee. Why cannot
_he_ do? Why may he not be the chosen child, the heir of the Promise?
Take him, O God!'

That is to say, he thinks he knows better than God. He is petulant, he
resists his blessing, he fancies that his own plan is quite as good as
the divine plan. He does not want to draw away his heart from the child
that it has twined round. So he loses the blessing of the revelation
that is being made to him; because he does not bow his will, and accept
God's way instead of his own. Now, do you not think that that is what
we do? When God sends us Isaac, do we not often say, 'Take Ishmael; he
is my own making. I have set all my hopes on him. Why should I have to
wrench them all away?' In our individual lives we want to prescribe to
God, far too often, not only the _ends_, but the _way_ in which we
shall get to the ends; and we think to ourselves, 'That road of my own
engineering that I have got all staked out, that is the true way for
God's providence to take.' And when His path does not coincide with
ours, then we are discontented, and instead of submitting we go with
our pet schemes to Him; and if not in so many words, at least in spirit
and temper, we try to force our way upon God, and when He is speaking
about Isaac insist on pressing Ishmael on His notice.

It is often so in regard to our individual lives; and it is so in
regard to the united action of Christian people very often. A great
deal of what calls itself earnest contending for 'the faith once
delivered to the saints' is nothing more nor less than insisting that
methods of men's devising shall be continued, when God seems to be
substituting for them methods of His own sending; and so fighting about
externals and church polity, and determining that the world has got to
be saved in my own special fashion, and in no other, though God Himself
seems to be suggesting the new thing to me. That is a very frequent
phenomenon in the experience of Christian communities and churches.
Ishmael is so very dear. He is not the child of promise, but he is the
child that we have thought it advisable to help God with. It is hard
for us to part with him.

Dear brethren, sometimes, too, God comes to us in various providences,
and not only reduces into chaos and a heap of confusion our nicely
built-up little houses, but He sometimes comes to us, and lifts us out
of some lower kind of good, which is perfectly satisfactory to us, or
all but perfectly satisfactory, in order to give to us something nobler
and higher. And we resist that too; and do not see why Ishmael should
not serve God's turn as he has served ours; or think that there is no
need at all for Isaac to come into our lives. God never takes away from
us a lower, unless for the purpose of bestowing upon us a higher
blessing. Therefore not to submit is the foolishest thing that men can
do.

But if that be anything like an account of the temper expressed by this
saying, is it not strange that murmuring against God takes the shape of
praying? Ah! there is a great deal of 'prayer' as it calls itself,
which is just moulded upon this petulant word of Abraham's momentarily
failing faith and submission. How many people think that to pray means
to bring their wishes to God, and try to coax Him to make them His
wishes! Why, half the shallow sceptical talk of this generation about
the worthlessness of prayer goes upon that fundamental fallacy that the
notion of prayer is to dictate terms to God; and that unless a man gets
his wishes answered he has no right to suppose that his prayers are
answered. But it is not so. Prayer is not after the type of 'O that
Ishmael might live before Thee!' That is a poor kind of prayer of which
the inmost spirit is resistance to a clear dictate of the divine will;
but the true prayer is, 'O that I may be willing to take what Thou art
willing, in Thy mercy and love, to send!'

I believe in importunate prayer, but I believe also that a great deal
of what calls itself importunate prayer is nothing more than an
obstinate determination not to be satisfied with what satisfies God. If
a man has been bringing his wishes--and he cannot but have
such--continuously to God, with regard to any outward things, and these
have not been answered, he needs to look very carefully into his own
temper and heart in order to make sure that what seems to be waiting
upon God in importunate petition is not pestering Him with refused
desires. To make a prayer out of my rebellion against His will is
surely the greatest abuse of prayer that can be conceived. And when
Abraham said, 'O that Ishmael might live before Thee!' if he said it in
the spirit in which I think he did, he was not praying, but he was
grumbling.

2. And then notice, still further, how such a temper and such a prayer
have the effect of hiding joy and blessing from us.

This was the crisis of Abraham's whole life. It was the moment at which
his hundred years nearly of patient waiting were about to be rewarded.
The message which he had just received was the most lovely and gracious
word that ever had come to him from the heavens, although many such
words had come. And what does he do with it? Instead of falling down
before God, and letting his whole heart go out in jubilant gratitude,
he has nothing to say but 'I would rather that Thou didst it in another
way. It is all very well to speak about sending this heir of promise. I
have no pleasure in that, because it means that my Ishmael is to be
passed by and shelved.' So the proffered joy is turned to ashes, and
Abraham gets no good, for the moment, out of God's greatest blessing to
him; but all the sky is darkened by mists that come up from his own
heart.

Brethren, if you want to be miserable, perk up your own will against
God's. If you want to be blessed, acquiesce in all that He does send,
in all that He has sent, and, by anticipation, in all that He will
send. For, depend upon it, the secret of finding sunbeams in everything
is simply letting God have His own way, and making your will the
sounding-board and echo of His. If Abraham had done as he ought to have
done, that would have been the gladdest moment of his life. You and I
can make out of our deepest sorrows the occasions of pure, though it is
quiet, gladness, if only we have learned to say, 'Not my will, but Thy
will be done.' That is the talisman that turns everything into gold,
and makes sorrow forget its nature, and almost approximate to solemn
joy.

3. My last word is this: God loves us all too well to listen to such a
prayer.

Abraham's passionate cry was so much empty wind, and was like a straw
laid across the course of an express train, in so far as its power to
modify the gracious purpose of God already declared was concerned. And
would it not be a miserable thing if we could deflect the solemn,
loving march of the divine Providence by these hot, foolish, purblind
wishes of ours, that see only the nearer end of things, and have no
notion of where their further end may go, or what it may be?

Is it not better that we should fall back upon this thought, though, at
first sight, it seems so to limit the power of petition, 'We know that
if we ask anything according to His will He heareth us'? There is
nothing that would more wreck our lives than if what some people want
were to be the case--that God should let us have our own way, and give
us serpents because we asked for them and fancied they were eggs; or
let us break our teeth upon bestowed stones because, like whimpering
children crying for the moon, we had asked for them under the delusion
that they were bread.

Leave all that in His hands; and be sure of this, that the true way to
peace, to rest, to gladness, and to wringing the last drop of possible
sweetness out of gifts and losses, disappointments and fruitions, is to
have no will but God's will enthroned above and in our own wills. If
Abraham had acquiesced and submitted, Ishmael and Isaac would have been
a pair to bless his life, as they stood together over his grave. And if
you and I will leave God to order all our ways, and not try to
interfere with His purposes by our short-sighted dictation, 'all things
will work together for good to us, because we love God,' and lovingly
accept His will and His law.




'BECAUSE OF HIS IMPORTUNITY'


    'And the men rose up from thence, and looked toward
    Sodom: and Abraham went with them to bring them on the
    way. And the Lord said, Shall I hide from Abraham that
    thing which I do; Seeing that Abraham shall surely become
    a great and mighty nation, and all the nations of the
    earth shall be blessed in him! For I know him, that he
    will command his children and his household after him,
    and they shall keep the way of the Lord, to do justice
    and judgment; that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that
    which He hath spoken of him. And the Lord said, Because
    the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, and because
    their sin is very grievous; I will go down now, and see
    whether they have done altogether according to the cry
    of it, which is come unto Me; and if not, I will know.
    And the men turned their faces from thence, and went
    toward Sodom: but Abraham stood yet before the Lord.
    And Abraham drew near, and said, Wilt Thou also destroy
    the righteous with the wicked? Peradventure there be
    fifty righteous within the city: wilt Thou also destroy
    and not spare the place for the fifty righteous that
    are therein? That be far from Thee to do after this
    manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked: and that
    the righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from
    Thee: Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?
    And the Lord said, If I find in Sodom fifty righteous
    within the city, then I will spare all the place for
    their sakes. And Abraham answered and said, Behold now,
    I have taken upon me to speak unto the Lord, which am
    but dust and ashes: Peradventure there shall lack five
    of the fifty righteous: wilt Thou destroy all the city
    for lack of five? And He said, If I find there forty
    and five, I will not destroy it. And he spake unto Him
    yet again, and said, Peradventure there shall be forty
    found there. And He said, I will not do it for forty's
    sake. And he said unto Him, Oh let not the Lord be angry,
    and I will speak: Peradventure there shall thirty be
    found there. And He said, I will not do it, if I find
    thirty there. And he said, Behold now, I have taken upon
    me to speak unto the Lord: Peradventure there shall be
    twenty found there. And He said, I will not destroy it
    for twenty's sake. And he said, Oh let not the Lord be
    angry, and I will speak yet but this once: Peradventure
    ten shall be found there. And He said, I will not destroy
    it for ten's sake. And the Lord went His way, as soon as
    He had left communing with Abraham: and Abraham returned
    unto his place.'--GENESIS xviii. 16-33.


I


The first verse of this chapter says that 'the Lord appeared' unto
Abraham, and then proceeds to tell that 'three men stood over against
him,' thus indicating that these were, collectively, the manifestation
of Jehovah. Two of the three subsequently 'went toward Sodom,' and are
called 'angels' in chapter xix. 1. One remained with Abraham, and is
addressed by him as 'Lord,' but the three are similarly addressed in
verse 3. The inference is that Jehovah appeared, not only in the one
'man' who spake with Abraham, but also in the two who went to Sodom.

In this incident we have, first, God's communication of His purpose to
Abraham. He was called the friend of God, and friends confide in each
other. 'The secret of the Lord is with them that fear Him,' and it is
ever true that they who live in amity and communion with God thereby
acquire insight into His purposes. Even in regard to public or
so-called 'political' events, a man who believes in God and His moral
government will often be endowed with a 'terrible sagacity,' which
forecasts consequences more surely than do godless politicians. In
regard to one's own history, it is still more evidently true that the
one way to apprehend God's purposes in it is to keep in close
friendship with Him. Then we shall see the meaning of the else
bewildering whirl of events, and be able to say, 'He that hath wrought
us for the selfsame thing is God.' But the reason assigned for
intrusting Abraham with the knowledge of God's purpose is to be noted.
It was because of his place as the medium of blessing to the nations,
and as the lawgiver to his descendants. God had 'known him,'--that is,
had lovingly brought him into close relations with Himself, not for his
own sake only, but, much more, that he might be a channel of grace to
Israel and the world. His 'commandment' to his descendants was to lead
to their worship of Jehovah and their upright living, and these again
to their possession of the blessings promised to Abraham. That purpose
would be aided by the knowledge of the judgment on Sodom, its source,
and its cause, and therefore Abraham was admitted into the
council-chamber of Jehovah. The insight given to God's friends is given
that they may more fully benefit men by leading them into paths of
righteousness, on which alone they can be met by God's blessings.

The strongly figurative representation in verses 20, 21, according to
which Jehovah goes down to ascertain whether the facts of Sodom's sin
correspond to the report of it, belongs to the early stage of
revelation, and need not surprise us, but should impress on us the
gradual character of the divine Revelation, which would have been
useless unless it had been accommodated to the mental and spiritual
stature of its recipients. Nor should it hide from us the lofty
conception of God's long-suffering justice, which is presented in so
childlike a form. He does 'not judge after ... the hearing of His
ears,' nor smite without full knowledge of the sin. A later stage of
revelation puts the same thought in language less strange to us, when
it teaches that 'the Lord is a God of knowledge, and by Him actions are
weighed,' and in His balances many a false estimate, both of virtuous
and vicious acts, is corrected, and retribution is always exactly
adjusted to the deed.

But the main importance of the incident is in the wonderful picture of
Abraham's intercession, which, in like manner, veils, under a strangely
sensuous representation, lofty truths for all ages. It is to be noted
that the divine purpose expressed in 'I will go down now, and see,' is
fulfilled in the going of the two (men or angels) towards Sodom;
therefore Jehovah was in them. But He was also in the One before whom
Abraham stood. The first great truth enshrined in this part of the
story is that the friend of God is compassionate even of the sinful and
degraded. Abraham did not intercede for Lot, but for the sinners in
Sodom. He had perilled his life in warfare for them; he now pleads with
God for them. Where had he learned this brave pity? Where but from the
God with whom he lived by faith? How much more surely will real
communion with Jesus lead _us_ to look on all men, and especially on
the vicious and outcast, with His eyes who saw the multitudes as sheep
without a shepherd, torn, panting, scattered, and lying exhausted and
defenceless! Indifference to the miseries and impending dangers of
Christless men is impossible for any whom He calls 'not servants, but
friends.'

Again, we are taught the boldness of pleading which is permitted to the
friend of God, and is compatible with deepest reverence. Abraham is
keenly conscious of his audacity, and yet, though he knows himself to
be but dust and ashes, that does not stifle his petitions. His was the
holy 'importunity' which Jesus sent forth for our imitation. The word
so rendered in Luke xi. 8, which is found in the New Testament there
only, literally means 'shamelessness,' and is exactly the disposition
which Abraham showed here. Not only was he persistent, but he increased
his expectations with each partial granting of his prayer. The more God
gives, the more does the true suppliant expect and crave; and rightly
so, for the gift to be given is infinite, and each degree of possession
enlarges capacity so as to fit to receive more, and widens desire. What
contented us to-day should not content us to-morrow.

Again, Abraham is bold in appealing to a law to which God is bound to
conform. 'Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?' is often
quoted with an application foreign to its true meaning. Abraham was not
preaching to men trust that the most perplexing acts of God would be
capable of full vindication if we knew all, but he was pleading with
God that His acts should be plainly accordant with the idea of justice
planted by Him in us. The phrase is often used to strengthen the
struggling faith that

  'All is right which seems most wrong,
   If it be His sweet will.'

But it means not 'Such and such a thing must be right because God has
done it,' but 'Such and such a thing is right, therefore God must do
it.' Of course, our conceptions of right are not the absolute measure
of the divine acts, and the very fact which Abraham thought contrary to
justice is continually exemplified in Providence, that 'the righteous
should be as the wicked' in regard to earthly calamities affecting
communities. So far Abraham was wrong, but the spirit of his
remonstrance was wholly right.

Again, we learn the precious lesson that prayer for others is a real
power, and does bring down blessings and avert evils. Abraham did not
here pray for Lot, but yet 'God remembered Abraham, and sent Lot out of
the midst of the overthrow'(chap. xix. 29), so that there had been
unrecorded intercession for him too. The unselfish desires for others,
that exhale from human hearts under the influence of the love which
Christ plants in us, do come down in blessings on others, as the
moisture drawn up by the sun may descend in fructifying rain on far-off
pastures of the wilderness. We help one another when we pray for one
another.

The last lesson taught is that 'righteous' men are indeed the 'salt of
the earth' not only preserving cities and nations from further
corruption, but procuring for them further existence and probation. God
holds back His judgments so long as hope of amendment survives, and
'will not destroy for the ten's sake.'




THE INTERCOURSE OF GOD AND HIS FRIEND


II


We have seen that the fruit of Abraham's faith was God's entrance into
close covenant relations with him; or, as James puts it, 'It was
reckoned unto him for righteousness; and he was called the friend of
God.' This incident shows us the intercourse of the divine and human
friends in its familiarity, mutual confidence, and power. It is a
forecast of Christ's own profound teachings in His parting words in the
upper chamber, concerning the sweet and wondrous intercourse between
the believing soul and the indwelling God.

1. The friend of God catches a gleam of divine pity and tenderness.
Abraham has no relations with the men of Sodom. Their evil ways would
repel him; and he would be a stranger among them still more than among
the Canaanites, whose iniquity was 'not yet full.' But though he has no
special bonds with them, he cannot but melt with tender compassion when
he hears their doom. Communion with the very Source of all gentle love
has softened his heart, and he yearns over the wicked and fated city.
Where else than from his heavenly Friend could he have learned this
sympathy? It wells up in this chapter like some sudden spring among
solemn solitudes--the first instance of that divine charity which is
the best sign that we have been with God, and have learned of Him. All
that the New Testament teaches of love to God, as necessarily issuing
in love to man, and of the true love to man as overleaping all narrow
bounds of kindred, country, race, and ignoring all questions of
character, and gushing forth in fullest energy towards the sinners in
danger of just punishment, is here in germ. The friend of God must be
the friend of men; and if they be wicked, and he sees the frightful
doom which they do not see, these make his pity the deeper. Abraham
does not contest the justice of the doom. He lives too near his friend
not to know that sin must mean death. The effect of friendship with God
is not to make men wish that there were no judgments for evil-doers,
but to touch their hearts with pity, and to stir them to intercession
and to effort for their deliverance.

2. The friend of God has absolute trust in the rectitude of His acts.
Abraham's remonstrance, if we may call it so, embodies some thoughts
about the government of God in the world which should be pondered.

His first abrupt question, flung out without any reverential preface,
assumes that the character of God requires that the fate of the
righteous should be distinguished from that of the wicked. The very
brusqueness of the question shows that he supposed himself to be
appealing to an elementary and indubitable law of God's dealings. The
teachings of the Fall and of the Flood had graven deep on his
conscience the truth that the same loving Friend must needs deal out
rewards to the good and chastisement to the bad. That was the simple
faith of an early time, when problems like those which tortured the
writers of the seventy-third Psalm, or of Job and Ecclesiastes, had not
yet disturbed the childlike trust of the friend of God, because no
facts in his experience had forced them on him. But the belief which
was axiomatic to him, and true for his supernaturally shaped life with
its special miracles and visible divine guard, is not the ultimate and
irrefragable principle which he thought it. In widespread calamities
the righteous are blended with the wicked in one bloody ruin; and it is
the very misery of such judgments that often the sufferers are not the
wrongdoers, but that the fathers eat the sour grapes, and the
children's teeth are set on edge. The whirlwind of temporal judgments
makes no distinctions between the dwellings of the righteous and the
wicked, but levels them both. No doubt, the fact that the impending
destruction was to be a direct Divine interposition of a punitive kind
made it more necessary that it should be confined to the actual
culprits. No doubt, too, Abraham's zeal for the honour of God's
government was right. But his first plea belongs to the stage of
revelation at which he stood, not to that of the New Testament, which
teaches that the eighteen on whom the tower in Siloam fell were not
sinners above all men in Jerusalem. Abraham's confidence in God's
justice, not Abraham's conceptions of what that justice required, is to
be imitated. A friend of God will hold fast by the faith that 'His way
is perfect,' and will cherish it even in the presence of facts more
perplexing than any which met Abraham's eyes.

Another assumption in his prayer is that the righteous are sources of
blessing and shields for the wicked. Has he there laid hold of a true
principle? Certainly, it is indeed the law that 'every man shall bear
his own burden,' but that law is modified by the operation of this
other, of which God's providence is full. Many a drop of blessing
trickles from the wet fleece to the dry ground. Many a stroke of
judgment is carried off harmlessly by the lightning conductor. Where
God's friends are inextricably mixed up with evil-doers, it is not rare
to see diffused blessings which are destined indeed primarily for the
former, but find their way to the latter. Christians are the 'salt of
the earth' in this sense too, that they save corrupt communities from
swift destruction, and for their sakes the angels delay their blow. In
the final resort, each soul must reap its own harvest from its own
deeds; but the individualism of Christianity is not isolation. We are
bound together in mysterious community, and a good man is a fountain of
far-flowing good. The truest 'saviours of society' are the servants of
God.

A third principle is embodied in the solemn question, 'Shall not the
Judge of all the earth do right?' This is not meant in its bearing
here, as we so often hear it quoted, to silence man's questionings as
to mysterious divine acts, or to warn us from applying our measures of
right and wrong to these. The very opposite thought is conveyed;
namely, the confidence that what God does must approve itself as just
to men. He is Judge of all the earth, and therefore bound by His very
nature, as by His relations to men, to do nothing that cannot be
pointed to as inflexibly right. If Abraham had meant, 'What God does,
must needs be right, therefore crush down all questions of how it
accords with thy sense of justice,' he would have been condemning his
own prayer as presumptuous, and the thought would have been entirely
out of place. But the appeal to God to vindicate His own character by
doing what shall be in manifest accord with His name, is bold language
indeed, but not too bold, because it is prompted by absolute confidence
in Him. God's punishments must be obviously righteous to have moral
effect, or to be worthy of Him.

But true as the principle is, it needs to be guarded. Abraham himself
is an instance that men's conceptions of right do not completely
correspond to the reality. His notion of 'right' was, in some
particulars, as his life shows, imperfect, rudimentary, and far beneath
New Testament ideas. Conscience needs education. The best men's
conceptions of what befits divine justice are relative, progressive;
and a shifting standard is no standard. It becomes us to be very
cautious before we say to God, 'This is the way. Walk Thou in it,' or
dismiss any doctrine as untrue on the ground of its contradicting our
instincts of justice.

3. The friend of God has power with God. 'Shall I hide from Abraham
that thing which I do?' The divine Friend recognises the obligation of
confidence. True friendship is frank, and cannot bear to hide its
purposes. That one sentence in its bold attribution of a like feeling
to God leads us deep into the Divine heart, and the sweet reality of
his amity. Insight into His will ever belongs to those who live near
Him. It is the beginning of the long series of disclosures of 'the
secret of the Lord' to 'them that fear Him,' which is crowned by
'henceforth I call you not servants; but ... friends; for all things
that I have heard of My Father I have made known unto you.' So much for
the divine side of the communion.

On the human side, we are here taught the great truth, that God's
friends are intercessors, whose voice has a mysterious but most real
power with God. If it be true, that, in general terms, the righteous
are shields and sources of blessing to the unholy, it is still more
distinctly true that they have access to God's secret place with
petitions for others as well as for themselves. The desires which go up
to God, like the vapours exhaled to heaven, fall in refreshing rain on
spots far away from that whence they rose. In these days we need to
keep fast hold of our belief in the efficacy of prayer for others and
for ourselves. God knows Himself and the laws of His government a great
deal better than any one besides does; and He has abundantly shown us
in His Word, and by many experiences, that breath spent in intercession
is not wasted. In these old times, when worship was mainly sacrificial,
this wonderful instance of pure intercession meets us, an anticipation
of later times. And from thence onwards there has never failed proof to
those who will look for it, that God's friends are true priests, and
help their brethren by their prayers. Our voices should 'rise like a
fountain night and day' for men. But there is a secret distrust of the
power, and a flagrantly plain neglect of the duty, of intercession
nowadays, which need sorely the lesson that God 'remembered Abraham'
and delivered Lot. Luther, in his rough, strong way, says: 'If I have a
Christian who prays to God for me, I will be of good courage, and be
afraid of nothing. If I have one who prays against me, I had rather
have the Grand Turk for my enemy.'

The tone of Abraham's intercession may teach us how familiar the
intercourse with the Heavenly Friend may be. The boldest words from a
loving heart, jealous of God's honour, are not irreverent in His eyes.
This prayer is abrupt, almost rough. It sounds like remonstrance quite
as much as prayer. Abraham appeals to God to take care of His name and
honour, as if he had said, If Thou doest this, what will the world say
of Thee, but that Thou art unmerciful? But the grand confidence in
God's character, the eager desire that it should be vindicated before
the world, the dread that the least film should veil the silvery
whiteness or the golden lustre of His name, the sensitiveness for His
honour--these are the effects of communion with Him; and for these God
accepts the bold prayer as truer reverence than is found in many more
guarded and lowly sounding words. Many conventional proprieties of
worship may be broken just because the worship is real. 'The frequent
sputter shows that the soul's depths boil in earnest.' We may learn,
