Zealand, and Polynesia.  When I was a boy there was but one English
settlement, and that was known throughout the world as Botany Bay, the
abode of the most abandoned criminals of English civilization.  There
are to-day twenty-one Bishops in those islands.  I wish I could tell the
story inwrought in the lives of Selwyn, Patteson, Williams, and a host
of others, some of whom have laid down their lives for Christ.

To-day cannibalism is a thing of the past.  Human sacrifices, thank God,
are to be found nowhere on the earth.  There is not one of those islands
without its Christian church, and in some of them the last vestige of
heathenism has passed away.  They have thousands of Christian men and
women under their native pastors.  Surely this is no time to talk about
the failure of Christian missions.

Now I turn to Japan.  Less than forty year ago one of our brave American
sailors, Commodore Perry, cast anchor on Sunday morning in the harbor of
Yeddo.  He called his officers and crew together for public worship, and
they sang that old hymn of our fathers, "Old Hundred"; and the first
sound that this hermit nation heard from her younger sister of the West
was that grand old hymn.


Next year Japan will have a constitutional government.  It has already
adopted the Christian calendar.  There are more that a million of
children in their public schools.  Many of these schools are under the
charge of Christian men and women, and it is only a question of a few
years when Japan will take her place beside other Christian nations.
This is more wonderful when we remember that until recently there was a
statute in Japan that, "if any Christian shall set his foot on the
Island of Japan, or if the Christian's God, Jesus, shall come, he shall
be beheaded."

I turn to China.  I wonder that its doors are open to Christian missions
when I remember that Christian nations at the mouth of the cannon have
forced upon that people that deadly drug which drags body and soul to
death, that their names have been by-words and hissing in Christian
lands.  The secret is that God sent to China a young Englishman whose
life was hid with Christ in God.  Chinese Gordon saved the nation of
China, and his name will be a household word forever.  Surely a people
where the poorest laborer can become the first prince of the realm if he
becomes the first scholar, and if his son is a vagabond sinks to the
place from which his father came, surely such a people have the elements
to receive the Gospel of Christ.

Time would fail me to tell the story of missions in North America; I
should begin at Hudson's Bay, where Bishop John Horden has lived
thirty-five years amid its solitudes and won every one of its Indian
tribes to Christianity.  I should tell you of the Bishop of Athabasca,
whose home is within the Arctic circle, who could not attend the Lambeth
Conference because he could not go and return the same year.  I should
tell of my young friend, the Bishop of Mackenzie River, when I knew that
he spent nine months each year travelling upon snowshoes and three months
in a birch-bark canoe; that the only way that he could carry to them the
Gospel was to follow them in the chase, hunt with them, fish with them,
lie down in their wigwams in his blanket and always have waiting upon
his lips the sweet story of the love of God, our Father.  I told him I
wished he would give me his post-office address and I would send him
books and papers; he said: "Bishop, I am a thousand miles from a
post-office and only get one mail a year."

I should tell you of another, the Bishop of Rupertsland, Dr. Macrae, the
only Bishop in Christendom who has a university made up of a Roman
Catholic college, a Presbyterian college, and a college of the Church of
England; so large-hearted that almost by one consent the people of
Manitoba have made him the president of their entire educational system.


If I turn to our own land, it would be to tell you that one hundred
years ago the Church was a feeble folk, scattered along the Atlantic
coast and known as a people that were everywhere spoken against.  Thank
God, to-day her voice is heard in the miner's camp, in the schoolhouse
of the border, in the wigwam of the Indians, and sturdy heralds are in
the fore-front of that mighty movement which is peopling this land with
its millions of souls.  Marvellous as is the progress of Christian
missions and the work which has been done in this century, it has
largely been committed to the English-speaking race.  In the providence
of God races of men have been selected by Him to do His work.  Two
hundred years ago the English-speaking people of Europe were less than
many of the nations of the Latin races.  Spain outnumbered England two
to one.  To-day there are one hundred and fifty millions of
English-speaking people in the world, one-tenth of the entire human
family. When we think of the future, that by the close of another century
more than five hundred millions will be speaking one language, it leads
us to ask, on bended knees, why has this commission been committed to
this English-speaking race, and what are the responsibilities that rest
upon our branch of the Church of God?  I reverently believe that it is
because on its civil side it recognizes as no other race that government
is a delegated trust from God, who alone has the right to govern.  It
represents constitutional government, and it has done so since Bishop
Stephen Langton, at the head of the nobles of England, wrung the _Magna
Charta_ from King John, and henceforth recognized the sacredness of the
citizen, who has been clothed with an individuality unlike any being who
lives or will live in all the ages of eternity.  On its religious side
it recognizes the two truths which underlie the possibility of the
reunion of Christendom--the validity of all Christian Baptism in the name
of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, and that the condition of
fellowship in the Church of God is faith in the incarnate Son of God as
contained in the Old Catholic creeds.  Surely we may hold up the olive
branch of God's peace over all strife and divisions among the disciples
of Christ, and say "Ye are brethren."

When we remember that in the providence of God the Greek tongue was
spoken throughout the civilized world to prepare a way for the coming of
His Son and the preaching of the blessed Gospel, we see in these facts
forerunning tokens of his preparation for the second coming of Jesus
Christ.

If I had time to-day, I would love to tell you the story that is
inwrought in the history of our noble Missionary Bishops; men who have
hazarded their lives for the Lord Jesus.  I wish I could tell you of
their ventures of faith, foundations for Christian schools which they
have laid with prayers and watered with tears, and with a prophet's eye
looked forward to a future when the land will swarm with millions of
souls, that so by Christian nurture and Christian training the Church
may fulfil the Master's words, "Feed my lambs."  I wish I could tell you
of the work, dear to every Bishop's heart, of the daughters of the
Cross; yes, and I would like to bring to this Council some of the
tempest-tossed and weary souls who have been led out of their darkness
to the rest and peace and gladness of Christian faith.  I wish I could
bring here some from the northern forests and the prairies of the West,
the men of the trembling eye and the wandering foot, that they might
thank you for having led them out of their heritage of anguish and
sorrow into the light of the children of God.

I may not close without a word of tribute to those who have fallen
asleep.  Since our last General Convention nine Bishops have crossed the
river and are waiting for us on the other shore.  Unbidden tears come as
I remember the loving Elliot, our St. John; Welles, another holy
Herbert; Brown, with his Catholic heart that had room enough to take in
all the poor and the sorrowful of his diocese; Harris, every whit a
great leader in our Israel; Dunlop, the soldier on the outpost, often
debarred brotherly sympathy, who in loneliness and weariness bravely did
his work.  Others who were patriarchs of the Church of God--Green, Lee,
Potter and Stevens--all men who were great leaders in the Church of God,
who bravely did their work, whose faces are upon every heart, and who
have entered into rest.

Since I entered the House of Bishops, fifty-three Bishops have laid down
their shepherd's staves and entered into rest.


A word, and I have done.  Surely in such a day as this it is no time to
discuss shibboleths.  Its is a time for brotherly sympathy and
great-hearted work.  With such responsibilities around us there must be
no divisions among those who love the same Saviour and look for the same
heavenly home.  I remember that at a critical period in our missionary
work the venerable Doctor Dyer said to me with tears in his eyes,
"Strife is an awful price to pay for the best results, but strife among
the kinsmen of Christ in the presence of those for whom He died, and
when wandering souls are going down to death, is almost an unpardonable
sin."  May I not ask you to-day, dear brothers and sisters, what have we
done to help on in the great work which is to be done in the eventide of
the world?  What lonely missionary have we remembered in prayer during
the past week?  What wanderer have we tried with love to lead to the
Saviour?  Have we given the cost of the trimmings of a dress?  Have we
made any sacrifices for Him who gave Himself for us?  May I not ask you
to-day here beside God's altar to consecrate all you have and are to His
service?

With some of us the eventide draws on.  A little while, such a little
while, just time enough to do His work, and then the end shall come.
And when we reach that other home, next to seeing the Saviour, next to
having the old ties re-united, will be the comfort and the blessedness
of meeting some one whom we helped heavenward and home.





IV. _ADDRESS IN LAMBETH CHAPEL, AT THE FIRST SESSION OF THE LAMBETH
CONFERENCE, JULY 3, 1888_.


Most reverend and right reverend brethren: No assembly is fraught with
such awful responsibility to God, as a council of the Bishops of His
Church.  Since the Holy Spirit presided in the first council of
Jerusalem, faithful souls have looked with deep interest to the
deliberations of those whom Christ has made the shepherds of His flock,
and to whom he gave His promise, "Lo, I am with you always to the end of
the world."  The responsibility is greater when division has marred the
beauty of the Lamb's Bride.  Our words and acts will surely hasten or
(which God forbid) retard the reunion of Christendom.  Feeling the grave
responsibility which is imposed on me to-day, my heart cries out as did
the prophet's, "I am a child and cannot speak."  Pray for me, venerable
brethren, that God may help me to obey His word--"Whatsoever I command,
that shalt thou speak."  I would kneel with you at our Master's feet and
pray that "the Holy Spirit may guide us into all truth."  We meet as the
representatives of national Churches; each with its own peculiar
responsibility to God for the souls intrusted to its care; each with all
the rights of a national Church, to adapt itself to the varying
conditions of human society; and each bound to preserve the order, the
faith, the sacraments, and the worship of the Catholic Church, for which
it is a trustee.  As we kneel by the table of our common Lord we
remember separated brothers.  Division has multiplied division until
infidelity sneers at Christianity as an effete superstition, and the
modern Sadducee, more bold than his Jewish brother, denies the existence
of God.  Millions for whom Christ died have not so much as heard that
there is a Saviour.  It will heal no divisions to say, Who is at fault?
The sin of schism does not lie at one door.  If one has sinned by
self-will, the other has sinned as deeply by lack of charity and love.
The way to reunion looks difficult.  To man it is impossible.  No human
_eirenicon_ can bridge the gulf of separation.  There are unkind words to
be taken back, alienations to be healed, and heartburnings to be
forgiven.  Where we are blind, God can make a way.  When "the God of
Peace" rules in all Christian hearts, our Lord's prayer will be
answered--"That they all may be one, as Thou, Father, art in Me, and I in
Thee, that they all may be one in Us, that the world may believe that
