The Second or General Judgment.

The Egyptian Astrologers, recognizing the soul as a material entity,
and conceiving the idea that in the future life it would require a
material organization for its perfect action, taught that at the
general judgment it would be re-united to its resurrected body. In
conformity to this belief, Job is made to say in chapter xix. 25, 26,
"I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall stand at the latter
day upon the earth; and though worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh
shall I see God." The higher class Egyptians, however, fearing that
their existence would continue to be of the same shadowy and intangible
character after the second judgment, as they believed it would be in
the Amenti, if worms were allowed to destroy their bodies, hoped to
preserve them until that time by the process of embalming.

The imaginary events to occur in connection with the second judgment,
which, constituting the finale of the plan of redemption, and
inculcated in what are known as the doctrines of Second Adventism, were
to be inaugurated by an archangel sounding a trumpet summoning the
quick and the dead to appear before the bar of the gods to receive
their final awards. At the second judgment, designated in the
allegories as "the last day," "day of judgment," "great and terrible
day of the Lord," etc., it was taught that the tenth and last saviour
would make his second advent by descending upon the clouds, and after
the final awards, the elect being caught up "to meet the Lord in the
air" (I. Thes. iv. 17), the heaven and the earth would be reduced to
chaos through the agency of fire. In reference to that grand
catastrophe we find it recorded in II. Peter iii. 10, that "the heavens
shall pass away with a great noise and the elements shall melt with
fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein shall be
burned up."

After the organization of a new heaven and a new earth it was taught
that upon the latter would descend a beautiful city, with pearly gates
and golden streets, called the City of God, the Kingdom of God, the
Kingdom of Heaven or New Jerusalem, in which the host of the redeemed
would, with their Lord and Saviour, enjoy the Millennium, or thousand
years of happiness unalloyed with evil; and such was the Kingdom for
the speedy coming of which the votaries of Astral worship were taught
to pray in what is known as the Lord's Prayer.

According to the teachings of the Allegories, there were to be no sun,
moon or stars during the Millennium, their authors having arranged it
so that the light of those luminaries would not be needed, as we find
recorded in Rev. xxi. 23, and xxii. 5: "The city had no need of the
sun, neither of the moon to shine in it; for the glory of God did
lighten it," and "there shall be no night there; and they need no
candle, neither the light of the sun; for the Lord God giveth them
light." It must be remembered, when reading the fanciful ideas relative
to the City of God, that they were composed by men who, living in a
very ignorant age, gave free rein to fervid imaginations.



JEWISH OR ANCIENT CHRISTIANITY.

It is our purpose to present the evidences showing that a system of
Astral worship, which we designate as Jewish Christianity, was in
existence more than two centuries and a half before the institution of
its modern form. In verification of this assertion we must find the
initial point of our inquiry in ancient history, which teaches that in
the division of the Grecian Empire among his generals, after the death
of Alexander the Great, who died 332 years before the beginning of our
era, the governorship of Egypt and adjacent provinces was secured by
Ptolemy Lagus, or Soter, who, having subsequently suppressed a revolt
in Judea, removed from that country a large body of its inhabitants to
people the new city of Alexandria, which had been laid out by order of
and named after the great Conqueror.

The Egyptian version of the Gospel story, being more appropriate to the
Nile Valley than to the region from whence they came, the Greek
colonists of Alexandria adopted it, but preferring to pay homage to
Serapis, one of the ninth incarnations of God Sol, which they imported
from Pontus, a Greek province of Asia Minor, they erected to his
worship that celebrated temple known as the Grand Serapium; and,
transferring the culture and refinement of Greece to the new city, it
became, under the Ptolemian dynasty, a great seat of learning; the arts
and sciences flourished, an immense library was collected, the various
forms of Astral worship were represented and schools for the
dissemination of the several phases of Grecian philosophy and Oriental
Gnosticism were founded.

Such being the environment of the Jewish residents of Alexandria, they
soon acquired the vernacular and adopted the religion of the Greeks,
who, having ever attached to their incarnate saviours the title
signifying the Christ, or the anointed, were known as Christians.
Encouraged by the liberal policy of Philadelphus, the second Ptolemy, a
body of their learned men, who had been educated in the Greek schools,
founded a college for the education of their own people, which
institution was ultimately known as the University of Alexandria. Under
the auspices of Philadelphus the professors of that institution
rendered their Hebrew sacred records into the Greek language, which
translation is known as the Septuagint, or Alexandrian version of the
Old Testament.

Having acquired from the Egyptian astrologers the arts of healing,
thaumaturgy and necromancy, and teaching them in their school, the
professors of the Jewish college of Alexandria assumed the title of
Essenes, or Therapeutae, the Egyptian and Greek words signifying
Doctors, Healers or Wonder Workers. Possessed of the sad and gloomy
characteristics of their race, they adopted the "Contemplative Life,"
or asceticism of the Oriental Gnosticism, from which they derived the
name of Ascetics. Founding a church for the propagation of their
peculiar tenets, those who were set apart for the ministry assumed the
title of Ecclesiastics. Inculcating rigid temperance and self-denial
among their people, they were known as Enchratites, Nazarites or
Abstainers; and the more devout among them retiring to monasteries, or
to the solitude of caves and other secluded places, were also
designated as Monks, Cenobites, Friars, Eremites, Hermits or
Solitaries.

The time having arrived, according to the cyclic teachings of Astral
worship, for the manifestation of the tenth and last incarnation of God
Sol, or, in other words, to, give a new name to the mythical genius of
the sun, the professors of the Jewish school of Alexandria is resolved
to inaugurate their own form of worship. While retaining the same title
under which they had paid homage to Serapis and known as Christians,
Essenes or Therapeutae, they substituted for their Christ the name of
the Grecian Bacchus, which, composed of the letters {Greek:
IOTA, ETA, SIGMA}, signifies Yes, Ies or Jes. In composing their version
of the Gospel story, having, like their race, no inventive genius, they
appropriated that of Serapis as its basis and laid its scene in the
land of their ancestry, but inconsistently retained the sign of the
cross and the phraseology connected there with, which, having special
reference to the Nile River and its annual inundation, had no
application whatever to the sterile land of Judea. Selecting what they
conceived to be the best from other versions of the Gospel story, and
assuming the title of Eclectics, they designated their system as the
Eclectic Philosophy. In proof of the eclectic character of the Gospel
and Epistles of ancient Christianity, we refer to the Asceticism
inculcated therein, which, derived from the Oriental Gnosticism, we
find perpetuated in the scriptures of modern Christianity; we also
refer to the miracle of converting water into wine, taken from the
Gospel story of Bacchus, and to the statements that the Saviour was the
son of a carpenter and was hung between two thieves, copied from the
story of Christna, the Eighth, Avatar of the East Indian astrolatry.
Thus we see that, although the scene of the Gospel story of ancient
Christianity was laid in the land of Judea, its authors having adopted
a Greek version of that story as its basis, given a Greek title and
name to their Messiah, perpetuated a Greek name for their sect and
quoted exclusively from the Septuagint, or Greek version of the Old
Testament, the facts show conclusively that it was not Jews of Judea,
but Hellenized Jews of Alexandria, who were the real authors of the
ancient Christianity.



THE PROPHECIES.

The clergy having ever claimed that the prophecies are Divine
revelations of events yet to occur, and having incessantly agitated
society by preaching their speedy fulfillment, we propose to expose the
fallacy of their teachings by showing that these scriptures are not the
records of future events, Divinely reavealed, but that they originated
with the founders of Astral worship, who predicated them upon
predetermined events of their own concoction, relative to the general
judgment, and setting up of the kingdom of heaven, which were to occur
as the finale of the plan of redemption and from which were derived the
doctrines of second adventism; and, in determining the exact time when
then were to occur, we have but to prove that it was coincident with
the conclusion of the last half of the grand cycle of 12,000 years,
which, as we have shown, was dedicated to man as the duration of his
race on earth.

As evidence that the founders of the Jewish or ancient Christianity
believed, like the votaries of other forms of Astral worship, that the
prophecies were soon to be fulfilled, we find that the New Testament,
of the original version of which they were the authors, is replete with
such texts as "Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand," Matt. iv.
17; "There be some standing here which shall not taste death till they
see the Son of Man coming in His kingdom," Matt. xxi. 28; "The time is
fulfilled, and the Kingdom of God is at hand," Mark i. 15. That the
original version of the New Testament was composed when the Vernal
Equinox was in the sign of Aries we are assured by reason of the fact
that it inculcates homage to the Lord under the symbol of the Lamb; and
that it was during the last, or 30th degree of that sign, can readily
be proven by appealing to history and to astronomy, the former of which
teaches that the Jews were removed from Judea to Alexandria twenty-five
years before the accession to the throne of Philadelphus, the Second
Ptolemy, to whom we have referred in our preceding article, and who,
after reigning thirty-nine years, died 246 years before the beginning
of our era. By reference to the Celestial atlas we will find that the
Vernal Equinox will pass out of the sign of Pisces into that of
Aquarius, or in the year 1900, and we have but to deduct that period of
time from 2150, the number of years required for the cardinal points to
pass through one whole sign, to determine that the Spring Equinox
passed out of the sign of Aries into that of Pisces 250 years before
the beginning of our era, or about 2,100 years ago. Now, from the
projections of the astrological science, we are assured that the last
half of the grand cycle of 12,000 years, which was allotted to man as
the duration of his race on earth, was made to begin at a time
corresponding to the Autumnal Equinox, when that cardinal point was
passing out of the sign of Virgo, and that of necessity it had to come
to an end at a time corresponding to the Vernal Equinox, when that
cardinal point was passing out of the sign of Aries; from which we know
why, at the last judgment, the office of trumpeter was assigned to the
Archangel Gabriel, the genius of Spring, and why it was a ram's horn
with which he was to "toot the crack o' doom."

When the time arrived for the fulfillment of the prophecies we can well
imagine that, fearing the wrath of the Lamb, there were weeping,
wailing and gnashing of teeth among the terror-stricken sinners, while
those who believed they had made their calling and election sure were
looking with feverish expectancy for the second advent of their Lord
and Saviour; and, doubtless, clothed with their ascension robes, they
watched and waited, with ears alert, to hear the sound of Gabriel's
trumpet, summoning the quick, and the dead to the general judgment. But
not a blast from the archangel's ram's horn was heard reverberating
along the skies, no Lord appeared descending upon the clouds to meet
the elect in the air, and, in the last act of the fearful drama of
"judgment day," the curtain refused to be rung down upon a burning
world.

With the non-fulfillment of the prophecies, the more enlightened
elements of society began to scoff at the priests, who were temporarily
demoralized, but true to their deceptive instincts, soon rallying with
the plea of a mistake having been made in the calculations based upon
the prophecies, they undoubtedly concocted scripture to meet that very
emergency, for, to the taunts of the scoffers who, in reference to the
second advent of the Lord, enquired "Where is the sign of His coming?
for, since the fathers fell asleep, all things continue as they were
from the beginning of creation," they answered that "The Lord is not
slack concerning His promise," but "as a thief in the night" he would
soon come and all things be fulfilled. See II. Peter, chapter iii.

Following up the history of this interesting subject, we find that the
founders of modern Christianity, to which we will refer in our next
article, in composing their version of the New Testament from that of
the Jewish, or ancient Christians, made no change in its verbiage
relative to the prophecies; but when Constantine I., Emperor of Rome,
became the patron of the church, her hierarchy, tired of figuring upon
them, secured a long respite from that troublesome subject by claiming
to have made other calculations, which put off the time of fulfillment
to the year 1000; and from history we learn when the time arrived the
whole of Christendom was fearfully agitated upon the subject: Since
then every generation has been vexed with the fallacies of second
adventism; and the facts of the case justify the charge that the
clergy, by teaching that the prophecies refer to events yet to occur,
are perpetuating a most stupendous fraud upon Christendom, and an
earnest and efficient protest should be inaugurated against the further
agitation of the monstrous delusion of second adventism, which is
frightening thousands of weak-minded people into insanity and causing a
vast amount of social distress.



ROMAN OR MODERN CHRISTIANITY.

Having presented the evidences that the Jewish, or ancient
Christianity, originated at the University of Alexandria, under Greek
rule, we now propose to show that its modern form emanated from the
same source, under Roman rule; but, before entering upon this
investigation, it is important to become conversant with the sentiments
manifested towards religion by the cultured element of Roman society in
that enlightened era, which, designated as the golden age of
literature, was adorned by such distinguished orators, philosophers,
historians, poets and naturalists as Cicero, Tacitus, Pliny, Horace and
Virgil. In reference to this subject, Gibbon, in his history of The
Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, vol. I., chapter 2, says: "The
various modes of worship which prevailed in the Roman world were all
considered by the people as equally true, by the philosophers as
equally false and by the magistrate as equally useful. Both the
interests of the priests and the credulity of the people were
sufficiently respected. In their writings and conversation the
philosophers of antiquity asserted the independent dignity of reason,
but they resigned their actions to the commands of law and custom.
Viewing with a smile of pity and indulgence the various errors of the
vulgar, they diligently practiced the ceremonies of their fathers,
devoutly frequented the temples of the gods, and sometimes
condescending to act a part on the theatre of superstition, they
concealed the sentiments of an atheist under the sacerdotal robe.
Reasoners of such a temper were scarcely inclined to wrangle about
their respective modes of faith or of worship. It was indifferent to
them what shape the folly of the multitude might choose to assume, and
they approached with the same inward contempt and the same external
reverence to the altars of the Lybian, the Olympian or the Capitoline
Jupiter." Upon the same subject Mosheim, in his church history, Book
I., chapter 1, says that "The wiser part of mankind, about the time of
Christ's birth, looked upon the whole system of religion as a just
object of contempt and ridicule."

In determining why such adverse sentiments were entertained towards
religion by "the wiser part of mankind," about the time referred to in
the foregoing quotations, it will be found to have been owing to the
extensive spread of the Esoteric philosophy, which taught, as
previously stated, that the gods were mythical and the scriptures
allegorical. While attainable only through initiation, it was
necessarily confined to a limited number, but, ultimately getting
beyond the control of the priests and vast numbers acquiring the
knowledge of its secrets without initiation, it became evident that it
was but a question of time when there would be no respectable element
