another. When they are piled up in heaps around him, he looks at them
without pleasure, and leaves them without regret. He knew not that
all the good which they could yield lay in expectation; nor that his
wishes for more would increase faster than toys could be multiplied,
and is unhappy at last for the same reason as at first: his wishes
are ungratified. Still indulging them, and still believing that the
gratification of them will furnish the enjoyment for which he pines,
he goes on, only to be unhappy.

Men are merely taller children. Honor, wealth and splendor are the
toys for which grown children pine; but which, however accumulated,
leave them still disappointed and unhappy. God never designed that
intelligent beings should be satisfied with these enjoyments. By his
wisdom and goodness they were formed to derive their happiness and
virtue.

Moderated desires constitute a character fitted to acquire all the
good which this world can yield. He who is prepared, in whatever
situation he is, therewith to be content, has learned effectually the
science of being happy, and possesses the alchemic stone which will
change every metal into gold. Such a man will smile upon a stool,
while Alexander at his side sits weeping on the throne of the world.

The doctrine of the text teaches you irresistibly that, since you can
not command gratifications, you should command your desires; and that,
as the events of life do not accord with your wishes, your wishes
should accord with them. Multiplied enjoyments fall to but few men,
and are no more rationally expected than the highest prize in a
lottery. But a well-regulated mind, a dignified independence of the
world, and a wise preparation to possess one's soul in patience,
whatever circumstances may exist, is in the power of every man, and is
greater wealth than that of both Indies, and greater honor than Caesar
ever required.

Thirdly. As your course and your success through life are not under
your control, you are strongly urged to commit yourselves to God, who
can control both.

That you can not direct your course through the world, that your best
concerted plans will often fail, that your sanguine expectations will
be disappointed, and that your fondest worldly wishes will terminate
in mortification can not admit of a momentary doubt. That God can
direct you, that He actually controls all your concerns, and that,
if you commit yourselves to His care, He will direct you kindly and
safely, can be doubted only of choice. Why, then, do you hesitate to
yield yourselves and your interests to the guidance of your Maker?
There are two reasons which appear especially to govern mankind in
this important concern; they do not and will not realize the agency of
God in their affairs; and they do not choose to have them directed
as they imagine He will direct them. The former is the result of
stupidity; the latter, of impiety. Both are foolish in the extreme,
and not less sinful than foolish.

The infinitely wise, great and glorious benefactor of the universe
has offered to take men by the hand, lead them through the journey of
life, and conduct them to His own house in the heavens. The proof of
His sincerity in making this offer has been already produced. He has
given His own Son to live, and die, and rise, and reign, and intercede
for our race. "Herein is love," if there ever was love; "not that we
have loved him, but that he has loved us." That He, who has done this,
should not be sincere is impossible. St. Paul, therefore, triumphantly
asks what none can answer: "He, that spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely
give us all things?" Trust, then, His word with undoubting confidence;
take His hand with humble gratitude, and with all thy heart obey His
voice, which you will everywhere hear, saying, "this is the way, walk
ye therein." In sickness and in health, by night and by day, at home
and in crowds, He will watch over you with tenderness inexpressible.
He will make you lie down in green pastures, lead you beside the still
waters and guide you in paths of righteousness, for His name's sake.
He will prepare a table before you in the presence of your enemies,
and cause your cup to run over with blessings. When you pass through
the waters of affliction He will be with you, and through the rivers
they shall not overflow you. When you walk through the fire, you shall
not be burned; neither shall the flame kindle on you. From their
native heavens He will commission those charming twin sisters,
goodness and mercy, to descend and "follow you all your days."

But if you wish God to be your guide and your friend, you must conform
to his pleasure. Certainly you can not wonder that the infinitely Wise
should prefer His own wisdom to yours, and that he should choose for
His children their allotments, rather than leave them to choose for
themselves. That part of His pleasure, which you are to obey, is all
summed up in the single word duty, and it is perfectly disclosed in
the Scriptures. The whole scheme is so formed as to be plain, easy,
profitable, and delightful; profitable in hand, delightful in the
possession. Every part and precept of the whole is calculated for this
end, and will make you only wise, good, and happy.

Life has been often styled an ocean, and our progress through it a
voyage. The ocean is tempestuous and billowy, overspread by a cloudy
sky, and fraught beneath with shelves and quicksands. The voyage
is eventful beyond comprehension, and at the same time full of
uncertainty, and replete with danger. Every adventurer needs to be
well prepared for whatever may befall him, and well secured against
the manifold hazards of losing his course, sinking in the abyss, or of
being wrecked against the shore.

These evils have all existed at all times. The present, and that
part of the past which is known to you by experience, has seen them
multiplied beyond example. It has seen the ancient and acknowledged
standards of thinking violently thrown down. Religion, morals,
government, and the estimate formed by man of crimes and virtues, and
of all the means of usefulness and enjoyment, have been questioned,
attacked, and in various places, and with respect to millions of
the human race, finally overthrown. A licentiousness of opinion and
conduct, daring, outrageous, and rending asunder every bond formed by
God or man, has taken place of former good sense and sound morals, and
has long threatened the destruction of human good. Industry, cunning,
and fraud have toiled with unrivaled exertions to convert man into
a savage and the world into a desert. A wretched and hypocritical
philanthropy, also, not less mischievous, has stalked forth as the
companion of these ravages: a philanthropy born in a dream, bred in a
hovel, and living only in professions. This guardian genius of human
interests, this friend of human rights, this redresser of human
wrongs, is yet without a heart to feel, and without a hand to bless.
But she is well furnished with lungs, with eyes, and a tongue. She can
talk, and sigh, and weep at pleasure, but can neither pity nor give.
The objects of her attachment are either knaves and villains at home,
or unknown sufferers beyond her reach abroad. To the former, she
ministers the sword and the dagger, that they may fight their way into
place, and power, and profit. At the latter she only looks through a
telescope of fancy, as an astronomer searches for stars invisible
to the eye. To every real object of charity within her reach she
complacently says, "Be thou warmed, and be thou filled; depart in
peace."

By the daring spirit, the vigorous efforts, and the ingenious cunning
so industriously exerted on the one hand, and the smooth and gentle
benevolence so softly profest on the other, multitudes have been,
and you easily may be, destroyed. The mischief has indeed been met,
resisted, and overcome; but it has the heads and the lives of the
hydra, and its wounds, which at times have seemed deadly, are much
more readily healed than any good man could wish, than any sober man
could expect. Hope not to escape the assaults of this enemy: To feel
that you are in danger will ever be a preparation for your safety. But
it will be only such a preparation; your deliverance must ultimately
and only flow from your Maker. Resolve, then, to commit yourselves
to Him with a cordial reliance on His wisdom, power, and protection.
Consider how much you have at stake, that you are bound to eternity,
that your existence will be immortal, and that you will either rise to
endless glory or be lost in absolute perdition. Heaven is your proper
home. The path, which I have recommended to you, will conduct you
safely and certainly to that happy world. Fill up life, therefore,
with obedience to God, with faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and
repentance unto life, the obedience to the two great commands of the
gospel, with supreme love to God and universal good-will to men, the
obedience to the two great commands of the law. On all your sincere
endeavors to honor Him, and befriend your fellow men, He will smile;
every virtuous attempt He will bless; every act of obedience He will
reward. Life in this manner will be pleasant amid all its sorrows; and
beams of hope will continually shine through the gloom, by which it
is so often overcast. Virtue, the seed that can not die, planted from
heaven, and cultivated by the divine hand, will grow up in your hearts
with increasing vigor, and blossom in your lives with supernal beauty.
Your path will be that of the just, and will gloriously resemble the
dawning light, "which shines brighter and brighter, to the perfect
day." Peace will take you by the hand, and offer herself as the
constant and delightful companion of your progress. Hope will walk
before you, and with an unerring finger point out your course; and
joy, at the end of the journey, will open her arms to receive you. You
will wait on the Lord, and renew your strength; will mount up with
wings as eagles; will run, and not be weary; will walk, and not faint.




ROBERT HALL

MARKS OF LOVE TO GOD

BIOGRAPHICAL NOTE


Robert Hall, Baptist divine, was born at Arnesby, near Leicester,
England, in 1764. Destined for the ministry, he was educated at the
Baptist Academy at Bristol, and preached for the first time in
1779. In 1783 he began his ministry in Bristol and drew crowded
congregations of all classes. The tradition of Hall's pupit oratory
has secured his lasting fame. Many minds of a high order were
fascinated by his eloquence, and his conversation was brilliant.
His treatment of religious topics had the rare merit of commending
evangelical doctrine to people of taste. Dugald Stewart declares that
his writings and public utterances exhibited the English language in
its perfection. He died in 1831.




ROBERT HALL

1764--1831

MARKS OF LOVE TO GOD

_But I know you, that ye have not the love of God in you._--John v.,
42.


The persons whom our Lord addrest in these words made a high
profession of religion, valued themselves upon their peculiar
opportunities of knowing the true God and His will, and proclaimed
themselves as the Israel and the temple of the Lord, while they
despised the surrounding pagans as those who were strangers to the
divine law. Yet the self-complacent Pharisees of our Savior's age were
as far from the love of God, he assures them in the text, as any of
those who had never heard of His name. In this respect, many of "the
first were last, and the last first." The rejection of the gospel
evinces a hardness of heart which is decisive against the character;
and, in the case of the Pharisees, it gave ample evidence that they
possest no love of God. Had they really known God, as our Lord argues,
they would have known Himself to be sent by God: whereas, in proving
the bitter enemies of Christ, they proved that they were in a state of
enmity against God. By parity of reason, we, my brethren, who know God
and His Word in the way of Christian profession, ought not to take it
for granted that we possess the love of God, and are in the way of
eternal life: the same self-delusion may overtake us also; and similar
admonitions may be no less necessary to many present, than to the
Pharisees of old. Suffer then, my brethren, the word of exhortation,
while I invite each individual seriously to consider this subject,
with a view to the discovery of his real character.

In proceeding to lay down certain marks of grace, let it be premised,
that either these marks partake of the nature of true religion, or
they do not. If they do, they must be identified with it, and here the
mark is the thing: if they do not partake of its nature, some of
them may exist as indications where genuine religion is not. It is
necessary, then, that we combine a variety of particular signs of
grace: any one taken by itself, may, or may not, exist, without true
religion; but where many are combined, no just doubt can remain.

Whether you have the love of God in your soul presents a most
critical subject of inquiry; since the love of God will be
acknowledged by all to be the great, the essential, principle of
true religion. The simple question, then, to which I would call your
attention, is this: "Am I, or am I not, a sincere lover of the Author
of my being?"

In endeavoring to assist you in the decision of this momentous
question, as it respects yourselves. I shall entreat your attention
while I suggest a variety of marks which indicate love to God; and
supposing the conviction produced by the statement to be, that you
have not the love of God, I shall point out the proper improvement of
such a conviction.

In suggesting various marks by which you may ascertain whether you
love God or not, I would mention the general bent and turn of your
thoughts, when not under the immediate control of circumstances; for
these, you are aware, give a new and peculiar bias to our thoughts,
and stamp them with an impress of their own. There is an infinite
variety of thoughts continually passing through the mind of every
individual: of these, some are thrown up by occasions; but others, and
often the greater part, follow the habitual train of our associations.
It is not to thoughts of the former kind that I refer; it is to those
of the latter class--those involuntary thoughts which spring up of
themselves in the mind of every person: it is these, not the former,
that afford clear indication of the general temper and disposition.
The question I would propose to you is, What is the bent of your
thoughts when, disengaged from the influence of any particular
occurrence, you are left to yourselves, in the intervals of retirement
and tranquillity, in the silence of the midnight watches, and, in
short, whenever your mind is left free to its own spontaneous musings?
Are the thoughts most familiar to your mind, at such times, thoughts
of God and the things of God--or are they thoughts that turn upon the
present world and its transient concerns? Are they confined, for the
most part, within the narrow circle of time and sense; or do they make
frequent and large excursions into the spiritual and eternal world?
The answer to this question will go far to decide whether you have, or
have not, the love of God. It is impossible that such an object as the
divine Being should be absent long from your thoughts; impossible
that His remembrance should long remain merged in the stream of other
imaginations; unless you are supposed chargeable with a decided
indifference to divine things! Unless you are destitute of love to God
you can never be so utterly uncongenial in sentiment and feeling with
the psalmist, when he says, "My mouth shall praise thee with joyful
lips, while I meditate upon thee in the night watches." "How precious
are thy thoughts unto me, O God!" When that man of God gazed upon the
starry heavens, his mind was not merely wrought into astonishment at
the physical energy there displayed; he was still more deeply lost in
grateful admiration of the mercy of Providence as manifested to man--a
sinful child of dust, and yet visited by God in the midst of so
magnificent a universe! But when day passes after day, and night after
night, without any serious thoughts of God, it is plain that He is not
the home of your mind, not your portion, center, and resting-place:
and if this is the case, it is equally plain that you are not in a
state of acceptance with Him; since nothing can be more certain than
that, as our thoughts are, such must be our character. I do not ask
what are your thoughts at particular times, or under the influence
of some particular event: there may be little difference, on some
occasions, between those who remember, and those who neglect, God
habitually. The charge against the ungodly is, that "God is not in all
their thoughts." If there are any here who feel this charge as bearing
against themselves, let them take that solemn warning given by God
himself at the close of the fiftieth psalm, "Oh, consider this, ye
that forget God, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to
deliver you!"

Let me request you to consider seriously how you stand disposed to the
exercises of religion. If God is the object of your love, you will
gladly avail yourselves of the most favorable opportunities of
cultivating a closer friendship with the Father of your spirits: on
the contrary, he who feels no regard for these opportunities, proves
that he has no love to God, and will never be able to establish the
conviction that God is his friend. Wherever there exists a sincere
friendship, opportunities of cultivating it are gladly embraced, and
the opposite privations are regretted. Where a habitual neglect of
sacred exercises prevails it must be interpreted as if it said, like
those whom the prophet describes, "Cause the Holy One of Israel to
cease from amongst us. Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge
of thy way!" If your closets seldom witness your private devotions,
if your moments in retirement are languid and uninteresting--your
religion can have no hold on your heart; and the reason why your
religion has no hold on your heart is because you have no love of God.
There are some whose religion sits easy and delightful upon them; its
acts and functions are free and lively: there are others who seem to
bear their religion as a burden, to drag their duties as a chain--as
no vital part of themselves, but rather a cumbrous appendage: this is
a decisive and melancholy symptom of a heart alienated from God. There
is no genuine religion, no real contact of the heart with the best of
beings, unless it makes us continually resort to Him as our chief joy.
The psalmist is always expressing his fervent desires after God: after
the light of the divine countenance, and the sense of the divine
favor: but do you suppose such desires peculiar to the state of
believers under the Old Testament? No, my brethren; there exist more
abundant reasons than ever, since the gospel of Christ has been
displayed in all the glorious fulness of its blessings, why our souls
should be inflamed with such feelings as those which inspired
the psalmist, when he exclaimed, "As the hart panteth for the
water-brooks, so longeth my soul after thee, O God!"

If you would ascertain whether you love God, consider how you stand
affected toward the Word of God. We can entertain no just thoughts of
God, but such as we derive from His own Word: we can acquire no true
knowledge of God, nor cherish any suitable affections toward Him,
unless they are such as His own revelation authorizes. Otherwise we
must suppose that revelation insufficient for its specific purposes,
and set the means against the end. All, therefore, who sincerely love
God, are students of His Word; they here, also accord in soul with the
psalmist, and like him, can say, "O how I love thy word! in it is my
meditation all the day:" they eat it as food for their souls, and find
it sweeter than honey. They go to it as to an inexhaustible fountain,
and drink from it streams of sacred light and joy. A neglected Bible
is too unambiguous a sign of an unsanctified heart; since that blest
book can not fail to attract every one that loves its divine Author.
How is it possible to delight in God, and yet neglect that Word which
alone reveals Him in His true and glorious character--alone discovers
the way by which He comes into unison with us, and condescends to
pardon us, to love us, and to guide us through all this mysterious
state of being? It is observable that the only persons who are
inattentive to their own sacred books are to be found among
Christians. Mohammedans commit large portions of the Koran to memory;
the Jews regard the Old Testament with reverence; the Hindu Brahmans
are enthusiastically attached to their Shastra; while Christians alone
neglect their Bible. And the reason is, that the Scriptures are so
much more spiritual than the religious books received by others; they
afford so little scope for mere amusement or self-complacency; they
place the reader alone with God; they withdraw him from the things
that are seen and temporal, and fix him among the things that are
unseen and eternal; they disclose to his view at once the secret evils
of his own condition, and the awful purity of that Being with whom he
has to do. No wonder the ungodly man hates their light, neither comes
to their light, but retires from it farther and farther into the
shades of guilty ignorance. How melancholy the infatuation of such a
character!

Estimate your character in respect to your love of God, by reflecting,
with what sentiments you regard the people of God. God has a people
peculiarly His own: they are not of that world to which they outwardly
belong--not conformed to it in the spirit of their mind; they stand
apart, many of them at least, in conspicuous conformity to Jesus
Christ, and in earnest expectation of the glory which He had promised.
How, then, do you regard these decided followers of God? Do you shun
their society with aversion and secret shame; or do you enjoy
their communion as one of the most delightful among your Christian
privileges? Are you content merely to be the companion of those who
"have a name to live, but are dead": or can you say with the psalmist,
"My delight is in the excellent of the earth"? or, with the beloved
disciple, "We know that we have passed from death unto life, because
we love the brethren"? for, as he adds, "He that loveth him that
begot, loveth him that is begotten"; if you do not love the image
which you have seen, how can you love the unseen original? If the
features of holiness and grace in the creature are not attractive to
your view, how can your affections rise to the perfect essence? How
can you ascend to the very sun itself, when you can not enjoy even the
faint reflection of its glory? He who knew the heart, could alone say
to those around Him, "I know you, that ye have not the love of God
in you": but tho none can address you now in the same tone of divine
authority, yet we may hear it uttered by a voice--the voice of your
own conscience: you may know, without any perturbations of hope or
fear, by the spiritual insensibility and inaction of your soul--by
this you may know, with equal certainty as by a voice from heaven,
that you have not the love of God in you.

Consider the disposition you entertain toward the person and office of
the Son of God. "If ye had loved the Father, ye would have loved me
also," was the constant argument of Jesus Christ to those Pharisees
whom He addresses in the text For Jesus Christ is the express image of
God: the effulgence of the divine character is attempered in Him, to
suit the views of sinful humanity. In the life of Jesus Christ we see
how the divine Being conducts Himself in human form and in our own
circumstances: we behold how He bears all the sorrows, and passes
through all the temptations, of flesh and blood. Such, indeed, is the
identity, so perfect the oneness of character, between the man Christ
Jesus and the divine Being--that our Savior expressly assures us, "He
that hath seen me, hath seen the Father; I and my Father are one." The
purpose for which God was manifested in the flesh was not to reveal
high speculations concerning the nature of the Deity: it was to bear
our sorrows, and to die for our sins. But can you contemplate Him,
thus stooping to your condition, thus mingling with every interest of
your own, and not be moved by such a spectacle?--not be attracted,
fixt, filled with grateful astonishment and devotion--crucified, as
it were, on the cross of Christ, to the flesh, and to the world? What
mark, then, of our possessing no love of God can equal this, that we
are without love to Jesus Christ?--that neither the visibility of His
divine excellence, nor His participation of all our human sufferings,
can reach our hearts and command our affections?

In examining whether you love God, examine how you are affected by His
benefits. These are so numerous and so distinguished that they
ought to excite our most ardent gratitude: night and day they are
experienced by us; they pervade every moment of our being. We know
that favors from an enemy derive a taint from the hands through which
they are received, and excite alienation rather than attachment: but
the kindness of a friend, by constantly reminding us of himself,
endears that friend more and more to our hearts; and thus, he that has
no love to God receives all His favors without the least attraction
toward their Author, whom he regards rather as an enemy than as a
friend. But the Christian feels his love of God excited by every fresh
goodness. The mercies of God have accompanied you through every
stage of your journey; and they are exhibited to you in His word as
stretching through a vast eternity. Are these the only benefits you
can receive without gratitude, and suffer to pass unregarded How,
then, can any love of God dwell in your bosom?

Consider, in the next place, in what manner you are imprest by
the sense of your sins. The question is not whether you have any
sins,--none can admit a doubt on this point; the only inquiry is, how
you are affected by those sins? Are they remembered by you with a
sentiment of tender regret, of deep confusion and humiliation, that
you should ever have so requited such infinite goodness? And is this
sentiment combined with a sacred resolution to go and sin no more,--to
devote yourself to the service of your divine Benefactor? If you
can live without an habitual sense of penitential tenderness and
reverential fear, be assured you can not love God; you have no
experience of those Scripture declarations: "They shall fear the Lord
and his goodness in the latter days;" "There is forgiveness with thee,
that thou mayst be feared;" you know not that "the goodness of God
leadeth to repentence." If the mind is softened by the love of God,
all His favors serve to inflame its gratitude, and confirm its
devotion to His will: but he who has no love of God in his soul,
thinks of nothing but how he may escape from God's hand, and selfishly
devours all His favors, without an emotion of gratitude to the Giver.

Finally, let me remind you to consider how you are affected to the
present world. If you could only be exempt from its afflictions, would
you wish it to be your lasting home? If you could surround yourself
with all its advantages and enjoyments, would you be content to dwell
in it forever? Yet you know that it is a place of separation and exile
from the divine majesty; that it is a scene of darkness, in comparison
with heaven, very faintly illuminated with the beams of His distant
glory; that its inhabitant is constrained to say, "I have heard
of thee by the hearing of the ear, but mine eye hath not yet seen
thee";--while heaven is the proper dwelling-place of God and His
people! Could you then consent to remain here always, without ever
seeing as you are seen--seeing light in His light--without ever
beholding His glory; without ever drinking at the fountain,
and basking in that presence which is fulness of joy, and
life forevermore? always to remain immersed in the shadows of
time--entombed in its corruptible possessions? never to ascend up on
high to God and Christ and the glories of the eternal world? If such
is the state of your spirit, you want the essential principle of a
Christian--you want the love of God. The genuine Christian, the lover
of God, is certain to feel himself a "stranger on the earth." No
splendor, no emolument of this world,--not all the fascinations of
sensual pleasure,--can detain his heart below the skies, or keep him
from sympathizing with the sentiment of the psalmist: "As for me, I
shall behold thy face in righteousness; I shall be satisfied when I
wake in thy likeness." I do not ask whether you have, at present, "a
desire to depart": perhaps you may not be as yet sufficiently prepared
and established to entertain so exalted a desire; but still, if you
have received a new heart, you will deprecate nothing so much as
having your portion in this life,--as having your eternal abode on
earth. It is the character of faith to dwell much in eternity: the
apostle says, in the name of all real believers, "We look not at the
things that are seen, but the things that are not seen; for the things
that are seen are temporal, but the things that are not seen are
eternal."

And now, my brethren, supposing the preceding remarks to have produced
in any of you the conviction that you have not the love of God in you,
permit me very briefly to point out the proper improvement of such a
conviction.

First, it should be accompanied with deep humiliation. If you labored
under the privation of some bodily organ, requisite to the discharge
of an animal function, you would feel it as in some degree a
humiliating circumstance; but what would be any defect of this kind,
however serious, in comparison with that great want under which you
labor--the want of piety, the calamity of a soul estranged from the
love of God! What are the other subjects of humiliation compared with
this--a moral fall, a spiritual death in sin: and this, unless it be
removed, the sure precursor of the second death--eternal ruin! "This
is a lamentation indeed, and it shall be for a lamentation."

Suppose the children of a family, reared and provided for by the most
affectionate of parents, to rise up in rebellion against their father,
and cast off all the feelings of filial tenderness and respect; would
any qualities those children might possess, any appearance of
virtue they might exhibit in other respects, compensate for such
an unnatural, such an awful deformity of character? Transfer this
representation to your conduct in relation to God: "If I," says He,
"am a father, where is my fear? if I am a master, where is my honor?"
"Hear, O heavens, and give ear, O earth! I have nourished and brought
up children, and they have rebelled against me: the ox knoweth his
owner, and the ass his master's crib: but Israel doth not know, my
people doth not consider."

And let your humiliation be accompanied with concern and alarm. To be
alienated from the great Origin of being; to be severed, or to sever
yourself from the essential Author and element of all felicity, must
be a calmity which none can understand, an infinite wo which none can
measure or conceive. If the stream is cut off from the fountain, it
soon ceases to flow, and its waters are dissipated in the air: and
if the soul is cut off from God, it dies! Its vital contact with
God,--its spiritual union with the Father of spirits through the blest
Mediator, is the only life and beauty of the immortal soul. All,
without this, are dead--"dead in trespasses and sins"! A living
death--a state of restless wanderings, and unsatisfied desires! What
a condition theirs! And, oh! what a prospect for such, when they look
beyond this world! who will give them a welcome when they enter an
eternal state? What reception will they meet with, and where? What
consolation amid their losses and their sufferings, but that of the
fellow-sufferers plunged in the same abyss of ruin? Impenitent sinners
are allied to evil spirits, they have an affinity with the kingdom
of darkness; and when they die, they are emphatically said to "go to
their own place"!

This is an awful state for any to be in at present; but, blest be God,
it is not yet a hopeless situation. Let no person say, "I find by what
I have heard, that I do not love God, and therefore I can entertain
no hope." There is a way of return and recovery open to all. Jesus
Christ, my dear brethren, proclaims to you all, "I am the way. No man
