_lives_, not dollars.

And some too there will be, and not few in numbers, who have given of
their strength in business pursuits to the making of money, as the Spirit
has guided them, or to whom it has been left in trust by others, and who
have been steadily investing the wealth that has come in the _lives of
men_. Some folks ought to be getting better acquainted at the foreign
exchange desk in the banks where this sort of business is done.

There are a good many banks that make a specialty of this sort of foreign
exchange. The great Church Boards, the International Committee of the
Young Men's Christian Associations, the American Committee of the Young
Women's Christian Associations, the individual churches and associations,
and the Bible Societies are a few of the better known of the banks having
a large exchange business of this sort.

Their methods of business have been very thoroughly systematized for the
convenience of investors. In almost every pew of a church may be found
little deposit envelopes, mediums of exchange. There are weekly
opportunities for making deposits. And the handling of the money has been
so thoroughly systematized, too, that, as a rule, a very small proportion
is taken up in keeping the banks running, the great bulk passing directly
out to the designated place of use.



Gold-Exchanged Lives.


Jesus says that our money in its new form will be waiting our arrival on
the other side. The men and women into whose lives we have been
exchanging it will be eagerly looking for us as the ship pulls into port.
When you get through with your life down here--it will be a long life, I
hope--you will go up and into the homeland. And--I suppose--at the first
you will have eyes and heart for nobody but _Jesus_. My mother used to say
to me, "I have thought that I would like to have a talk with Moses, and
with Elijah, and with John and Paul, but"--with the quick tears of deepest
emotion filling her dark eyes--"I have never been able in my thinking of
it, _to get past Jesus yet_." Even so it will be, no doubt, with all of
us.

But this word of Jesus' own suggests that as you go in you will find some
one coming eagerly up with outstretched hands and such a glad face to meet
you. And he will say, "Oh! I have been looking forward so eagerly to
meeting you; welcome." And you will say, "Well, this is very kind of you.
But, pardon me, I can't just recall your face. Where was it I knew you? in
New York?"

And he will say, with a flush of earnest feeling, "Oh, no! I never saw New
York. And I never saw you before. My home was over in the heart of China.
Our lives were very miserable there. There was a great tugging at my heart
that nothing seemed ever to ease. But one day a stranger came into our
village, with some little books, and as we gathered about him he talked
to us about _Jesus_, and you can never know how that story of Jesus came
to me, and how much it meant. My whole life was changed, and my home and
our village were changed. And since coming up here I have learned that it
was _through you_ that that man came, and I want to thank you. Next to
Jesus I think you're the best friend I have."

And you will be thinking, "I'm so glad I gave that money. I had to pinch
quite a bit, but that's nothing compared to the joy of this." And as that
is flashing swiftly through your thought, here is somebody else eagerly
pressing up, with the same word of welcome, and a face with such a glad
light the sight of which is alone quite enough to even up any sacrifice.
And you will say maybe, "And where did I meet you? are you from China,
too?"

No, this one is from a western frontier settlement where the home
missionary had gone, and now this one elbowing by her with the same
lightened face is from the mountain section of the South. And so they come
eagerly up from many places where you have never been in person but where
you have gone potentially through your money. That is what Jesus means.
Make to yourselves friends by means of money which the unrighteous world
reckons riches, that when it fails they may welcome you eagerly into the
homeland. Exchange your gold into lives.



Spirit Alchemy.


There is a divine alchemy whereby money may be transmuted into redeemed,
purified, uplifted lives. There is another alchemy whereby men, made of
finest gold in the image of God, may be transmuted into the basest metals.
When Moses coming down from the presence of God saw the shocking sight of
the people worshiping a calf made of gold, he reproached Aaron for
permitting it. Do you remember Aaron's answer? He had the gift of speech,
you remember, an easy, smooth way of explaining things. Yet in the light
of the recited facts the answer seems rather lame. It needs a crutch to
steady it up. He said, that he had put in the gold and--"_there came out
this calf_."

A great many men might fairly make use of Aaron's explanation. They have
put into the crucible of life their gold, themselves, God's finest gold
intrusted to their hands. And under their manipulation what has come out
is as a vealy, callow calf, a bull calf at that too, scrub stock, fit only
for the ax.

There is the other, the divine alchemy whereby a man may put in the gold
intrusted to his handling and there shall come out _lives_, sweet, strong,
fragrant lives, made anew in the image of their Maker.



The Fragrance of the Life in the Gift.


It is a part of the peculiar potent value of money that there can be a
practical transfer of personality through its use. For instance I have a
friend whose heart burned to go to a foreign mission field for service
there. But the physician said it would not be wise for her to go. Yielding
to his expert judgment, she still yearned to be of service there. In the
providence of God she became intrusted with large wealth. And so she
arranged to have a man go in her stead to China, she caring for all the
expense involved, while he was so left wholly free for the service.

Tell me, was that not a practical transfer of her personality to the point
of service where he is engaged? Then she arranged for another, and
another, and yet others. It is not only a transfer of personality in
practical results, but a duplication of personality, and a triplication,
and more. For she is busy in her home circle, while her representatives
are busy elsewhere through the influence of her action.

A young woman, graduate of a western college, developed much talent in
speaking to other young women of the Christian life. Her public service
was much blessed in the lives of large numbers of women. She had no
wealth, but was dependent upon her efforts for a livelihood. Another young
woman, in the East, came under the warm spell of her personality and
speech. And her life was blessedly revolutionized by that spell. Her own
heart burned to be doing something of the sort for her sisters out over
the land.

But she seemed not to have gifts of that kind. Yet she had been intrusted
with large means. And so she said to her new friend whom God had so
graciously blessed to her own life, "Let us be partners together. I will
so gladly give what I have, that you may be wholly free to give to others
what you have brought to me." And so it was arranged. And the one woman
gives of the gold of her inheritance while the other gives her life and
her special gift. The one in her home pays and prays. The other goes
constantly here and there, and lives are ever transformed through the
Spirit of God resting upon her.

Is not that a practical transfer of personality? and duplication of
personality, too? Is not this young woman whose own actual personality
remains, in the gracious providence of God, in her home, is she not going
potentially about from place to place winning her sisters up to the
highlands of the best living? It surely is so.

And these two are but illustrations of the many who have come to
understand Jesus' law for the right use of money. And there are to be many
more as the days go by, doing just that sort of thing. And let those of us
who have not been intrusted either with the large amount of money, or
with the large power to earn, remember that the _amount_ involved does not
affect the law of results. All who have felt the blessed contagion of the
Master's example will give freely of what is in store, whether much or
little.

Those whose giving is in smaller amounts by our bulky way of reckoning
values, may still be making that same blessed transfer and doubling their
own capacity for service through the agency of their gold. For the gold
given represents the life that gives. And the gift takes on the quality
and power and fragrance of the life that gives it. I have sometimes
thought that there seems to be a peculiar potency in the smaller gifts,
that represent as they so often do the greatest, most devoted sacrifice.
Could we trace the intricate crossings of the lines of influence in the
web of life, we would be awed many times at the potency of the giving that
is small in amount but tinted red with the life-blood of sacrifice.

It should be remembered that through this strange stuff called money there
is a double transfer of personality going on all the time. Men are
constantly transferring themselves into gold, in a perfectly proper way. A
man gives his labor, and at the end of a specified period he gets a
certain amount of money. That money represents himself. It is himself for
that length of time. That is the first transfer of manhood in money. It is
going on all the time. It is necessarily so, for so we get our food, and
clothing, and home.

Then there is the re-transfer of this money into some other form. As we
choose to use this money, so we are re-transferring ourselves into what
forms we will. The money is the transition state of ourselves. We pass
through it out into the exchange of life. We reveal ourselves in the way
we pass it out. In no way does a man reveal the true inner self more. And
if perchance we let it, or some of it, lie and gather rust, there we are,
some part of us being covered with rust.



Sacrifice Hallows and Increases the Gift.


But there is more yet to be said here. The great blending of the spirit
forces with gold comes out wondrously in this: that _sacrifice hallows
what it touches_. And under its hallowing touch values increase by long
leaps and big bounds. Here is a fine opportunity for those who would
increase the value of gifts that seem small in amount. Without stopping
now for the philosophy of it, this is the tremendous fact.

Perhaps the annual foreign missionary offering is being taken up in your
church. The pastor has preached a special sermon, and it has caught fire
within you. You find yourself thinking as he preaches, and during the
prayer following, "I believe I can easily make it fifty dollars this year.
I gave thirty-five last time." You want to be careful _not_ to make it
fifty dollars, because you can do that _easily_. If you are shrewd to have
your money count the most, you will pinch a bit somewhere and make it
sixty-two fifty. For the extra amount that you pinch to give will hallow
the original sum and increase its practical value enormously. Sacrifice
hallows what it touches, and the hallowing touch acts in geometrical
proportion upon the value of the gift.

Better turn your gown, and readjust your hat, for the sacrifice involved
will give a new beauty to the spirit looking out through your face. And
real folks will not be able to get past the beauty of face to the
incidentals of your apparel. Wear your derby another season, and get your
shoes half-soled, and some deft mending done. Let that extra horse go to
other buyers, and the automobile be picked up by somebody who has not yet
mined any of the fine gold of sacrifice. The coming rainy day will never
be able to use up all that some folks are salting down for it.

And yet some folks, many folks, should be spending more on their bodies
and giving less. The giving should never intrench upon the strength of
one's personality. That is a treasure to be sacredly guarded. All the
power of one's life, in serving, in giving, in praying, in speaking, and
in personal contact, the power of all roots down in the personality. The
safe rule, and the only safe rule, is to decide such questions with the
knee-joint bent, and the door shut, and the spirit willing. A strong will
played upon by the Holy Spirit, mellowed by emotions that have been moved
by the need, and held steady by a disciplined judgment must attend to
loosening the purse-strings.

But the one fact being emphasized here just now is that the element of
sacrifice must be in the giving if it is to be effective. Sacrifice was
the dominant factor in _God's_ giving of His Son, real sacrifice. It was
dominant in _Jesus'_ giving of His own self and His life, keen cutting
sacrifice. Who will follow in _their_ train? Whoever will, will be getting
a post-graduate course in financiering and in multiplying of values. He
will be astonished at the results working out, and most astonished at the
final disclosures.

Keeping out of circulation more than one's wants, properly adjusted, call
for is poor financiering. For that which is held back is not earning
anything. All beyond one's needs should be out in circulation for the
Master in His campaign for a world. Yet nowhere is there finer chance or
greater need for the play of keen judgment than in deciding that question
of need. Mistakes are made on both sides. It looks very much as though the
most serious mistakes are being made on the side of too little sacrifice
or none. Yet clearly some serious mistakes are made on the other side
too. But no one may criticise another. Each must decide for himself. In
the judgment of charity we are to presume that each is doing what he
thinks right and best. We are, none of us, the keeper of our brother's
purse.



A Living Sacrifice.


There is a simple story told that contains its truth in its very
naturalness and simplicity. It reveals a bit of the real life ever going
on all around us unnoticed. A minister in a certain small town in an
eastern state received from the home mission board of his church a letter
asking for a special offering for a needy field in the West. With the
letter was literature setting forth the need. The call appealed to him and
with good heart he prepared a special sermon, calling the attention of his
people to the great need.

Sabbath morning came and he preached the sermon. But somehow it did not
just seem to hook in. That banker down there on the left looked listless,
and yawned a couple of times behind his hand. And the merchant over on the
right, who could give freely, examined his watch secretly more than once.
And so it was with a little tinge of discouragement insistently creeping
into his spirit that he finished, and sat down. And he remained with head
bowed in prayer that the results might prove better than seemed likely,
while the church officers passed down the aisles with the collection
plates.

Meanwhile something unseen by human eye was going on in the very last pew.
Back there, sitting alone, was a little girl of a poor family. She had met
with a misfortune which left her crippled. And her whole life seemed so
dark and hopeless. But some kind friends in the church, pitying her
condition, had made up a small fund and bought her a pair of crutches. And
these had seemed to transform her completely. She went about her rounds
always as cheery and bright as a bit of sunshine.

She had listened to the sermon, and her heart had been strangely warmed by
the preacher's story of need. And as he was finishing she was thinking,
"How I wish I might give something. But I haven't anything to give, not
even a copper left." And a very soft voice within seemed to say very
softly, but very distinctly, "There are your crutches." "Oh," she gasped
to herself as though it took away her very breath, "my crutches? I
couldn't give my _crutches_; they're my _life_." And that strangely clear
voice went on, so quietly, "Yes--you _could_--and then some one would know
of Jesus--if you did--and that would mean so much to them--He's meant so
much to you--give your crutches." And her breath seemed to fail her at the
thought. And so the little woman had her fight all unseen and unknown by
those in the church. And by and by the victory came. And she sat with a
beautiful light in her tearful eyes, and a smile coming to her lips,
waiting for the plate to get to her pew.

And the man with the plate came down the aisle to the end. It seemed
hardly worth while reaching it into the last pew. Just little Maggie
sitting there alone, with her one foot dangling above the floor. But with
fine courtesy he stopped and passed the plate in. And Maggie in her
childlike simplicity lifted her crutches, and tried rather awkwardly to
put them on the collection plate. Quick as a flash the man caught her
thought, and with a queer lump in his throat reached out and steadied her
strange gift on the plate.

And then he turned back and walked slowly up the aisle toward the pulpit,
carrying the plate in one hand and steadying the crutches on it with the
other. And people commenced to look. And eyes quickly dimmed. Everybody
knew the crutches. _Maggie_--giving her _crutches_! And the banker over
here blew his nose suddenly and reached for his pencil, and the merchant
reached out to stop the man returning up his aisle.

As the pastor stood with his eyesight not very clear to receive the
morning's offering, he said, "Surely our little crippled friend is giving
us a wonderful example." Then the plates were called back toward the
pews. And somebody paid fifty dollars for the crutches, and sent them back
to that end pew. When the offering was counted up it contained several
hundred dollars. And the little girl, crippled in body but not in any
other way, hobbled out of church the happiest little woman in the world.

She had recognized and obeyed the inner voice. That was the simple
explanation of her giving. And her gift, small in itself, _touched with
sacrifice_, became worth several hundred dollars in its earning power. And
the original investment was returned for its usual service. And her gift
has been increasing in its earning power as its recital has reached other
hearts, and the end is not yet. I do not know just where Maggie is now.
But I do know that she will be a greatly surprised woman some day when she
finds out what God has done with her sacrifice-hallowed gift. She
recognized and obeyed the inner Voice. That is the one law of giving, as
of all living.




Worry: A Hindrance to Service.



    Fear Not.
    A Fence of Trust.
    A Lord of the Harvest.
    Do Your Best--Leave the Rest.
    Anxious for Nothing.
    Thankful for Anything.
    Prayerful about Everything.
    A Steamer Chair for His Friend.
    He Has You on His Heart.
    Paul's Prison Psalm.
    He Touched Her Hand.




Worry: A Hindrance to Service.

(Psalm xxxvii:1-11; Matthew vi:19-34, Philippians iv:6-7. American
Revision.)



Fear Not.


There is nothing commoner than worry. Everybody seems to worry. Men worry.
Women worry. It is commonly supposed that women worry more than men. I
doubt it. After watching both pretty closely under all sorts of
circumstances I doubt it. Yet if it be true that woman does worry the
more, I think it is because, being more sensitively organized, she is more
keenly alive to the issues involved and to the responsibilities of life.
Poor people worry. Those with enough money to be easy worry. And those
with the largest wealth seem to worry too. Busy folks worry. And so do the
idle. The cultured and scholarly touch elbows with the ignorant here.

Americans are supposed to be specialists in worrying. The name
Americanitis has been given to a certain run-down condition of the nerves.
Well, we may possibly have set the pace, and may be making new records.
But certainly there are plenty of pushing followers. Our Canadian
neighbors seem not to be wholly strangers to worry. Nor our British and
Dutch forbears. The European continentals, and those of the East nearer
and farther off seem to be good or bad at worrying. It is a characteristic
of the race everywhere, the difference being merely in the degree. It
seems inbred in man.

There are two "don't-worry" chapters in this old Bible, one in the Old
Testament and one in the New. In the Old Testament is the Thirty-seventh
Psalm with its oft-repeated "fret not." The word under that English phrase
"fret not" is significant. It is so blunt as to sound almost like a bit of
American slang. Literally it means "don't get hot." The New Testament has
the sixth chapter of Matthew with Jesus' own words. One should be careful
here to note the better reading of the revision. The old version says
"take no thought," and that has been misunderstood by many who have not
thought about its meaning. The newer translations are truer to the meaning
on Jesus' lips. Do not take _anxious_ thought, "be not anxious." But apart
from these two chapters there is a phrase running through these pages
clear through the whole Book, a phrase shot through, piercing everywhere,
even as the glorious sunlight pierces through the thick cloud and fog. I
mean the phrase "fear not." All worry roots down its tenacious tendrils
in fear.



A Fence of Trust.


It will help to understand just what worry is. It is always an advantage
to get an enemy clearly defined and keep it so, so you can hit it harder,
and make every blow tell on a vital part of its anatomy.

Worry is not concern, but distress of mind. Some one said to me at the
close of a talk on worry, "some folks ought to worry more." Of course he
meant that some people should bear their share of the responsibilities of
life, instead of selfishly and lazily shirking them. There is a proper
concern about matters for which we are responsible. A man never makes a
good speech unless there is a feeling of concern, of apprehension lest
there be failure in that for which he is pleading. A strong sensitive
spirit feels the responsibility and does the best to meet it. Worry is
mental distress. It is sinking under the sense of responsibility. It is
_yielding_ to the fear that there may be failure, instead of gripping the
lines and whip and determining to ride down the chance of its coming.

Sometimes worry is carrying to-morrow's load with to-day's strength;
carrying two days in one. It is moving into to-morrow ahead of time.
There is just one day in the calendar of action; that's to-day. Planning
should include a wide swing of days; wise planning must. But action
belongs to one day only, to-day.

    "Build a little fence of trust
      Around to-day;
    Fill the space with living work
      And therein stay;
    Look not through the sheltering bars
      Upon to-morrow;
    God will help thee bear what comes
      Of joy or sorrow."

    "Live for to-day, to-morrow's sun
      To-morrow's cares will bring to light,
    Go like the infant to thy sleep
      And heaven thy morn shall bless."



A Lord of the Harvest.


Sometimes worry is carrying a load that one should not carry at all. I
think it was Lyman Beecher who said that he got along very comfortably
after he gave up running the universe. Some good earnest people are
greatly concerned about the way things in the world are going, I'm obliged
to confess to some pretty serious blunders there. It seemed to me that
there was so much to be done, so many people needing help, so much of
wrong and sin to fight that I must be ever pushing and never sleeping. I
had to sleep of course; but all my burden, which meant the burden of the
world's need as I saw it, was lugged faithfully to bed every night. There
was a lot of pillow-planning. But I found that the wrinkles grew thick,
and the physical strength gave out, and yet at the end of vigorous
campaigning there _seemed_ about as much left to do as ever.

Then one day my tired eyes lit upon that wondrous phrase, "the lord of the
harvest." It caught fire in my heart at once. "Oh! there is a _Lord_ of
the harvest," I said to myself. I had been forgetting that. He is a Lord,
a masterful one. He has the whole campaign mapped out, and each one's part
in helping mapped out too. And I let the responsibility of the campaign
lie over where it belonged. When night time came I went to bed to sleep.
My pillow was this, "There is a _Lord_ of the harvest."

My keynote came to be _obedience_ to Him. That meant keen ears to hear,
keen judgment to understand, keeping quiet so the sound of His voice would
always be distinctly heard. It meant trusting Him when things didn't seem
to go with a swing. It meant sweet sleep at night, and new strength at the
day's beginning. It did not mean any less work. It did seem to mean less
friction, less dust. Aye, it meant better work, for there was a swing to
it, and a joyous abandon in it, and a rhythm of music with it. And the
undercurrent of thought came to be like this: There is a _Lord_ to the
harvest. He is taking care of things. My part is full, faithful,
intelligent obedience to Him. He is a Master, a masterful One. He is
organizing victory. And the fine tingle of victory was ever in the air.



Do Your Best--Leave the Rest.


I knew a mother one of whose sons was not a Christian man, and not of good
habits. She was a devoted true Christian woman, bearing her part in life's
service with fine faith and a keen sweet spirit. The children were all
Christians but this one, her first-born, the beginning of her strength.
The thought of him troubled her much. She prayed fervently, and used her
best endeavor, and the years grew on without change. And her face showed
the burden upon her fine spirit. We would talk together about her son, and
pray together, but her brow remained clouded.
