appetite. Drink water slowly but don't give your body anything else.
Always keep before yourself the distinction between the regal "I--am--I"
the soul and the carnal, sensating animal known as the body. The great
point of achievement during a fast lies in thinking high thoughts and
forgetting the demands of the flesh. Don't think of your fast. If you
do think say to yourself "this is to develop my will." Breathe plenty of
fresh air. Exercise gently and walk. I have seen educated men afraid to
go out for a walk during a day's religious fast "lest they should feel
hungry." O shame! You can't control a little hunger! You should
bathe daily thoroughly early in the morning, fast or no fast.

And don't be afraid. "Man liveth not by bread alone but by very
word that proceeds from the mouth of God"--said Christ. Starvation
may kill off your body but not fasting. Deny the power of all disease
and weakness over yourself. Your mind is master of your body. Assert
this mental control. Lastly, during a fast, your body is sensitive to
your suggestions. Fill your mind with incessant affirmations of courage.
Think courage, say courage, act courage. Take time by the forelock.
Force your suggestions upon body and brain right now.

HOW TO BREAK A FAST.

When breaking a fast, be sure to control re-action. Eat very lightly
and only sensible food. Now that you have a clean body, stay clean
You can train yourself to fast for 40 days at a stretch.

TRANSMUTING SEX-ENERGY.

Here is some sensible advice from a leading thinker and teacher:
To be a perfect Bramhacharin (a regenerate).

1. You must have a clean, healthy body; 2. Good breathing capacity and
some control over same; 3. A strong will such as can move body and mind;
4. Assiduous cultivation of the intellectual side; 5. Control over
emotions; 6. A fearless mind; 7. Great determination; 8. and abstemious
living and high thinking.

The Yogis possess great knowledge regarding the use and abuse of
the reproductive principle in both sexes. Some hints of this esoteric
knowledge have filtered out and have been used by Western writers on
the subject, and much good has been accomplished in this way. In this
little book we cannot do more than touch upon the subject, and omitting
all except a bare mention of theory, we will give a practical breathing
exercise whereby the student will be enabled to transmute the
re-productive energy into vitality for the entire system, instead of
dissipating and wasting it in lustful indulgence in or out of the
marriage relations. The reproductive energy is creative energy, and may
be taken up by the system and transmuted into strength and vitality, thus
serving the purpose of regeneration instead of generation. If the young
men of the Western world understood these underlying principles they
would be saved much misery and unhappiness in after years, and would be
stronger mentally, morally and physically.

This transmutation of the reproductive energy gives more vitality to
those practising it. They will be filled with great vital force, which
will radiate from them and will manifest in what has been called
"personal magnetism." The energy thus transmuted may be turned into new
channels and used to great advantage. Nature has condensed one of its
most powerful manifestations of prana into productive energy, as its
purpose is to create. The greatest amount of vital force is concentrated
in the smallest area. The re-productive organism is the most powerful
storage factory in animal life, and its force can be drawn upward and
used, as well as expended in the ordinary functions of reproduction, or
wasted in vicious lust. The majority of our students know something of
the theories of regeneration, and we can do little more than to state the
above facts, without attempting to prove them.

The Yogi exercise for transmuting re-productive energy is simple. It is
coupled with rhythmic breathing, and can be easily performed. It may be
practised at any time, but is especially recommended when one feels the
instinct more strongly, at which time the re-productive energy is
manifesting and may be most easily transmuted for regenerative purpose.
The exercise is as follows:--

Keep the mind fixed on the idea of energy, and away from ordinary
sexual thoughts and imaginings. If these thoughts come into the mind
do not be discouraged, but regard them as manifestations of a force which
you intend using for the purpose of strengthening the body and mind.
Lie passively or sit erect, and fix your mind on the idea of drawing the
re-productive energy upward to the Solar Plexus, where it will be
transmuted and stored away as a reserve force of vital energy. Then
breathe rhythmically, forming the mental image of drawing up the
re-productive energy with each inhalation. With each inhalation make a
command of the Will that the energy be drawn upward from the
re-productive organisation to the Solar Plexus. If the rhythm is fairly
established and the mental image is clear, you will be conscious of the
upward passage of the energy, and will feel its stimulating effect. If
you desire an increase in mental force, you may draw it up to the brain
instead of to the Solar Plexus, by giving the mental command and holding
the mental image of the transmission to the brain.

The man or woman doing mental creative work, or bodily creative work will
be able to use this creative energy in their work by following the above
exercise, drawing up the energy with the inhalation and sending it forth
with the exhalation. In this last form of exercise only such portions as
are needed in the work will pass into the work being done, the balance
remaining stored up in the Solar Plexus.

You will understand, of course, that it is not the reproductive fluids
which are drawn up and used, but the etheric prana energy which animates
the latter, the soul of the reproductive organism, as it were. It is
usual to allow the head to bend forward easily and naturally during the
transmuting exercise.

Practise this Breathing Exercise sturdily. Be heroic. Learn to make 100
Pranayams at a sitting, but do not rush things. Deep breathing exercise,
Will-Culture, regular Meditation and a clean normal mode of living when
combined with much thinking will surely awaken your Latent Powers. Be not
worried if progress be a bit slow at first. Keep up cheerful and work
patiently. Things cannot but come your way if you don't give up but
preserve to the last. Have infinite and unbounded faith in yourself. And,
lastly, if you want to grow space in Wisdom and Power, persevere in deep
breathing. Pranayam is the key to all spiritual success. "Spirituality is
fullness of Breath." Almost all forms or Mental and physical weakness are
due to imperfect and shallow breathing. Of all these instructions you
practise nothing but the Breathing Exercise, your gain shall be great but
in order to get all the results you must practise all the instructions
regularly and methodically.

Your sex-force is under the direction of your sub-conscious mind which is
quite amenable to your authoritative suggestions. Get control through
your sub-consciousness. All you have to do is to let it to do its own
work without adverse and negative suggestions and fear-thoughts. Say "No"
vigorously to all adverse thoughts and shake them off from you. All
health comes by letting nature alone.

BREATHING EXERCISE.

Find a quiet place as far as possible, where the air is pure and the
surroundings soothing and pleasant. After a bath or a thorough rubbing
of the body from top to toe, with a wet towel, on an empty stomach,
take this exercise: Send a current of holy thought to everyone, on
planes seen and unseen, north and south, east and west, engage in
meditation--take anyone of the meditation exercises you like. When you
are perfectly calm and relaxed, seat yourself cross-legged, assuming any
posture that comes easiest to you, with head, neck and chest held in a
straight line and the weight of the upper parts of the body resting on
ribs. Keep the region about the waist quite free. Loosen the cloth there
out and out. Now inhale air slowly and steadily through right nostril
after closing left nostril with your finger as long as it takes to count
sixteen mentally. Close both nostrils, holding the inspired air within
and count sixty-four. Then very slowly exhale the air through the left
nostril for as long as it takes to count thirty-two. You must begin with
a 4 second inhalation, 16 second retention and 8 second exhalation.
Instead of dry counting you might improve yourself decidedly by repeating
the word "Fearless" as many times holding mentally that dominant idea
back of the word. Practise 5 pranayamas mornings and evenings for one
week daily. Increase to 10 next week. Work up to 20. Go slowly. Practise
as long as you like, but not less than 6 months. Be serious and earnest.
This is not for non-serious minds. This exercise will augment digestive
power, steady heart-action, make the body light and the mind calm. It
shall help also miraculously in your Soul-Unfoldment. During this
practice be pure in all ways. Observe Bramhacharya. Practice mental
concentration and spiritual meditation. Don't talk much with others.
Don't encourage any but holy society. Don't sleep much. Don't work very
hard. Keep your emotions well-in-hand. Be always engaged mentally
and physically. Be hopeful and cheerful. Never encourage negative
thinking. It shall do wonders for you.

PHYSICAL EXERCISE.

Exercise No. 1.

Stand straight, facing a corner of the room with bare feet about 14 or 15
inches from the corner itself, arms straight out, even with shoulders or
perhaps two inches below, hands resting on the two-side walls, chest out,
abdomen in. Now lean forward towards the corner, without moving the feet
or bending the knees. Aim lightly to touch the corner with the chest,
while holding the head and abdomen as far back from the corner as
possible, arms and hands slipping forward on the walls in a straight line
with shoulders. Resume first position without moving the feet or lowering
the arms, and repeat. Make the forward movement slowly, at the same time
inhaling through nostrils a slow, full breath; put your whole effort into
stretching the chest forward and upward (careful not to bruise yourself
against wall) and head and abdomen backward, thus straightening the back
at the shoulders. Hold the chest to the corner a moment, holding the
breath likewise, then slowly resume original upright position, slowly
exhaling through slightly open lips at the same time bending the head
forward towards the chest. As you lean forward toward the corner,
mentally keep count of your exercise one, two, three, etc. As you resume
the upright position, exhaling and bending the head forward mentally,
affirm "I am fearless, pure, strong." Make these movements always slowly,
deliberately, with the closest attention. Begin with 5 or 6 movements and
raise to 20 at a time.

Exercise No. 2.

Stand straight about two feet from the wall. Place the palms on the
wall-level with the shoulders. Without moving the feet or bending the
body, lean forward slowly, inhaling slowly as you do so, until the
chest touches the wall, head back; then push yourself slowly to an
upright position slowly exhaling as you do so. Repeat 10 times or more.

Exercise No. 3.

Clasp the hands behind. As you slowly inhale extend the clasped hand
slowly downwards as far as possible, straightening arms at elbow and
lowering shoulders as much as possible, at the same time extending
and lifting the chest as far as you can. Hold the breath and the position
a moment only, shoulders down, chest out and up, abdomen in, then release
the hand and slowly exhale. A rather vigorous exercise. So go slowly.

Exercise No. 4.

Stand straight, arms extended even with the shoulders, head up;
tense muscles of right arm doubling slowly at elbow and hand only, until
the clenched fist touches the shoulders; at the same time tensing the
neck muscles, chin up, and turning the head slowly to face the clenched
fist. Repeat with the left arm. The arms from shoulder to elbow must
be kept in a horizontal position.

Exercise No. 5.

Stand straight, hands at sides. Bend as far over to the right as
possible, slowly; then to the left as far as possible. Repeat 10 times.

Exercise No. 6.

Stand straight, arms at sides. Lean as far forward as you can without
bending the knees and roll the body clear around in a circle to the
right, arms and body as limp as possible. Repeat 5 times. Then roll
five times to the left.

Exercise No. 7.

Stand straight. Extend arms easily in front. Wave them backwards and
upwards in a sort of reversed swimming movement, until they meet
overhead; at the same time bending backward as far as possible slowly
inhale a full breath. Now bend forward, exhaling breath, taking care not
to bend the knees, until your fingers touch your toes, head hanging as
low as possible, toes and head as limp as possible, fingers reaching
towards the floor. Repeat upright position. Keep the knees straight
throughout. Aim to stretch the entire body and hands upward and backward
as far as possible, with the upward motion of the arms. If you can't
touch the floor without bending the knees, just come as near it as you
can. Practice will limber you up until you can touch it.

Exercise No. 8.

Lie full length on the back of the floor, hands clasped under head.
Tense the muscles of the right leg, raising the knee slowly until it
touches or almost touches the body, at the same time bending the foot
downward as far as possible, stretching the toes towards the floor. Now
slowly lower the right leg, still tense, towards the floor, straightening
the knee and turning the toe upward towards the body. As the right
leg is being lowered, raise the left one upward in the same way tensing
the muscles, knee to chest, toes stretching upward; as the left leg goes
down, point the toes and foot toward the knee 5 times, increasing
gradually to 10 times.


PHYSICAL EXERCISES.

SERIES 2.


Exercise I.

(1) Extend the arms straight out in front of you, on the level of
the shoulder, with palms of the hand touching each other; (2) swing
back the hands until the arms stand out straight, sideways, from the
shoulders or even a little further back if they will go there easily
without forcing; return briskly to position 1, and repeat several times.
The arms should be swung with a rapid movement and with animation and
life. Do not go to sleep over the work or rather play. This exercise is
most useful in developing the chest, muscles of the shoulders, etc. In
swinging the hands backward, it is an improvement if you will rise on
your toe during the backward sweep; sinking on your heels as you move the
arms forward again. The repeated movements should be rhythmical, backward
and forward, like the swinging of a quick pendulum.

Exercise II.

(1) Extend the arms straight in front of you, letting the little fingers
of each hand touch each other, the palms being upward; (2) then keeping
the little fingers still touching, bring the hands straight up in a
curved circular movement, until the tips of the fingers of both hands
touch the top of the head back of the forehead, the backs of the fingers
touching, the elbows swinging out as the movement is made until (when
the fingers touch the head, with thumbs pointing the rear) they point
out straight sideways; (3) let the fingers rest on the top of the head a
moment, and then with the elbows pressing back (which forces the
shoulders back) force the arms backward with an oblique motion until
they reach the sides at full length, as in the standing position.


Exercise III.

(1) Extend the arms straight out, sideways, from the shoulders;
(2) then, still keeping the upper arms extended in same position, bend
the arms at the elbow and bring the forearm upward with a circular
movement, until the tips of the extended fingers lightly touch the tops
of the shoulders; (3) then with fingers in the last position, force the
elbows out to the front until they touch, or nearly go (a little practice
will enable you to touch them together); (4) then, keeping the fingers
still lightly touching the tops of the shoulders, swinging the elbows as
far back as you can get them. (A little practice will enable you to get
them much farther back than at the first attempt.) (S) Swing the elbows
to the front position and then back to the rear position, several times.

Exercise IV.

(1) Place the hands on the hips, thumbs to the rear, and elbows pressed
back; (2) bend the body forward, from the hips as far as you can, keeping
the chest protruding and the shoulders pressed back; (3) raise the body
to the original standing position (hands still at the hips) and then bend
backward. In these movements the knees should not be bent and the motions
should be made slowly and gently; (4) then (hands still on the hips) bend
gently to the right, keeping the heels firmly on the ground, knees unbent
and avoid twisting the body; (5) resume original position, and then bend
the body gently to the left, observing the precautions given in the last
movement. This exercise is somewhat fatiguing and you should be careful
not to overdo it at the start. Proceed gradually; (6) with hands in same
position on the hips, swing the upper part of the body around in a
circle, from the waist-up, the head describing the largest circle, of
course. Do not move the feet or bend the knees.

Exercise V.

(1) Standing erect, with hands on hips, raise yourself on the balls
of the feet several times, with sort of a springing motion. Pause a
moment after you have raised upon your toes, then let the heels sink to
the floor, then repeat, as above suggested. Keep the knees unbent and the
heels together. This exercise is specially beneficial in developing the
calf of the leg, and will make it sure the first few times it is tried.
If you have an undeveloped calf here is the exercises for you; (2) with
hands still on hips place your feet about two feet apart, and then cover
the body into a "squatting" position, pausing a moment and then resuming
original position. Repeat several times, but not too often at the first,
as it will make the thighs feel a little sore at the beginning. This
exercise will give one well developed thighs. This last movement may be
improved upon by sinking down with the weight resting upon the balls of
the foot, instead of upon the heel.

Exercise VI.

(1) Stand erect with hands on hips; (2) keeping the knee straight,
swing the right leg out about fifteen inches (keeping the toe turned a
little out and the sole flat)--then swing back to the rear until the toe
points straight to the ground, _keeping the knee stiff all the time_; (3)
repeat the swinging backward and forward several times; (4) then do
the same with the left leg; (5) with hands still on hips, raise the right
leg up, bending the knee, until the upper-leg (thigh) stands straight out
from the body (if you can raise it still higher, you may do so); (6)
place your foot again on the ground, and go through the same motion
with the left leg; (7) repeat several times, first one leg and then the
other, moving slowly at first and gradually increasing your speed until
you are executing a slow trot without moving from the over spot.

Exercise VII.

(1) Stand erect, with the arms extended straight in front of you, from
the shoulders, and of course on a level with the shoulders--the palms
must be down, fingers straight out, thumbs folded under and the thumb
