us set about it seriously, and pray for one another.

Yours, &c.



NINTH LETTER.


The enclosed is an answer to that which I received from ----; pray
deliver it to her. She seems to me full of good will, but she would go
faster than grace. One does not become holy all at once. I recommend
her to you: we ought to help one another by our advice, and yet more
by our good examples. You will oblige me to let me hear of her from
time to time, and whether she be very fervent and very obedient.

Let us thus think often that our only business in this life is to
please GOD, and that all besides is but folly and vanity. You and I
have lived about forty years in religion (_i.e._, a monastic life).
Have we employed them in loving and serving GOD, who by His mercy has
called us to this state and for that very end? I am filled with shame
and confusion when I reflect on one hand upon the great favors which
GOD has done, and incessantly continues to do me; and on the other,
upon the ill use I have made of them, and my small advancement in the
way of perfection.

Since by His mercy He gives us still a little time, let us begin in
earnest: let us repair the lost time: let us return with a full
assurance to that FATHER of mercies, who is always ready to receive us
affectionately. Let us renounce, let us generously renounce, for the
love of Him, all that is not Himself; He deserves infinitely more. Let
us think of Him perpetually. Let us put all our trust in Him. I doubt
not but we shall soon find the effects of it in receiving the
abundance of His grace, with which we can do all things, and without
which we can do nothing but sin.

We cannot escape the dangers which abound in life without the actual
and _continual_ help of GOD: let us then pray to Him for it
_continually_. How can we pray to Him without being with Him? How can
we be with Him but in thinking of Him often? And how can we often
think of Him, but by a holy habit which we should form of it? You will
tell me that I am always saying the same thing. It is true, for this
is the best and easiest method I know; and as I use no other, I advise
all the world to do it. We must _know_ before we can _lore_. In order
to _know_ GOD, we must often _think_ of Him; and when we come to
_love_ Him, we shall then also think of Him often, for our heart will
be with our treasure. This is an argument which well deserves your
consideration.

I am, Yours, &c.



TENTH LETTER.


I have had a good deal of difficulty to bring myself to write to Mr.
----, and I do it now purely because you and Madam ---- desire me.
Pray write the directions and send it to him. I am very well pleased
with the trust which you have in GOD: I wish that He may increase it
in you more and more. We cannot have too much in so good and faithful
a Friend, who will never fail us in this world nor in the next.

If Mr. ---- makes his advantage of the loss he has had, and puts all
his confidence in GOD, He will soon give him another friend, more
powerful and more inclined to serve him. He disposes of hearts as He
pleases. Perhaps Mr. ---- was too much attached to him he has lost. We
ought to love our friends, but without encroaching upon the love due
to GOD, which must be the principal.

Pray remember what I have recommended to you, which is, to think often
on GOD, by day, by night, in your business, and even in your
diversions. He is always near you and with you: leave Him not alone.
You would think it rude to leave a friend alone who came to visit you:
why then must GOD be neglected? Do not then forget Him, but think on
Him often, adore Him continually, live and die with Him; this is the
glorious employment of a Christian. In a word, this is our profession;
if we do not know it, we must learn it. I will endeavor to help you
with my prayers, and am, in our LORD, Yours, &c.



ELEVENTH LETTER.


I do not pray that you may be delivered from your pains, but I pray
GOD earnestly that He would give you strength and patience to bear
them as long as He pleases. Comfort yourself with Him who holds you
fastened to the cross. He will loose you when He thinks fit. Happy
those who suffer with Him: accustom yourself to suffer in that manner,
and seek from Him the strength to endure as much, and as long, as He
shall judge to be necessary for you. The men of the world do not
comprehend these truths, nor is it to be wondered at, since they
suffer like what they are, and not like Christians. They consider
sickness as a pain to nature, and not as a favor from GOD; and seeing
it only in that light, they find nothing in it but grief and distress.
But those who consider sickness as coming from the hand of GOD, as the
effect of His mercy, and the means which He employs for their
salvation--such, commonly find in it great sweetness and sensible
consolation.

I wish you could convince yourself that GOD is often (in some sense)
nearer to us, and more effectually present with us, in sickness than
in health. Rely upon no other Physician; for, according to my
apprehension, He reserves your cure to Himself. Put, then, all your
trust in Him, and you will soon find the effects of it in your
recovery, which we often retard by putting greater confidence in
physic than in GOD.

Whatever remedies you make use of, they will succeed only so far as He
permits. When pains come from GOD, He only can cure them. He often
sends diseases of the body to cure those of the soul. Comfort yourself
with the sovereign Physician both of the soul and body.

Be satisfied with the condition in which GOD places you: however happy
you may think me, I envy you. Pains and sufferings would be a paradise
to me while I should suffer with my GOD; and the greatest pleasures
would be hell to me if I could relish them without Him. All my
consolation would be to suffer something for His sake.

I must, in a little time, go to GOD. What comforts me in this life is,
that I now see Him _by faith_; and I see Him in such a manner as might
make me say sometimes, _I believe no more, but I see_. I feel what
faith teaches us, and in that assurance and that practice of faith, I
will live and die with Him.

Continue then always with GOD: it is the only support and comfort for
your affliction. I shall beseech Him to be with you. I present my
service.

Yours, &c.



TWELFTH LETTER.


If we were well accustomed to the exercise of _the presence of_ GOD,
all bodily diseases would be much alleviated thereby. GOD often
permits that we should suffer a little to purify our souls and oblige
us to continue _with_ Him.

Take courage: offer Him your pains incessantly: pray to Him for
strength to endure them. Above all, get a habit of entertaining
yourself often with GOD, and forget Him the least you can. Adore Him
in your infirmities, offer yourself to Him from time to time, and in
the height of your sufferings, beseech Him humbly and affectionately
(as a child his father) to make you conformable to His holy-will. I
shall endeavor to assist you with my poor prayers.

GOD has many ways of drawing us to Himself. He sometimes hides Himself
from us, but _faith_ alone, which will not fail us in time of need,
ought to be our support, and the foundation of our confidence, which
must be all in GOD.

I know not how GOD will dispose of me. I am always happy. All the
world suffer; and I, who deserve the severest discipline, feel joys so
continual and so great that I can scarce contain them.

I would willingly ask of GOD a part of your sufferings, but that I
know my weakness, which is so great, that if He left me one moment to
myself I should be the most wretched man alive. And yet I know not how
He can leave me alone, because faith gives me as strong a conviction
as sense can do, that He never forsakes us until we have first
