had wrought many miracles through me; that great numbers of the Gentiles
had come to the knowledge of Christ through my ministry; when they
heard that the Gentiles had received the Holy Ghost without Law and
circumcision, by the simple preaching of faith; when they heard all this
they glorified God for His grace in me." Hence, Paul was justified in
concluding that the apostles were for him, and not against him.


  VERSE 9. The right hands of fellowship.

As if the apostles had said to him: "We, Paul, do agree with you in all
things. We are companions in doctrine. We have the same Gospel with this
difference, that to you is committed the Gospel for the uncircumcised,
while the Gospel for the circumcision is committed unto us. But this
difference ought not to hinder our friendship, since we preach one and
the same Gospel."


  VERSE 10. Only they would that we should remember the poor; the same
  which I also was forward to do.

Next to the preaching of the Gospel, a true and faithful pastor will
take care of the poor. Where the Church is, there must be the poor,
for the world and the devil persecute the Church and impoverish many
faithful Christians.

Speaking of money, nobody wants to contribute nowadays to the
maintenance of the ministry, and the erection of schools. When it comes
to establishing false worship and idolatry, no cost is spared. True
religion is ever in need of money, while false religions are backed by
wealth.


  VERSE 11. But when Peter was come to Antioch, I withstood him to the
  face, because he was to be blamed.

Paul goes on in his refutation of the false apostles by saying that in
Antioch he withstood Peter in the presence of the whole congregation.
As he stated before, Paul had no small matter in hand, but the chief
article of the Christian religion. When this article is endangered, we
must not hesitate to resist Peter, or an angel from heaven. Paul paid no
regard to the dignity and position of Peter, when he saw this article in
danger. It is written: "He that loveth father or mother or his own life,
more than me, is not worthy of me." (Matt. 10:37.)

For defending the truth in our day, we are called proud and obstinate
hypocrites. We are not ashamed of these titles. The cause we are called
to defend, is not Peter's cause, or the cause of our parents, or that of
the government, or that of the world, but the cause of God. In defense
of that cause we must be firm and unyielding.

When he says, "to his face," Paul accuses the false apostles of
slandering him behind his back. In his presence they dared not to open
their mouths. He tells them, "I did not speak evil of Peter behind his
back, but I withstood him frankly and openly."

Others may debate here whether an apostle might sin. I claim that we
ought not to make Peter out as faultless. Prophets have erred. Nathan
told David that he should go ahead and build the Temple of the Lord. But
his prophecy was afterwards corrected by the Lord. The apostles erred
in thinking of the Kingdom of Christ as a worldly state. Peter had heard
the command of Christ, "Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel
to every creature." But if it had not been for the heavenly vision and
the special command of Christ, Peter would never have gone to the home
of Cornelius. Peter also erred in this matter of circumcision. If Paul
had not publicly censured him, all the believing Gentiles would have
been compelled to receive circumcision and accept the Jewish law. We are
not to attribute perfection to any man.

Luke reports "that the contention between Paul and Barnabas was so
sharp that they departed asunder one from the other." The cause of their
disagreement could hardly have been small since it separated these
two, who had been joined together for years in a holy partnership. Such
incidents are recorded for our consolation. After all, it is a comfort
to know that even saints might and do sin.

Samson, David, and many other excellent men, fell into grievous sins.
Job and Jeremiah cursed the day of their birth. Elijah and Jonah became
weary of life and prayed for death. Such offenses on the part of the
saints, the Scriptures record for the comfort of those who are near
despair. No person has ever sunk so low that he cannot rise again. On
the other hand, no man's standing is so secure that he may not fall. If
Peter fell, I may fall. If he rose again, I may rise again. We have the
same gifts that they had, the same Christ, the same baptism and the
same Gospel, the same forgiveness of sins. They needed these saving
ordinances just as much as we do.


  VERSE 12. For before that certain came from James, he did eat with the
  Gentiles.

The Gentiles who had been converted to faith in Christ, ate meats
forbidden by the Law. Peter, visiting some of these Gentiles, ate
meat and drank wine with them, although he knew that these things were
forbidden in the Law. Paul declared that he did likewise, that he became
as a Jew to the Jews, and to them that were without law, as without law.
He ate and drank with the Gentiles unconcerned about the Jewish Law.
When he was with the Jews, however, he abstained from all things
forbidden in the Law, for he labored to serve all men, that he "might by
all means save some." Paul does not reprove Peter for transgressing the
Law, but for disguising his attitude to the Law.


  VERSE 12. But when they were come, he withdrew and separated himself,
  fearing them which were of the circumcision.

Paul does not accuse Peter of malice or ignorance, but of lack of
principle, in that he abstained from meats, because he feared the Jews
that came from James. Peter's weak attitude endangered the principle of
Christian liberty. It is the deduction rather than the fact which Paul
reproves. To eat and to drink, or not to eat and drink, is immaterial.
But to make the deduction "If you eat, you sin; if you abstain you are
righteous"--this is wrong.

Meats may be refused for two reasons. First, they may be refused for the
sake of Christian love. There is no danger connected with a refusal of
meats for the sake of charity. To bear with the infirmity of a
brother is a good thing. Paul himself taught and exemplified such
thoughtfulness. Secondly, meats may be refused in the mistaken hope of
thereby obtaining righteousness. When this is the purpose of abstaining
from meats, we say, let charity go. To refrain from meats for this
latter reason amounts to a denial of Christ. If we must lose one or the
other, let us lose a friend and brother, rather than God, our Father.

Jerome, who understood not this passage, nor the whole epistle for
that matter, excuses Peter's action on the ground "that it was done
in ignorance." But Peter offended by giving the impression that he was
indorsing the Law. By his example he encouraged Gentiles and Jews to
forsake the truth of the Gospel. If Paul had not reproved him, there
would have been a sliding back of Christians into the Jewish religion,
and a return to the burdens of the Law.

It is surprising that Peter, excellent apostle that he was, should have
been guilty of such vacillation. In a former council at Jerusalem he
practically stood alone in defense of the truth that salvation is
by faith, without the Law. Peter at that time valiantly defended the
liberty of the Gospel. But now by abstaining from meats forbidden in the
Law, he went against his better judgment. You have no idea what danger
there is in customs and ceremonies. They so easily tend to error in
works.


  VERSE 13. And the other Jews dissembled likewise with him; insomuch
  that Barnabas also was carried away with their dissimulation.

It is marvelous how God preserved the Church by one single person. Paul
alone stood up for the truth, for Barnabas, his companion, was lost to
him, and Peter was against him. Sometimes one lone person can do more in
a conference than the whole assembly.

I mention this to urge all to learn how properly to differentiate
between the Law and the Gospel, in order to avoid dissembling. When it
come to the article of justification we must not yield, if we want to
retain the truth of the Gospel.

When the conscience is disturbed, do not seek advice from reason or from
the Law, but rest your conscience in the grace of God and in His Word,
and proceed as if you had never heard of the Law. The Law has its place
and its own good time. While Moses was in the mountain where he talked
with God face to face, he had no law, he made no law, he administered
no law. But when he came down from the mountain, he was a lawgiver. The
conscience must be kept above the Law, the body under the Law.

Paul reproved Peter for no trifle, but for the chief article of
Christian doctrine, which Peter's hypocrisy had endangered. For Barnabas
and other Jews followed Peter's example. It is surprising that such good
men as Peter, Barnabas, and others should fall into unexpected error,
especially in a matter which they knew so well. To trust in our own
strength, our own goodness, our own wisdom, is a perilous thing. Let us
search the Scriptures with humility, praying that we may never lose the
light of the Gospel. "Lord, increase our faith."


  VERSE 14. But when I saw that they walked not uprightly according to
  the truth of the gospel.

No one except Paul had his eyes open. Consequently it was his duty
to reprove Peter and his followers for swerving from the truth of the
Gospel. It was no easy task for Paul to reprimand Peter. To the honor of
Peter it must be said that he took the correction. No doubt, he freely
acknowledged his fault.

The person who can rightly divide Law and Gospel has reason to thank
God. He is a true theologian. I must confess that in times of temptation
I do not always know how to do it. To divide Law and Gospel means to
place the Gospel in heaven, and to keep the Law on earth; to call the
righteousness of the Gospel heavenly, and the righteousness of the Law
earthly; to put as much difference between the righteousness of the
Gospel and that of the Law, as there is difference between day and
night. If it is a question of faith or conscience, ignore the Law
entirely. If it is a question of works, then lift high the lantern of
works and the righteousness of the Law. If your conscience is oppressed
with a sense of sin, talk to your conscience. Say: "You are now
groveling in the dirt. You are now a laboring ass. Go ahead, and carry
your burden. But why don't you mount up to heaven? There the Law cannot
follow you!" Leave the ass burdened with laws behind in the valley. But
your conscience, let it ascend with Isaac into the mountain.

In civil life obedience to the law is severely required. In civil life
Gospel, conscience, grace, remission of sins, Christ Himself, do
not count, but only Moses with the lawbooks. If we bear in mind this
distinction, neither Gospel nor Law shall trespass upon each other. The
moment Law and sin cross into heaven, i.e., your conscience, kick them
out. On the other hand, when grace wanders unto the earth, i.e., into
the body, tell grace: "You have no business to be around the dreg and
dung of this bodily life. You belong in heaven."

By his compromising attitude Peter confused the separation of Law and
Gospel. Paul had to do something about it. He reproved Peter, not to
embarrass him, but to conserve the difference between the Gospel which
justifies in heaven, and the Law which justifies on earth.

The right separation between Law and Gospel is very important to know.
Christian doctrine is impossible without it. Let all who love and fear
God, diligently learn the difference, not only in theory but also in
practice.

When your conscience gets into trouble, say to yourself: "There is a
time to die, and a time to live; a time to learn the Law, and a time
to unlearn the Law; a time to hear the Gospel, and a time to ignore the
Gospel. Let the Law now depart, and let the Gospel enter, for now is
the right time to hear the Gospel, and not the Law." However, when the
conflict of conscience is over and external duties must be performed,
close your ears to the Gospel, and open them wide to the Law.


  VERSE 14. I said unto Peter before them all, If thou being a Jew, livest
  after the manner of Gentiles, and not as do the Jews, why compellest
  thou the Gentiles to live as do the Jews

To live as a Jew is nothing bad. To eat or not to eat pork, what
difference does it make? But to play the Jew, and for conscience' sake
to abstain from certain meats, is a denial of Christ. When Paul saw that
Peter's attitude tended to this, he withstood Peter and said to
him: "You know that the observance of the Law is not needed unto
righteousness. You know that we are justified by faith in Christ.
You know that we may eat all kinds of meats. Yet by your example you
obligate the Gentiles to forsake Christ, and to return to the Law. You
give them reason to think that faith is not sufficient unto salvation."

Peter did not say so, but his example said quite plainly that the
observance of the Law must be added to faith in Christ, if men are to
be saved. From Peter's example the Gentiles could not help but draw the
conclusion that the Law was necessary unto salvation. If this error
had been permitted to pass unchallenged, Christ would have lost out
altogether.

The controversy involved the preservation of pure doctrine. In such a
controversy Paul did not mind if anybody took offense.


  VERSE 15. We who are Jews by nature, and not sinners of the Gentiles.

"When we Jews compare ourselves with the Gentiles, we look pretty good.
We have the Law, we have good works. Our rectitude dates from our birth,
because the Jewish religion is natural to us. But all this does not
make us righteous before God." Peter and the others lived up to the
requirements of the Law. They had circumcision, the covenant, the
promises, the apostleship. But because of these advantages they were
not to think themselves righteous before God. None of these prerogatives
spell faith in Christ, which alone can justify a person. We do not mean
to imply that the Law is bad. We do not condemn the Law, circumcision,
etc., for their failure to justify us. Paul spoke disparagingly of these
ordinances, because the false apostles asserted that mankind is saved by
them without faith. Paul could not let this assertion stand, for without
faith all things are deadly.


  VERSE 16. Knowing that a man is not justified by the works of the law,
  but by the faith of Jesus Christ.

For the sake of argument let us suppose that you could fulfill the Law
in the spirit of the first commandment of God: "Thou shalt love the
Lord, thy God, with all thy heart." It would do you no good. A person
simply is not justified by the works of the Law.

The works of the Law, according to Paul, include the whole Law,
judicial, ceremonial, moral. Now, if the performance of the moral law
cannot justify, how can circumcision justify, when circumcision is part
of the ceremonial law?

The demands of the Law may be fulfilled before and after justification.
There were many excellent men among the pagans of old, men who never
heard of justification. They lived moral lives. But that fact did not
justify them. Peter, Paul, all Christians, live up to the Law. But that
fact does not justify them. "For I know nothing by myself," says Paul,
"yet am I not hereby justified." (I Cor. 4:4.)

The nefarious opinion of the papists, which attributes the merit of
grace and the remission of sins to works, must here be emphatically
rejected. The papists say that a good work performed before grace has
been obtained, is able to secure grace for a person, because it is
no more than right that God should reward a good deed. When grace has
already been obtained, any good work deserves everlasting life as a due
payment and reward for merit. For the first, God is no debtor, they say;
but because God is good and just, it is no more than right (they say)
that He should reward a good work by granting grace for the service.
But when grace has already been obtained, they continue, God is in the
position of a debtor, and is in duty bound to reward a good work with
the gift of eternal life. This is the wicked teaching of the papacy.

Now, if I could perform any work acceptable to God and deserving of
grace, and once having obtained grace my good works would continue to
earn for me the right and reward of eternal life, why should I stand in
need of the grace of God and the suffering and death of Christ? Christ
