 individual every power is most complete, and stands out most distinct,
 just in that proportion has the man reached the entireness of his
 Humanity.

 Now brethren, we apply all this to the mind of God. The Trinitarian
 maintains against the Unitarian and the Sabellian, that the higher you
 ascend in the scale of being, the more distinct are the
 consciousnesses, and that the law of unity implies and demands a
 manifold unity. The doctrine of Sabellianism, for example, is this,
 that God is but one essence--but one person under different
 manifestations; and that when He made the world He was called the
 Father, when He redeemed the world He was called the Son, and when He
 sanctified the world He was called the Holy Ghost. The Sabellian and
 the Unitarian maintain that the unity of God consists simply in a
 unity of person, and in opposition to this does the Trinitarian
 maintain that grandness, either in man or in God, must be a unity of
 manifoldness.

 But we will enter into this more deeply. The first power or
 consciousness in which God is made known to us is as the Father, the
 Author of our being. It is written, "In Him we live, and move, and
 have our being." He is the Author of all life. In this sense He is not
 merely our Father as Christians, but the Father of mankind; and not
 merely the Father of mankind, but the Father of creation; and in this
 way the sublime language of the prophets may be taken as true
 literally, "The morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God
 shouted for joy;" and the language of the canticle which belongs to
 our morning service, "the deeps, the fountains, the wells," all unite
 in one hymn of praise, one everlasting hallelujah to God the Father,
 the Author of their being. In this respect, simply as the Author of
 life, merely as the supreme Being, God has reference to us in relation
 to the body. He is the Lord of life: in Him we live, and move, and
 have our being. In this respect God to us is as law--as the collected
 laws of the universe; and therefore to offend against law, and bring
 down the result of transgressing law, is said in Scripture language,
 because applied to a person, to be provoking the wrath of God the
 Father.

 In the next place, the second way through which the personality and
 consciousness of God has been revealed to us is as the Son. Brethren,
 we see in all those writers who have treated of the Trinity, that much
 stress is laid upon this eternal generation of the Son, the
 everlasting sonship. It is this which we have in the Creed--the Creed
 which was read to-day--"God, of the substance of the Father, begotten
 before the worlds;" and, again, in the Nicene Creed, that expression,
 which is so often wrongly read, "God of God, Light of Light, very God
 of very God," means absolutely nothing. There are two statements made
 there. The first is this, "The Son was God:" the second is this, "The
 Son was--_of_ God," showing his derivation. And in that, brethren, we
 have one of the deepest and most blessed truths of revelation. The
 Unitarian maintains a divine Humanity--a blessed, blessed truth. There
 is a truth more blessed still--the Humanity of Deity. Before the world
 was, there was that in the mind of God which we may call the Humanity
 of His Divinity. It is called in Scripture the Word: the Son: the Form
 of God. It is in virtue of this that we have a right to attribute to
 Him our own feelings; it is in virtue of this that Scripture speaks of
 His wisdom, His justice, His love. Love in God is what love is in man;
 justice in God is what justice is in man; creative power in God is
 what creative power is in man; indignation in God is that which
 indignation is in man, barring only this, that the one is emotional,
 but the other is calm, and pure, and everlastingly still. It is
 through this Humanity in the mind of God, if I may dare so to speak of
 Deity, that a revelation became possible to man. It was the Word that
 was made flesh; it was the Word that manifested Itself to man. It is
 in virtue of the connection between God and man, that God made man in
 His own image; that through a long line of prophets the human truth of
 God could be made known to man, till it came forth developed most
 entirely and at large in the incarnation of the Redeemer. Now in this
 respect, it will be observed that God stands connected with us in
 relation to the soul as "the Light which lighteth every man that
 cometh into the world."

 Once more; there is a nearer, a closer, and a more enduring relation
 in which God stands to us--that is, the relation of the Spirit. It is
 to the writings of St. John that we have to turn especially, if we
 desire to know the doctrines of the Spirit. You will remember the
 strange way in which he speaks of God. It would almost seem as if the
 external God has disappeared to him; nay, as if an external Christ
 were almost forgotten, because the internal Christ has been formed. He
 speaks of God as kindred with us; he speaks of Christ as Christ _in_
 us; and "if we love one another," he says, "God dwelleth in us." If a
 man keep the commandments, "God dwelleth in him, and he in God." So
 that the spiritual manifestation of God to us is that whereby He
 blends Himself with the soul of man.

 These then, my Christian brethren, are the three consciousnesses by
 which He becomes known to us. Three, we said, _known_ to us. We do not
 dare to limit God; we do not presume to say that there are in God only
 three personalities--only three consciousnesses: all that we dare
 presume to say is this, that there are three in reference to us, and
 only three; that a fourth there is not; that perchance, in the present
 state a fourth you cannot add to these--Creator, Redeemer, Sanctifier.

 Lastly, let us turn to the relation which the Trinity in unity bears
 to the triad in discord. It is intended for the entireness of our
 sanctification: "the very God of peace sanctify you wholly." Brethren,
 we dwell upon that expression "_wholly_." There is this difference
 between Christianity and every other system: Christianity proposes to
 ennoble the whole man; every other system subordinates parts to parts.
 Christianity does not despise the intellect, but it does not exalt the
 intellect in a one-sided way: it only dwells with emphasis on the
 third and highest part of man--his spiritual affections; and these it
 maintains are the chief and real seat of everlasting life, intended to
 subordinate the other to themselves.

 Asceticism would crush the natural affections--destroy the appetites.
 Asceticism feels that there is a conflict between the flesh and the
 spirit, and it would put an end to that conflict; it would bring back
 unity by the excision of all our natural appetites, and all the
 desires and feelings which we have by nature. But when the apostle
 Paul comes forward to proclaim the will of God, he says it is not by
 the crushing of the body, but by the sanctification of the body: "I
 pray God your whole spirit and soul and body be preserved blameless
 unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ."

 In this my Christian brethren, there is one of the deepest of all
 truths. Does a man feel himself the slave and the victim of his lower
 passions? Let not that man hope to subdue them merely by struggling
 against them. Let him not by fasting, by austerity, by any earthly
 rule that he can conceive, expect to subdue the flesh. The more he
 thinks of his vile and lower feelings, the more will they be brought
 into distinctness, and therefore into power; the more hopelessly will
 he become their victim. The only way in which a man can subdue the
 flesh, is not by the extinction of those feelings, but by the
 elevation of their character. Let there be added to that character,
 sublimity of aim, purity of affection; let there be given grandeur,
 spiritual nobleness; and then, just as the strengthening of the whole
 constitution of the body makes any particular and local affection
 disappear, so by degrees, by the raising of the character, do these
 lower affections become, not extinguished or destroyed by excision,
 but ennobled by a new and loftier spirit breathed through them.

 This is the account given by the apostle. He speaks of the conflict
 between the flesh and the spirit. And his remedy is to give vigour to
 the higher, rather than to struggle with the lower. "This I say then,
 Walk in the spirit, and ye _shall not_ fulfil the lust of the flesh."

 Once more; the apostle differs from the world in this, that the world
 would restore this unity, and sanctify man simply from the soul. It is
 this which civilization pretends to effect. We hear much in these
 modern days of "the progress of Humanity." We hear of man's invention,
 of man's increase of knowledge; and it would seem in all this, as if
 man were necessarily becoming better. Brethren, it always must be the
 case in that state in which God is looked upon as the Supreme Being
 merely, where the intellect of man is supposed to be the chief
 thing--that which makes him most kindred to his Maker.

 The doctrine of Christianity is this--that unity of all this discord
 must be made. Man is to be made one with God, not by soaring
 intellect, but by lowly love. It is the Spirit which guides him to all
 truth; not merely by rendering more acute the reasoning powers, but by
 convincing of sin, by humbling the man. It is the graces of the Spirit
 which harmonize the man, and make him one; and that is the end, and
 aim, and object of all the Gospel: the entireness of sanctification to
 produce a perfectly developed man.

 Most of us in this world are monsters, with some part of our being
 bearing the development of a giant, and others showing the proportions
 of a dwarf: a feeble, dwarfish will--mighty, full-blown passions; and
 therefore it is that there is to be visible through the Trinity in us,
 a noble manifold unity; and when the triune power of God shall so have
 done its work on the entireness of our Humanity, that the body, soul,
 and spirit have been sanctified, then shall there be exhibited, and
 only then, a perfect affection in man to his Maker, and body, soul,
 and spirit shall exhibit a Trinity in unity.




 V.

 _Preached June 2, 1850._

 ABSOLUTION.


   "And the Scribes and the Pharisees began to reason, saying, Who is
    this which speaketh blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God
    alone?"--Luke v. 21.

 There are questions which having been again and again settled, still
 from time to time, present themselves for _re_-solution; errors which
 having been refuted, and cut up by the roots, re-appear in the next
 century as fresh and vigorous as ever. Like the fabled monsters of
 old, from whose dissevered neck the blood sprung forth and formed
 fresh heads, multiplied and indestructible; or like the weeds, which,
 extirpated in one place, sprout forth vigorously in another.

 In every such case it may be taken for granted that the root of the
 matter has not been reached; the error has been exposed, but the truth
 which lay at the bottom of the error has not been disengaged. Every
 error is connected with a truth; the truth being perennial, springs up
 again as often as circumstances foster it, or call for it, and the
 seeds of error which lay about the roots spring up again in the form
 of weeds, as before.

 A popular illustration of this may be found in the belief in the
 appearance of the spirits of the departed. You may examine the
 evidence for every such alleged apparition; you may demonstrate the
 improbability; you may reduce it to an impossibility; still the
 popular feeling will remain; and there is a lurking superstition even
 among the enlightened, which in the midst of professions of
 incredulity, shows itself in a readiness to believe the wildest new
 tale, if it possess but the semblance of an authentication. Now two
 truths lie at the root of this superstition. The first is the reality
 of the spirit-world, and the instinctive belief in it. The second is
 the fact that there are certain states of health in which the eye
 creates the objects which it perceives. The death-blow to such
 superstition is only struck when we have not only proved that men have
 been deceived, but shown besides how they came to be deceived; when
 science has explained the optical delusion, and shown the
 physiological state in which such apparitions become visible. Ridicule
 will not do it. Disproof will not do it. So long as men feel that
 there is a spirit-world, and so long as to some the impression is
 vivid that they have seen it, you spend your rhetoric in vain. You
 must show the truth that lies below the error.

 The principle we gain from this is that you cannot overthrow falsehood
 by negation, but by establishing the antagonistic truth. The
 refutation which is to last must be positive, not negative. It is an
 endless work to be uprooting weeds: plant the ground with wholesome
 vegetation, and then the juices which would have otherwise fed
 rankness will pour themselves into a more vigorous growth; the
 dwindled weeds will be easily raked out then. It is an endless task to
 be refuting error. Plant truth, and the error will pine away.

 The instance to which all this is preliminary, is the pertinacious
 hold which the belief in a human absolving power retains upon mankind.
 There has perhaps never yet been known a religion without such a
 belief. There is not a savage in the islands of the South Pacific who
 does not believe that his priest can shield him from the consequences
 of sin. There was not a people in antiquity who had not dispensers of
 Divine favour. That same belief passed from Paganism into Romanism. It
 was exposed at the period of the Reformation. A mighty reaction was
 felt against it throughout Europe. Apparently the whole idea of human
 priesthood was proved, once and for ever, to be baseless; human
 mediation, in every possible form, was vehemently controverted; men
 were referred back to God as the sole absolver.

 Yet now again, three centuries after, the belief is still as strong as
 ever. That which we thought dead is alive again, and not likely it
 seems, to die. Recent revelations have shown that confession is daily
 made in the country whose natural manners are most against it; private
 absolution asked by English men and given by English priests. A fact
 so significant might lead us well to pause, and ask ourselves whether
 we have found the true answer to the question. The negation we have
 got--the vehement denial; we are weary of its reiteration: but the
 positive truth which lies at the bottom of this craving--where is
 that?

 Parliaments and pulpits, senators and clergymen, have vied with each
 other in the vehemence with which they declare absolution
 un-Christian, un-English. All that is most abominable in the
 confessional has been with unsparing and irreverent indelicacy forced
 before the public mind. Still, men and women, whose holiness and
 purity are beyond slander's reach, come and crave assurance of
 forgiveness. How shall we reply to such men? Shall we say, "Who is
 this that speaketh blasphemies? who can forgive sins, but God only?"
 Shall we say it is all blasphemy; an impious intrusion upon the
 prerogatives of the One Absolver? Well, we may; it is _popular_ to say
 we ought; but you will observe, if we speak so, we do no more than the
 Pharisees in this text: we establish a negation; but a negation is
 only one side of truth.

 Moreover, we have been asserting that for 300 years, with small
 fruits. We keep asserting, Man cannot give assurance that sin is
 pardoned; in other words, man cannot absolve: but still the heart
 craves human assurance of forgiveness. What truth have we got to
 supply that craving? We shall therefore, rather try to fathom the
 deeps of the positive truth which is the true reply to the error; we
 shall try to see whether there is not a real answer to the craving
 contained in the Redeemer's words, "The Son of Man hath power on earth
 to forgive sins." What power is there in human forgiveness? What does
 absolution mean in the lips of a son of man? These are our questions
 for to-day. We shall consider two points.

    I. The impotency of the negation.
   II. The power of the positive truth.

 The Pharisees denied the efficacy of human absolution: they said,
 "None can forgive sins, but God only:" that was a negation. What did
 they effect by their system of negations? They conferred no peace;
 they produced no holiness. It would be a great error to suppose that
 the Pharisees were hypocrites in the ordinary sense of the term--that
 is, pretending to be anxious about religion when they knew that they
 felt no anxiety. They _were_ anxious, in their way. They heard a
 startling free announcement of forgiveness by a man. To them it
 appeared license given to sin. If this new teacher, this upstart--in
 their own language, "this fellow--of whom every man knew whence he
 was," were to go about the length and breadth of the land, telling
 sinners to be at peace; telling them to forget the past, and to work
 onwards; bidding men's consciences be at rest; and commanding them not
 to _fear_ the God whom they had offended, but to _trust_ in Him--what
 would become of morality and religion? This presumptuous Absolver
 would make men careless about both. If the indispensable safeguards of
 penalty were removed, what remained to restrain men from sin?

 For the Pharisees had no notion of any other goodness than that which
 is restrained; they could conceive no goodness free, but only that
 which is produced by rewards and punishments--law-goodness,
 law-righteousness: to dread God, not to love and trust Him, was their
 conception of religion. And this, indeed, is the _ordinary_ conception
 of religion--the ordinary meaning implied to most minds by the word
 religion. The word religion means, by derivation, restriction or
 obligation--obligation to do, obligation to avoid. And this is the
 negative system of the Pharisees--scrupulous avoidance of evil, rather
 than positive and free pursuit of excellence. Such a system never
 produced anything but barren denial. "_This_ is wrong;" "_that_ is
 heresy;" "_that_ is dangerous."

 There was another class of men who denied human power of absolution.
 They were called Scribes or writers--pedants, men of ponderous
 learning and accurate definitions; from being mere transcribers of the
 law, they had risen to be its expounders. They could define the exact
 number of yards that might be travelled on the Sabbath-day without
 infringement of the law; they could decide, according to the most
 approved theology, the respective importance of each duty; they would
 tell you, authoritatively, which was the _great_ commandment of the
 law. The Scribe is a man who turns religion into etiquette: his idea
 of God is that of a monarch, transgression against whom is an offence
 against statute law, and he the Scribe, is there to explain the
