
FROM THE GERMAN.

    One short six months had scarcely gone,
      When, full of all he'd learned,
    Young Frederick, that hopeful son,
      From college home returned.

    To his paternal roof restored,
      It was not long before
    The learned man at table poured
      The treasures of his lore.

    "Now," said the youngster, "father dear,
      You doubtless think you see
    Two roasted fowls before us here;
      But I say there are three.

    "_Atqui_ these roasted fowls are two,
      And one in two must be;
    _Ergo_,--or logic is not true,--
      These roasted fowls are three."

    "God bless your studies!" quoth papa;
    "'Tis just as you have said;
    _This_ is for me, _that_ for mamma,
    The third for learned Fred."


LITTLE ROLAND.

TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN OF UHLAND.

    Lady Bertha sat in the rocky cleft,
      Her bitter woes to weep;
    Little Roland played in the free fresh air;
      His sorrows were not deep.

    "My royal brother, O King Charles,
      Why did I fly from thee?
    Splendor and rank I left for love;
      Now thou art wroth with me.

    "O Milon, Milon, husband dear!
      Beneath the waves art thou;
    For love I have forsaken all,
      Yet love forsakes me now.

    "O Roland! thou, my dearest boy,
      Now fame and love to me;
    Come quickly, little Roland, come!
      My hope rests all on thee.

    "Go to the city, Roland, go!
      To beg us meat and bread;
    And whoso gives the smallest gift,
      Ask blessings on his head."

    Now great King Charles at table sat,
      In the golden hall of state;
    With dish and cup the servants ran,
      On the noble guests to wait.

    Flute, harp, and minstrelsy now tune
      All hearts to joyful mood;
    The cheerful music does not reach
      To Bertha's solitude.

    Before the hall in the court-yard sat
      Of beggars a motley throng;
    The meat and drink was more to them
      Than flute, and harp, and song.

    The king looked out, through the open door,
      Upon the beggar throng;
    Through the crowd he saw a noble boy,
      Pushing his way along.

    Strange was the little fellow's dress,
      Of divers colors all;
    But with the beggars he would not stay,--
      He looked up at the hall.

    Within the hall little Roland treads,
      As though it were his own;
    He takes a dish from the royal board
      In silence, and is gone.

    The king he thinks,--"What do I see?
      This is a curious way";
    But, as he quietly submits,
      The rest do nothing say.

    In a little while again he comes,
      To the king he marches up,
    And little Roland boldly takes
      The royal golden cup.

    "Halloo! stop there! thou saucy wight!"
      King Charles's voice did ring;
    Little Roland kept the golden cup,
      And looked up at the king.

    The king at first looked angrily;
      But very soon he smiled:--
    "You tread here in our golden hall,
      As in the green woods wild.

    "From the royal table you take a dish,
      As they take an apple from a tree;
    As with the waters of the brook,
      With my red wine you make free."

    "The peasant drinks from the running brook,
      On apples she may dine;
    My mother must have fish and game,
      For her is the foaming wine."

    "Is thy mother such a noble dame
      As thou, my boy, dost boast,
    Then surely has she a castle fair,
      And of vassals a stately host.

    "Tell me, who may her sewer be?
      And who cupbearer, too?"
    "My own right hand her sewer is;
      My left, cupbearer true."

    "Tell on; who are her faithful guards?"
      "My two blue eyes alway."
    "Tell on; who is her minstrel free?"
      "My rosy mouth, I say."

    "Brave servants has the dame, indeed;
      But does strange livery choose,--
    Made up of colors manifold,
      Shining with rainbow hues."

    "From each quarter of the city,
      With eight boys I have fought;
    Four sorts of cloth to the conqueror,
      As tribute, they have brought."

    "The best of servants, to my mind,
      The dame's must surely be;
    She is, I wot, the beggar's queen,
      Who keeps a table free.

    "The noble lady should not far
      From my royal palace be;
    Arise, three ladies, and three lords,
      And bring her in to me."

    Little Roland, holding fast the cup,
      From the splendid hall he hies;
    To follow him, at the king's command,
      Three lords, three ladies, rise.

    And after now a little while,
      The king sees, far away,
    The noble ladies and the knights
      Return without delay.

    The king he cries out suddenly,--
      "Help, Heaven! see I aright?
    'Tis my own blood, in open hall,
      I have treated with cruel slight.

    "Help, Heaven! in pilgrim dress I see
      My sister Bertha stand;
    So pale in my gay palace here,
      A beggar's staff in her hand!"

    Lady Bertha sinks down at his feet,
      Pale image of despair;
    His wrath returns, and he looks on her
      With a stern and angry air.

    Lady Bertha quick cast down her eyes,
      No word to speak she tried;
    Little Roland raised his clear blue eyes,--
      "My uncle!" loud he cried.

    "Rise up, my sister Bertha, rise!"
      The king said tenderly;
    "For the sake of this dear son of thine,
      Thou shalt forgiven be."

    Lady Bertha rose up joyfully:--
      "Dear brother! thanks to thee;
    Little Roland shall requite the boon
      Thou hast bestowed on me.

    "He of the glory of his king
      Shall be an image fair;
    The colors of many a foreign realm
      His banner and shield shall bear.

    "The cup from many a royal board
      He shall seize with his free right hand,
    And safety and fresh glory bring
      To his sighing mother-land."


BILLY RABBIT TO MARY.

     [Billy Rabbit was a little rabbit which a boy caught in the
     woods, and gave to a little girl of the name of Mary. She
     was very attentive to the little prisoner, gave him an
     abundance of good things to eat, and tried her best to make
     him happy; but all in vain. After many attempts, he at last
     succeeded in making his escape, and instantly disappeared in
     the woods. In the course of the day, the following letter,
     sealed with a sharp thorn, was received by his friend Mary.]

    Artichoke Woods.

    You thought, my dear Mary, you had Billy fast,
    But I tried very hard, and escaped you at last;
    The chance was so tempting, I thought I would _nab_ it,--
    It was not very naughty, I'm sure, in a rabbit.
    O, let not your kind heart be angry with me;
    But think what a joy it is to be free,
    To see the green woods, to feel the fresh air,
    To skip, and to play, and to run everywhere.
    The food that you gave me was pleasant and sweet,
    But I'd rather be free, though with nothing to eat.

    O, how glad they all were to see me come back,
    And every one wanted to give me a smack.
    Dick knocked over Brownie, and jumped over Bun,
    And the neighbours came in to witness the fun.
    My father said something, but could not be heard;
    My mother looked at me, but spoke not a word;
    And while she was looking, her eyes became pink,
    And she shed a few tears, I verily think.

    To him who a hole or a palace inhabits,
    To all sorts of beings, to men, and to rabbits,
    Ah! dear to us all is sweet Liberty,
    Especially, Mary, to you and to me.
    So I hope you'll forgive me for sending this letter,
    To tell you I'm safe, and feel so much better,
    Cut all sorts of capers, and act very silly,
    And am your devoted, affectionate

    BILLY.


THE OLD AND NEW SHOES.

    "Good bye, get away, you ugly old things!"
      Said a little boy once to his shoes;
    "All stubbed are your toes, all twisted your strings,
      You're wrinkled, one-sided, and loose.

    "But here are my new ones, so shiny and bright,
      They are almost as smooth as my skin;
    How stiff they are, too! how straight and upright!
      How snug my feet feel now they're in!"

    So saying, he gave to his old shoes a kick,
      And strutted with pride to the door;
    His unkindness had cut the old shoes to the quick,
      For nothing contempt can endure.

    "Master Frank, Master Frank, stop a while, if you please,"
      ('Twas one of the shoes he heard call);
    "Our _soles_ cannot bear such insults as these,
      And your pride, Sir, will soon have a fall."

    Frank stood still with wonder and looked at the shoe,
      But could not see into the matter;
    At last he exclaimed,--"As they've nothing to do,
      I suppose, like Poll Parrot, they chatter."

    So he opened the door, and walked down the stairs;
      His shoes were too stiff to go fast;
    But let us observe him, and see how he fares,
      How repentant poor Frank was at last.

    His shoes were so smooth that he could but just stand,
      So tight, that they pinched in his toes;
    He could only sit still, and try to look grand,
      And remember he had on new shoes.

    But Fido ran in, who loved little Frank,
      And the shoes were remembered no more;
    They began to cut capers, but at the first prank
      Down tumbled poor Frank on the floor.

    He was a brave boy, he thought not of crying,
      He said, "Never mind," though in pain;
    He whistled to Fido, but there is no denying
      He fell down again and again.

    He went to his bed with his heart full of sorrow;
      He said to the nurse,--"I should choose,
    If you please, when I'm dressed, my good Betsey, to-morrow,
      To put on my easy old shoes.

    "See how red my toes are, and I'm all black and blue;
      I don't like my new shoes at all."
    "Ah! you see," answered Betsey, "what I told you was true;
      Your shoes, Master Frank, are too small."

    His old shoes he was glad in the morning to see,
      And, forgetting his trouble and pain,
    "How happy," said he, "my poor toes will be
      To get into the old shoes again."

    The voice of the old shoe now once more was heard:--
      "Master Frank, will you please to attend?
    I wish, with your leave, to say just a word,--
      'Tis a word of advice from a friend.

    "Never part with old shoes till they part from you;
      Let your new ones be always well tried;
    Old shoes and old friends are far better than new,
      And, trust me, more worthy of pride.

    "Our strings and our toes are bad, we must own,
      But they can be easily mended.
    I have done," said the shoe, in a kind, easy tone,
      And it gaped as the lecture was ended.

    New toes and new heels now the old shoes have got,
      New strings, too, their beauty renew;
    Frank wears them in peace, and has never forgot
      The words of the friendly old shoe.


THE MONKEYS AND THE BEARS.

TRANSLATED FROM THE GERMAN OF GELLART.

    The monkeys, 'tis said, once asked of the bears,
    How it was that their nation so much surpassed theirs,
    And begged that the means they would graciously tell
    By which the young bears were kept hearty and well.
    "Perhaps it may be," said one of the mothers,
    Who seemed more considerate and wise than the others,
    "Perhaps," said she, trembling at even the thought,
    "We give our dear young ones less food than we ought;
    We may be impatient; I have really some fears
    That we rock them too little, the poor little dears;
    Our milk may cause fever, and their stomachs not suit,
    Or perhaps they are weakened and injured by fruit.
    Perhaps the whole mischief is caused by the air,
    And who 'gainst this evil can ever prepare?
    In their earliest years, it may poison instil,
    And through their whole lifetime produce every ill.
    Perhaps it may be, before we are aware,
    They breathe in a pestilence, borne on the air.
    Perhaps, for the nerves of us monkeys are weak,
    In jumping, or leaping, some bone they may break
    In their breasts." Here, for weeping, she scarcely could speak,
    And she snatched up her little one long to her breast;
    With such vehement love the poor victim she pressed,
    That all its complainings and troubles were stilled;
