is perfect. They have all the beauties of a great cathedral chime, with
infinitely less expense.

There is practically no limit to the uses to which these bells may be put.
They can be called into requisition in theatres, concert halls, and public
buildings, as they range in all sizes, from those described down to little
sets of silver bells that might be placed on a small centre table.

       *       *       *       *       *

[_The Republic_, Washington, D.C., February 2, 1895]

[Extract]


CHRISTIAN SCIENCE

    MARY BAKER EDDY THE "MOTHER" OF THE IDEA--SHE HAS AN IMMENSE
    FOLLOWING THROUGHOUT THE UNITED STATES, AND A CHURCH COSTING
    $250,000 WAS RECENTLY BUILT IN HER HONOR AT BOSTON

"My faith has the strength to nourish trees as well as souls," was the
remark Rev. Mary Baker Eddy, the "Mother" of Christian Science, made
recently as she pointed to a number of large elms that shade her delightful
country home in Concord, N.H. "I had them brought here in warm weather,
almost as big as they are now, and not one died." This is a remarkable
statement, but it is made by a remarkable woman, who has originated a new
phase of religious belief, and who numbers over one hundred thousand
intelligent people among her devoted followers.

The great hold she has upon this army was demonstrated in a very tangible
and material manner recently, when "The First Church of Christ, Scientist,"
erected at a cost of two hundred and fifty thousand dollars, was dedicated
in Boston. This handsome edifice was paid for before it was begun, by the
voluntary contributions of Christian Scientists all over the country, and a
tablet imbedded in its wall declares that it was built as "a testimonial to
our beloved teacher, Rev. Mary Baker Eddy, Discoverer and Founder of
Christian Science, author of its textbook, 'Science and Health with Key to
the Scriptures,' president of the Massachusetts Metaphysical College, and
the first pastor of this denomination."

There is usually considerable difficulty in securing sufficient funds for
the building of a new church, but such was not the experience of Rev. Mary
Baker Eddy. Money came freely from all parts of the United States. Men,
women, and children contributed, some giving a pittance, others donating
large sums. When the necessary amount was raised, the custodian of the
funds was compelled to refuse further contributions, in order to stop the
continued inflow of money from enthusiastic Christian Scientists.

Mrs. Eddy says she discovered Christian Science in 1866. She studied the
Scriptures and the sciences, she declares, in a search for the great
curative Principle. She investigated allopathy, homoeopathy, and
electricity, without finding a clew; and modern philosophy gave her no
distinct statement of the Science of Mind-healing. After careful study she
became convinced that the curative Principle was the Deity.

       *       *       *       *       *

[_New York Tribune_, February 7, 1895]

[Extract]


Boston has just dedicated the first church of the Christian Scientists, in
commemoration of the Founder of that sect, the Rev. Mary Baker Eddy,
drawing together six thousand people to participate in the ceremonies,
showing that belief in that curious creed is not confined to its original
apostles and promulgators, but that it has penetrated what is called the
New England mind to an unlooked-for extent. In inviting the Eastern
churches and the Anglican fold to unity with Rome, the Holy Father should
not overlook the Boston sect of Christian Scientists, which is rather small
and new, to be sure, but is undoubtedly an interesting faith and may have a
future before it, whatever attitude Rome may assume toward it.

       *       *       *       *       *

[_Journal_, Kansas City, Mo., January 10, 1895]

[Extract]


GROWTH OF A FAITH

Attention is directed to the progress which has been made by what is called
Christian Science by the dedication at Boston of "The First Church of
Christ, Scientist." It is a most beautiful structure of gray granite, and
its builders call it their "prayer in stone," which suggests to
recollection the story of the cathedral of Amiens, whose architectural
construction and arrangement of statuary and paintings made it to be called
the Bible of that city. The Frankish church was reared upon the spot where,
in pagan times, one bitter winter day, a Roman soldier parted his mantle
with his sword and gave half of the garment to a naked beggar; and so was
memorialized in art and stone what was called the divine spirit of giving,
whose unbelieving exemplar afterward became a saint. The Boston church
similarly expresses the faith of those who believe in what they term the
divine art of healing, which, to their minds, exists as much to-day as it
did when Christ healed the sick.

The first church organization of this faith was founded fifteen years ago
with a membership of only twenty-six, and since then the number of
believers has grown with remarkable rapidity, until now there are societies
in every part of the country. This growth, it is said, proceeds more from
the graveyards than from conversions from other churches, for most of those
who embrace the faith claim to have been rescued from death miraculously
under the injunction to "heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, raise the dead,
cast out demons." They hold with strict fidelity to what they conceive to
be the literal teachings of the Bible as expressed in its poetical and
highly figurative language.

Altogether the belief and service are well suited to satisfy a taste for
the mystical which, along many lines, has shown an uncommon development in
this country during the last decade, and which is largely Oriental in its
choice. Such a rapid departure from long respected views as is marked by
the dedication of this church, and others of kindred meaning, may
reasonably excite wonder as to how radical is to be this encroachment upon
prevailing faiths, and whether some of the pre-Christian ideas of the
Asiatics are eventually to supplant those in company with which our
civilization has developed.

       *       *       *       *       *

[_Montreal Daily Herald_, Saturday, February 2, 1895]

[Extract]


CHRISTIAN SCIENCE

SKETCH OF ITS ORIGIN AND GROWTH--THE MONTREAL BRANCH

"If you would found a new faith, go to Boston," has been said by a great
American writer. This is no idle word, but a fact borne out by
circumstances. Boston can fairly claim to be the hub of the logical
universe, and an accurate census of the religious faiths which are to be
found there to-day would probably show a greater number of them than even
Max O'Rell's famous enumeration of John Bull's creeds.

Christian Science, or the Principle of divine healing, is one of those
movements which seek to give expression to a higher spirituality. Founded
twenty-five years ago, it was still practically unknown a decade since, but
to-day it numbers over a quarter of a million of believers, the majority of
whom are in the United States, and is rapidly growing. In Canada, also,
there is a large number of members. Toronto and Montreal have strong
churches, comparatively, while in many towns and villages single believers
or little knots of them are to be found.

It was exactly one hundred years from the date of the Declaration of
Independence, when on July 4, 1876, the first Christian Scientist
Association was organized by seven persons, of whom the foremost was Mrs.
Eddy. The church was founded in April, 1879, with twenty-six members, and a
charter was obtained two months later. Mrs. Eddy assumed the pastorship of
the church during its early years, and in 1881 was ordained, being now
known as the Rev. Mary Baker Eddy.

The Massachusetts Metaphysical College was founded by Mrs. Eddy in 1881,
and here she taught the principles of the faith for nine years. Students
came to it in hundreds from all parts of the world, and many are now
pastors or in practice. The college was closed in 1889, as Mrs. Eddy felt
it necessary for the interests of her religious work to retire from active
contact with the world. She now lives in a beautiful country residence in
her native State.

       *       *       *       *       *

[_The American_, Baltimore, Md., January 14, 1895]

[Extract]


MRS. EDDY'S DISCIPLES

It is not generally known that a Christian Science congregation was
organized in this city about a year ago. It now holds regular services in
the parlor of the residence of the pastor, at 1414 Linden Avenue. The
dedication in Boston last Sunday of the Christian Science church, called
The Mother Church, which cost over two hundred thousand dollars, adds
interest to the Baltimore organization. There are many other church
edifices in the United States owned by Christian Scientists. Christian
Science was founded by Mrs. Mary Baker Eddy. The Baltimore congregation was
organized at a meeting held at the present location on February 27, 1894.

Dr. Hammond, the pastor, came to Baltimore about three years ago to
organize this movement. Miss Cross came from Syracuse, N.Y., about eighteen
months ago. Both were under the instruction of Mrs. Mary Baker Eddy, the
Founder of the movement.

Dr. Hammond says he was converted to Christian Science by being cured by
Mrs. Eddy of a physical ailment some twelve years ago, after several
doctors had pronounced his case incurable. He says they use no medicines,
but rely on Mind for cure, believing that disease comes from evil and
sick-producing thoughts, and that, if they can so fill the mind with good
thoughts as to leave no room there for the bad, they can work a cure. He
distinguishes Christian Science from the faith-cure, and added: "This
Christian Science really is a return to the ideas of primitive
Christianity. It would take a small book to explain fully all about it, but
I may say that the fundamental idea is that God is Mind, and we interpret
the Scriptures wholly from the spiritual or metaphysical standpoint. We
find in this view of the Bible the power fully developed to heal the sick.
It is not faith-cure, but it is an acknowledgment of certain Christian and
scientific laws, and to work a cure the practitioner must understand these
laws aright. The patient may gain a better understanding than the Church
has had in the past. All churches have prayed for the cure of disease, but
they have not done so in an intelligent manner, understanding and
demonstrating the Christ-healing."

       *       *       *       *       *

[_The Reporter_, Lebanon, Ind., January 18, 1895]

[Extract]


DISCOVERED CHRISTIAN SCIENCE

REMARKABLE CAREER OF REV. MARY BAKER EDDY, WHO HAS OVER ONE HUNDRED
THOUSAND FOLLOWERS

Rev. Mary Baker Eddy, Discoverer and Founder of Christian Science, author
of its textbook, "Science and Health with Key to the Scriptures," president
of the Massachusetts Metaphysical College, and first pastor of the
Christian Science denomination, is without doubt one of the most remarkable
women in America. She has within a few years founded a sect that has over
one hundred thousand converts, and very recently saw completed in Boston,
as a testimonial to her labors, a handsome fire-proof church that cost two
hundred and fifty thousand dollars and was paid for by Christian Scientists
all over the country.

Mrs. Eddy asserts that in 1866 she became certain that "all causation was
Mind, and every effect a mental phenomenon." Taking her text from the
Bible, she endeavored in vain to find the great curative Principle--the
Deity--in philosophy and schools of medicine, and she concluded that the
way of salvation demonstrated by Jesus was the power of Truth over all
error, sin, sickness, and death. Thus originated the divine or spiritual
Science of Mind-healing, which she termed Christian Science. She has a
palatial home in Boston and a country-seat in Concord, N.H. The Christian
Science Church has a membership of four thousand, and eight hundred of the
members are Bostonians.

       *       *       *       *       *

[_N.Y. Commercial Advertiser_, January 9, 1895]


The idea that Christian Science has declined in popularity is not borne out
by the voluntary contribution of a quarter of a million dollars for a
memorial church for Mrs. Eddy, the inventor of this cure. The money comes
from Christian Science believers exclusively.

       *       *       *       *       *

[_The Post_, Syracuse, New York, February 1, 1895]


DO NOT BELIEVE SHE WAS DEIFIED

CHRISTIAN SCIENTISTS OF SYRACUSE SURPRISED AT THE NEWS ABOUT MRS. MARY
BAKER EDDY, FOUNDER OF THE FAITH

Christian Scientists in this city, and in fact all over the country, have
been startled and greatly discomfited over the announcements in New York
papers that Mrs. Mary Baker G. Eddy, the acknowledged Christian Science
Leader, has been exalted by various dignitaries of the faith....

It is well known that Mrs. Eddy has resigned herself completely to the
study and foundation of the faith to which many thousands throughout the
United States are now so entirely devoted. By her followers and cobelievers
she is unquestionably looked upon as having a divine mission to fulfil,
and as though inspired in her great task by supernatural power.

For the purpose of learning the feeling of Scientists in this city toward
the reported deification of Mrs. Eddy, a _Post_ reporter called upon a few
of the leading members of the faith yesterday and had a number of very
interesting conversations upon the subject.

Mrs. D.W. Copeland of University Avenue was one of the first to be seen.
Mrs. Copeland is a very pleasant and agreeable lady, ready to converse, and
evidently very much absorbed in the work to which she has given so much of
her attention. Mrs. Copeland claims to have been healed a number of years
ago by Christian Scientists, after she had practically been given up by a
number of well-known physicians.

"And for the past eleven years," said Mrs. Copeland, "I have not taken any
medicine or drugs of any kind, and yet have been perfectly well."

In regard to Mrs. Eddy, Mrs. Copeland said that she was the Founder of the
faith, but that she had never claimed, nor did she believe that Mrs.
Lathrop had, that Mrs. Eddy had any power other than that which came from
God and through faith in Him and His teachings.

"The power of Christ has been dormant in mankind for ages," added the
speaker, "and it was Mrs. Eddy's mission to revive it. In our labors we
take Christ as an example, going about doing good and healing the sick.
Christ has told us to do his work, naming as one great essential that we
have faith in him.

"Did you ever hear of Jesus' taking medicine himself, or giving it to
others?" inquired the speaker. "Then why should we worry ourselves about
sickness and disease? If we become sick, God will care for us, and will
send to us those who have faith, who believe in His unlimited and divine
power. Mrs. Eddy was strictly an ardent follower after God. She had faith
in Him, and she cured herself of a deathly disease through the mediation of
her God. Then she secluded herself from the world for three years and
studied and meditated over His divine Word. She delved deep into the
Biblical passages, and at the end of the period came from her seclusion one
of the greatest Biblical scholars of the age. Her mission was then the
mission of a Christian, to do good and heal the sick, and this duty she
