the kind. There are six organized churches at Amoy. They are all Dutch
(i.e. Reformed), and they are all Presbyterian, for the Dutch Churches
are all Presbyterian. But they are Chinese, not American, nor English,
nor Scotch. If these churches are not _one_, then it is impossible for
two or more individual churches to be one. If schism in a Church be a
sin, then the separation of this Church will be a sin, for it will be
an actual schism. You can make nothing more nor less of it. If you say
that schism is only an evil, then the separation of this Church will, at
least, be an evil.

Perhaps it will be thought that _schism_ is too hard a term whereby to
designate the separation of the Church at Amoy. Never mind the word,
then, but let us look at the facts. The proper Classis of Amoy, composed
of all the churches of like order, and of the Missionaries, has
proceeded, according to the order of our Church, to ordain and install
native pastors, and to perform a few other necessary ecclesiastical
acts. These pastors are now called on to separate from, and break up
that body, through which they received their office! The opinions and
wishes of these native pastors, as well of the native Classis, and the
native churches, are all ignored! Are such things right? Are these the
doctrines or policy of the Dutch Church? We are told that we need say
nothing to the native churches on the subject. Is this right? Is the
Dutch Church a hierarchy? Does the General Synod claim authority to
order the division in such a manner of a Classis of the Church of Christ
without the consent of that Classis? "_What God hath joined together let
not man put asunder._"

In consequence of fallen humanity, there are evils which we call
necessary evils. Such is the case of different Denominations of
Christians in the same region of territory. They differ in sentiment on
important (or supposed to be important) subjects, and because of this
difference in sentiment, they can work together in greater harmony, and
with greater efficiency, by being formed into distinct organizations.
Such, however, is not the case of the six churches at Amoy, and others
growing up under their care and the care of your own and the English
Presbyterian Missionaries. Even when Churches agree in doctrine and
order, it is sometimes better, and sometimes necessary, in consequence
of geographical separation or national distinctions, to form distinct
organizations. It is better, or necessary, that the Churches in Holland,
and America, and South Africa, be ecclesiastically distinct. We do not
call this an evil, for all the advantages of ecclesiastical courts and
control are better thus secured. But suppose a case. There are, say,
thirty Dutch churches in the city of New York. Now, suppose there were
no others of the same order throughout this whole land: instead of
allowing these churches to remain one organic whole--forming Classes and
Synods, as the growth and convenience may allow and direct--it is
proposed to take one-half of these churches, form them into a distinct
organization, thus depriving them of ecclesiastical relations to the
other half, and attach them to an ecclesiastical body in China--a nation
of different customs and different language. How should we designate
such an act? The first part would be schism, and the last part would be
folly. The only difference between such a procedure and that required of
us is, that the churches at Amoy have been gathered partly by our
instrumentality, and are dependent partly on us for instruction. If our
Presbyterial order be scriptural, all these churches at Amoy, growing
out of each other, are bound to associate together, ecclesiastically. It
is their duty to submit to each other. They would also be bound to
submit to the Church of the same order in England and America, and every
other country throughout the world, if it were possible and convenient.
But such relation is not convenient, or possible. Therefore, we must
choose that which is possible and most convenient. It is possible, and
it is convenient, that they associate together. It is not possible that
they all be subject to the Church in England, and, at the same time, to
the Church in America. It is not convenient that they all be subject to
either of these Churches. We do not think it is convenient that one-half
of them be subject to either of these Churches. Besides the sin, or
evil, of schism, they never can be properly represented in the higher
ecclesiastical bodies of either of these Churches. They never can have
an Elder present (I speak now of their connection with the Church in
America, for this is the subject before us). They never can have a full
representation of ministers. Only very seldom can they have even one
minister present. He usually will only be one who is ill, and
consequently not a proper representative. The native element, _i.e., the
chief element_ of the Church can never be represented at all. The
representation, at the best, will only be a representation of your
Missionaries, not at all of the Chinese Church. Therefore, we assert
that such a union would not be _real_, not even _apparent_, only
_nominal_. In striving after it, we are pursuing a chimera, destroying a
substance for the sake of a shadow.

But it is offered as an objection to our views, that the Presbyterian
Church (O.S.) has Presbyteries and Synods in India and China. Yes, they
have three Presbyteries and a Synod in India, and have had for twenty
years. But even yet there is not so much of a native element in their
whole Synod as there is already in the little Church in the region of
Amoy. As an ecclesiastical body, it is not _Indian_ in its
characteristics--it is _American_. So with all their Presbyteries in
Siam and China, with the exception, perhaps, of the Presbytery at
Ningpo. They are _American_ Presbyteries, not native in their
character.[2]

[Footnote 2: The following statistics are from the Minutes of General
Assembly, 1863.

_Synod of Northern India_--Was organized in 1841. Is composed of three
Presbyteries. Now has 19 ministers (only one of these is a _native
pastor_); 9 churches; 246 communicants. (How many of these are natives
not reported.)

_Presbytery of Canton_--Has 4 ministers; no native pastor; 1 church; 12
communicants. (How many of these are natives not reported.) _Presbytery
of Ningpo_--Has 8 ministers; no native pastor; 2 churches; 111 native
members.

_Presbytery of Siam_--Has 6 ministers; no native pastor; 1 church; 8
communicants. (How many of these are native members not reported.)

_Presbytery of West Africa_--Has 9 ministers; no native pastor; 6
churches; 191 communicants (probably all natives.)

Are these ecclesiastical bodies respectively Indian, Chinese, and
African in their character? or are they all _essentially American_? Yet
these are the bodies to which the Committee of General Synod of 1857
referred when they said, "As to the difficulties suggested" [by the
Missionaries at Amoy] "respecting the delays of carrying out a system of
appellate jurisdiction covering America and China, it is enough to say,
that the Presbyterian Church (O.S.) finds no insuperable difficulties in
carrying into operation her system, which comprehends Presbyteries and
Synods in India as well as here." Why should there be many _insuperable_
difficulties so long as these bodies remain _American Missionary
bodies_, instead of being _native ecclesiastical bodies_? Practically
they do not need representation in the Church at home more than our
Missions need representatives in the Board of Missions. In the aggregate
of all the above-mentioned ecclesiastical missionary bodies, there is
_but one native pastor_, and this, as might be expected, so far as we
are aware, furnished the only case in which difficulty has occurred.
Doubtless in the instance referred to, the native pastor was in error,
and, as he found some _insuperable difficulty_ in getting his case
before the General Assembly, a similar effort is not likely soon to be
made.]

So is the Classis of Arcot appealed to. Such appeals put us in a
somewhat painful position. As with the Presbyterian bodies just
mentioned, so with the Classis of Arcot. We have no rivalry with the
brethren there, and do not wish to say a word that looks like stricture
on their policy. We do not utter a word of this kind, except in
self-defense. We rejoice in all their successes. But the time will come,
if the blessing of God continues to follow their labors, when they will
be compelled to adopt our principles. The Missionaries at Arcot are not
properly _pastors_ of the native churches. They exercise the pastoral
office only temporarily, until native pastors are raised up. Their
relation to the Synods in this country is not like that of the other
Classes of our Church. They never have had and never will have a proper
representation in these higher courts. They have never had a native
elder present. They never have even a partial representation of
ministers, except under the afflictive dispensations of Providence. For
several years past they would have been without any representation at
all, but for the fact of one of their number being in this country whose
ill health forbids his return to that field of labor. It is by being
unfitted to be a member of the Classis that he becomes able to be a
representative of the Classis in the Synod! At the present time, because
of the still American character of their body, they may feel no serious
inconvenience. If our position had been like theirs, occupying the
ground at Amoy alone, possibly we should have done as they have. We
should have understood well enough that the connection of the native
Church with the Church at home could only be _nominal_. But if our
Church desired this, so long as it did not injure the native Church, we
probably should have made no objections.

But we are told that it is not desired that this connection with the
Church in America should be perpetual. It will last only until the
Church at Amoy has sufficient development to stand alone. Then, of
course, our Church will consent to the separation. (A very different
doctrine, by the way, from the "_assertion_" of the committee of Synod
that the Church can not "voluntarily relinquish its powers.") After
that, the churches at Amoy which have been under our care, and those
which have been under the care of the English Presbyterians, may again
unite in one Denomination, if they see fit. This sounds pretty well. But
look at it. First separate the churches long enough to engender
rivalries and allow prejudices to grow up, and then attempt to unite
them, and what will be the result? Unless they have a more liberal
spirit than is usual in the churches in this land, instead of making one
denomination out of two, we shall have three. But who shall be the
judge when the proper time has arrived to liberate the Church in China,
if the opinions of those on the ground, and of the native churches, are
all to be ignored?

3. It will injure the efficiency of the Church at Amoy. Besides the
objection--which the heathen will thus, as readily as the irreligious in
this country, be able to urge against Christianity--furnished by the
increase of Denominations, it will deprive the churches of the benefit
of the united wisdom and strength of the whole of them for
self-cultivation and for Christian enterprise, and will introduce a
spirit of jealous rivalry among them. We know it is said that there need
be no such result, and that the native churches may remain just as
united in spirit after the organization of two Denominations as before.
Such a sentiment takes for granted, either that ecclesiastical
organization has in fact no efficiency (such is not the doctrine of our
Church), or that the Chinese churches have arrived at a far higher state
of sanctification than the churches have attained to in this land. Do
not different Denominations exhibit jealous rivalry in this land? Why,
your Missionaries are already frequently charged with being too liberal
towards their English Presbyterian brethren in giving to them members
and churches which, it is said, properly belong to us. Is Chinese human
nature different from American?

In consequence of such division, the native Churches will not be so able
to support the Gospel among themselves. Look at the condition of our
western towns in this respect. Why strive to entail like evils on our
Missionary churches? Their strength will be weakened for evangelistic
effort. Their Missionary efforts is one of the most striking and
praiseworthy characteristics of the Amoy churches. How will they be
shorn of their strength by division and necessary rivalry! Besides
this, if the connection with the Church at home be anything more than
nominal, our churches should, in part at least, work through the Church
at home. No? Then why form the connection?

4. Instead of the Dutch Church being _the_ Presbyterian Church at Amoy,
it will only be a small Church, bearing about the same proportion to the
other Christian Churches there, that it does to the other Churches in
this land. Why is not the Dutch Church the principal Presbyterian body
in this land? Unless we are mistaken in regard to its excellency of
order, it has all the adaptedness, and it was here first. Do you wish a
similar result in China?

       *       *       *       *       *

That it may be seen whether the Missionaries of Amoy have asked of our
Church to "surrender the Constitution, the policy, the interests of our
Church," "nay, even their own welfare, and that of the Mission they are
so tenderly attached to"--whether what they ask for "is flatly in the
face of our Constitution and order"--whether the "Synod has no right to
form, or to authorize any such self-regulating, ecclesiastical body, or
to consent that any Ministers of our Church should hold seats in such a
body"--whether, "if we do it, we transcend the most liberal construction
which has ever been known to be given to the powers of the General
Synod"--whether, by granting the request of the Missionaries, "we
violate our own order, our fundamental principles, the polity to which
we are bound by our profession, by our subscription, by every tie which
can bind religious and honorable, men"--I will append the resolution
which was offered by me in the General Synod as a substitute for those
offered by the Committee. If it called for declamation like the above,
well. These are the words:

_Resolved_, That the Synod learn, with gratitude to God, of the great
progress of the work of the Lord at Amoy, and in the region around, so
that already we hear of six organized churches with their Consistories,
and others growing up, not yet organized; two native Pastors, who were
to have been ordained on the 29th of March last, and the whole under the
care of a Classis composed of the Missionaries of our Church and the
English Presbyterian Church, and representative Elders of the several
churches. It calls for our hearty gratitude to the Great Head of the
Church, that the Missionaries of different Churches, and different
countries, have been enabled, through Divine grace, to work together in
such harmony. It is also gratifying to us that these Churches and this
Classis have been organized according to the polity of our Church.
Inasmuch as the Synod of the English Presbyterian Church has approved of
the course of their Missionaries in uniting with ours in the
organization of the Church at Amoy, after our order, therefore, this
Synod would direct its Board of Foreign Missions to allow their
Missionaries to continue their present relations with the Missionaries
of the English Presbyterian Church, and the churches under their several
care, so long as the present harmony shall continue, and no departure
shall be made from the doctrines and essential polity of our Church, or
until this Synod shall otherwise direct.

Some, after reading the foregoing discussion, will be ready to say to
us: "Your views are in the main correct. It would have been better if
Synod had decided otherwise, but the decision has been made, and we must
put up with it." We answer, Not so. We must obey Synod, but may not the
Church change or improve her decisions? Here is one of the good things
we hope to see come out of this mistake of the Church. Jesus rules, and
he is ordering all things for the welfare of his Church and the
advancement of his cause. Sometimes, the better to accomplish this end,
he permits the Church to make mistakes. When we failed in former days to
get our views made public, it gave us no anxiety, for we believed the
doctrine that Jesus reigns. So we now feel, nothwithstanding this
mistake. The Master will overrule it for good. We do not certainly know
how, but we can imagine one way. By means of this mistake the matter may
be brought before our Church, and before other Churches, more clearly
than it would otherwise have been for many years to come, and in
consequence of this we expect, in due time, that our Church, instead of
coming up merely to the standard of liberality for which we have been
contending, will rise far above anything we have asked for or even
imagined, and other Churches will also raise their standard higher.
Hereafter we expect to contend for still higher principles. This is the
doctrine: Let all the branches of the great Presbyterian family in the
same region in any heathen country, which are sound in the faith,
organize themselves, _if convenient_, into one organic whole, allowing
liberty to the different parts in things non-essential. Let those who
adopt Dutch customs, as at Amoy, continue, if they see fit, their
peculiarities, and those who adopt other Presbyterian customs, as at
Ningpo and other places, continue their peculiarities, and yet all unite
as one Church. This subject does not simply relate to the interests of
the Church at Amoy. It relates to the interests of all the Missionary
