Publication to correct in a Christian manner impositions on the
public in regard to Christian Science, injustices done Mrs. Eddy
or members of this Church by the daily press, by periodicals or
circulated literature of any sort. This Committee on Publication
shall be responsible for correcting or having corrected a false
newspaper article which has not been replied to by other Scientists,
or which has been forwarded to this Committee for the purpose of
having him reply to it. If the correction by the Committee on
Publication is not promptly published by the periodical in which it
is desirable that this correction shall appear, this Committee shall
immediately apply for aid to the Committee on Business. Furthermore,
the Committee on Publication shall read the _last proof sheet_ of
such an article and see that it is published according to copy; he
shall circulate in large quantities the papers containing such an
article, sending a copy to the Clerk of the Church. It shall also be
the duty of the Committee on Publication to have published each year
in a leading Boston newspaper the letter sent to the Pastor Emeritus
by the Church members in annual meeting assembled. The State
Committees on Publication act under the direction of this Committee
on Publication.

In Branch Churches. SECTION 3. The Readers of the three largest
branch churches in each State of the United States and in Canada
shall annually and alternately appoint a Committee on Publication to
serve in their localities. For the purposes of this By-Law, the State
of California shall be considered as though it were two States, the
dividing line being the 36th parallel of latitude. Each county of
Great Britain and Ireland, except as hereinafter specified, through
the Readers of its three largest branch churches, shall annually
and alternately appoint a Committee on Publication to serve in
its locality. Each church is not necessarily confined to its own
members in selecting this Committee, but if preferred, can appoint
a Committee on Publication who is in good fellowship with another
Church of Christ, Scientist.

This By-Law applies to all States except Massachusetts, in which the
Committee on Publication is elected only by the Christian Science
Board of Directors. The Committee for the counties in which London,
England, is situated shall be appointed by the Christian Science
Board of Directors, and he shall, in addition to his other duties,
act as District Manager of the Committees on Publication for Great
Britain and Ireland.

Appointment. SECTION 4. The Committees on Publication shall consist
of men generally. Each State Committee shall be appointed by the
First and Second Readers of the church employing said Committee.
If prior to the meeting of the church for the election of officers,
Mrs. Eddy shall send to the First Reader of the church the name of
a candidate for its Committee on Publication, the Readers shall
appoint said candidate. Or if she shall send a special request to any
Committee on Publication, the request shall be carried out according
to her directions.

Removal from Office. SECTION 5. If the Committee on Publication
neglects to fulfil the obligations of his office according to these
By-Laws, and this becomes apparent to the Christian Science Board
of Directors, it shall be the duty of the Directors immediately to
act upon this important matter in accordance with said By-Laws.

The Christian Science Board of Directors may notify any Church of
Christ, Scientist, to remove its Committee on Publication and to
appoint another Committee to fill the vacancy; and it shall be the
duty of that church to comply with this request. In such cases it
shall be the privilege of this Board to name the Committee if it so
desires, and any Committee so named by the Board shall be elected by
the branch church.

Case of Necessity. SECTION 6. If a suitable man is not obtainable for
Committee on Publication, a suitable woman shall be elected. If at
any time the Christian Science Board of Directors shall determine
that the manager of the general Committee on Publication needs an
assistant, the Board shall, with the approval of the Pastor Emeritus,
appoint an assistant manager, who shall receive an adequate salary
from The Mother Church.




CHURCH-BUILDING


Article XXXIV

Building Committee. SECTION 1. There shall be a Building Committee
consisting of not less than three members, and this committee shall
not be dissolved until the new church edifice is completed. This
committee shall elect, dismiss, or supply a vacancy of its members
by a majority vote.

Designation of Deeds. SECTION 2. All deeds of further purchases of
land for The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Mass.,
shall have named in them all the trusts mentioned in the deeds given
by Albert Metcalf and E. Noyes Whitcomb in March, 1903; but this rule
shall not apply to land purchased for any purpose other than the
erection of a church edifice. Also there shall be incorporated in all
such deeds the phrase, "Mary Baker Eddy's Church, The Mother Church
or The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Mass."

The Mother Church Building. SECTION 3. The edifice erected in 1894
for The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Mass., shall
neither be demolished, nor removed from the site where it was built,
without the written consent of the Pastor Emeritus, Mary Baker Eddy.




CHURCH MANUAL


Article XXXV

For The Mother Church Only. SECTION 1. The Church Manual of The First
Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Mass., written by Mary Baker
Eddy and copyrighted, is adapted to The Mother Church only. It stands
alone, uniquely adapted to form the budding thought and hedge it
about with divine Love. This Manual shall not be revised without the
written consent of its author.

Seventy-third Edition the Authority. SECTION 2. The Board of
Directors, the Committee on Bible Lessons, and the Board of Trustees
shall each keep a copy of the Seventy-third Edition and of subsequent
editions of the Church Manual; and if a discrepancy appears in any
revised edition, these editions shall be cited as authority.

Amendment of By-Laws. SECTION 3. No new Tenet or By-Law shall be
adopted, nor any Tenet or By-Law amended or annulled, without the
written consent of Mary Baker Eddy, the author of our textbook,
SCIENCE AND HEALTH.




Appendix


Special Instructions Regarding Applications for Church Membership


1. Loyal members of The Mother Church are eligible to approve
candidates to unite with this Church.

2. No persons are eligible to countersign applications except
loyal students of Mrs. Eddy, Directors, and students of the Board
of Education who have been given a degree, and are members of The
Mother Church.

3. Those who approve applicants should have applications returned
to them after being filled out by the applicants, as required by
Article V, Sect. 6, and should compare them with the forms here
given, and see that names are legibly written, before sending
them to the Clerk of the Church. If not correct, the applicant
will be notified, and new applications will be required, as
none will be returned that are not correctly made out. This
requirement is to prevent applications being duplicated and the
confusion that might result therefrom. It is important that these
seemingly strict conditions be exactly complied with, as the
names of the members of The Mother Church will be recorded in the
history of the Church and become a part thereof.

4. All names, whether of applicants, signers, or countersigners,
must be plainly written, and one, at least, of the given names of
each, written in full. Initials only of first names will not be
received. Women must sign Miss or Mrs. before their names as the
case may be.

All names must be written the same in all places where they are
required.




TO APPLICANTS


1. In filling out the application blank, one of the Christian
names must be written in full. Initials alone will not be
received.

2. If the applicant is a married woman she must sign her own
Christian name, not her husband's, and prefix her signature with
"Mrs;" unmarried women must sign "Miss."

3. There are two regular forms of application. 1. For those who
have studied Christian Science with an authorized teacher; 2. For
those who have not studied Christian Science with a teacher.

Applicants will find the chief points of these instructions
illustrated in Form 1 and Form 2, on pages 114 and 118.

4. Those whose teachers are deceased, absent, or disloyal, or
those whose teachers refuse, without sufficient cause, to sign
applications (see Art. V, Sect. 4), will be furnished special
forms on application to the Clerk.

5. When branch churches are designated by number, as First Church,
Second Church, etc., the number must be written First, Second,
as shown on page 118. The article "the" either capitalized (The),
or small (the), must not be used before titles of branch churches.
See Article XXIII, Sect. 2.

6. If the applicant is not a member of a branch church, he should
fill out his application in this respect according to the form on
page 114.




APPLICATION FORMS


Application I

PROPERLY SIGNED AND ENDORSED,

ACCORDING TO ARTICLE V, SECT. 2

If you have been taught by a loyal student who has taken a degree at
the Massachusetts Metaphysical College, or by one who has passed an
examination by the Board of Education, fill this blank.


  FORM 1

  The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Mass., is
  designed to be built on the rock of Christ--Truth and Life--and to
  reflect the Church Triumphant.

  One who is not a member of any church, excepting a branch church
  of Christ, Scientist, who loves Christian Science, and reads
  understandingly the Bible, and SCIENCE AND HEALTH WITH KEY TO THE
  SCRIPTURES, by Reverend Mary Baker Eddy, and other works by this
  author, and who is Christianly qualified and can enter into full
  fellowship with the Tenets and Rules of The First Church of Christ,
  Scientist, in Boston, Mass., is eligible to membership.

  _To The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Mass._

                                       Gordon V. Comer Clerk.

  I hereby make application for membership, and subscribe to the
  Tenets and the By-Laws of the Church.

  My teacher in Christian Science is
  ...............James B. Brown, C.S.D. ..................

  I am not a member of any church.


FORM 1--(Continued)

  I was formerly a member of the .............................
  ............ denomination, but have definitely severed my
  connection therewith.

  Name .............. Mrs. Jennie W. Field, C.S. ..........
  Street and Number ....... 18 Forest St., ................
  Town or City ................ Chicago, ..................
  State ............................ Ill ..................
  Date ................. Jan. 2nd, 1901 ...................

  I cordially approve the applicant.

  (a) ............... James B. Brown, C.S.D. ...............

  Countersigned by ..........................................


  DO NOT DETACH.

  To the applicant:      Name ...... Mrs. Jennie W. Field, C.S. ......
  Please fill out the    Street and Number ... 18 Forest St., ........
  following for the use  Town or City ............ Chicago, ..........
  of the Treasurer of    State ............................ Ill ......
  the Church:


Application I

PROPERLY SIGNED AND ENDORSED,

ACCORDING TO ARTICLE V, SECT. 2

If you have been taught by a loyal student who has taken a degree at
the Massachusetts Metaphysical College, or by one who has passed an
examination by the Board of Education, fill this blank.


  FORM 1

  The First Church of Christ, Scientist, in Boston, Mass., is
  designed to be built on the rock of Christ--Truth and Life--and to
  reflect the Church Triumphant.

  One who is not a member of any church, excepting a branch church
  of Christ, Scientist, who loves Christian Science, and reads
