was strong enough and good enough to deliver him out of prison, and make
his righteousness as clear as the light and his just dealing as the
noonday.  He cried out of his prison, doubt it not, many a time and
oft--"O God, in thee have I trusted; let me never be confounded."

And he was not confounded.  He came into Egypt a slave.  He was cast into
prison on a shameful accusation: but he came out of prison to be a ruler
and a prince, honoured and obeyed by the greatest nation of the old
world.  He trusted in God, and he was not confounded for ever; even as
the Lord Christ trusted in God and was not confounded for ever; even as
we, if we do not wish to be confounded for ever, must trust in God; and
instead of being scornful, careless, conceited, must fear Him, and say,
"My flesh trembleth because of Thy righteous judgments."  And then the
laughter of fools will end, where it began, in harmless noise, like (says
Solomon) the crackling of thorns under a pot.  Then, whosoever may scorn
you on earth, the great God in heaven will not scorn you.  You may be
confounded for a moment here on earth.  Worldly people may take advantage
of your misfortunes, and cry over you--There, there, so would we have it.
Take him and persecute him, for there is none to deliver him; where is
now his God?  So it may be with you; for as surely as you fall, many a
cur will spring up and bark at you, who dared not open his mouth at you
while you stood safe.  Or--worse by far than that--the world may take
hold of your really weak points, of your inconsistencies, of your faults
and failings; and cry--Fie on thee, fie on thee.  We saw it with our
eyes.  For all his high professions, for all his talk of truth and
justice, he is no better than the rest of the world.  And that scoff does
go very near to confound a man; because he feels that it is half true,
half deserved, and is afraid that it may be quite true and quite
deserved: and then confounded indeed he would be, by his own conscience
and by God, as well as by man.  All he can do is, to cry to God, like him
who wrote the 119th Psalm,--I have stuck unto thy testimonies: O Lord,
confound me not.  I know I am weak, ignorant, unsuccessful; full of
faults too, and failings, which make me ashamed of myself every day of my
life.  I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost.  But seek thy
servant, O Lord, for I do not forget thy commandments.  I am trying to
learn my duty.  I am trying to do my duty.  I have stuck unto thy
testimonies: O Lord, confound me not.  Man may confound me.  But do not
thou, of thy mercy and pity, O Lord.  Do not let me find, when I die, or
before I die, that all my labour has been in vain; that I am not a better
man, not a wiser man, not a more useful man after all.  Do not let my
grey hairs go down with sorrow to the grave.  Do not let me die with the
miserable thought that, in spite of all my struggles to do my duty, my
life has been a failure, and I a fool.  Do not let me wake in the next
life, like Dives in the torment, to be utterly confounded; to find that I
was all wrong, and have nothing left but everlasting disappointment and
confusion of face.  O Lord, who didst endure all shame for me, save me
from that most utter shame.  O God, in thee have I trusted; let me never
be confounded.

Wake in the next life to find oneself confounded?  Alas! alas!  Many a
man wakes in this life to find himself that; and really sometimes by no
fault, seemingly, of his own: so that all he can do is to be dumb, and
not to open his mouth, for it is God's doing.  For a man's worst miseries
and sorrows are, too often, caused not by himself, but by those whom he
loves.

Consider the one case of vice, or even of mere ingratitude, in those
nearest and dearest to a man's heart; and of being so confounded through
them, and by them, in spite of all love, care, strictness, tenderness,
teaching, prayers--what not--and all in vain.

No wonder that, under that bitterest blow, valiant and virtuous men, ere
now, have never lifted up their heads again, but turned their faces to
the wall, and died: and may the Lord have mercy on them.  Confounded they
have been in this world; confounded they will not be, we must trust, in
the world to come.  The Lord of all pity will pity them, and pour His oil
and wine into their aching wounds, and bring them to His own inn, and to
His secret dwelling-place, where the wicked cease from troubling, and the
weary are at rest.

One word more, and I have done.  Do you wish to pray, with hope that you
may be heard,--O Lord, confound me not, and bring me not to shame?  Then
hold to one commandment of Christ's.  Do to others as you would they
should do to you.  For with what measure you measure to your fellow-men,
it shall be measured to you again.  Have charity, have patience, have
mercy.  Never bring a human being, however silly, ignorant, or weak,
above all any little child, to shame and confusion of face.  Never, by
cruelty, by petulance, by suspicion, by ridicule, even by selfish and
silly haste; never, above all, by indulging in the devilish pleasure of a
sneer, crush what is finest, and rouse up what is coarsest in the heart
of any fellow-creature.  Never confound any human soul in the hour of its
weakness.  For then, it may be, in the hour of thy weakness, Christ will
not confound thee.




SERMON VIII.  THE SHAKING OF THE HEAVENS AND THE EARTH.


HEBREWS XII. 26-29.

   Yet once more I shake not the earth only, but also heaven.  And this
   word, Yet once more, signifieth the removing of those things that are
   shaken, as of things that are made, that those things which cannot be
   shaken may remain.  Wherefore we receiving a kingdom which cannot be
   moved, let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with
   reverence and godly fear: for our God is a consuming fire.

This is one of the Royal texts of Scripture.  It is inexhaustible, like
the God who inspired it.  It has fulfilled itself again and again, at
different epochs.  It fulfilled itself specially and notoriously in the
first century.  But it fulfilled itself again in the fifth century; and
again at the Crusades; and again at the Reformation in the sixteenth
century.  And it may be that it is fulfilling itself at this very day;
that in this century, both in the time of our fathers and in our own, the
Lord has been shaking the heavens and the earth, that those things which
can be shaken may be removed, as things that are made, while those things
which cannot be shaken may remain.

All confess this to be true, each in his own words.  They talk of this
age as one of change; of rapid progress, for good or evil; of unexpected
discoveries; of revolutions, intellectual, moral, social, as well as
political.  Our notions of the physical universe are rapidly altering,
with the new discoveries of science; and our notions of ethics and
theology are altering as rapidly.  The era assumes a different aspect to
different minds, just as did the first century after Christ, according as
men look forward to the future with hope, or back to the past with
regret.  Some glory in the nineteenth century as one of rapid progress
for good; as the commencement of a new era for humanity; as the
inauguration of a Reformation as grand as that of the sixteenth century.
Others bewail it as an age of rapid decay; in which the old landmarks are
being removed, the old paths lost; in which we are rushing headlong into
scepticism and atheism; in which the world and the Church are both in
danger; and the last day is at hand.

Both parties may be right; and yet both may be wrong.  Men have always
talked thus, at great crises in the world's life.  They talked thus in
the first century; and in the fifth, and in the eleventh; and again in
the sixteenth; and then both parties were partially right and partially
wrong; and so they may be now.  What they meant to say, what they wanted
to say, what we mean and want to say, has been said already for us in far
deeper, wider, and more accurate words, by him who wrote this wonderful
Epistle to the Hebrews, when he told the Jews of his time that the Lord
was shaking the heavens and the earth, that those things which were
shaken might be removed, as things that are made--cosmogonies, systems,
theories, prejudices, fashions, of man's invention: while those things
which could not be shaken might remain, because they were according to
the mind and will of God, eternal as that source from whence they came
forth, even the bosom of God the Father.

"Yet once more I shake, not the earth only, but also heaven."

How has the earth been shaken in our days; and the heaven likewise.  How
rapidly have our conceptions of both altered.  How easy, simple, certain,
it all looked to our forefathers in the middle age.  How difficult,
complex, uncertain, it all looks to us.  With increased knowledge has
come--not increased doubt: that I deny utterly.  I deny, once and for
all, that this age is an irreverent age.  I say that an irreverent age is
one like the age of the Schoolmen; when men defined and explained all
heaven and earth by a priori theories, and cosmogonies invented in the
cloister; and dared, poor, simple, ignorant mortals, to fancy that they
could comprehend and gauge the ways of Him Whom the heaven and the heaven
of heavens could not contain.  This, this is irreverence: but it is
neither irreverence nor want of faith, if a man, awed by the mystery
which encompasses him from the cradle to the grave, shall lay his hand
upon his mouth, with Job, and obey the voice which cries to him from
earth and heaven--"Be still, and know that as the heavens are higher than
the earth, so are my ways higher than thy ways, and my thoughts higher
than thine."

But it was all easy, and simple, and certain enough to our forefathers.
The earth, according to the popular notion, was a flat plane; or, if it
were, as the wiser held, a sphere, yet antipodes were an unscriptural
heresy.  Above it were the heavens, in which the stars were fixed, or
wandered; and above them heaven after heaven, each tenanted by its own
orders of beings, up to that heaven of heavens in which Deity--and by
Him, be it always remembered, the mother of Deity--was enthroned.

And if above the earth was the kingdom of light, and purity, and
holiness, what could be more plain, than that below it was the kingdom of
darkness, and impurity, and sin?  That was no theory to our forefathers:
it was a physical fact.  Had not even the heathens believed as much, and
said so, by the mouth of the poet Virgil?  He had declared that the mouth
of Tartarus lay in Italy, hard by the volcanic lake Avernus; and after
the unexpected eruption of Vesuvius in the first century, nothing seemed
more clear than that Virgil was right; and that men were justified in
talking of Tartarus, Styx, and Phlegethon as indisputable Christian
entities.  Etna, Stromboli, Hecla, were (according to this cosmogony) in
like wise mouths of hell; and there were not wanting holy hermits, who
had heard, from within those craters, shrieks, and clanking chains, and
the howls of demons tormenting the souls of the endlessly lost.

Our forefathers were not aware that, centuries before the Incarnation of
our Lord, the Buddhist priests had held exactly the same theory of moral
retribution; and that, painted on the walls of Buddhist temples, might be
seen horrors identical with those which adorned the walls of many a
Christian Church, in the days when men believed in this Tartarology as
firmly as they now believe in the results of chemistry or of astronomy.

And now--How is the earth shaken, and the heavens likewise, in that very
sense in which the expression is used by him who wrote to the Hebrews?
Our conceptions of them are shaken.  How much of that mediaeval cosmogony
do educated men believe, in the sense in which they believe that the
three angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles, or that if they
steal their neighbour's goods they commit a sin?

The earth has been shaken for us, more and more violently, as the years
have rolled on.  It was shaken when Astronomy told us that the earth was
not the centre of the universe, but a tiny planet revolving round a sun
in a remote region thereof.

It was shaken when Geology told us that the earth had endured for
countless ages, during which continents had become oceans, and oceans
continents, again and again.  And even now, it is being shaken by
researches into the antiquity of man, into the origin and permanence of
species, which--let the result be what it will--must in the meanwhile
shake for us theories and dogmas which have been undisputed for 1500
years.

And with the rest of our cosmogony, that conception of a physical
Tartarus below the earth has been shaken likewise, till good men have
been fain to find a fresh place for it in the sun, or in a comet; or to
patronize the probable, but as yet unproved theory of a central fire
within the earth; not on any scientific grounds, but simply if by any
means they can assign a region in space, wherein material torment can be
inflicted on the spirits of the lost.

And meanwhile the heavens, the spiritual world, is being shaken no less.
More and more frequently, more and more loudly, men are asking--not
sceptics merely, but pious men, men who wish to be, and who believe
themselves to be, orthodox Christians--more and more loudly are such men
asking questions which demand an answer, with a learning and an
eloquence, as well as with a devoutness and a reverence for Scripture,
which--whether rightly or wrongly employed--is certain to command
attention.

Rightly or wrongly, these men are asking, whether the actual and literal
words of Scripture really involve the mediaeval theory of an endless
Tartarus.

They are saying, "It is not we who deny, but you who assert, endless
torments, who are playing fast and loose with the letter of Scripture.
You are reading into it conceptions borrowed from Virgil, Dante, Milton,
when you translate into the formula 'endless torment' such phrases as
'the outer darkness,' 'the fire of Gehenna,' 'the worm that dieth not;'
which, according to all just laws of interpretation, refer not to the
next life, but to this life, and specially to the approaching catastrophe
of the Jewish nation; or when you say that eternal death really means
eternal life--only life in torture."

Rightly or wrongly, they are saying this; and then they add, "We do not
yield to you in love and esteem for Scripture.  We demand not a looser,
but a stricter; not a more metaphoric, but a more literal; not a more
contemptuous, but a more reverent interpretation thereof."

So these men speak, rightly or wrongly.  And for good or for evil, they
will be heard.

And with these questions others have arisen, not new at all--say these
men--but to be found, amid many contradictions, in the writings of all
the best divines, when they have given up for a moment systems and
theories, and listened to the voice of their own hearts; questions
natural enough to an age which abhors cruelty, has abolished torture,
labours for the reformation of criminals, and debates--rightly or
wrongly--about abolishing capital punishment.  Men are asking questions
about the heaven--the spiritual world--and saying--"The spiritual world?
Is it only another material world which happens to be invisible now, but
which may become visible hereafter: or is it not rather the moral
world--the world of right and wrong?  Heaven?  Is not the true and real
heaven the kingdom of love, justice, purity, beneficence?  Is not that
the eternal heaven wherein God abides for ever, and with Him those who
are like God?  And hell?  Is it not rather the anarchy of hate,
injustice, impurity, uselessness; wherein abides all that is opposed to
God?"

And with those thoughts come others about moral retribution--"What is its
purpose?  Can it--can any punishment have any right purpose save the
correction, or the annihilation, of the criminal?  Can God, in this
respect, be at once less merciful and less powerful than man?  Is He so
controlled by necessity that He is forced to bring into the world beings
whom He knows to be incorrigible, and doomed to endless misery?  And if
not so controlled, is not the alternative as to His character even more
fearful?  He bids us copy His justice, His love.  Is that His justice,
that His love, which if we copied, we should call each other, and
deservedly, utterly unjust and unloving?  Can there be one morality for
God, and another for man, made in the image of God?  Are these dark
dogmas worthy of a Father who hateth nothing that He hath made, and is
perfect in this--that He makes His sun shine on the evil and on the good,
and His rain fall on the just and on the unjust, and is good to the
unthankful and to the evil?  Are they worthy of a Son who, in the fire of
His divine charity, stooped from heaven to earth, to toil, to suffer, to
die on the Cross, that the world by Him might be saved?  Are they worthy
of that Spirit which proceeds from the Father and the Son, even that
Spirit of boundless charity, and fervent love, by which the Son offered
Himself to the Father, a sacrifice for the sins of the whole world--and
surely not in vain?"

So men are asking--rightly or wrongly; and they are guarding themselves,
at the same time, from the imputation of disbelief in moral retribution;
of fancying God to be a careless, epicurean deity, cruelly indulgent to
sin, and therefore, in so far, immoral.

They say--"We believe firmly enough in moral retribution.  How can we
help believing in it, while we see it working around us, in many a
fearful shape, here, now, in this life?  And we believe that it may work
on, in still more fearful shapes, in the life to come.  We believe that
as long as a sinner is impenitent, he must be miserable; that if he goes
on impenitent for ever, he must go on making himself miserable--ay, it
may be more and more miserable for ever.  Only do not tell us that he
must go on.  That his impenitence, and therefore his punishment, is
irremediable, necessary, endless; and thereby destroy the whole purpose,
and we should say, the whole morality, of his punishment.  If that
punishment be corrective, our moral sense is not shocked by any severity,
by any duration: but if it is irremediable, it cannot be corrective; and
then, what it is, or why it is, we cannot--or rather dare not--say.  We,
too, believe in an eternal fire.  But because we believe also the
Athanasian Creed, which tells us that there is but One Eternal, we
believe that that fire must be the fire of God, and therefore, like all
that is in God and of God, good and not evil, a blessing and not a curse.
We believe that that fire is for ever burning, though men are for ever
trying to quench it all day long; and that it has been and will be in
every age burning up all the chaff and stubble of man's inventions; the
folly, the falsehood, the ignorance, the vice of this sinful world; and
we praise God for it; and give thanks to Him for His great glory, that He
is the everlasting and triumphant foe of evil and misery, of whom it is
written, that our God is a consuming fire."  Such words are being spoken,
right or wrong.

Such words will bear their fruit, for good or evil.  I do not pronounce
how much of them is true or false.  It is not my place to dogmatize and
define, where the Church of England, as by law established, has declined
to do so.  Neither is it for you to settle these questions.  It is rather
a matter for your children.  A generation more, it may be, of earnest
thought will be required, ere the true answer has been found.  But it is
your duty, if you be educated and thoughtful persons, to face these
questions; to consider seriously what these men would have you
consider--whether you are believing the exact words of the Bible, and the
conclusions of your own reason and moral sense; or whether you are merely
believing that cosmogony elaborated in the cloister, that theory of moral
retribution pardonable in the middle age, which Dante and Milton sang.

But this I do not hesitate to say--That if we of the clergy can find no
other answers to these doubts than those which were reasonable and
popular in an age when men racked women, burned heretics, and believed
that every Mussulman killed in a crusade went straight to Tartarus--then
very serious times are at hand, both for the Christian clergy and for
Christianity itself.

What, then, are we to believe and do?  Shall we degenerate into a lazy
scepticism, which believes that everything is a little true, and
everything a little false--in plain words, believes nothing at all?  Or
shall we degenerate into faithless fears, and unmanly wailings that the
flood of infidelity is irresistible, and that Christ has left His Church?

We shall do neither, if we believe the text.  That tells us of a firm
standing-ground amid the wreck of fashions and opinions.  Of a kingdom
which cannot be moved, though the heavens pass away like a scroll, and
the earth be burnt up with fervent heat.

And it tells us that the King of that kingdom is He, who is called Jesus
Christ--the same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.

An eternal and changeless kingdom, and an eternal and changeless King.
These the Epistle to the Hebrews preaches to all generations.

It does not say that we have an unchangeable cosmogony, an unchangeable
eschatology, an unchangeable theory of moral retribution, an unchangeable
dogmatic system: not to these does it point the Jews, while their own
nation and worship were in their very death-agony, and the world was
rocking and reeling round them, decay and birth going on side by side, in
a chaos such as man had never seen before.  Not to these does the Epistle
point the Hebrews: but to the changeless kingdom and to the changeless
King.

My friends, do you really believe in that kingdom, and in that King?  Do
you believe that you are now actually in a kingdom of heaven, which
cannot be moved; and that the living, acting, guiding, practical, real
King thereof is Christ who died on the Cross?

These are days in which a preacher is bound to ask his congregation--and
still more to ask himself--whether he really believes in that kingdom,
and in that King; and to bid himself and them, if they have not believed
earnestly enough therein, to repent, in this time of Lent, of that at
least; to repent of having neglected that most cardinal doctrine of
Scripture and of the Christian faith.

But if we really believe in that changeless kingdom and in that
changeless King, shall we not--considering who Christ is, the co-equal
and co-eternal Son of God--believe also, that if the heavens and the
earth are being shaken, then Christ Himself may be shaking them?  That if
opinions be changing, then Christ Himself may be changing them?  That if
new truths are being discovered, Christ Himself may be revealing them?
That if some of those truths seem to contradict those which He has
revealed already, they do not really contradict them?  That, as in the
sixteenth century, Christ is burning up the wood and stubble with which
men have built on His foundation, that the pure gold of His truth may
alone be left?  It is at least possible; it is probable, if we believe
that Christ is a living, acting King, to whom all power is given in
heaven and earth, and who is actually exercising that power; and
educating Christendom, and through Christendom the whole human race, to a
knowledge of Himself, and through Himself of God their Father in heaven.

Should we not say--We know that Christ has been so doing, for centuries
and for ages?  Through Abraham, through Moses, through the prophets,
through the Greeks, through the Romans, and at last through Himself, He
gave men juster and wider views of themselves, of the universe, and of
God.  And even then He did not stop.  How could He, who said of Himself,
"My Father worketh hitherto, and I work"?  How could He, if He be the
same yesterday, to-day, and for ever?  Through the Apostles, and
specially through St Paul, He enlarged, while He confirmed, His own
teaching.  And did He not do the same in the sixteenth century?  Did He
not then sweep from the minds and hearts of half Christendom beliefs
which had been held sacred and indubitable for a thousand years?  Why
should He not be doing so now?  If it be answered, that the Reformation
of the sixteenth century was only a return to simpler and purer Apostolic
truth--why, again, should it not be so now?  Why should He not be
perfecting His work one step more, and sweeping away more of man's
inventions, which are not integral and necessary elements of the one
Catholic faith, but have been left behind, in pardonable human weakness,
by our great Reformers?  Great they were, and good: giants on the earth,
while we are but as dwarfs beside them.  But, as the hackneyed proverb
says, the dwarf on the giant's shoulders may see further than the giant
himself: and so may we.

Oh! that men would approach new truth in something of that spirit; in the
spirit of reverence and Godly fear, which springs from a living belief in
Christ the living King, which is--as the text tells us--the spirit in
which we can serve God acceptably.  Oh! that they would serve God;
waiting reverently and anxiously, as servants standing in the presence of
their Lord, for the slightest sign or hint of His will.  Then they would
have grace; by which they would receive new thought with grace;
gracefully, courteously, fairly, charitably, reverently; believing that,
however strange or startling, it may come from Him whose ways are not as
our ways, nor His thoughts as our thoughts; and that he who fights
against it, may haply be fighting against God.

True, they would receive all new thought with caution, that conservative
spirit, which is the duty of every Christian; which is the peculiar
strength of the Englishman, because it enables him calmly and slowly to
take in the new, without losing the old which his forefathers have
already won for him.  So they would be cautious, even anxious, lest in
grasping too greedily at seeming improvements, they let go some precious
knowledge which they had already attained: but they would be on the look
out for improvements; because they would consider themselves, and their
generation, as under a divine education.  They would prove all things
fairly and boldly, and hold fast that which is good; all that which is
beautiful, noble, improving and elevating to human souls, minds, or
