       *       *       *       *       *

    Finish then Thy new creation;
      Pure and spotless let us be;
    Let us see our whole salvation
      Perfectly secured by Thee.

    Changed from glory into glory
      Till in Heaven we take our place,
    Till we cast our crowns before Thee
      Lost in wonder, love and praise!

The hymn has been set to H. Isaac's ancient tune (1490), to Wyeth's
"Nettleton" (1810), to Thos. H. Bailey's (1777-1839) "Isle of Beauty,
fare thee well" (named from Thomas Moore's song), to Edward Hopkins'
"St. Joseph," and to a multitude of others more or less familiar.

Most familiar of all perhaps, (as in the instance of "Far from mortal
cares retreating,") is its association with "Greenville," the production
of that brilliant but erratic genius and freethinker, Jean Jacques
Rousseau. It was originally a love serenade, ("Days of absence, sad and
dreary") from the opera of _Le Devin du Village_, written about 1752.
The song was commonly known years afterwards as "Rousseau's Dream." But
the unbelieving philosopher, musician, and misguided moralist builded
better than he knew, and probably better than he meant when he wrote his
immortal choral. Whatever he heard in his "dream" (and one legend says
it was a "song of angels") he created a harmony dear to the church he
despised, and softened the hearts of the Christian world towards an evil
teacher who was inspired, like Balaam, to utter one sacred strain.

Rousseau was born in Geneva, 1712, but he never knew his mother, and
neither the affection or interest of his father or of his other
relatives was of the quality to insure the best bringing up of a child.

He died July, 1778. But his song survives, while the world gladly
forgets everything else he wrote. It is almost a pardonable exaggeration
to say that every child in Christendom knows "Greenville."


"WHEN ALL THY MERCIES, O MY GOD."

This charming hymn was written by Addison, the celebrated English poet
and essayist, about 1701, in grateful commemoration of his delivery from
shipwreck in a storm off the coast of Genoa, Italy. It originally
contained thirteen stanzas, but no more than four or six are commonly
sung. It has put the language of devotional gratitude into the mouths of
thousands of humble disciples who could but feebly frame their own:

    When all Thy mercies, O my God
      My rising soul surveys,
    Transported with the view I'm lost
      In wonder, love and praise.

    Unnumbered comforts on my soul
      Thy tender care bestowed
    Before my infant heart conceived
      From whom those comforts flowed.

    When in the slippery paths of youth
      With heedless steps I ran,
    Thine arm unseen conveyed me safe,
      And led me up to man.

Another hymn of Addison--

    How are Thy servants bless'd, O Lord,

--was probably composed after the same return from a foreign voyage. It
has been called his "Traveller's Hymn."

Joseph Addison, the best English writer of his time, was the son of
Lancelot Addison, rector of Milston, Wiltshire, and afterwards Dean of
Litchfield. The distinguished author was born in Milston Rectory, May 1,
1672, and was educated at Oxford. His excellence in poetry, both English
and Latin, gave him early reputation, and a patriotic ode obtained for
him the patronage of Lord Somers. A pension from King William III.
assured him a comfortable income, which was increased by further honors,
for in 1704 he was appointed Commissioner of Appeals, then secretary of
the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, and in 1717 Secretary of State. He died
in Holland House, Kensington, near London, June 17, 1719.

His hymns are not numerous, (said to be only five), but they are
remarkable for the simple beauty of their style, as well as for their
Christian spirit. Of his fine metrical version of the 23rd Psalm,--

    The Lord my pasture shall prepare,
    And feed me with a shepherd's care,

--one of his earliest productions, the tradition is that he gathered its
imagery when a boy living at Netheravon, near Salisbury Plain, during
his lonely two-mile walks to school at Amesbury and back again. All his
hymns appeared first in the _Spectator_, to which he was a prolific
contributor.


_THE TUNE._

The hymn "When all Thy mercies" still has "Geneva" for its vocal mate in
some congregational manuals. The tune is one of the rare survivals of
the old "canon" musical method, the parts coming in one after another
with identical notes. It is always delightful as a performance with its
glory of harmony and its sweet duet, and for generations it had no other
words than Addison's hymn.

John Cole, author of "Geneva," was born in Tewksbury, Eng., 1774, and
came to the United States in his boyhood (1785). Baltimore, Md. became
his American home, and he was educated there. Early in life he became a
musician and music publisher. At least twelve of his principal song
collections from 1800 to 1832 are mentioned by Mr. Hubert P. Main, most
of them sacred and containing many of his own tunes.

He continued to compose music till his death, Aug. 17, 1855. Mr. Cole
was leader of the regimental band known as "The Independent Blues,"
which played in the war of 1812, and was present at the "North Point"
fight, and other battles.

Besides "Geneva," for real feeling and harmonic beauty "Manoah," adapted
from Haydn's Creation, deserves mention as admirably suited to
"Addison's" hymn, and also "Belmont," by Samuel Webbe, which resembles
it in style and sentiment.

Samuel Webbe, composer of "Belmont," was of English parentage but was
born in Minorca, Balearic Islands, in 1740, where his father at that
time held a government appointment; but his father, dying suddenly, left
his family poor, and Samuel was apprenticed to a cabinet-maker. He
served his apprenticeship, and immediately repaired to a London teacher
and began the study of music and languages. Surmounting great
difficulties, he became a competent musician, and made himself popular
as a composer of glees. He was also the author of several masses,
anthems, and hymn-tunes, the best of which are still in occasional use.
Died in London, 1816.


"JESUS, I LOVE THY CHARMING NAME."

When Dr. Doddridge, the author of this hymn, during his useful ministry,
had finished the preparation of a pulpit discourse that strongly
impressed him, he was accustomed, while his heart was yet glowing with
the sentiment that had inspired him, to put the principal thoughts into
metre, and use the hymn thus written at the conclusion of the preaching
of the sermon. This hymn of Christian ardor was written to be sung after
a sermon from Romans 8:35, "Who shall separate us from the love of
Christ?"

    Jesus, I love Thy charming name,
     'Tis music to mine ear:
    Fain would I sound it out so loud
      That earth and heaven should hear.

       *       *       *       *       *

    I'll speak the honors of Thy name
      With my last laboring breath,
    Then speechless, clasp Thee in my arms,
      The conqueror of death.

Earlier copies have--

    The _antidote_ of death.

Philip Doddridge, D.D., was born in London, June 26, 1702. Educated at
Kingston Grammar School and Kibworth Academy, he became a scholar of
respectable attainments, and was ordained to the Non-conformist
ministry. He was pastor of the Congregational church at Northampton,
from 1729 until his death, acting meanwhile as principal of the
Theological School in that place. In 1749 he ceased to preach and went
to Lisbon for his health, but died there about two years later, of
consumption, Oct. 26, 1752.


_THE TUNE._

The hymn has been sometimes sung to "Pisgah," an old revival piece by
J.C. Lowry (1820) once much heard in camp-meetings, but it is a
pedestrian tune with too many quavers, and a headlong tempo.

Bradbury's "Jazer," in three-four time, is a melody with modulations,
though more sympathetic, but it is hard to divorce the hymn from its
long-time consort, old "Arlington." It has the accent of its sincerity,
and the breath of its devotion.


"LO, ON A NARROW NECK OF LAND."

This hymn of Charles Wesley is always designated now by the above line,
the first of the _second_ stanza as originally written. It is said to
have been composed at Land's End, in Cornwall, with the British Channel
and the broad Atlantic in view and surging on both sides around a
"narrow neck of land."

    Lo! on a narrow neck of land,
    Twixt two unbounded seas, I stand,
      Secure, insensible:
    A point of time, a moment's space,
    Removes me to that heavenly place,
      Or shuts me up in hell.

    O God, mine inmost soul convert,
    And deeply on my thoughtful heart
      Eternal things impress:
    Give me to feel their solemn weight,
    And tremble on the brink of fate,
      And wake to righteousness.

The preachers and poets of the great spiritual movement of the
eighteenth century in England abated nothing in the candor of their
words. The terrible earnestness of conviction tipped their tongues and
pens with fire.


_THE TUNE._

Lady Huntingdon would have lent "Meribah" gladly to this hymn, but Mason
was not yet born. Many times it has been borrowed for Wesley's words
since it came to its own, and the spirit of the pious Countess has
doubtless approved the loan. It is rich enough to furnish forth her own
lyric and more than one other of like matter and metre.

The muscular music of "Ganges" has sometimes carried the hymn, and there
are those who think its thunder is not a whit more Hebraic than the
words require.


"COME YE SINNERS POOR AND NEEDY."

Few hymns have been more frequently sung in prayer-meetings and
religious assemblies during the last hundred and fifty years. Its
author, Joseph Hart, spoke what he knew and testified what he felt. Born
in London, 1712, and liberally educated, he was in his young manhood
very religious, but he went so far astray as to indulge in evil
practices, and even published writings, both original and translated,
against Christianity and religion of any kind. But he could not drink at
the Dead Sea and live. The apples of Sodom sickened him. Conscience
asserted itself, and the pangs of remorse nearly drove him to despair
till he turned back to the source he had forsaken. He alludes to this
experience in the lines--

    Let not conscience make you linger,
      Nor of fitness fondly dream;
    All the fitness He requireth
      Is to feel your need of Him.

During Passion Week, 1767, he had an amazing view of the sufferings of
Christ, under the stress of which his heart was changed. In the joy of
this experience he wrote--

    Come ye sinners poor and needy,

--and--

    Come all ye chosen saints of God.

Probably no two hymn-lines have been oftener repeated than--

    If you tarry till you're better
      You will never come at all.

The complete form of the original stanzas is:

    Come ye sinners poor and needy,
      Weak and wounded, sick and sore;
    Jesus ready stands to save you,
      Full of pity, love and power.
          He is able,
      He is willing; doubt no more.

The whole hymn--ten stanzas--is not sung now as one, but two, the second
division beginning with the line--

    Come ye weary, heavy laden.

Rev. Joseph Hart became minister of Jewin St. Congregational Chapel,
London, about 1760, where he labored till his death, May 24, 1768.


_THE TUNE._

A revival song by Jeremiah Ingalls (1764-1828), written about 1804, with
an easy, popular swing and a _sforzando_ chorus--

    Turn to the Lord and seek salvation,

--monopolized this hymn for a good many years. The tunes commonly
assigned to it have since been "Greenville" and Von Weber's "Wilmot," in
which last it is now more generally sung--dropping the echo lines at the
end of each stanza.

Carl Maria Von Weber, son of a roving musician, was born in Eutin,
Germany, 1786. He developed no remarkable genius till he was about
twenty years old, though being a fine vocalist, his singing brought him
popularity and gain; but in 1806 he nearly lost his voice by accidently
drinking nitric acid. He was for several years private secretary to Duke
Ludwig at Stuttgart, and in 1813 Chapel-Master at Prague, from which
place he went to Dresden in 1817 as Musik-Director.

Von Weber's Korner songs won the hearts of all Germany; and his immortal
"Der Freischutz" (the Free Archer), and numerous tender melodies like
the airs to "John Anderson, my Jo" and "O Poortith Cauld" have gone to
all civilized nations. No other composer had such feeling for beauty of
sound.

This beloved musician was physically frail and delicate, and died of
untimely decline, during a visit to London in 1826.


"O HAPPY SAINTS WHO DWELL IN LIGHT."

Sometimes printed "O happy _souls_." This poetical and flowing hymn
seems to have been forgotten in the making up of most modern church
hymnals. Hymns on heaven and heavenly joys abound in embarrassing
numbers, but it is difficult to understand why this beautiful lyric
should be _universally_ neglected. It was written probably about 1760,
by Rev. John Berridge, from the text, "Blessed are the dead who die in
the Lord,"

The first line of the second stanza--

    Released from sorrow, toil and strife,

--has been tinkered in some of the older hymn-books, where it is found
to read--,

    Released from sorrows toil and _grief_,

--not only committing a tautology, but destroying the perfect rhyme with
"life" in the next line. The whole hymn, too, has been much altered by
substituted words and shifted lines, though not generally to the serious
detriment of its meaning and music.

The Rev. John Berridge--friend of the Wesleys, Whitefield, and Lady
Huntingdon--was an eccentric but very worthy and spiritual minister,
born the son of a farmer, in Kingston, Nottinghamshire, Eng., Mar. 1,
1716. He studied at Cambridge, and was ordained curate of Stapleford and
subsequently located as vicar of Everton, 1775. He died Jan. 22, 1793.
He loved to preach, and he was determined that his tombstone should
preach after his voice was still. His epitaph, composed by himself, is
both a testimony and a memoir:

   "Here lie the earthly remains of John Berridge, late vicar of
    Everton, and an itinerant servant of Jesus Christ, who loved his
    Master and His work, and after running His errands many years, was
    called up to wait on Him above.

   "Reader, art thou born again?

   "No salvation without the new birth.

   "I was born in sin, February, 1716.

   "Remained ignorant of my fallen state till 1730.

   "Lived proudly on faith and works for salvation till 1751.

   "Admitted to Everton vicarage, 1755.

   "Fled to Jesus alone for refuge, 1756.

   "Fell asleep in Jesus Christ,--" (1793.)


_THE TUNE._

The once popular score that easily made the hymn a favorite, was
"Salem," in the old _Psalmodist_. It still appears in some note-books,
though the name of its composer is uncertain. Its notes (in 6-8 time)
succeed each other in syllabic modulations that give a soft dactylic
accent to the measure and a wavy current to the lines:

    O happy saints that dwell in light,
    And walk with Jesus clothed in white,
    Safe landed on that peaceful shore,
    Where pilgrims meet to part no more:

    Released from sorrow, toil and strife,
    Death was the gate to endless life,
    And now they range the heavenly plains
    And sing His love in melting strains.

Another version reads:

    ----and welcome to an endless life,
    Their souls have now begun to prove
    The height and depth of Jesus' love.


"THOU DEAR REDEEMER, DYING LAMB."

The author, John Cennick, like Joseph Hart, was led to Christ after a
reckless boyhood and youth, by the work of the Divine Spirit in his
soul, independent of any direct outward influence. Sickened of his
cards, novels, and playhouse pleasures, he had begun a sort of
mechanical reform, when one day, walking in the streets of London, he
suddenly seemed to hear the text spoken "I am thy salvation!" His
consecration began at that moment.

He studied for the ministry, and became a preacher, first under
direction of the Wesleys, then under Whitefield, but afterwards joined
the Moravians, or "Brethren." He was born at Reading, Derbyshire, Eng.,
Dec. 12, 1718, and died in London, July 4, 1755.


_THE TUNE._

The word "Rhine" (in some collections--in others "Emmons") names a
revival tune once so linked with this hymn and so well known that few
religious people now past middle life could enjoy singing it to any
other. With a compass one note beyond an octave and a third, it utters
every line with a clear, bold gladness sure to infect a meeting with its
own spiritual fervor.

    Thou dear Redeemer, dying Lamb,
      I love to hear of Thee;
    No music like Thy charming name,
      Nor half so sweet can be.

The composer of the bright legato melody just described was Frederick
Burgmueller, a young German musician, born in 1804. He was a remarkable
genius, both in composition and execution, but his health was frail, and
he did not live to fulfil the rich possibilities that lay within him. He
died in 1824--only twenty years old. The tune "Rhine" ("Emmons") is from
one of his marches.


"WHILE THEE I SEEK, PROTECTING POWER."

Helen Maria Williams wrote this sweet hymn, probably about the year
1800. She was a brilliant woman, better known in literary society for
her political verses and essays than by her hymns; but the hymn here
noted bears sufficient witness to her deep religious feeling:

    While Thee I seek, Protecting Power,
      Be my vain wishes stilled,
    And may this consecrated hour
      With better hopes be filled.
    Thy love the power of thought bestowed;
      To Thee my thoughts would soar,
    Thy mercy o'er my life has flowed,
      That mercy I adore.

Miss Williams was born in the north of England, Nov. 30, 1762, but spent
much of her life in London, and in Paris, where she died, Dec. 14, 1827.


_THE TUNE._

Wedded so many years to the gentle, flowing music of Pleyel's "Brattle
Street," few lovers of the hymn recall its words without the melody of
that emotional choral.

The plain psalm-tune, "Simpson," by Louis Spohr, divides the stanzas
into quatrains.


"JESUS MY ALL TO HEAVEN IS GONE."

This hymn, by Cennick, was familiarized to the public more than two
generations ago by its revival tune, sometimes called "Duane Street,"
long-metre double. It is staffed in various keys, but its movement is
full of life and emphasis, and its melody is contagious. The piece was
composed by Rev. George Coles, in 1835.

The fact that this hymn of Cennick with Coles's tune appears in the _New
Methodist Hymnal_ indicates the survival of both in modern favor.

[Illustration: Augustus Montague Toplady]

    Jesus my all to heaven is gone,
    He whom I fixed my hopes upon;
    His track I see, and I'll pursue
    The narrow way till Him I view.
    The way the holy prophets went,
    The road that leads from banishment,
    The King's highway of holiness
    I'll go for all Thy paths are peace.

The memory has not passed away of the hearty unison with which
prayer-meeting and camp-meeting assemblies used to "crescendo" the last
stanza--

    Then will I tell to sinners round
    What a dear Saviour I have found;
    I'll point to His redeeming blood,
    And say "Behold the way to God."

The Rev. George Coles was born in Stewkley, Eng., Jan. 2, 1792, and died
in New York City, May 1, 1858. He was editor of the _N.Y. Christian
Advocate_, and _Sunday School Advocate_, for several years, and was a
musician of some ability, besides being a good singer.


"SWEET THE MOMENTS, RICH IN BLESSING."

The Hon. and Rev. Walter Shirley, Rector of Loughgree, county of Galway,
Ireland, revised this hymn under the chastening discipline of a most
trying experience. His brother, the Earl of Ferrars, a licentious man,
murdered an old and faithful servant in a fit of rage, and was executed
at Tyburn for the crime. Sir Walter, after the disgrace and long
distress of the imprisonment, trial, and final tragedy, returned to his
little parish in Ireland, humbled but driven nearer to the Cross.

    Sweet the moments, rich in blessing
      Which before the Cross I spend;
    Life and health and peace possessing
      From the sinner's dying Friend.

All the emotion of one who buries a mortifying sorrow in the heart of
Christ, and tries to forget, trembles in the lines of the above hymn as
he changed and adapted it in his saddest but devoutest hours. Its
original writer was the Rev. James Allen, nearly twenty years younger
than himself, a man of culture and piety, but a Christian of shifting
creeds. It is not impossible that he sent his hymn to Shirley to revise.
At all events it owes its present form to Shirley's hand.

    Truly blessed is the station
      Low before His cross to lie,
    While I see Divine Compassion
      Beaming in His gracious eye.[11]

[Footnote 11: "Floating in His languid eye" seems to have been the
earlier version.]

The influence of Sir Walter's family misfortune is evident also in the
mood out of which breathed his other trustful lines--

    Peace, troubled soul, whose plaintive moan
    Hath taught these rocks the notes of woe,

(changed now to "hath taught _these scenes_" etc).

Sir Walter Shirley, cousin of the Countess of Huntingdon, was born 1725,
and died in 1786. Even in his last sickness he continued to preach to
his people in his house, seated in his chair.

Rev. James Oswald Allen was born at Gayle, Yorkshire, Eng., June 24,
1743. He left the University of Cambridge after a year's study, and
became an itinerant preacher, but seems to have been a man of unstable
religious views. After roving from one Christian denomination to another
several times, he built a Chapel, and for forty years ministered there
to a small Independent congregation. He died in Gayle, Oct. 31, 1804.

The tune long and happily associated with "Sweet the Moments" is
"Sicily," or the "Sicilian Hymn"--from an old Latin hymn-tune, "O
Sanctissima."


"O FOR A CLOSER WALK WITH GOD."

The author, William Cowper, son of a clergyman, was born at
Berkhampstead, Hertfordshire, Eng., Nov. 15, 1731, and died at Dereham,
Norfolk, April 25, 1800. Through much of his adult life he was afflicted
with a mental ailment inducing melancholia and at times partial
insanity, during which he once attempted suicide. He sought literary
occupation as an antidote to his disorder of mind, and besides a great
number of lighter pieces which diverted him and his friends, composed
"The Task," an able and delightful moral and domestic poetic treatise in
blank verse, and in the same style of verse translated Homer's _Odyssey_
and _Iliad_.

One of the most beloved of English poets, this suffering man was also a
true Christian, and wrote some of our sweetest and most spiritual hymns.
Most of these were composed at Olney, where he resided for a time with
John Newton, his fellow hymnist, and jointly with him issued the volume
known as the _Olney Hymns_.


_THE TUNE._

Music more or less closely identified with this familiar hymn is
Gardiner's "Dedham," and also "Mear," often attributed to Aaron
Williams. Both, about equally with the hymn, are seasoned by time, but
have not worn out their harmony--or their fitness to Cowper's prayer.

William Gardiner was born in Leicester, Eng., March 15, 1770, and died
there Nov. 11, 1853. He was a vocal composer and a "musicographer" or
writer on musical subjects.

One Aaron Williams, to whom "Mear" has by some been credited, was of
Welsh descent, a composer of psalmody and clerk of the Scotch church in
London. He was born in 1734, and died in 1776. Another account, and the
more probable one, names a minister of Boston of still earlier date as
the author of the noble old harmony. It is found in a small New England
collection of 1726, but not in any English or Scotch collection. "Mear"
is presumably an American tune.


"WHAT VARIOUS HINDRANCES WE MEET."

Another hymn of Cowper's; and no one ever suffered more deeply the
plaintive regret in the opening lines, or better wrought into poetic
expression an argument for prayer.

    What various hindrances we meet
    In coming to a mercy-seat!
    Yet who that knows the worth of prayer
    But wishes to be often there?

    Prayer makes the darkest clouds withdraw,
    Prayer climbs the ladder Jacob saw.

The whole hymn is (or once was) so thoroughly learned by heart as to be
fixed in the church among its household words. Preachers to the
diffident do not forget to quote--

    Have you no words? ah, think again;
    Words flow apace when you _complain_.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Were half the breath thus vainly spent
    To Heaven in supplication sent,
    Our cheerful song would oftener be,
    "Hear what the Lord hath done for me!"

And there is all the lifetime of a proverb in the couplet--

    Satan trembles when he sees
    The weakest saint upon his knees.

Tune, Lowell Mason's "Rockingham."


"MY GRACIOUS REDEEMER I LOVE."

This is one of Benjamin Francis's lays of devotion. The Christian
Welshman who bore that name was a Gospel minister full of Evangelical
zeal, who preached in many places, though his pastoral home was with the
Baptist church in Shortwood, Wales. Flattering calls to London could not
tempt him away from his first and only parish, and he remained there
till his triumphant death. He was born in 1734, and died in 1799.

    My gracious Redeemer I love,
