    "With this spear-grass will I kill him--this man-eating giant dead."
    Though o'erpowered by bitterest sorrow--as they heard their prattling boy,
    Stole into the parents' bosoms--mute and inexpressive joy.




THE DELUGE.


    The following extract from the Mahabharata was published by
    Bopp, with a German translation, (the promised Latin version
    has not yet reached this country,) with four other extracts
    from the same poem. It is inserted here not on account of its
    poetical merit, but on account of the interest of the
    subject. It is the genuine, and probably the earliest,
    version of the Indian tradition of the Flood. The author has
    made the following observations on this subject in the
    Quarterly Review, which he ventures here to transcribe.

    Nothing has thrown so much discredit on oriental studies,
    particularly on the valuable Asiatic Researches, as the fixed
    determination to find the whole of the Mosaic history in the
    remoter regions of the East. It was not to be expected that,
    when the new world of oriental literature was suddenly
    disclosed, the first attempts to explore would be always
    guided by cool and dispassionate criticism. Even Sir W. Jones
    was led away, at times, by the ardour of his imagination; and
    the gorgeous palaces of the Mahabadian dynasty, which were
    built on the authority of the Desatir and the Dabistan, and
    thrown upward into an age anterior even to the earliest
    Indian civilisation, have melted away, and 'left not a wreck
    behind,' before the cooler and more profound investigations
    of Mr. Erskine[157]. Sir W. Jones was succeeded by Wilford, a
    man of most excursive imagination, bred in the school of
    Bryant, who, even if he had himself been more deeply versed
    in the ancient language, would have been an unsafe guide. But
    Wilford, it is well known, unfortunately betrayed to the
    crafty and mercenary pundits whom he employed, the objects
    which he hoped to find; and these unscrupulous interpreters,
    unwilling to disappoint their employer, had little difficulty
    in discovering, or forging, or interpolating, whatever might
    suit his purpose. The honest candour with which Wilford, a
    man of the strictest integrity, made the open and humiliating
    confession of the deceptions which had been practised upon
    him, ought for ever to preserve his memory from disrespect.
    The fictions to which he had given currency, only retained,
    and still we are ashamed to say retain, their ground in
    histories of the Bible and works of a certain school of
    theology, from which no criticism can exorcise an error once
    established: still, however, with sensible men, a kind of
    suspicion was thrown over the study itself; and the cool and
    sagacious researches of men, probably better acquainted with
    their own language than some of the Brahmins themselves, were
    implicated in the fate of the fantastic and, though
    profoundly learned, ever injudicious reveries of Wilford.

    Now, however, that we may depend on the genuineness of our
    documents, it is curious to examine the Indian version or
    versions of the universal tradition of the Deluge; for,
    besides this extract from the Mahabharata, Sir W. Jones had
    extracted from the Bhagavata Purana another, and, in some
    respects, very different legend. Both of these versions are
    strongly impregnated with the mythological extravagance of
    India; but the Purana, one of the Talmudic books of Indian
    tradition, as M. Bopp observes, is evidently of a much later
    date than the ruder and simpler fable of the old Epic. It
    belongs to a less ancient school of poetry, and a less
    ancient system of religion. While it is much more exuberant
    in its fiction, it nevertheless betrays a sort of
    apprehension lest it shall shock the less easy faith of a
    more incredulous reader; it is manifestly from the religious
    school of the follower of Vishnu, and, indeed, seems to have
    some reference to one of the philosophic systems. Yet the
    outline of the story is the same. In the Mahabharatic
    version, Manu, like Noah, stands alone in an age of universal
    depravity. His virtues, however, are of the Indian cast--the
    most severe and excruciating penance by which he extorts, as
    it were, the favour of the deity[158].




THE DELUGE.


    Vivaswata's son, a raja--and a sage of mighty fame,
    King of men, the first great fathers--in his glory equalled he,
    In his might and kingly power--Manu, and in earthly bliss,
    And in wonder-working penance--sire and grandsire far surpassed.
    With his arms on high outstretching--wrought the sovereign of men,
    Steadily on one foot standing--penance rigorous and dread,
    With his downward head low-drooping--with his fixed, unwavering eyes,
    Dreed he thus his awful penance--many a long and weary year.
      To the penitent with tresses--streaming loose, and wet, and long,
    By the margin of Wirini--thus the fish began to speak:
      "Blessed! lo, the least of fishes--of the mighty fish in dread,
    Wilt thou not from death preserve me--thou that all thy vows fulfill'st?
    Since the strongest of the fishes--persecute the weaker still,
    Over us impends for ever--our inevitable fate.
    Ere I sink, if thou wilt free me--from th' extremity of dread,
    Meet return can I compensate--when the holy deed is done."
    Speaking thus the fish when heard he--full of pity all his heart,
    In his hand that fish king Manu--son of Vivaswata took.
    Brought the son of Vivaswata--to the river shore the fish,
    Cast it in a crystal vessel--like the moonshine clear and bright.
    "Rapid grew that fish, O raja--tended with such duteous care,
    Cleaved to him the heart of Manu--as to a beloved son.
    Time rolled on, and larger, larger--ever waxed that wonderous fish,
    Nor within that crystal vessel--found he longer space to move."
    Spake again the fish to Manu--as he saw him, thus he spake:
    "O all prosperous! O all gentle!--bring me to another place."
    Then the fish from out the vessel--blessed Manu took again;
    And with gentle speed he bare him,--Manu, to a spacious lake.
    There the conqueror of cities,--mighty Manu, cast him in.
    Still he grew, that fish so wondrous--many a circling round of years.
    Three miles long that lake expanded--and a single mile its breadth,
    Yet that fish with eyes like lotus--there no longer might endure;
    Nor, O sovereign of the Vaisyas!--might that lake his bulk contain.
    Spake again that fish to Manu--as he saw him, thus he spake:
    "Bring me now, O blest and holy!--to the Ganga, ocean's bride,
    Let me dwell in her wide waters--yet, O loved one, as thou wilt,
    Be it so; whate'er thy bidding,--murmur would beseem me ill,
    Since through thee, O blest and blameless!--to this wondrous bulk I've
        grown."
    Thus addressed, the happy Manu--took again the fish, and bore
    To the sacred stream of Ganga--and himself he cast him in.
    Still it grew, as time rolled onward--tamer of thy foes! that fish.
    Spake again that fish to Manu--as he saw him, thus he spake:
    "Mightiest! I can dwell no longer--here in Ganga's narrow stream;
    Best of men! once more befriend me--bear me to the ocean swift."
    Manu's self from Ganga's water--took again that wondrous fish,
    And he brought him to the ocean,--with his own hand cast him in.
    Brought by Manu to the ocean--very large that fish appeared,
    But not yet of form unmeasured,--spread delicious odours round.
    But that fish by kingly Manu--cast into the ocean wide,
    In these words again bespake him--and he smiled as thus he spake:
    "Blessed! thou hast still preserved me--still my every wish fulfilled,
    When the awful time approaches--hear from me what thou must do.
    In a little time, O blessed!--all this firm and seated earth,
    All that moves upon its surface--shall a deluge sweep away.
    Near it comes, of all creation--the ablution day is near;
    Therefore what I now forewarn thee--may thy highest weal secure.
    All the fixed and all the moving--all that stirs, or stirreth not,
    Lo, of all the time approaches--the tremendous time of doom.
    Build thyself a ship, O Manu--strong, with cables well prepared,
    And thyself, with the seven Sages--mighty Manu enter in.
    All the living seeds of all things--by the Brahmins named of yore,
    Place thou first within thy vessel--well secured, divided well.
    From thy ship keep watch, O hermit--watch for me, as I draw near;
    Horned shall I swim before thee--by my horn thou'lt know me well.
    This the work thou must accomplish,--I depart; so fare thee well--
    Over these tumultuous waters--none without mine aid can sail.
    Doubt thou not, O lofty minded!--of my warning speech the truth."
    To the fish thus answered Manu--"All that thou requir'st, I'll do."
    Thus they parted, of each other--mutual leave when they had ta'en,
    Manu, raja! to accomplish--all to him the fish had said.
    Taking first the seeds of all things--launched he forth upon the sea;
    On the billowy sea, the prudent--in a beauteous vessel rode.
    Manu of the fish bethought him;--conscious of his thought the fish,
    Conqueror of hostile cities!--with his horn came floating by.
    King of men, the born of Manu!--Manu saw the sea-borne fish,
    In his form foreshewn, the horned--like a mountain huge and high.
    To the fish's head his cable, Manu bound--O king of men!
    Strong and firm his cable wound he--round and round on either horn:
    And the fish, all conquering raja!--with that twisted cable bound,
    With the utmost speed that vessel--dragged along the ocean tide.
    In his bark along the ocean--boldly went the king of men:
    Dancing with the tumbling billows--dashing through the roaring spray,
    Tossed about by winds tumultuous--in the vast and heaving sea,
    Like a trembling, drunken woman--reeled that ship, O king of men.
    Earth was seen no more, no region--nor the intermediate space;
    All around a waste of water--water all, and air and sky.
    In the whole world of creation--princely son of Bharata!
    None was seen but those seven Sages--Manu only, and the fish.
    Years on years, and still unwearied--drew that fish the bark along,
    Till at length it came, where lifted--Himavan its loftiest peak.
    There at length it came, and smiling--thus the fish addressed the sage:
    "To the peak of Himalaya--bind thou now thy stately ship."
    At the fish's mandate quickly--to the peak of Himavan
    Bound the sage his bark, and ever--to this day that loftiest peak,
    Bears the name of Manubandhan--from the binding of the bark.
      To the sage, the god of mercy--thus with fixed look bespake:
    "I am lord of all creation--Brahma, higher than all height;
    I in fishlike form have saved thee--Manu, in the perilous hour;
    But from thee new tribes of creatures--gods, asuras, men must spring.
    All the worlds must be created--all that moves or moveth not,
    By an all-surpassing penance--this great work must be achieved.
    Through my mercy, thy creation--to confusion ne'er shall run,"
    Spake the fish, and on the instant--to the invisible he passed.
    Vivaswata's son, all eager--the creation to begin,
    Stood amid his work confounded:--mighty penance wrought he then.
    So fulfilled that rigorous penance--instant Manu 'gan create--
    Instant every living creature--Raja! he began to form.
      Such the old, the famous legend--named the story of the Fish,
    Which to thee I have related--this for all our sins atones.
    He that hears it, Manu's legend,--in the full possession he,
    Of all things complete and perfect--to the heavenly world ascends.




NOTES ON NALA.


[Footnote 1: p. 3. l. 4. _Over, over all exalted_. This repetition is
in the original.]

[Footnote 2: p. 3. l. 5. _Holy deep-read in the Vedas_. All the
perfections, which, according to the opinions and laws of the Hindus,
distinguish the sovereign from the rest of mankind, are here ascribed
to the hero of the poem. The study of the Vedas must be cultivated by
the three superior castes, and ensures both temporal and eternal
beatitude. In the laws of Menu it is said, "Greatness is not conferred
by years, not by grey hairs, not by wealth, not by powerful kindred."
The divine sages have established this rule--Whoever has read the
Vedas and their Angas, he is among us great. (JONES'S MENU, ii. 254).
Of all these duties, answered Bhrigu, the principal is to acquire from
the Upanishads a true knowledge of the one supreme God: that is the
most exalted of all sciences, because it ensures immortality, (xii.
85). For in the knowledge and adoration of one God, which the Veda
teaches, all the rules of good conduct before-mentioned in order, are
fully comprised, (ib. 87.)

The study of the Vedas is considered the peculiar duty of kings, (vii.
43). The Upanishads are doctrinal extracts of the Vedas.

The Indian law demands in the most rigorous manner from every one of
noble birth, the mastery over the _senses_. Menu says, c. ii. 93, "A
man by the attachment of his organs to sensual pleasure, incurs
certain guilt; but having wholly subdued them, he thence attains
heavenly bliss. v. 94. Desire is never satisfied with the enjoyment of
desired objects; as the fire is not appeased with clarified butter; it
only blazes more vehemently. v. 97. To a man contaminated by
sensuality, neither the Vedas, nor liberality, nor sacrifices, nor
strict observances, nor pious austerities, ever procure felicity." The
control over every kind of sensual indulgence is enjoined upon the
king. vii. 44. Day and night must he strenuously exert himself to gain
complete victory over his own organs; since that king alone whose
organs are completely subdued, can keep his people firm to their duty.

Skill in the management of horses and chariots, which in a subsequent
part of the poem is of great importance to Nala, is often mentioned as
a praiseworthy accomplishment of kings. In the Ramayana, for instance,
in the description of king Dasaratha, which likewise contains the
above-mentioned traits of character--"In this city Ayodhya was a king
named Dusharutha, descended from Ikshwaku, perfectly skilled in the
Veda and Vedangas, prescient, of great ability, beloved by all his
people, a great charioteer, constant in sacrifice, eminent in sacred
duties, a royal sage, nearly equalling a Muhurshi, famed throughout
the three worlds, mighty, triumphant over his enemies, observant of
justice, having a perfect command of his appetites." CAREY and
MARSHMAN'S translation, sect. vi. p. 64.]

[Footnote 3: p. 3. l. 5. _--in Nishadha lord of earth_. I have accented
this word not quite correctly Nishadha, in order to harmonise with the
trochaic flow of my metre. It appears to be the same as Nishadha-rashtra
and Nishadha-desa. See Wilford's list of mountains, rivers, countries;
from the Puranas and other books. Asiatic Researches, vol. viii. BOPP.]

[Footnote 4: p. 3. l. 6. _Loving dice, of truth unblemished_. The
Sanscrit word Akshapujah is differently interpreted. Kosegarten
renders it in a good sense as "fearing heaven." He argues that it is
the poet's object in this passage to describe the good qualities of
Nala, and that he does not become a gamester till possessed by the
demon Kali. Bopp gives the sense in the text, which seems to connect
it with the history of king Yudishthira, to whom it is addressed.]

[Footnote 5: p. 3. l. 7. _Sense subdued_. The highest notion of this
favourite perfection of Indian character, may be given in the words of
the author of the Bhagavat-Gita: "The highest perfection to which the
soul can attain, is action without passion. The mind is to be entirely
independent of external objects; to preserve its undisturbed serenity
it should have the conscious power of withdrawing all its senses
within itself, as the tortoise draws all its limbs beneath in shell."
Action is necessary, but action must produce no emotion--no sensation
on the calm spirit within; whatever may be their consequences, however
important, however awful, events are to be unfelt, and almost
unperceived by the impassive mind; and on this principle Arjuna is to
execute the fated slaughter upon his kindred without the least feeling
of sorrow or compunction being permitted to intrude on the divine
apathy of his soul. Some of the images in which this passionless
tranquillity of the spirit is described, appear singularly beautiful:

    As to th' unrais'd unswelling ocean flow the multitudinous streams,
    So to the soul serene, unmov'd--flow in the undisturbing lusts.

And then again the soul, in this state of unbroken quietude,

    Floats like the lotus on the lake, unmov'd, unruffled by the tide.]

[Footnote 6: p. 3. l. 8. _Best, a present Manu he_. Manu, or Menu,
the representative of the human race; the holy, mythological ancestor
of the Hindus. In the Diluvium, the Indian version of the Deluge, (see
the latter part of this volume), Manu is the survivor of the human
race--the second ancestor of mankind. The first Menu is named
"Swayambhuva, or sprung from the self-existing." From him "came six
descendants, other Menus, or perfectly understanding the Scripture,
each giving birth to a race of his own, all exalted in dignity,
eminent in power." Laws of Menu, i. 61. The great code of law "the
Hindus firmly believe to have been promulged in the beginning of time
by Menu, son or grandson of Brahma, or in plain English the first of
created beings, and not the oldest only but the noblest of
legislators." Sir W. JONES'S preface to Laws of Menu; Works, vii. 76.
In the Ramayana, in like manner, king Dasaratha is compared to the
ancient king, Menu. The word Manu, as the name of the ancestor of men,
is derived from the Sanscrit root Man, to know (WILSONin voce); in
the same manner as the Sanscrit Manisha, knowledge, Manushya, Man--as
also the Latin Mens, and the German Mensch. According to this
etymology, Man, Mensch, properly means "the knowing," the Being
endowed with knowledge. The German word, Meinen, to mean, or be of
opinion, belongs to the same stock.]

[Footnote 7: p. 3. l. 9. _So there dwelt in high Vidarbha_. This city
is called by our poet Vidarbha Nagara, the city of Vidarbha, and
Cundina. According to Wilford it is Burra Nag-poor. BOPP. Colebrooke,
Asiatic Researches, remarks, that some suppose it to be the modern
Berar, which borders on the mountain Vindhya or Gondwanah. The kingdom
of Vidarbha, and its capital Kundini, are mentioned in the very
remarkable drama Malati and Madhava. WILSON's Hindu Theatre, ii. 16;
and extract from Harivansa, in LANGLOIS Monumens de l'Inde, p. 54.]

[Footnote 8: p. 3. l. 9. _Bhima, terrible in strength_.
Bhima-parakrama. There is a play upon the words, Bhima meaning
terrible.]

[Footnote 9: p. 3. l. 11. _Many a holy act, on offspring_. He made
offerings and performed penance, by which blessings were forced from
the reluctant gods. In India not only temporal, but eternal happiness,
depends on having children. The son alone by the offering of the
Sraddha, or libation for the dead, can obtain rest for the departed
spirit of the father. Hence the begetting of a son is a religious
duty, particularly for a Brahmin, and is one of the three debts to
which he is bound during life. After he has read the Vedas in the form
prescribed by Law, has legally begotten a son, and has performed
sacrifices to the best of his power, he has paid his three debts, and
may then apply his heart to eternal bliss. MENU, vi. 36. By a son a
man obtains victory over all people; by a son's son he enjoys
immortality; and afterwards, by the son of that grandson, he reaches
the solar abode. MENU, ix. 137.

This last passage is immediately followed by the explanation of the
Sanscrit word Puttra, son, by "the deliverer from hell." Since the son
(trayate) delivers his father from the hell, named put, he was
therefore called puttra by Brahma himself. This explanation, which it
given by the Indian etymologists, appears nevertheless, as is often
the case, rather forced; since the final syllable, tra, which is
translated by deliver (or preserve, WILSON, in voce) is a common
ending of many words, without the peculiar signification of
delivering: as with this final syllable on the word Pu, to be pure, is
formed the noun Puwitra, pure. WILKINS, Grammar, p. 454; KOSEGARTEN.
The affix with which this last is formed however, is not tra, but
itra, and it affords therefore no ground of objection to the usual
etymology of Puttra. WILSON.

The Indian poetry is full of instances of this strong desire for
offspring. In the Ramayana, king Dasaratha performs the Aswamedha, or
offering of a horse, to obtain a son. "To this magnanimous king,
acquainted in every duty, pre-eminent in virtue, and performing sacred
austerities for the sake of obtaining children, there was no son to
perpetuate his family. At length in the anxious mind of this noble one
the thought arose, 'Why do I not perform an Ushwamedha to obtain a
son.'" CAREY and MARSHMAN's translation, sect. viii. p. 74. Compare
the Raghu Vansa, canto i., and all that is done by king Dilipa to
obtain a son: and the poem of the death of Hidimbha, published by
Bopp.]

[Footnote 10: p. 3. l. 14. _--in his hospitable hall_. Hospitality to
a Brahmin is of course one of the greatest virtues. "A Brahmin coming
as a guest, and not received with just honour, takes to himself all
the reward of the housekeeper's former virtue, even though he had been
so temperate as to live on the gleanings of harvests, and so pious as
to make oblations in five distinct fires." Sir W. JONES, Menu, iii.
100.]

[Footnote 11: p. 3. l. 22. _--as around great Indra's queen_. Sachi.

    Sachi, soft as morning light,
    Blithe Sachi, from her lord Indrani hight.--Sir W. JONES's Hymn to Indra.]

[Footnote 12: p. 4. l. 2. _Mid her handmaids, like the lightning_.
There are two words of similar signification in the original; one of
them implies life-giving. Lightning in India being the forerunner of
the rainy season, is looked on as an object of delight as much as
terror. BOPP, from the Scholiast.]

[Footnote 13: p. 4. l. 2. _--shone she with her faultless form_. Sri,
or Lakshmi, the goddess of beauty and abundance, at once the Ceres and
the Alma Venus of India.

    Daughter of ocean and primeval night,
    Who fed with moonbeams dropping silent dew,
    And cradled in a wild wave dancing light.--Sir W. JONES's Ode to Lacshmi.]

[Footnote 14: p. 4. l. 4. _--never mid the Yaksha race_. The Yakshas
are demigods attendant on Kuvera, the god of wealth, descendants of
Kasyapa by his wife Khasa. They inhabit mountains, and have
intercourse with the Apsarasas, or heavenly nymphs. Sometimes they
appear not altogether as good beings, sometimes entirely harmless.
"The souls of men enslaved to their passions will rise no higher than
the Yakshas." MENU, xii. 47. The subject of the Meghaduta, or
Cloud-Messenger of Kalidasa, so elegantly translated by Mr. Wilson, is
the regret of a Yaksha for his beloved wife. Compare Mr. Wilson's note
on the Yakshas, Cloud Messenger, p. 69.]

[Footnote 15: p. 4. l. 7. _Nala too, 'mong kings the tiger_. Nara
Sardula, the Tiger warrior. I have retained the literal meaning,
though, according to Bopp, it means _in fine compositi, Optimus,
praestantissimus_. Mr. Southey's Young Tlalala, in Madoc, is the "tiger
of the war."]

[Footnote 16: p. 4. l. 8. _Like Kandarpa in his beauty_. Kandarpa is
the god of love. Kama, Love, or Kam Deo, God of Love. Dipaka, the
Inflamer. Manmatha, Heart-disturber. Ananga, the Incorporeal.

    God of each lovely sight, each lovely sound.
    Soul-kindling, world-inflaming, star y-crowned,
    Eternal Cama! or doth Smara bright,
    Or proud Ananga give thee more delight--SIR W. JONES, _Ode to Camdeo_.]

[Footnote 17: p. 4. l. 12. _Thus of each, O son of Kunti_. Kunti was
the mother of King Yudishthira, to whom the poem is related. I have
usually omitted this address, which is sometimes made to Yudishthira
under the title of Bharata, i. e. descendant of Bharata, or other
appellations.]

[Footnote 18: p. 4. l. 15. _There the swans he saw disporting_. In
the original this is a far less poetic bird, and the author must crave
forgiveness for having turned his geese into swans. If, however, we
are to believe Bohlen, in his learned work, Das Alte Indien, the
translators are altogether mistaken; they have been misled by the
similarity of the word Hansa to Gans--a goose. The original, he
asserts, to mean a mythic bird, closely resembling the swan, or
perhaps the tall and brilliant flamingo, which Southey has introduced
with such effect in one of his rich descriptions in the Curse of
Kehama. The goose, however, according to the general opinion, is so
common in Indian mythology, that this must be received with much
caution. In the modern Tamulic version of the story, translated by Mr.
Kindersley, are substituted, "Milk white Aunnays, descending from the
skies, like an undulating garland of pearls." The Aunnays are supposed
to be a sort of birds of paradise. They are represented as milk white;
remarkable for the gracefulness of their walk; and endowed with
considerable gifts. Mr. Wilson, in his Meghaduta, has given me a
precedent for the change of geese into swans; see p. 27, v. 71, with
the note. And Mr. Ellis, Asiatic Researches, vol. xiv. p. 29, has the
following note on the subject: "There are three distinctions of Hamsa;
the Raja-hamsa, with a milk-white body and deep red beak and legs,
this is the Phenicopteros, or flamingo; the Mallicacsha-hamsa, with
brownish beak and legs; and the Dhartarashtra-hamsa, with black beak
and legs: the latter is the European swan, the former a variety. The
gait of an elegant woman is compared by the Hindu poets to the proud
bearing of a swan in the water. Sonnerat, making a mistake similar to
that in the text, translates a passage in which this allusion occurs,
in words to the following purport, 'Her gait resembled that of a
goose.' Other writers have fallen into the same error." The swans, ou
Plutot les Genies ailes, play the same part in an extract from the
Harivansa, translated by M. Langlois, in his Monumens Litteraires de
l'Inde, _Paris_, 1827, p. 158. The first part of the Harivansa has
just appeared, under the auspices of the Oriental Translation
Committee.]

[Footnote 19: p. 5. l. 4. _Like the Aswinas in beauty_. See Asiatic
Researches, i. 263; ix. 323. Ramayana, i. 226.]

[Footnote 20: p. 5. l. 7. _Gandharvas_. Celestial choristers, of
beautiful forms and complexion, usually seen in Hindu sculptures
attendant on the deities.

    Celestial genii tow'rd their king advance
    (So called by men) in heaven Gandharvas named,
    For matchless music famed.
    Soon when the bands in lucid rows assemble,
    Flutes breathe, and citherns tremble.

SIR W. JONES, Ode to Indra.--See Ramayana, l. 125.]

[Footnote 21: p. 5. l. 7. _the Serpents_. The serpents are objects of
reverence and veneration in India. They are called Naga, not going;
Uragas--breast-going. Their residence is in Patala, though they are
occasional visitants both of heaven and earth. See notes to book V. In
the Bhagavat Gita, Arjun sees Brahma "sitting on his lotus-throne; all
the Reshees and Ooragas (serpents)," Wilkins' translation, p. 91.
According to Wilson, (Sanscrit Dict. voce Naga), the race of these
beings is said to have sprung from Kadru, the wife of Kasyapa, in
order to people Patala, or the regions below the earth.]

[Footnote 22: p. 5. l. 7. _The Rakshasas_. Demons who assume at will
the forms of lions, tigers, horses, and other animals, as well as the
human shape, with numerous heads and arms. They are represented as
cannibals who devour their enemies. See Ramayana.]

[Footnote 23: p. 6. l. 6. _--and with passion heart-possessed_. It
is, literally, her mind (or thought), being possessed by the
_heart-sleeper_, (i. e. love, reposing or dwelling in the heart).
WILSON.]

