having operated and suffered whatsoever befits His human and Divine
operation." But he here mentions only one human and Divine operation,
which is written in Greek _theandrike_, i.e. God-manlike. Hence it
seems that there is but one composite operation in Christ.

Obj. 2: Further, there is but one operation of the principal and
instrumental agent. Now the human nature in Christ was the instrument
of the Divine, as was said above (Q. 7, A. 1, ad 3; Q. 8, A. 1, ad 1;
Q. 18, A. 1, ad 2). Hence the operations of the Divine and human
natures in Christ are the same.

Obj. 3: Further, since in Christ there are two natures in one
hypostasis or person, whatever pertains to the hypostasis or person
is one and the same. But operation pertains to the hypostasis or
person, for it is only a subsisting suppositum that operates; hence,
according to the Philosopher (Metaph. i, 1), acts belong to
singulars. Hence in Christ there is only one operation of the Godhead
and the Manhood.

Obj. 4: Further, as being belongs to a subsisting hypostasis, so also
does operation. But on account of the unity of hypostasis there is
only one operation of the Godhead and the (Q. 17, A. 2). Hence, on
account of the same unity, there is one operation in Christ.

Obj. [5]: Further, [where there is one thing] operated there is one
operation. But the same thing was operated by the Godhead and the
Manhood, as the healing of the lepers or the raising of the dead.
Hence it seems that in Christ there is but one operation of the
Godhead and the Manhood.

_On the contrary,_ Ambrose says (De Fide ii, 8): "How can the same
operation spring from different powers? Cannot the lesser operate as
the greater? And can there be one operation where there are different
substances?"

_I answer that,_ As was said above (Q. 18, A. 1), the aforesaid
heretics who placed one will in Christ placed one operation in
Christ. Now in order better to understand their erroneous opinion, we
must bear in mind that wherever there are several mutually ordained
agents, the inferior is moved by the superior, as in man the body is
moved by the soul and the lower powers by the reason. And thus the
actions and movements of the inferior principle are things operated
rather than operations. Now what pertains to the highest principle is
properly the operation; thus we say of man that to walk, which
belongs to the feet, and to touch, which belongs to the hand, are
things operated by the man--one of which is operated by the soul
through the feet, the other through the hands. And because it is the
same soul that operates in both cases, there is only one indifferent
operation, on the part of the thing operating, which is the first
moving principle; but difference is found on the part of what is
operated. Now, as in a mere man the body is moved by the soul, and
the sensitive by the rational appetite, so in the Lord Jesus Christ
the human nature is moved and ruled by the Divine. Hence they said
that there is one indifferent operation on the part of the Godhead
operating, but divers things operated, inasmuch as the Godhead of
Christ did one thing by Itself, as to uphold all things by the word
of His power--and another thing by His human nature, as to walk in
body. Hence the Sixth Council [*Third Council of Constantinople, Act.
10] quotes the words of Severus the heretic, who said: "What things
were done and wrought by the one Christ, differ greatly; for some are
becoming to God, and some are human, as to walk bodily on the earth
is indeed human, but to give hale steps to sickly limbs, wholly
unable to walk on the ground, is becoming to God. Yet one, i.e. the
Incarnate Word, wrought one and the other--neither was this from one
nature, and that from another; nor can we justly affirm that because
there are distinct things operated there are therefore two operating
natures and forms."

But herein they were deceived, for what is moved by another has a
twofold action--one which it has from its own form--the other, which
it has inasmuch as it is moved by another; thus the operation of an
axe of itself is to cleave; but inasmuch as it is moved by the
craftsman, its operation is to make benches. Hence the operation
which belongs to a thing by its form is proper to it, nor does it
belong to the mover, except in so far as he makes use of this kind of
thing for his work: thus to heat is the proper operation of fire, but
not of a smith, except in so far as he makes use of fire for heating
iron. But the operation which belongs to the thing, as moved by
another, is not distinct from the operation of the mover; thus to
make a bench is not the work of the axe independently of the workman.
Hence, wheresoever the mover and the moved have different forms or
operative faculties, there must the operation of the mover and the
proper operation of the moved be distinct; although the moved shares
in the operation of the mover, and the mover makes use of the
operation of the moved, and, consequently, each acts in communion
with the other.

Therefore in Christ the human nature has its proper form and power
whereby it acts; and so has the Divine. Hence the human nature has
its proper operation distinct from the Divine, and conversely.
Nevertheless, the Divine Nature makes use of the operation of the
human nature, as of the operation of its instrument; and in the same
way the human nature shares in the operation of the Divine Nature, as
an instrument shares in the operation of the principal agent. And
this is what Pope Leo says (Ep. ad Flavian. xxviii): "Both forms"
(i.e. both the Divine and the human nature in Christ) "do what is
proper to each in union with the other, i.e. the Word operates what
belongs to the Word, and the flesh carries out what belongs to flesh."

But if there were only one operation of the Godhead and manhood in
Christ, it would be necessary to say either that the human nature had
not its proper form and power (for this could not possibly be said of
the Divine), whence it would follow that in Christ there was only the
Divine operation; or it would be necessary to say that from the
Divine and human power there was made up one power. Now both of these
are impossible. For by the first the human nature in Christ is
supposed to be imperfect; and by the second a confusion of the
natures is supposed. Hence it is with reason that the Sixth Council
(Act. 18) condemned this opinion, and decreed as follows: "We confess
two natural, indivisible, unconvertible, unconfused, and inseparable
operations in the same Lord Jesus Christ our true God"; i.e. the
Divine operation and the human operation.

Reply Obj. 1: Dionysius places in Christ a theandric, i.e. a
God-manlike or Divino-human, operation not by any confusion of the
operations or powers of both natures, but inasmuch as His Divine
operation employs the human, and His human operation shares in the
power of the Divine. Hence, as he says in a certain epistle (Ad Caium
iv), "what is of man He works beyond man; and this is shown by the
Virgin conceiving supernaturally and by the unstable waters bearing
up the weight of bodily feet." Now it is clear that to be begotten
belongs to human nature, and likewise to walk; yet both were in
Christ supernaturally. So, too, He wrought Divine things humanly, as
when He healed the leper with a touch. Hence in the same epistle he
adds: "He performed Divine works not as God does, and human works not
as man does, but, God having been made man, by a new operation of God
and man."

Now, that he understood two operations in Christ, one of the Divine
and the other of the human nature, is clear from what he says, Div.
Nom. ii: "Whatever pertains to His human operation the Father and the
Holy Ghost no-wise share in, except, as one might say, by their most
gracious and merciful will," i.e. inasmuch as the Father and the Holy
Ghost in their mercy wished Christ to do and to suffer human things.
And he adds: "He is truly the unchangeable God, and God's Word by the
sublime and unspeakable operation of God, which, being made man for
us, He wrought." Hence it is clear that the human operation, in which
the Father and the Holy Ghost do not share, except by Their merciful
consent, is distinct from His operation, as the Word of God, wherein
the Father and the Holy Ghost share.

Reply Obj. 2: The instrument is said to act through being moved by
the principal agent; and yet, besides this, it can have its proper
operation through its own form, as stated above of fire. And hence
the action of the instrument as instrument is not distinct from the
action of the principal agent; yet it may have another operation,
inasmuch as it is a thing. Hence the operation of Christ's human
nature, as the instrument of the Godhead, is not distinct from the
operation of the Godhead; for the salvation wherewith the manhood of
Christ saves us and that wherewith His Godhead saves us are not
distinct; nevertheless, the human nature in Christ, inasmuch as it is
a certain nature, has a proper operation distinct from the Divine, as
stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: To operate belongs to a subsisting hypostasis; in
accordance, however, with the form and nature from which the
operation receives its species. Hence from the diversity of forms or
natures spring the divers species of operations, but from the unity
of hypostasis springs the numerical unity as regards the operation of
the species: thus fire has two operations specifically different,
namely, to illuminate and to heat, from the difference of light and
heat, and yet the illumination of the fire that illuminates at one
and the same time is numerically one. So, likewise, in Christ there
are necessarily two specifically different operations by reason of
His two natures; nevertheless, each of the operations at one and the
same time is numerically one, as one walking and one healing.

Reply Obj. 4: Being and operation belong to the person by reason of
the nature; yet in a different manner. For being belongs to the very
constitution of the person, and in this respect it has the nature of
a term; consequently, unity of person requires unity of the complete
and personal being. But operation is an effect of the person by
reason of a form or nature. Hence plurality of operations is not
incompatible with personal unity.

Reply Obj. 5: The proper work of the Divine operation is different
from the proper work of the human operation. Thus to heal a leper is
a proper work of the Divine operation, but to touch him is the proper
work of the human operation. Now both these operations concur in one
work, inasmuch as one nature acts in union with the other.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 19, Art. 2]

Whether in Christ There Are Several Human Operations?

Objection 1: It would seem that in Christ there are several human
operations. For Christ as man communicates with plants by His
nutritive soul, with the brutes by His sensitive soul, and with the
angels by His intellective soul, even as other men do. Now the
operations of a plant as plant and of an animal as animal are
different. Therefore Christ as man has several operations.

Obj. 2: Further, powers and habits are distinguished by their acts.
Now in Christ's soul there were divers powers and habits; therefore
also divers operations.

Obj. 3: Further, instruments ought to be proportioned to their
operations. Now the human body has divers members of different form,
and consequently fitted to divers operations. Therefore in Christ
there are divers operations in the human nature.

_On the contrary,_ As Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 15),
"operation is consequent upon the nature." But in Christ there is
only one human nature. Therefore in Christ there is only one human
operation.

_I answer that,_ Since it is by his reason that man is what he is;
that operation is called human simply, which proceeds from the reason
through the will, which is the rational appetite. Now if there is any
operation in man which does not proceed from the reason and the will,
it is not simply a human operation, but belongs to man by reason of
some part of human nature--sometimes by reason of the nature of
elementary bodies, as to be borne downwards--sometimes by reason of
the force of the vegetative soul, as to be nourished, and to
grow--sometimes by reason of the sensitive part, as to see and hear,
to imagine and remember, to desire and to be angry. Now between these
operations there is a difference. For the operations of the sensitive
soul are to some extent obedient to reason, and consequently they are
somewhat rational and human inasmuch as they obey reason, as is clear
from the Philosopher (Ethic. i, 13). But the operations that spring
from the vegetative soul, or from the nature of elemental bodies, are
not subject to reason; consequently they are nowise rational; nor
simply human, but only as regards a part of human nature. Now it was
said (A. 1) that when a subordinate agent acts by its own form, the
operations of the inferior and of the superior agent are distinct;
but when the inferior agent acts only as moved by the superior agent,
then the operation of the superior and the inferior agent is one.

And hence in every mere man the operations of the elemental body and
of the vegetative soul are distinct from the will's operation, which
is properly human; so likewise the operations of the sensitive soul
inasmuch as it is not moved by reason; but inasmuch as it is moved by
reason, the operations of the sensitive and the rational part are the
same. Now there is but one operation of the rational part if we
consider the principle of the operation, which is the reason and the
will; but the operations are many if we consider their relationship
to various objects. And there were some who called this a diversity
of things operated rather than of operations, judging the unity of
the operation solely from the operative principle. And it is in this
respect that we are now considering the unity and plurality of
operations in Christ.

Hence in every mere man there is but one operation, which is properly
called human; but besides this there are in a mere man certain other
operations, which are not strictly human, as was said above. But in
the Man Jesus Christ there was no motion of the sensitive part which
was not ordered by reason. Even the natural and bodily operations
pertained in some respects to His will, inasmuch as it was His will
"that His flesh should do and suffer what belonged to it," as stated
above (Q. 18, A. 5). Much more, therefore, is there one
operation in Christ, than in any other man whatsoever.

Reply Obj. 1: The operations of the sensitive and nutritive
parts are not strictly human, as stated above; yet in Christ these
operations were more human than in others.

Reply Obj. 2: Powers and habits are diversified by comparison
with their objects. Hence in this way the diversity of operations
corresponds to the divers powers and habits, as likewise to the divers
objects. Now we do not wish to exclude this diversity of operations
from Christ's humanity, nor that which springs from a diversity of
time, but only that which regards the first active principle, as was
said above.

(St. Thomas gives no reply to Obj. 3; some codices add: Hence may be
gathered the reply to the third objection.)
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 19, Art. 3]

Whether the Human Action of Christ Could Be Meritorious to Him?

Objection 1: It would seem that the human action of Christ could not
be meritorious to Him. For before His death Christ was a comprehensor
even as He is now. But comprehensors do not merit: because the
charity of the comprehensor belongs to the reward of beatitude, since
fruition depends upon it. Hence it does not seem to be the principle
of merit, since merit and reward are not the same. Therefore Christ
before His passion did not merit, even as He does not merit now.

Obj. 2: Further, no one merits what is due to him. But because Christ
is the Son of God by nature, the eternal inheritance is due to Him,
which other men merit by their works. And hence Christ Who, from the
beginning, was the Word of God, could not merit anything for Himself.

Obj. 3: Further, whoever has the principle does not properly merit
what flows from its possession. But Christ has the glory of the soul,
whence, in the natural course, flowed the glory of the body, as
Augustine says (Ep. ad Dios cxviii); though by a dispensation it was
brought about that in Christ the glory of the soul should not
overflow to the body. Hence Christ did not merit the glory of the
body.

Obj. 4: Further, the manifestation of Christ's excellence is a good,
not of Christ Himself, but of those who know Him. Hence it is
promised as a reward to such as love Christ that He will be
manifested to them, according to John 14:21: "He that loveth Me,
shall be loved of My Father, and I will love him and will manifest
Myself to him." Therefore Christ did not merit the manifestation of
His greatness.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Phil. 2:8, 9): "Becoming
obedient unto death . . . For which cause God also hath exalted Him."
Therefore by obeying He merited His exaltation and thus He merited
something for Himself.

_I answer that,_ To have any good thing of oneself is more excellent
than to have it from another, for "what is of itself a cause is
always more excellent than what is a cause through another," as is
said _Phys._    viii, 5. Now a thing is said to have, of itself, that
of which it is to some extent the cause. But of whatever good we
possess the first cause by authority is God; and in this way no
creature has any good of itself, according to 1 Cor. 4:7: "What hast
thou that thou hast not received?" Nevertheless, in a secondary
manner anyone may be a cause, to himself, of having certain good
things, inasmuch as he cooperates with God in the matter, and thus
whoever has anything by his own merit has it, in a manner, of
himself. Hence it is better to have a thing by merit than without
merit.

Now since all perfection and greatness must be attributed to Christ,
consequently He must have by merit what others have by merit; unless
it be of such a nature that its want would detract from Christ's
dignity and perfection more than would accrue to Him by merit. Hence
He merited neither grace nor knowledge nor the beatitude of His soul,
nor the Godhead, because, since merit regards only what is not yet
possessed, it would be necessary that Christ should have been without
these at some time; and to be without them would have diminished
Christ's dignity more than His merit would have increased it. But the
glory of the body, and the like, are less than the dignity of
meriting, which pertains to the virtue of charity. Hence we must say
that Christ had, by merit, the glory of His body and whatever
pertained to His outward excellence, as His Ascension, veneration,
and the rest. And thus it is clear that He could merit for Himself.

Reply Obj. 1: Fruition, which is an act of charity, pertains to the
glory of the soul, which Christ did not merit. Hence if He merited by
charity, it does not follow that the merit and the reward are the
same. Nor did He merit by charity inasmuch as it was the charity of a
comprehensor, but inasmuch as it was that of a wayfarer. For He was
at once a wayfarer and a comprehensor, as was said above (Q. 15, A.
10). And therefore, since He is no longer a wayfarer, He is not in
the state of meriting.

Reply Obj. 2: Because by nature Christ is God and the Son of God, the
Divine glory and the lordship of all things are due to Him, as to the
first and supreme Lord. Nevertheless a glory is due to Him as a
beatified man; and this He has partly without merit, and partly with
merit, as is clear from what has been said.

Reply Obj. 3: It is by Divine appointment that there is an overflow
of glory from the soul to the body, in keeping with human merit; so
that as man merits by the act of the soul which he performs in the
body, so he may be rewarded by the glory of the soul overflowing to
the body. And hence not only the glory of the soul, but also the
glory of the body falls under merit, according to Rom. 8:11:
"He . . . shall quicken also our [Vulg.: 'your'] mortal bodies,
because of His Spirit that dwelleth in us [Vulg.: 'you']." And thus
it could fall under Christ's merit.

Reply Obj. 4: The manifestation of Christ's excellence is His good as
regards the being which it has in the knowledge of others; although
in regard to the being which they have in themselves it chiefly
belongs to the good of those who know Him. Yet even this is referred
to Christ inasmuch as they are His members.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 19, Art. 4]

Whether Christ Could Merit for Others?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ could not merit for others.
For it is written (Ezech. 18:4): "The soul that sinneth, the same
shall die." Hence, for a like reason, the soul that meriteth, the
same shall be recompensed. Therefore it is not possible that Christ
merited for others.

Obj. 2: Further, of the fulness of Christ's grace we all receive, as
is written John 1:16. Now other men having Christ's grace cannot
merit for others. For it is written (Ezech. 14:20) that if "Noe and
Daniel and Job be in the city [Vulg.: 'the midst thereof'] . . . they
shall deliver neither son nor daughter; but they shall only deliver
their own souls by their justice." Hence Christ could not merit
anything for us.

Obj. 3: Further, the "reward" that we merit is due "according to
justice [Vulg.: 'debt'] and not according to grace," as is clear from
Rom. 4:4. Therefore if Christ merited our salvation it follows that
our salvation is not by God's grace but by justice, and that He acts
unjustly with those whom He does not save, since Christ's merit
extends to all.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Rom. 5:18): "As by the offense of
one, unto all men to condemnation; so also by the justice of one,
unto all men to justification of life." But Adam's demerits reached
to the condemnation of others. Much more, therefore, does the merit
of Christ reach others.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (Q. 8, AA. 1, 5), grace was in
Christ not merely as in an individual, but also as in the Head of the
whole Church, to Whom all are united, as members to a head, who
constitute one mystical person. And hence it is that Christ's merit
extends to others inasmuch as they are His members; even as in a man
the action of the head reaches in a manner to all his members, since
it perceives not merely for itself alone, but for all the members.

Reply Obj. 1: The sin of an individual harms himself alone; but the
sin of Adam, who was appointed by God to be the principle of the
whole nature, is transmitted to others by carnal propagation. So,
too, the merit of Christ, Who has been appointed by God to be the
head of all men in regard to grace, extends to all His members.

Reply Obj. 2: Others receive of Christ's fulness not indeed the fount
of grace, but some particular grace. And hence it need not be that
men merit for others, as Christ did.

Reply Obj. 3: As the sin of Adam reaches others only by carnal
generation, so, too, the merit of Christ reaches others only by
spiritual regeneration, which takes place in baptism; wherein we are
incorporated with Christ, according to Gal. 3:27, "As many of you as
have been baptized in Christ, have put on Christ"; and it is by grace
that it is granted to man to be incorporated with Christ. And thus
man's salvation is from grace.
_______________________

QUESTION 20

OF CHRIST'S SUBJECTION TO THE FATHER
(In Two Articles)

We must now consider such things as belong to Christ in relation to
the Father. Some of these things are predicated of Him because of His
relation to the Father, e.g. that He was subject to Him, that He
prayed to Him, that He ministered, to Him by priesthood. And some are
predicated, or may be predicated, of Him because of the Father's
relation to Him, e.g. that the Father adopted Him and that He
predestined Him.

Hence we must consider (1) Christ's subjection to the Father; (2) His
prayer; (3) His priesthood; (4) Adoption--whether it is becoming to
Him; (5) His predestination.

Under the first head there are two points of inquiry:

(1) Whether Christ is subject to the Father?

(2) Whether He is subject to Himself?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 20, Art. 1]

Whether We May Say That Christ Is Subject to the Father?

Objection 1: It would seem that we may not say that Christ was
subject to the Father. For everything subject to the Father is a
creature, since, as is said in _De Eccles. Dogm._ iv, "in the Trinity
there is no dependence or subjection." But we cannot say simply that
Christ is a creature, as was stated above (Q. 16, A. 8). Therefore we
cannot say simply that Christ is subject to God the Father.

Obj. 2: Further, a thing is said to be subject to God when it is
subservient to His dominion. But we cannot attribute subservience to
the human nature of Christ; for Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii,
21): "We must bear in mind that we may not call it" (i.e. Christ's
human nature) "a servant; for the words 'subservience' and
'domination' are not names of the nature, but of relations, as the
words 'paternity' and 'filiation.'" Hence Christ in His human nature
is not subject to God the Father.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (1 Cor. 15:28): "And when all things
shall be subdued unto Him, then the Son also Himself shall be subject
unto Him that put all things under Him." But, as is written (Heb.
2:8): "We see not as yet all things subject to Him." Hence He is not
yet subject to the Father, Who has subjected all things to Him.

_On the contrary,_ Our Lord says (John 14:28), "The Father is greater
than I"; and Augustine says (De Trin. i, 7): "It is not without
reason that the Scripture mentions both, that the Son is equal to the
Father and the Father greater than the Son, for the first is said on
account of the form of God, and the second on account of the form of
a servant, without any confusion." Now the less is subject to the
greater. Therefore in the form of a servant Christ is subject to the
Father.

_I answer that,_ Whoever has a nature is competent to have what is
proper to that nature. Now human nature from its beginning has a
threefold subjection to God. The first regards the degree of
goodness, inasmuch as the Divine Nature is the very essence of
goodness as is clear from Dionysius (Div. Nom. i) while a created
nature has a participation of the Divine goodness, being subject, so
to say, to the rays of this goodness. Secondly, human nature is
subject to God, as regards God's power, inasmuch as human nature,
even as every creature, is subject to the operation of the Divine
ordinance. Thirdly, human nature is especially subject to God through
its proper act, inasmuch as by its own will it obeys His command.
This triple subjection to God Christ professes of Himself. The first
(Matt. 19:17): "Why askest thou Me concerning good? One is good,
God." And on this Jerome remarks: "He who had called Him a good
master, and had not confessed Him to be God or the Son of God, learns
that no man, however holy, is good in comparison with God." And
hereby He gave us to understand that He Himself, in His human nature,
did not attain to the height of Divine goodness. And because "in such
things as are great, but not in bulk, to be great is the same as to
be good," as Augustine says (De Trin. vi, 8), for this reason the
Father is said to be greater than Christ in His human nature. The
second subjection is attributed to Christ, inasmuch as all that
befell Christ is believed to have happened by Divine appointment;
hence Dionysius says (Coel. Hier. iv) that Christ "is subject to the
ordinance of God the Father." And this is the subjection of
subservience, whereby "every creature serves God" (Judith 16:17),
being subject to His ordinance, according to Wis. 16:24: "The
creature serving Thee the Creator." And in this way the Son of God
(Phil. 2:7) is said to have taken "the form of a servant." The third
subjection He attributes to Himself, saying (John 8:29): "I do always
the things that please Him." And this is the subjection to the
Father, of obedience unto death. Hence it is written (Phil. 2:8) that
he became "obedient" to the Father "unto death."

Reply Obj. 1: As we are not to understand that Christ is a creature
simply, but only in His human nature, whether this qualification be
added or not, as stated above (Q. 16, A. 8), so also we are to
understand that Christ is subject to the Father not simply but in His
human nature, even if this qualification be not added; and yet it is
better to add this qualification in order to avoid the error of
Arius, who held the Son to be less than the Father.

Reply Obj. 2: The relation of subservience and dominion is based upon
action and passion, inasmuch as it belongs to a servant to be moved
by the will of his master. Now to act is not attributed to the nature
as agent, but to the person, since "acts belong to supposita and to
singulars," according to the Philosopher (Metaph. i, 1). Nevertheless
action is attributed to the nature as to that whereby the person or
hypostasis acts. Hence, although the nature is not properly said to
rule or serve, yet every hypostasis or person may be properly said to
be ruling or serving in this or that nature. And in this way nothing
prevents Christ being subject or servant to the Father in human
nature.

Reply Obj. 3: As Augustine says (De Trin. i, 8): "Christ will give
the kingdom to God and the Father, when He has brought the faithful,
over whom He now reigns by faith, to the vision," i.e. to see the
essence common to the Father and the Son: and then He will be totally
subject to the Father not only in Himself, but also in His members by
the full participation of the Godhead. And then all things will be
fully subject to Him by the final accomplishment of His will
concerning them; although even now all things are subject to Him as
regards His power, according to Matt. 28:18: "All power is given to
Me in heaven and in earth."
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 20, Art. 2]

Whether Christ Is Subject to Himself?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ is not subject to Himself. For
Cyril says in a synodal letter which the Council of Ephesus (Part I,
ch. xxvi) received: "Christ is neither servant nor master of Himself.
It is foolish, or rather impious, to think or say this." And
Damascene says the same (De Fide Orth. iii, 21): "The one Being,
Christ, cannot be the servant or master of Himself." Now Christ is
said to be the servant of the Father inasmuch as He is subject to
Him. Hence Christ is not subject to Himself.

Obj. 2: Further, servant has reference to master. Now nothing has a
relation to itself, hence Hilary says (De Trin. vii) that nothing is
like or equal to itself. Hence Christ cannot be said to be the
servant of Himself, and consequently to be subject to Himself.

Obj. 3: Further, "as the rational soul and flesh are one man; so God
and man are one Christ," as Athanasius says (Symb. Fid.). Now man is
not said to be subject to himself or servant to himself or greater
than himself because his body is subject to his soul. Therefore,
Christ is not said to be subject to Himself because His Manhood is
subject to His Godhead.

_On the contrary,_ Augustine says (De Trin. i, 7): "Truth shows in
this way" (i.e. whereby the Father is greater than Christ in human
nature) "that the Son is less than Himself."

Further, as he argues (De Trin. i, 7), the form of a servant was so
taken by the Son of God that the form of God was not lost. But
because of the form of God, which is common to the Father and the
Son, the Father is greater than the Son in human nature. Therefore
the Son is greater than Himself in human nature.

Further, Christ in His human nature is the servant of God the Father,
according to John 20:17: "I ascend to My Father and to your Father to
My God and your God." Now whoever is the servant of the Father is the
servant of the Son; otherwise not everything that belongs to the
Father would belong to the Son. Therefore Christ is His own servant
and is subject to Himself.

_I answer that,_ As was said above (A. 1, ad 2), to be master or
servant is attributed to a person or hypostasis according to a
nature. Hence when it is said that Christ is the master or servant of
Himself, or that the Word of God is the Master of the Man Christ,
this may be understood in two ways. First, so that this is understood
to be said by reason of another hypostasis or person, as if there was
the person of the Word of God ruling and the person of the man
serving; and this is the heresy of Nestorius. Hence in the
condemnation of Nestorius it is said in the Council of Ephesus (Part
III, ch. i, anath. 6): "If anyone say that the Word begotten of God
the Father is the God or Lord of Christ, and does not rather confess
the same to be at once God and man as the Word made flesh, according
to the Scriptures, let him be anathema." And in this sense it is
denied by Cyril and Damascene (Obj. 1); and in the same sense must it
be denied that Christ is less than Himself or subject to Himself.
Secondly, it may be understood of the diversity of natures in the one
person or hypostasis. And thus we may say that in one of them, in
which He agrees with the Father, He presides and rules together with
the Father; and in the other nature, in which He agrees with us, He
is subject and serves, and in this sense Augustine says that "the Son
is less than Himself."

Yet it must be borne in mind that since this name "Christ" is the
name of a Person, even as the name "Son," those things can be
predicated essentially and absolutely of Christ which belong to Him
by reason of the Person, Which is eternal; and especially those
relations which seem more properly to pertain to the Person or the
hypostasis. But whatever pertains to Him in His human nature is
rather to be attributed to Him with a qualification; so that we say
that Christ is simply greatest, Lord, Ruler, whereas to be subject or
servant or less is to be attributed to Him with the qualification, in
His human nature.

Reply Obj. 1: Cyril and Damascene deny that Christ is the head of
Himself inasmuch as this implies a plurality of supposita, which is
required in order that anyone may be the master of another.

Reply Obj. 2: Simply speaking it is necessary that the master and the
servant should be distinct; yet a certain notion of mastership and
subservience may be preserved inasmuch as the same one is master of
Himself in different respects.

Reply Obj. 3: On account of the divers parts of man, one of which is
superior and the other inferior, the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 11)
that there is justice between a man and himself inasmuch as the
irascible and concupiscible powers obey reason. Hence this way a man
may be said to be subject and subservient to Himself as regards His
different parts.

To the other arguments, the reply is clear from what has been said.
For Augustine asserts that the Son is less than, or subject to,
Himself in His human nature, and not by a diversity of supposita.
_______________________

QUESTION 21

OF CHRIST'S PRAYER
(In Four Articles)

We must now consider Christ's prayer; and under this head there are
four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether it is becoming that Christ should pray?

(2) Whether it pertains to Him in respect of His sensuality?

(3) Whether it is becoming to Him to pray for Himself or only for
others?

(4) Whether every prayer of His was heard?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 21, Art. 1]

Whether It Is Becoming of Christ to Pray?

Objection 1: It would seem unbecoming that Christ should pray. For,
as Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 24), "prayer is the asking for
becoming things from God." But since Christ could do all things, it
does not seem becoming to Him to ask anything from anyone. Therefore
it does not seem fitting that Christ should pray.

Obj. 2: Further, we need not ask in prayer for what we know for
certain will happen; thus, we do not pray that the sun may rise
tomorrow. Nor is it fitting that anyone should ask in prayer for what
he knows will not happen. But Christ in all things knew what would
happen. Therefore it was not fitting that He should ask anything in
prayer.

Obj. 3: Further, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 24) that "prayer
is the raising up of the mind to God." Now Christ's mind needed no
uplifting to God, since His mind was always united to God, not only
by the union of the hypostasis, but by the fruition of beatitude.
Therefore it was not fitting that Christ should pray.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Luke 6:12): "And it came to pass in
those days, that He went out into a mountain, and He passed the whole
night in the prayer of God."

_I answer that,_ As was said in the Second Part (Q. 83, AA. 1, 2),
prayer is the unfolding of our will to God, that He may fulfill it.
If, therefore, there had been but one will in Christ, viz. the
Divine, it would nowise belong to Him to pray, since the Divine will
of itself is effective of whatever He wishes by it, according to Ps.
134:6: "Whatsoever the Lord pleased, He hath done." But because the
Divine and the human wills are distinct in Christ, and the human will
of itself is not efficacious enough to do what it wishes, except by
Divine power, hence to pray belongs to Christ as man and as having a
human will.

Reply Obj. 1: Christ as God and not as man was able to carry out all
He wished, since as man He was not omnipotent, as stated above (Q.
13, A. 1). Nevertheless being both God and man, He wished to offer
prayers to the Father, not as though He were incompetent, but for our
instruction. First, that He might show Himself to be from the Father;
hence He says (John 11:42): "Because of the people who stand about I
have said it" (i.e. the words of the prayer) "that they may believe
that Thou hast sent Me." Hence Hilary says (De Trin. x): "He did not
need prayer. It was for us He prayed, lest the Son should be
unknown." Secondly, to give us an example of prayer; hence Ambrose
says (on Luke 6:12): "Be not deceived, nor think that the Son of God
prays as a weakling, in order to beseech what He cannot effect. For
the Author of power, the Master of obedience persuades us to the
precepts of virtue by His example." Hence Augustine says (Tract. civ
in Joan.): "Our Lord in the form of a servant could have prayed in
silence, if need be, but He wished to show Himself a suppliant of the
Father, in such sort as to bear in mind that He was our Teacher."

Reply Obj. 2: Amongst the other things which He knew would happen, He
knew that some would be brought about by His prayer; and for these He
not unbecomingly besought God.

Reply Obj. 3: To rise is nothing more than to move towards what is
above. Now movement is taken in two ways, as is said _De Anima_ iii,
7; first, strictly, according as it implies the passing from
potentiality to act, inasmuch as it is the act of something
imperfect, and thus to rise pertains to what is potentially and not
actually above. Now in this sense, as Damascene says (De Fide Orth.
iii, 24), "the human mind of Christ did not need to rise to God,
since it was ever united to God both by personal being and by the
blessed vision." Secondly, movement signifies the act of something
perfect, i.e. something existing in act, as to understand and to feel
are called movements; and in this sense the mind of Christ was always
raised up to God, since He was always contemplating Him as existing
above Himself.
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 21, Art. 2]

Whether It Pertains to Christ to Pray According to His Sensuality?

Objection 1: It would seem that it pertains to Christ to pray
according to His sensuality. For it is written (Ps. 83:3) in the
person of Christ: "My heart and My flesh have rejoiced in the Living
God." Now sensuality is called the appetite of the flesh. Hence
Christ's sensuality could ascend to the Living God by rejoicing; and
with equal reason by praying.

Obj. 2: Further, prayer would seem to pertain to that which desires
what is besought. Now Christ besought something that His sensuality
desired when He said (Matt. 26:39): "Let this chalice pass from Me."
Therefore Christ's sensuality prayed.

Obj. 3: Further, it is a greater thing to be united to God in person
than to mount to Him in prayer. But the sensuality was assumed by God
to the unity of Person, even as every other part of human nature.
Much more, therefore, could it mount to God by prayer.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Phil. 2:7) that the Son of God in
the nature that He assumed was "made in the likeness of men." But the
rest of men do not pray with their sensuality. Therefore, neither did
Christ pray according to His sensuality.

_I answer that,_ To pray according to sensuality may be understood in
two ways. First as if prayer itself were an act of the sensuality;
and in this sense Christ did not pray with His sensuality, since His
sensuality was of the same nature and species in Christ as in us. Now
in us the sensuality cannot pray for two reasons; first because the
movement of the sensuality cannot transcend sensible things, and,
consequently, it cannot mount to God, which is required for prayer;
secondly, because prayer implies a certain ordering inasmuch as we
desire something to be fulfilled by God; and this is the work of
reason alone. Hence prayer is an act of the reason, as was said in
the Second Part (II-II, Q. 83, A. 1).

Secondly, we may be said to pray according to the sensuality when our
prayer lays before God what is in our appetite of sensuality; and in
this sense Christ prayed with His sensuality inasmuch as His prayer
expressed the desire of His sensuality, as if it were the advocate of
the sensuality--and this, that He might teach us three things. First,
to show that He had taken a true human nature, with all its natural
affections: secondly, to show that a man may wish with his natural
desire what God does not wish: thirdly, to show that man should
subject his own will to the Divine will. Hence Augustine says in the
Enchiridion (Serm. 1 in Ps. 32): "Christ acting as a man, shows the
proper will of a man when He says 'Let this chalice pass from Me';
for this was the human will desiring something proper to itself and,
so to say, private. But because He wishes man to be righteous and to
be directed to God, He adds: 'Nevertheless not as I will but as Thou
wilt,' as if to say, 'See thyself in Me, for thou canst desire
something proper to thee, even though God wishes something else.'"

Reply Obj. 1: The flesh rejoices in the Living God, not by the act of
the flesh mounting to God, but by the outpouring of the heart into
the flesh, inasmuch as the sensitive appetite follows the movement of
the rational appetite.

Reply Obj. 2: Although the sensuality wished what the reason
besought, it did not belong to the sensuality to seek this by
praying, but to the reason, as stated above.

Reply Obj. 3: The union in person is according to the personal being,
which pertains to every part of the human nature; but the uplifting
of prayer is by an act which pertains only to the reason, as stated
above. Hence there is no parity.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 21, Art. 3]

Whether It Was Fitting That Christ Should Pray for Himself?

Objection 1: It would seem that it was not fitting that Christ should
pray for Himself. For Hilary says (De Trin. x): "Although His word of
beseeching did not benefit Himself, yet He spoke for the profit of
our faith." Hence it seems that Christ prayed not for Himself but for
us.

Obj. 2: Further, no one prays save for what He wishes, because, as
was said (A. 1), prayer is an unfolding of our will to God that He
may fulfil it. Now Christ wished to suffer what He suffered. For
Augustine says (Contra Faust. xxvi): "A man, though unwilling, is
often angry; though unwilling, is sad; though unwilling, sleeps;
though unwilling, hungers and thirsts. But He" (i.e. Christ) "did all
these things, because He wished." Therefore it was not fitting that
He should pray for Himself.

Obj. 3: Further, Cyprian says (De Orat. Dom.): "The Doctor of Peace
and Master of Unity did not wish prayers to be offered individually
and privately, lest when we prayed we should pray for ourselves
alone." Now Christ did what He taught, according to Acts 1:1: "Jesus
began to do and to teach." Therefore Christ never prayed for Himself
alone.

_On the contrary,_ our Lord Himself said while praying (John 17:1):
"Glorify Thy Son."

_I answer that,_ Christ prayed for Himself in two ways. First, by
expressing the desire of His sensuality, as stated above (A. 2); or
also of His simple will, considered as a nature; as when He prayed
that the chalice of His Passion might pass from Him (Matt. 26:39).
Secondly, by expressing the desire of His deliberate will, which is
considered as reason; as when He prayed for the glory of His
Resurrection (John 17:1). And this is reasonable. For as we have said
above (A. 1, ad 1) Christ wished to pray to His Father in order to
give us an example of praying; and also to show that His Father is
the author both of His eternal procession in the Divine Nature, and
of all the good that He possesses in the human nature. Now just as in
His human nature He had already received certain gifts from His
Father. so there were other gifts which He had not yet received, but
which He expected to receive. And therefore, as He gave thanks to the
Father for gifts already received in His human nature, by
acknowledging Him as the author thereof, as we read (Matt. 26:27;
John 11:41): so also, in recognition of His Father, He besought Him
in prayer for those gifts still due to Him in His human nature, such
as the glory of His body, and the like. And in this He gave us an
example, that we should give thanks for benefits received, and ask in
prayer for those we have not as yet.

Reply Obj. 1: Hilary is speaking of vocal prayer, which was not
necessary to Him for His own sake, but only for ours. Whence he says
pointedly that "His word of beseeching did not benefit Himself." For
if "the Lord hears the desire of the poor," as is said in the Ps.
9:38, much more the mere will of Christ has the force of a prayer
with the Father: wherefore He said (John 11:42): "I know that Thou
hearest Me always, but because of the people who stand about have I
said it, that they may believe that Thou hast sent Me."

Reply Obj. 2: Christ wished indeed to suffer what He suffered, at
that particular time: nevertheless He wished to obtain, after His
passion, the glory of His body, which as yet He had not. This glory
He expected to receive from His Father as the author thereof, and
therefore it was fitting that He should pray to Him for it.

Reply Obj. 3: This very glory which Christ, while praying, besought
for Himself, pertained to the salvation of others according to Rom.
4:25: "He rose again for our justification." Consequently the prayer
which He offered for Himself was also in a manner offered for others.
So also anyone that asks a boon of God that he may use it for the
good of others, prays not only for himself, but also for others.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 21, Art. 4]

Whether Christ's Prayer Was Always Heard?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's prayer was not always heard.
For He besought that the chalice of His passion might be taken from
Him, as we read (Matt. 26:39): and yet it was not taken from Him.
Therefore it seems that not every prayer of His was heard.

Obj. 2: Further, He prayed that the sin of those who crucified Him
might be forgiven, as is related (Luke 23:34). Yet not all were
pardoned this sin, since the Jews were punished on account thereof.
Therefore it seems that not every prayer of His was heard.

Obj. 3: Further, our Lord prayed for them "who would believe in Him
through the word" of the apostles, that they "might all be one in
Him," and that they might attain to being with Him (John 17:20, 21,
24). But not all attain to this. Therefore not every prayer of His
was heard.

Obj. 4: Further, it is said (Ps. 21:3) in the person of Christ: "I
shall cry by day, and Thou wilt not hear." Not every prayer of His,
therefore, was heard.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Heb. 5:7): "With a strong cry
and tears offering up prayers . . . He was heard for His reverence."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), prayer is a certain
manifestation of the human will. Wherefore, then is the request of
one who prays granted, when his will is fulfilled. Now absolutely
speaking the will of man is the will of reason; for we will
absolutely that which we will in accordance with reason's
deliberation. Whereas what we will in accordance with the movement of
sensuality, or even of the simple will, which is considered as nature
is willed not absolutely but conditionally (_secundum quid_)--that
is, provided no obstacle be discovered by reason's deliberation.
Wherefore such a will should rather be called a "velleity" than an
absolute will; because one would will (_vellet_) if there were no
obstacle.

But according to the will of reason, Christ willed nothing but what
He knew God to will. Wherefore every absolute will of Christ, even
human, was fulfilled, because it was in conformity with God; and
consequently His every prayer was fulfilled. For in this respect also
is it that other men's prayers are fulfilled, in that their will is
in conformity with God, according to Rom. 8:27: "And He that
searcheth the hearts knoweth," that is, approves of, "what the Spirit
desireth," that is, what the Spirit makes the saints to desire:
"because He asketh for the saints according to God," that is, in
conformity with the Divine will.

Reply Obj. 1: This prayer for the passing of the chalice is variously
explained by the Saints. For Hilary (Super Matth. 31) says: "When He
asks that this may pass from Him, He does not pray that it may pass
by Him, but that others may share in that which passes on from Him to
them; So that the sense is: As I am partaking of the chalice of the
passion, so may others drink of it, with unfailing hope, with
unflinching anguish, without fear of death."

Or according to Jerome (on Matt. 26:39): "He says pointedly, 'This
chalice,' that is of the Jewish people, who cannot allege ignorance
as an excuse for putting Me to death, since they have the Law and the
Prophets, who foretold concerning Me."

Or, according to Dionysius of Alexandria (De Martyr. ad Origen 7):
"When He says 'Remove this chalice from Me,' He does not mean, 'Let
it not come to Me'; for if it come not, it cannot be removed. But, as
that which passes is neither untouched nor yet permanent, so the
Saviour beseeches, that a slightly pressing trial may be repulsed."

Lastly, Ambrose, Origen and Chrysostom say that He prayed thus "as
man," being reluctant to die according to His natural will.

Thus, therefore, whether we understand, according to Hilary, that He
thus prayed that other martyrs might be imitators of His Passion, or
that He prayed that the fear of drinking His chalice might not
trouble Him, or that death might not withhold Him, His prayer was
entirely fulfilled. But if we understand that He prayed that He might
not drink the chalice of His passion and death; or that He might not
drink it at the hands of the Jews; what He besought was not indeed
fulfilled, because His reason which formed the petition did not
desire its fulfilment, but for our instruction, it was His will to
make known to us His natural will, and the movement of His
sensuality, which was His as man.

Reply Obj. 2: Our Lord did not pray for all those who crucified Him,
as neither did He for all those who would believe in Him; but for
those only who were predestinated to obtain eternal life through Him.

Wherefore the reply to the third objection is also manifest.

Reply Obj. 4: When He says: "I shall cry and Thou wilt not hear," we
must take this as referring to the desire of sensuality, which
shunned death. But He is heard as to the desire of His reason, as
stated above.
_______________________

QUESTION 22

OF THE PRIESTHOOD OF CHRIST
(In Six Articles)

We have now to consider the Priesthood of Christ; and under this head
there are six points of inquiry:

(1) Whether it is fitting that Christ should be a priest?

(2) Of the victim offered by this priest;

(3) Of the effect of this priesthood;

(4) Whether the effect of His priesthood pertains to Himself, or only
to others?

(5) Of the eternal duration of His priesthood;

(6) Whether He should be called "a priest according to the order of
Melchisedech"?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 22, Art. 1]

Whether It Is Fitting That Christ Should Be a Priest?

Objection 1: It would seem unfitting that Christ should be a priest.
For a priest is less than an angel; whence it is written (Zech. 3:1):
"The Lord showed me the high-priest standing before the angel of the
Lord." But Christ is greater than the angels, according to Heb. 1:4:
"Being made so much better than the angels, as He hath inherited a
more excellent name than they." Therefore it is unfitting that Christ
should be a priest.

Obj. 2: Further, things which were in the Old Testament were figures
of Christ, according to Col. 2:17: "Which are a shadow of things to
come, but the body is Christ's." But Christ was not descended from
the priests of the Old Law, for the Apostle says (Heb. 7:14): "It is
evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah, in which tribe Moses spoke
nothing concerning priests." Therefore it is not fitting that Christ
should be a priest.

Obj. 3: Further, in the Old Law, which is a figure of Christ, the
lawgivers and the priests were distinct: wherefore the Lord said
to Moses the lawgiver (Ex. 28:1): "Take unto thee Aaron, thy
brother . . . that he [Vulg.: 'they'] may minister to Me in the
priest's office." But Christ is the giver of the New Law, according
to Jer. 31:33: "I will give My law in their bowels." Therefore it
is unfitting that Christ should be a priest.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Heb. 4:14): "We have [Vulg.:
'Having'] therefore a great high-priest that hath passed into the
heavens, Jesus, the Son of God."

_I answer that,_ The office proper to a priest is to be a mediator
between God and the people: to wit, inasmuch as He bestows Divine
things on the people, wherefore _sacerdos_ (priest) means a giver of
sacred things (_sacra dans_), according to Malachi 2:7: "They shall
seek the law at his," i.e. the priest's, "mouth"; and again,
forasmuch as he offers up the people's prayers to God, and, in a
manner, makes satisfaction to God for their sins; wherefore the
Apostle says (Heb. 5:1): "Every high-priest taken from among men is
ordained for men in the things that appertain to God, that he may
offer up gifts and sacrifices for sins." Now this is most befitting
to Christ. For through Him are gifts bestowed on men, according to 2
Pet. 1:4: "By Whom" (i.e. Christ) "He hath given us most great and
precious promises, that by these you may be made partakers of the
Divine Nature." Moreover, He reconciled the human race to God,
according to Col. 1:19, 20: "In Him" (i.e. Christ) "it hath well
pleased (the Father) that all fulness should dwell, and through Him
to reconcile all things unto Himself." Therefore it is most fitting
that Christ should be a priest.

Reply Obj. 1: Hierarchical power appertains to the angels, inasmuch
as they also are between God and man, as Dionysius explains (Coel.
Hier. ix), so that the priest himself, as being between God and man,
is called an angel, according to Malachi 2:7: "He is the angel of the
Lord of hosts." Now Christ was greater than the angels, not only in
His Godhead, but also in His humanity, as having the fulness of grace
and glory. Wherefore also He had the hierarchical or priestly power
in a higher degree than the angels, so that even the angels were
ministers of His priesthood, according to Matt. 4:11: "Angels came
and ministered unto Him." But, in regard to His passibility, He "was
made a little lower than the angels," as the Apostle says (Heb. 2:9):
and thus He was conformed to those wayfarers who are ordained to the
priesthood.

Reply Obj. 2: As Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 26): "What
is like in every particular must be, of course, identical, and not a
copy." Since, therefore, the priesthood of the Old Law was a figure of
the priesthood of Christ, He did not wish to be born of the stock of
the figurative priests, that it might be made clear that His
priesthood is not quite the same as theirs, but differs therefrom as
truth from figure.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (Q. 7, A. 7, ad 1), other
men have certain graces distributed among them: but Christ, as being
the Head of all, has the perfection of all graces. Wherefore, as to
others, one is a lawgiver, another is a priest, another is a king; but
all these concur in Christ, as the fount of all grace. Hence it is
written (Isa. 33:22): "The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our
law-giver, the Lord is our King: He will" come and "save us."
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 22, Art. 2]

Whether Christ Was Himself Both Priest and Victim?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ Himself was not both priest
and victim. For it is the duty of the priest to slay the victim. But
Christ did not kill Himself. Therefore He was not both priest and
victim.

Obj. 2: Further, the priesthood of Christ has a greater similarity to
the Jewish priesthood, instituted by God, than to the priesthood of
the Gentiles, by which the demons were worshiped. Now in the old Law
man was never offered up in sacrifice: whereas this was very much to
be reprehended in the sacrifices of the Gentiles, according to Ps.
105:38: "They shed innocent blood; the blood of their sons and of
their daughters, which they sacrificed to the idols of Chanaan."
Therefore in Christ's priesthood the Man Christ should not have been
the victim.

Obj. 3: Further, every victim, through being offered to God, is
consecrated to God. But the humanity of Christ was from the beginning
consecrated and united to God. Therefore it cannot be said fittingly
that Christ as man was a victim.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Eph. 5:2): "Christ hath loved
us, and hath delivered Himself for us, an oblation and a victim
[Douay: 'sacrifice'] to God for an odor of sweetness."

_I answer that,_ As Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x, 5): "Every visible
sacrifice is a sacrament, that is a sacred sign, of the invisible
sacrifice." Now the invisible sacrifice is that by which a man offers
his spirit to God, according to Ps. 50:19: "A sacrifice to God is an
afflicted spirit." Wherefore, whatever is offered to God in order to
raise man's spirit to Him, may be called a sacrifice.

Now man is required to offer sacrifice for three reasons. First, for
the remission of sin, by which he is turned away from God. Hence the
Apostle says (Heb. 5:1) that it appertains to the priest "to offer
gifts and sacrifices for sins." Secondly, that man may be preserved
in a state of grace, by ever adhering to God, wherein his peace and
salvation consist. Wherefore under the old Law the sacrifice of
peace-offerings was offered up for the salvation of the offerers, as
is prescribed in the third chapter of Leviticus. Thirdly, in order
that the spirit of man be perfectly united to God: which will be most
perfectly realized in glory. Hence, under the Old Law, the holocaust
was offered, so called because the victim was wholly burnt, as we
read in the first chapter of Leviticus.

Now these effects were conferred on us by the humanity of Christ.
For, in the first place, our sins were blotted out, according to Rom.
4:25: "Who was delivered up for our sins." Secondly, through Him we
received the grace of salvation, according to Heb. 5:9: "He became to
all that obey Him the cause of eternal salvation." Thirdly, through
Him we have acquired the perfection of glory, according to Heb.
10:19: "We have [Vulg.: 'Having'] a confidence in the entering into
the Holies" (i.e. the heavenly glory) "through His Blood." Therefore
Christ Himself, as man, was not only priest, but also a perfect
victim, being at the same time victim for sin, victim for a
peace-offering, and a holocaust.

Reply Obj. 1: Christ did not slay Himself, but of His own free-will
He exposed Himself to death, according to Isa. 53:7: "He was offered
because it was His own will." Thus He is said to have offered Himself.

Reply Obj. 2: The slaying of the Man Christ may be referred to a
twofold will. First, to the will of those who slew Him: and in this
respect He was not a victim: for the slayers of Christ are not
accounted as offering a sacrifice to God, but as guilty of a great
crime: a similitude of which was borne by the wicked sacrifices of
the Gentiles, in which they offered up men to idols. Secondly, the
slaying of Christ may be considered in reference to the will of the
Sufferer, Who freely offered Himself to suffering. In this respect He
is a victim, and in this He differs from the sacrifices of the
Gentiles.

(The reply to the third objection is wanting in the original
manuscripts, but it may be gathered from the above.--Ed.)

[*Some editions, however, give the following reply:

Reply Obj. 3: The fact that Christ's manhood was holy from its
beginning does not prevent that same manhood, when it was offered to
God in the Passion, being sanctified in a new way--namely, as a
victim actually offered then. For it acquired then the actual
holiness of a victim, from the charity which it had from the
beginning, and from the grace of union sanctifying it absolutely.]
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 22, Art. 3]

Whether the Effect of Christ's Priesthood Is the Expiation of Sins?

Objection 1: It would seem that the effect of Christ's priesthood is
not the expiation of sins. For it belongs to God alone to blot out
sins, according to Isa. 43:25: "I am He that blot out thy iniquities
for My own sake." But Christ is priest, not as God, but as man.
Therefore the priesthood of Christ does not expiate sins.

Obj. 2: Further, the Apostle says (Heb. 10:1-3) that the victims of
the Old Testament could not "make" (the comers thereunto) "perfect:
for then they would have ceased to be offered; because the worshipers
once cleansed should have no conscience of sin any longer; but in
them there is made a commemoration of sins every year." But in like
manner under the priesthood of Christ a commemoration of sins is made
in the words: "Forgive us our trespasses" (Matt. 6:12). Moreover, the
Sacrifice is offered continuously in the Church; wherefore again we
say: "Give us this day our daily bread." Therefore sins are not
expiated by the priesthood of Christ.

Obj. 3: Further, in the sin-offerings of the Old Law, a he-goat was
mostly offered for the sin of a prince, a she-goat for the sin of
some private individual, a calf for the sin of a priest, as we gather
from Lev. 4:3, 23, 28. But Christ is compared to none of these, but
to the lamb, according to Jer. 11:19: "I was as a meek lamb, that is
carried to be a victim." Therefore it seems that His priesthood does
not expiate sins.

_On the contrary,_ The Apostle says (Heb. 9:14): "The blood of
Christ, Who by the Holy Ghost offered Himself unspotted unto God,
shall cleanse our conscience from dead works, to serve the living
God." But dead works denote sins. Therefore the priesthood of Christ
has the power to cleanse from sins.

_I answer that,_ Two things are required for the perfect cleansing
from sins, corresponding to the two things comprised in sin--namely,
the stain of sin and the debt of punishment. The stain of sin is,
indeed, blotted out by grace, by which the sinner's heart is turned
to God: whereas the debt of punishment is entirely removed by the
satisfaction that man offers to God. Now the priesthood of Christ
produces both these effects. For by its virtue grace is given to us,
by which our hearts are turned to God, according to Rom. 3:24, 25:
"Being justified freely by His grace, through the redemption that is
in Christ Jesus, Whom God hath proposed to be a propitiation, through
faith in His blood." Moreover, He satisfied for us fully, inasmuch as
"He hath borne our infirmities and carried our sorrows" (Isa. 53:4).
Wherefore it is clear that the priesthood of Christ has full power to
expiate sins.

Reply Obj. 1: Although Christ was a priest, not as God, but as man,
yet one and the same was both priest and God. Wherefore in the
Council of Ephesus [*Part III, ch. i, anath. 10] we read: "If anyone
say that the very Word of God did not become our High-Priest and
Apostle, when He became flesh and a man like us, but altogether
another one, the man born of a woman, let him be anathema." Hence in
so far as His human nature operated by virtue of the Divine, that
sacrifice was most efficacious for the blotting out of sins. For this
reason Augustine says (De Trin. iv, 14): "So that, since four things
are to be observed in every sacrifice--to whom it is offered, by whom
it is offered, what is offered, for whom it is offered; the same one
true Mediator reconciling us to God by the sacrifice of peace, was
one with Him to Whom it was offered, united in Himself those for whom
He offered it, at the same time offered it Himself, and was Himself
that which He offered."

Reply Obj. 2: Sins are commemorated in the New Law, not on account of
the inefficacy of the priesthood of Christ, as though sins were not
sufficiently expiated by Him: but in regard to those who either are
not willing to be participators in His sacrifice, such as
unbelievers, for whose sins we pray that they be converted; or who,
after taking part in this sacrifice, fall away from it by whatsoever
kind of sin. The Sacrifice which is offered every day in the Church
is not distinct from that which Christ Himself offered, but is a
commemoration thereof. Wherefore Augustine says (De Civ. De. x, 20):
"Christ Himself both is the priest who offers it and the victim: the
sacred token of which He wished to be the daily Sacrifice of the
Church."

Reply Obj. 3: As Origen says (Sup. Joan. i, 29), though various
animals were offered up under the Old Law, yet the daily sacrifice,
which was offered up morning and evening, was a lamb, as appears from
Num. 38:3, 4. By which it was signified that the offering up of the
true lamb, i.e. Christ, was the culminating sacrifice of all. Hence
(John 1:29) it is said: "Behold the Lamb of God, behold Him Who
taketh away the sins [Vulg.: 'sin'] of the world."
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 22, Art. 4]

Whether the Effect of the Priesthood of Christ Pertained Not Only to
Others, but Also to Himself?

Objection 1: It would seem that the effect of the priesthood of
Christ pertained not only to others, but also to Himself. For it
belongs to the priest's office to pray for the people, according to 2
Macc. 1:23: "The priests made prayer while the sacrifice was
consuming." Now Christ prayed not only for others, but also for
Himself, as we have said above (Q. 21, A. 3), and as expressly stated
(Heb. 5:7): "In the days of His flesh, with a strong cry and tears He
offered [Vulg.: 'offering'] up prayers and supplications to Him that
was able to save Him from death." Therefore the priesthood of Christ
had an effect not only in others, but also in Himself.

Obj. 2: Further, in His passion Christ offered Himself as a
sacrifice. But by His passion He merited, not only for others, but
also for Himself, as stated above (Q. 19, AA. 3, 4). Therefore the
priesthood of Christ had an effect not only in others, but also in
Himself.

Obj. 3: Further, the priesthood of the Old Law was a figure of the
priesthood of Christ. But the priest of the Old Law offered sacrifice
not only for others, but also for himself: for it is written (Lev.
16:17) that "the high-priest goeth into the sanctuary to pray for
himself and his house, and for the whole congregation of Israel."
Therefore the priesthood of Christ also had an effect not merely in
others, but also in Himself.

_On the contrary,_ We read in the acts of the Council of Ephesus
[*Part III, ch. i, anath. 10]: "If anyone say that Christ offered
sacrifice for Himself, and not rather for us alone (for He Who knew
not sin needed no sacrifice), let him be anathema." But the priest's
office consists principally in offering sacrifice. Therefore the
priesthood of Christ had no effect in Himself.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 1), a priest is set between God
and man. Now he needs someone between himself and God, who of himself
cannot approach to God; and such a one is subject to the priesthood
by sharing in the effect thereof. But this cannot be said of Christ;
for the Apostle says (Heb. 7:25): "Coming of Himself to God, always
living to make intercession for us [Vulg.: 'He is able to save for
ever them that come to God by Him; always living,' etc.]." And
therefore it is not fitting for Christ to be the recipient of the
effect of His priesthood, but rather to communicate it to others. For
the influence of the first agent in every genus is such that it
receives nothing in that genus: thus the sun gives but does not
receive light; fire gives but does not receive heat. Now Christ is
the fountain-head of the entire priesthood: for the priest of the Old
Law was a figure of Him; while the priest of the New Law works in His
person, according to 2 Cor. 2:10: "For what I have pardoned, if I
have pardoned anything, for your sakes have I done it in the person
of Christ." Therefore it is not fitting that Christ should receive
the effect of His priesthood.

Reply Obj. 1: Although prayer is befitting to priests, it is not
their proper office, for it is befitting to everyone to pray both for
himself and for others, according to James 5:16: "Pray for one
another that you may be saved." And so we may say that the prayer by
which Christ prayed for Himself was not an action of His priesthood.
But this answer seems to be precluded by the Apostle, who, after
saying (Heb. 5:6), "Thou art a priest for ever according to the order
of Melchisedech," adds, "Who in the days of His flesh offering up
payers," etc., as quoted above (Obj. 1): so that it seems that the
prayer which Christ offered pertained to His priesthood. We must
therefore say that other priests partake in the effect of their
priesthood, not as priests, but as sinners, as we shall state farther
on (ad 3). But Christ had, simply speaking, no sin; though He had the
"likeness of sin in the flesh [Vulg.: 'sinful flesh']," as is
written Rom. 8:3. And, consequently, we must not say simply that He
partook of the effect of His priesthood but with this qualification--
in regard to the passibility of the flesh. Wherefore he adds
pointedly, "that was able to save Him from death."

Reply Obj. 2: Two things may be considered in the offering of a
sacrifice by any priest--namely, the sacrifice itself which is
offered, and the devotion of the offerer. Now the proper effect of
priesthood is that which results from the sacrifice itself. But
Christ obtained a result from His passion, not as by virtue of the
sacrifice, which is offered by way of satisfaction, but by the very
devotion with which out of charity He humbly endured the passion.

Reply Obj. 3: A figure cannot equal the reality, wherefore the
figural priest of the Old Law could not attain to such perfection as
not to need a sacrifice of satisfaction. But Christ did not stand in
need of this. Consequently, there is no comparison between the two;
and this is what the Apostle says (Heb. 7:28): "The Law maketh men
priests, who have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was
since the Law, the Son Who is perfected for evermore."
_______________________

FIFTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 22, Art. 5]

Whether the Priesthood of Christ Endures for Ever?

Objection 1: It would seem that the priesthood of Christ does not
endure for ever. For as stated above (A. 4, ad 1, 3) those alone need
the effect of the priesthood who have the weakness of sin, which can
be expiated by the priest's sacrifice. But this will not be for ever.
For in the Saints there will be no weakness, according to Isa. 60:21:
"Thy people shall be all just": while no expiation will be possible
for the weakness of sin, since "there is no redemption in hell"
(Office of the Dead, Resp. vii). Therefore the priesthood of Christ
endures not for ever.

Obj. 2: Further, the priesthood of Christ was made manifest most of
all in His passion and death, when "by His own blood He entered into
the Holies" (Heb. 9:12). But the passion and death of Christ will not
endure for ever, as stated Rom. 6:9: "Christ rising again from the
dead, dieth now no more." Therefore the priesthood of Christ will not
endure for ever.

Obj. 3: Further, Christ is a priest, not as God, but as man. But at
one time Christ was not man, namely during the three days He lay
dead. Therefore the priesthood of Christ endures not for ever.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Ps. 109:4): "Thou art a priest for
ever."

_I answer that,_ In the priestly office, we may consider two things:
first, the offering of the sacrifice; secondly, the consummation of
the sacrifice, consisting in this, that those for whom the sacrifice
is offered, obtain the end of the sacrifice. Now the end of the
sacrifice which Christ offered consisted not in temporal but in
eternal good, which we obtain through His death, according to Heb.
9:11: "Christ is [Vulg.: 'being come'] a high-priest of the good
things to come"; for which reason the priesthood of Christ is said to
be eternal. Now this consummation of Christ's sacrifice was
foreshadowed in this, that the high-priest of the Old Law, once a
year, entered into the Holy of Holies with the blood of a he-goat and
a calf, as laid down, Lev. 16:11, and yet he offered up the he-goat
and calf not within the Holy of Holies, but without. In like manner
Christ entered into the Holy of Holies--that is, into heaven--and
prepared the way for us, that we might enter by the virtue of His
blood, which He shed for us on earth.

Reply Obj. 1: The Saints who will be in heaven will not need any
further expiation by the priesthood of Christ, but having expiated,
they will need consummation through Christ Himself, on Whom their
glory depends, as is written (Apoc. 21:23): "The glory of God hath
enlightened it"--that is, the city of the Saints--"and the Lamb is
the lamp thereof."

Reply Obj. 2: Although Christ's passion and death are not to be
repeated, yet the virtue of that Victim endures for ever, for, as it
is written (Heb. 10:14), "by one oblation He hath perfected for ever
them that are sanctified."

Wherefore the reply to the third objection is clear.

As to the unity of this sacrifice, it was foreshadowed in the Law in
that, once a year, the high-priest of the Law entered into the
Holies, with a solemn oblation of blood, as set down, Lev. 16:11. But
the figure fell short of the reality in this, that the victim had not
an everlasting virtue, for which reason those sacrifices were renewed
every year.
_______________________

SIXTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 22, Art. 6]

Whether the Priesthood of Christ Was According to the Order of
Melchisedech?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ's priesthood was not according
to the order of Melchisedech. For Christ is the fountain-head of the
entire priesthood, as being the principal priest. Now that which is
principal is not secondary in regard to others, but others are
secondary in its regard. Therefore Christ should not be called a
priest according to the order of Melchisedech.

Obj. 2: Further, the priesthood of the Old Law was more akin to
Christ's priesthood than was the priesthood that existed before the
Law. But the nearer the sacraments were to Christ, the more clearly
they signified Him; as is clear from what we have said in the Second
Part (II-II, Q. 2, A. 7). Therefore the priesthood of Christ should
be denominated after the priesthood of the Law, rather than after the
order of Melchisedech, which was before the Law.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Heb. 7:2, 3): "That is 'king of
peace,' without father, without mother, without genealogy; having
neither beginning of days nor ending of life": which can be referred
only to the Son of God. Therefore Christ should not be called a
priest according to the order of Melchisedech, as of some one else,
but according to His own order.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Ps. 109:4): "Thou art a priest for
ever according to the order of Melchisedech."

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 4, ad 3) the priesthood of the
Law was a figure of the priesthood of Christ, not as adequately
representing the reality, but as falling far short thereof: both
because the priesthood of the Law did not wash away sins, and because
it was not eternal, as the priesthood of Christ. Now the excellence
of   Christ's over the Levitical priesthood was foreshadowed in the
priesthood of Melchisedech, who received tithes from Abraham, in
whose loins the priesthood of the Law was tithed. Consequently the
priesthood of Christ is said to be "according to the order of
Melchisedech," on account of the excellence of the true priesthood
over the figural priesthood of the Law.

Reply Obj. 1: Christ is said to be according to the order of
Melchisedech not as though the latter were a more excellent priest,
but because he foreshadowed the excellence of Christ's over the
Levitical priesthood.

Reply Obj. 2: Two things may be considered in Christ's priesthood:
namely, the offering made by Christ, and (our) partaking thereof. As
to the actual offering, the priesthood of Christ was more distinctly
foreshadowed by the priesthood of the Law, by reason of the shedding
of blood, than by the priesthood of Melchisedech in which there was
no blood-shedding. But if we consider the participation of this
sacrifice and the effect thereof, wherein the excellence of Christ's
priesthood over the priesthood of the Law principally consists, then
the former was more distinctly foreshadowed by the priesthood of
Melchisedech, who offered bread and wine, signifying, as Augustine
says (Tract. xxvi in Joan.) ecclesiastical unity, which is
established by our taking part in the sacrifice of Christ [*Cf. Q.
79, A. 1]. Wherefore also in the New Law the true sacrifice of Christ
is presented to the faithful under the form of bread and wine.

Reply Obj. 3: Melchisedech is described as "without father, without
mother, without genealogy," and as "having neither beginning of days
nor ending of life," not as though he had not these things, but
because these details in his regard are not supplied by Holy
Scripture. And this it is that, as the Apostle says in the same
passage, he is "likened unto the Son of God," Who had no earthly
father, no heavenly mother, and no genealogy, according to Isa. 53:8:
"Who shall declare His generation?" and Who in His Godhead has
neither beginning nor end of days.
_______________________

QUESTION 23

OF ADOPTION AS BEFITTING TO CHRIST
(In Four Articles)

We must now come to consider whether adoption befits Christ: and
under this head there are four points of inquiry:

(1) Whether it is fitting that God should adopt sons?

(2) Whether this is fitting to God the Father alone?

(3) Whether it is proper to man to be adopted to the sonship of God?

(4) Whether Christ can be called the adopted Son?
_______________________

FIRST ARTICLE [III, Q. 23, Art. 1]

Whether It Is Fitting That God Should Adopt Sons?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not fitting that God should
adopt sons. For, as jurists say, no one adopts anyone but a stranger
as his son. But no one is a stranger in relation to God, Who is the
Creator of all. Therefore it seems unfitting that God should adopt.

Obj. 2: Further, adoption seems to have been introduced in default of
natural sonship. But in God there is natural sonship, as set down in
the First Part (Q. 27, A. 2). Therefore it is unfitting that God
should adopt.

Obj. 3: Further, the purpose of adopting anyone is that he may
succeed, as heir, the person who adopts him. But it does not seem
possible for anyone to succeed God as heir, for He can never die.
Therefore it is unfitting that God should adopt.

_On the contrary,_ It is written (Eph. 1:5) that "He hath
predestinated us unto the adoption of children of God." But the
predestination of God is not ineffectual. Therefore God does adopt
some as His sons.

_I answer that,_ A man adopts someone as his son forasmuch as out of
goodness he admits him as heir to his estate. Now God is infinitely
good: for which reason He admits His creatures to a participation of
good things; especially rational creatures, who forasmuch as they are
made to the image of God, are capable of Divine beatitude. And this
consists in the enjoyment of God, by which also God Himself is happy
and rich in Himself--that is, in the enjoyment of Himself. Now a
man's inheritance is that which makes him rich. Wherefore, inasmuch
as God, of His goodness, admits men to the inheritance of beatitude,
He is said to adopt them. Moreover Divine exceeds human adoption,
forasmuch as God, by bestowing His grace, makes man whom He adopts
worthy to receive the heavenly inheritance; whereas man does not make
him worthy whom he adopts; but rather in adopting him he chooses one
who is already worthy.

Reply Obj. 1: Considered in his nature man is not a stranger in
respect to God, as to the natural gifts bestowed on him: but he is as
to the gifts of grace and glory; in regard to which he is adopted.

Reply Obj. 2: Man works in order to supply his wants: not so God, Who
works in order to communicate to others the abundance of His
perfection. Wherefore, as by the work of creation the Divine goodness
is communicated to all creatures in a certain likeness, so by the
work of adoption the likeness of natural sonship is communicated to
men, according to Rom. 8:29: "Whom He foreknew . . . to be made
conformable to the image of His Son."

Reply Obj. 3: Spiritual goods can be possessed by many at the same
time; not so material goods. Wherefore none can receive a material
inheritance except the successor of a deceased person: whereas all
receive the spiritual inheritance at the same time in its entirety
without detriment to the ever-living Father.

Yet it might be said that God ceases to be, according as He is in us
by faith, so as to begin to be in us by vision, as a gloss says on
Rom. 8:17: "If sons, heirs also."
_______________________

SECOND ARTICLE [III, Q. 23, Art. 2]

Whether It Is Fitting That the Whole Trinity Should Adopt?

Objection 1: It would seem unfitting that the whole Trinity should
adopt. For adoption is said of God in likeness to human custom. But
among men those only adopt who can beget: and in God this can be
applied only to the Father. Therefore in God the Father alone can
adopt.

Obj. 2: Further, by adoption men become the brethren of Christ,
according to Rom. 8:29: "That He might be the first-born among many
brethren." Now brethren are the sons of the same father; wherefore
our Lord says (John 20:17): "I ascend to My Father and to your
Father." Therefore Christ's Father alone has adopted sons.

Obj. 3: Further, it is written (Gal. 4:4, 5, 6): "God sent His
Son . . . that we might receive the adoption of sons. And because
you are sons of God, God hath sent the Spirit of His Son into your
hearts, crying: 'Abba' (Father)." Therefore it belongs to Him to
adopt, Who has the Son and the Holy Ghost. But this belongs to the
Father alone. Therefore it befits the Father alone to adopt.

_On the contrary,_ It belongs to Him to adopt us as sons, Whom we can
call Father; whence it is written (Rom. 8:15): "You have received the
spirit of adoption of sons, whereby we cry: 'Abba' (Father)." But
when we say to God, "Our Father," we address the whole Trinity: as is
the case with the other names which are said of God in respect of
creatures, as stated in the First Part (Q. 33, A. 3, Obj. 1; cf. Q.
45, A. 6). Therefore to adopt is befitting to the whole Trinity.

_I answer that,_ There is this difference between an adopted son of
God and the natural Son of God, that the latter is "begotten not
made"; whereas the former is made, according to John 1:12: "He gave
them power to be made the sons of God." Yet sometimes the adopted son
is said to be begotten, by reason of the spiritual regeneration which
is by grace, not by nature; wherefore it is written (James 1:18): "Of
His own will hath He begotten us by the word of truth." Now although,
in God, to beget belongs to the Person of the Father, yet to produce
any effect in creatures is common to the whole Trinity, by reason of
the oneness of their Nature: since, where there is one nature, there
must needs be one power and one operation: whence our Lord says (John
5:19): "What things soever the Father doth, these the Son also doth
in like manner." Therefore it belongs to the whole Trinity to adopt
men as sons of God.

Reply Obj. 1: All human individuals are not of one individual nature,
so that there need be one operation and one effect of them all, as is
the case in God. Consequently in this respect no comparison is
possible.

Reply Obj. 2: By adoption we are made the brethren of Christ, as
having with Him the same Father: Who, nevertheless, is His Father in
one way, and ours in another. Whence pointedly our Lord says,
separately, "My Father," and "Your Father" (John 20:17). For He is
Christ's Father by natural generation; and this is proper to Him:
whereas He is our Father by a voluntary operation, which is common to
Him and to the Son and Holy Ghost: so that Christ is not the Son of
the whole Trinity, as we are.

Reply Obj. 3: As stated above (A. 1, ad 2), adoptive sonship is a
certain likeness of the eternal Sonship: just as all that takes place
in time is a certain likeness of what has been from eternity. Now man
is likened to the splendor of the Eternal Son by reason of the light
of grace which is attributed to the Holy Ghost. Therefore adoption,
though common to the whole Trinity, is appropriated to the Father as
its author; to the Son, as its exemplar; to the Holy Ghost, as
imprinting on us the likeness of this exemplar.
_______________________

THIRD ARTICLE [III, Q. 23, Art. 3]

Whether It Is Proper to the Rational Nature to Be Adopted?

Objection 1: It would seem that it is not proper to the rational
nature to be adopted. For God is not said to be the Father of the
rational creature, save by adoption. But God is called the Father
even of the irrational creature, according to Job 38:28: "Who is
father of the rain? Or who begot the drops of dew?" Therefore it is
not proper to the rational creature to be adopted.

Obj. 2: Further, by reason of adoption some are called sons of God.
But to be sons of God seems to be properly attributed by the
Scriptures to the angels; according to Job 1:6: "On a certain day
when the sons of God came to stand before the Lord." Therefore it is
not proper to the rational creature to be adopted.

Obj. 3: Further, whatever is proper to a nature, belongs to all that
have that nature: just as risibility belongs to all men. But to be
adopted does not belong to every rational nature. Therefore it is not
proper to human nature.

_On the contrary,_ Adopted sons are the "heirs of God," as is stated
Rom. 8:17. But such an inheritance belongs to none but the rational
nature. Therefore it is proper to the rational nature to be adopted.

_I answer that,_ As stated above (A. 2, ad 3), the sonship of
adoption is a certain likeness of natural sonship. Now the Son of God
proceeds naturally from the Father as the Intellectual Word, in
oneness of nature with the Father. To this Word, therefore, something
may be likened in three ways. First, on the part of the form but not
on the part of its intelligibility: thus the form of a house already
built is like the mental word of the builder in its specific form,
but not in intelligibility, because the material form of a house is
not intelligible, as it was in the mind of the builder. In this way
every creature is like the Eternal Word; since it was made through
the Word. Secondly, the creature is likened to the Word, not only as
to its form, but also as to its intelligibility: thus the knowledge
which is begotten in the disciple's mind is likened to the word in
the mind of the master. In this way the rational creature, even in
its nature, is likened to the Word of God. Thirdly, a creature is
likened to the Eternal Word, as to the oneness of the Word with the
Father, which is by reason of grace and charity: wherefore our Lord
prays (John 17:21, 22): "That they may be one in Us . . . as We also
are one." And this likeness perfects the adoption: for to those who
are thus like Him the eternal inheritance is due. It is therefore
clear that to be adopted belongs to the rational creature alone: not
indeed to all, but only to those who have charity; which is "poured
forth in our hearts by the Holy Ghost" (Rom. 5:5); for which reason
(Rom. 8:15) the Holy Ghost is called "the Spirit of adoption of sons."

Reply Obj. 1: God is called the Father of the irrational creature,
not properly speaking, by reason of adoption, but by reason of
creation; according to the first-mentioned participation of likeness.

Reply Obj. 2: Angels are called sons of God by adoptive sonship, not
that it belongs to them first; but because they were the first to
receive the adoption of sons.

Reply Obj. 3: Adoption is a property resulting not from nature, but
from grace, of which the rational nature is capable. Therefore it
need not belong to every rational nature: but every rational creature
must needs be capable of adoption.
_______________________

FOURTH ARTICLE [III, Q. 23, Art. 4]

Whether Christ As Man Is the Adopted Son of God?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ as man is the adopted Son of
God. For Hilary says (De Trin. ii) speaking of Christ: "The dignity
of power is not forfeited when carnal humanity [*Some editions read
