cometh to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek Him."  There are certain truths, the
knowledge of which we believe are necessary to salvation.  That is,
without an understanding of certain definite revealed truths, there is
not much chance of salvation, for the ignorance of these truths is
proper in a Christian, and without a knowledge of them, a Christian is
not able to live a spiritual and a Christian life.  These truths are
contained in the Creed, and are taught to every child.  It is not
enough to repeat the Creed like a parrot, but the meaning of the truths
contained in it must be grasped by the mind and understood.  This is
the advantage of Christian instruction, and I think it would be well if
we Clergy, instead of so generally appealing to your consciences to
lead good lives, were more frequently to refresh your minds with the
truths which you must embrace with your understandings.  I believe one
great reason why you make so little advance in the spiritual life is,
that you so little understand what God requires of you to believe.

After the Children of Israel had been carried into captivity by the
Assyrian king Shalmanezar, a number of persons were sent from Babylon
to inhabit Samaria, the capital, and other cities of Israel.  They
settled there, but did not thrive, for this reason, the land was
overrun with lions.  You will find the story in 2 Kings xvii.  A great
many of the colonists were killed by the lions.  "Therefore they spake
to the king of Assyria, saying, The nations which thou hast removed,
and placed in the cities of Samaria, have lions among them, and behold,
they slay them."  What course did Shalmanezar adopt, on hearing this?
Did he send them hunters, expert in killing lions?  No.  Or dogs to
drive them?  Did he supply them with snares, and teach them how to make
pitfalls for the lions?  No!--listen to what he did.  "Then the king of
Assyria commanded, saying, Carry thither one of the priests whom ye
brought from thence; and let him teach them the manner of the God of
the land."

This succeeded, for we learn that the lions ceased to trouble the
colonists when they had learned to know and fear the God of Israel.

What a lesson this heathen king sets us!  "The devil walketh about as a
roaring lion seeking whom he may devour, whom resist, steadfast in the
faith."  Do you notice the words of S. Peter?  The lion who seeks to
devour you, who lays waste the land, who destroys so many souls, can be
mastered and expelled, but only if you are steadfast in the faith, only
if, like these settlers in Samaria, you have been taught the manner of
the God of our land.  Evil of all sort, temptations and snares, evil
spirits and seductions will draw you into destruction, and you will be
quite powerless to escape or resist, unless you know the manner of the
God of our land, or--in S. Peter's words--are steadfast in the faith.

II.  It is not enough to understand, you must also love and follow the
law of your God with all your hearts.  You must not only know God, but
you must obey Him.  You must not only be instructed in the manner of
the God of our land, but you must also observe it.  Now there are a
great many who are Christians in profession only, they draw near to God
with their lips, and say Lord! Lord! but with their hearts they are far
from Him.

One day a philosopher came before king Herod Atticus, and when the king
asked him what profession he was of, what office he held, the
philosopher answered, "Look at my robe and you will see what I am."
For the philosophers affected a certain sort of garment.  Then Herod
answered, "Pardon me, I see the habit, but not the philosopher."  That
is to say--"I see what you call yourself, and pretend to be, but I do
not know whether you are the wise and learned man for which you give
yourself out."

I fear that if I were to follow and watch you during the week, I should
be obliged to say--"I see the habit, but not the Christian."  It is
true there is the profession.  You say you are a Christian, you assure
me you believe in God, you undertake to live a sober and godly life, to
resist evil, and cleave to what is good.  All this is the outside
habit, the mere name and profession, I see the habit,--but in your acts
I do not see the Christian.  No! there is not the Christian in you when
you tell lies.  Not the Christian when you slander your neighbour.  Not
the Christian when you deal dishonestly with your masters.  Not the
Christian when you fly into a passion and swear and curse.  Not the
Christian when you use foul words.  On Sundays you have on your Sunday
coat, or your Sunday gown, and you are as demure as Saints, and attend
Church regularly.  There is the habit.  I see the habit.  But where is
your Christianity in the week?  How much prayer?  How much thought of
God?  How much self-restraint?  I see the habit, but not the Christian.

CONCLUSION.--Remember then that it is not enough to know Christ, and to
believe.  You must also love Christ and obey.  Only by acting up to
your profession, by walking worthy of the vocation whereby you are
called, can you be regarded as a true disciple of Christ.  He is not
the true soldier who is enrolled, and deserts; he is not the good
servant who says to his master, I go, and goeth not.  If you know of
Christ, you have a greater obligation laid on you to follow Him in love
and obedience, than if you knew Him not.  "What think ye of Christ?"
That is not enough.  "How live ye as Christians?" is needed as well.




LVI.

_EVIL THOUGHTS._

19th Sunday after Trinity.

S. Matt. ix. 4.

"Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts?"


INTRODUCTION.--Thoughts are only thoughts! who is to beheld accountable
for them?  They are clouds blown about by fancy, taking various shapes.
God is not so hard as to judge us for our thoughts; He will try us by
what we have done, not by what we have dreamed.  No garden is without
weeds; there are tares in every cornfield.  Who speak thus?  Is it
those who are conscientious and scrupulous to drive away evil thoughts?
Or those who allow their heads and hearts to be hives in which they
dwell?  I allow that evil thoughts must enter the mind, and I add that
they do no harm so long as they are not admitted into the heart.  I
allow that it is impossible to keep the mind so closed against evil
that no bad thoughts find admission.  There is no sin in the bad
thoughts coming, but the sin begins when they are allowed to settle,
and to fly-blow the heart.

SUBJECT.--I am not going to speak to-day anything that will distress
those good souls who struggle with, and drive away, evil thoughts when
they torment them; God has seen fit to try them with these, as He
suffered the Israelites to lie tried by the remnants of the heathen
nations which remained in the land,--but I am going to speak to those
who indulge in evil thoughts of all kinds, and make no effort to banish
them.  I tell them that this is a dangerous thing.  If they rely on
being safe so long as they keep their bodies from evil, and allow their
minds and hearts to revel in evil thoughts, they are guilty of sin;
they may not be staining their bodies, but they are corrupting their
souls.

I have lived for some weeks on the side of the Rhine where a bridge
connected the German side of the river with the town on the other side,
which is in Switzerland.  When the market-women came over the bridge,
the Custom-House officers made them open their baskets, and they looked
in to see whether they brought over anything taxable.  I would have you
examine all the thoughts that come drifting through your head, and if
they are bad, and not allowable, turn them back.

I.  "Wherefore think ye evil in your hearts?"  Our Lord tells us that
sin commences in the heart, and is as truly in the thought as in the
act.  "Ye have heard that it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt
not kill.  But I say unto you, That whosoever is angry with his brother
without a cause shall be in danger of the judgment.  Ye have heard that
it was said by them of old time, Thou shalt not commit adultery.  But I
say unto you, That whosoever looketh on a woman to lust after her, hath
committed adultery with her already in his heart."  S. John Chrysostom
truly said, "Men's souls are not so greatly injured by the temptations
which assail them from outside, as from those evil thoughts which
poison them within."  There may be evil thoughts of many kinds, envious
thoughts, discontented thoughts, profane thoughts, unkind thoughts,
angry thoughts, avaricious thoughts, impure thoughts.  All these
thoughts come buzzing about the head and heart, and will settle to do
harm, unless driven away.  They are only little thoughts.  Each is very
small, but altogether they are a great host.  They are like flies.

Pharaoh, King of Egypt, was plagued with flies.  They came upon his
servants, and the houses of the Egyptians were full of swarms of flies,
"and the land was corrupted by reason of the swarm of flies."  The
heads of a great many people are like the houses of the Egyptians--full
of swarms of evil thoughts thick as flies, and all as small, and in
themselves as insignificant.  The flies tormented the Egyptians when
they sat in their chambers, flying round them, buzzing in their ears,
lighting on their hands and faces; when they went to their meals the
flies were there, all over the meat and the bread, and falling into
their cups, and defiling every thing.  When they went to bed the flies
were in their bedrooms, and all night long were racing over their
faces, and driving away sleep.

Now look at your evil thoughts, you who are plagued with a swarm of
them.  When you kneel down to say your prayers, they are there
distracting your attention.  When you are at table or with friends,
they are there disturbing your thoughts, perhaps corrupting your
conversation.  When you are alone, they are there filling your mind
with images and sounds.  When you are in bed, they are there, keeping
you awake.  Your thoughts--these evil thoughts, so numerous, in such
swarms, never forsake you.  In church they are present, disturbing you.
When you walk, they surround you, when you work, they interrupt you.
And, like the flies in Egypt, "the land is corrupted by reason of the
swarm."  Your hearts are corrupted by the bad thoughts always hovering
over them, and settling down on them.

Am I drawing a fanciful picture?  Not at all.  I know it is so with
many, I do not say all, but with many.  They disregard evil thoughts
because they are such trifling things--like flies, so easily brushed
away; like flies, so light and volatile; like flies, so little.  And
yet they utterly degrade and corrupt the heart.  "The land was
corrupted by reason of the swarm of flies."

II.  When Abraham prepared a sacrifice to the Lord, there came down on
it swarms of birds of carrion (Gen. xv.)  And when they did so, we are
told that Abraham "drove them away."  The chief Baker of Pharaoh had
meats in a basket on his head, and the birds came down on them, and
carried them off.  "The birds did eat them out of the basket upon my
head" (Gen. xl.)  To Abraham was given a promise of a great blessing
and glorious future.  To the Baker was given a warning that he should
be hanged within three days.  One drove the birds away, and the other
did not.

Now this applies to evil thoughts.  If you will be like Abraham and be
blessed, you will drive the evil thoughts away as fast as they come on.
If you let them come, and make no effort to repel them, they will carry
away from you all the graces wherewith you have been endowed at
baptism, and they will corrupt your heart as well.




LVII.

_THE HEAVENLY BANQUET._

20th Sunday after Trinity.

S. Matt. xxii. 4.

"Behold, I have prepared my dinner; my oxen and my fatlings are killed,
and all things are ready; come unto the marriage."


INTRODUCTION.--The Kingdom of Heaven has two meanings in this parable.
It means in the first place the Catholic Church.  Into that the
apostles and pastors of Christ invite men to enter, and many refuse.
In the second place it means the Church Triumphant,--eternal
blessedness, and into that the pastors of Christ's Church invite you
continually, Sunday after Sunday, and many refuse.

SUBJECT.--Our subject to-day shall be the Heavenly Banquet, and the
invitation to it.

I.  When God created the world, He did so with a "Let be."  He said,
"Let there be light"--and light was.  "Let there be a firmament in the
midst of the waters," and it was so, at once.  He said, "Let the waters
be gathered together into one place, and let the dry land appear," and,
immediately, it was so.  And it was the same throughout the work of the
Seven Days.  He spake the word and the world was made, and all the host
of heaven by the breath of His mouth.

But when man's salvation was wrought it was otherwise.  There was
nothing instantaneous about that.  Long ages passed before the time
came for the Son of God to be born.  The preparation was lengthy, there
was delay.  And when He came, there was no "Let there be," and it was
done, but there were thirty-three years spent on earth, and there were
the laborious ministry, the sufferings, and the death.  That was not
all.  Still more was done.  The Son of God ascended into Heaven after
having spent forty days on earth after His resurrection, founding and
framing His Church.  Then He sent the Holy Ghost down on the Church He
had made.  Still all is not done.  The Church has to battle with the
world, to endure persecution, the blood of martyrs has to flow, and
three hundred years to pass, before she emerges out of her hidden
suffering life into light before the world.

That is not all.  Still the work goes on.  The Sacraments are
ministered, the word of God is preached.  Invitation to the Banquet of
Heaven is given.  Salvation is not yet come; the work goes on, and goes
on slowly.

Look at yourselves, and see how slow the process is.  You are baptized,
and thereby made a member of Christ.  Is all done?  By no means, the
work is only begun.  You grow older, and your temptations grow
stronger.  Then comes Confirmation, the Holy Spirit is given to
strengthen, the seal is put on the Baptismal Contract.  Is all done?
By no means, it is only progressing.  The Holy Communion is given you.
You partake of the sacred Body and Blood of Christ.  Surely now all is
complete, and salvation secured.  No--by no means, not yet.  All
through life the work goes on.  It is not done at death.  It will not
be done till the Judgment Day.

Why is this?  Because man has Free Will, and can oppose and hinder the
work of God.  He can even bring it to naught.

When God made the world it was done at His word, for there was no
opposition, no independent free will had to be taken account of; but in
the salvation of man it is otherwise, man has to be considered, he has
a will which can turn all the good intentions of God from him, and make
them of no avail.  God cannot save man without his free consent.  God's
grace cannot sanctify him without his co-operation with it.  God can
invite and attract, He cannot force.  In the parable, the king sends
out to entreat his subjects to come, and when they refuse he punishes
them, but he does not send his soldiers to drive them into his
banqueting hall.

II.  All that God can do is to invite; but He invites most pressingly,
and holds out every inducement that He possibly could.

God desires all men to be saved, He willeth not the death of a sinner.
"Christ," says S. Paul, "died for all,"--to reconcile all men to God.
He hung on the cross for all, to save all that will come to Him and be
saved--He died "for us men, and our salvation."

The Amalekites attacked the city of Ziklag, and took it, and burned it
with fire, and departed, carrying away with them the two wives of
David, Ahinoam the Jezreelitess, and Abigail, who had been the wife of
Nabal the Carmelite.  When David knew this, he fell into great
distress, and he gathered an army and went to the place, and there he
wept "till he had no more power to weep."  And he pursued after the
Amalekites with four hundred men, and he fell on them, and the battle
raged four and twenty hours.  "He smote them from twilight even unto
the evening of the next day," and he recovered out of their hands his
two wives.  Now suppose that one of them, say Abigail, fell into low
spirits, thinking that David did not love her, and would not bring her
into his palace, and show her favour, one would say to her, What is the
meaning of this?  Your sad spirits and gloomy doubts are proof of an
unthankful spirit.  Look at David.  See a clear evidence that you are
wrong.  Look! he is covered with dust from the battle, he is so
exhausted that he can scarce breathe.  For you he fought, for you he
exposed himself to great risk, for you he conquered.  He has redeemed
you out of the power of the enemy.  See! he extends to you his hand,
red with his blood shed for you.  He holds out his hand to invite you
to follow him, that he may bring you home in safety.  Away with these
wicked doubts and this black mistrust!

I may say exactly the same to you.  Do you want any token of the love
of Christ?  Any assurance of His goodwill towards you?  Look at Him!
See what He has done and suffered for you!  For you He spent
thirty-three years in struggle, for you He was exposed to the scoffs of
the Jews, for you He was scourged, for you He was crucified.  To you He
extends His hand, red with His blood, to beckon you to follow Him, that
where He is there you may be also.  He has shown you His love.  What
could He have done more?  He has promised you Heaven.  He has assured
you that He is gone there to prepare a place for you, that He may
receive you unto Himself.  He tells you that there is the kingdom He
has prepared for you from the foundation of the world.  Could He make
better promises?

III.  But He can do no more.  He cannot drive you into Heaven.  It is
left to you, to your free will to decide.  You can accept, or you can
refuse.  You can make use of the Sacraments, the means He has provided
for enabling you to gain the Kingdom, or you may turn your backs on
them.  He will not drive you.  All He will do is to invite, and say,
"Come! for all things are now ready."




LVIII.

_EXAMPLE._

21st Sunday after Trinity.

S. John iv. 13.

"And himself believed, and his whole house."


INTRODUCTION.--As the tree so the fruit, as the parents so the
children, as the master so his men, as the mistress so her household.
This is not indeed a rule without exceptions, but as a general rule it
holds.

No man liveth and dieth to himself, we are all members one of another,
and we all influence the conduct of others, and determine their
careers, more than we ourselves imagine.  It is not, indeed, always
true that good parents have good children, but it is generally the
case.  It is not always that bad parents have bad children, but it is
exceptional when it is otherwise.  Indeed, the virtues of parents
become in some way inherent in their offspring, and the vices of
parents last in the blood of their children, and even descend to their
children's children.  How often is this the case with a tendency to
drink!  Although the child may have lost his parent young, and not seen
his bad example, yet he has in him a yearning after stimulants, and
very often becomes a drunkard like his father.

SUBJECT.--Let us, to-day, consider the effect of the example of parents
on their children; and of teachers on their pupils.

I.  There is a striking passage in the fifth chapter of S. John which
may not hitherto have attracted your attention.  One Sabbath Day our
Blessed Lord went to Bethesda, and there healed a man who had had an
infirmity thirty and eight years.  He healed him, and bade him take up
his bed, and walk.  The Jews were wroth, and said, "It is the Sabbath
Day, it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed."  Then we are told the
Jews did persecute Jesus, and sought to slay Him, because He had done
these things on the Sabbath Day.  "But Jesus answered them: My Father
worketh hitherto, and I work."  That is to say--My Father worketh on
the Sabbath, He sends His rain, He makes the grass to grow, He feeds
the young ravens, He causes the sun to rise and set, He works good to
all creatures, feeds, and heals, and as I see my Father act, so,
naturally, as a Son, I act also.  Whatsoever the Son seeth the Father
do, He doeth likewise.  The argument of the Jews avails nothing, that
as the man has lain infirm for thirty-eight years, he may lie another
twelve hours.  "My Father worketh hitherto good on the Sabbath, and
therefore I work."  It matters nothing what the Law may enjoin, nor how
strict may be the tradition of the Pharisees, "My Father worketh good
on the Sabbath, and therefore I work."  Our Lord produces this as an
argument against which there can be no resistance, to which there can
be no reply, an argument commending itself to every man's
understanding--to universal experience--As the father acts, so acts the
son.  The example of the father is the law of right and wrong to the
child.

Do you know the fable of the crab and his children?  The crab was sore
distressed to see his little ones run crookedly on the sand of the sea
shore, so he said, "My sons, walk straight!"  "Yes," answered the
little crabs, "lead thou the way, father, and we will follow thy
footsteps."

Is it a wonder to you, a wonder and a distress, that your sons do not
turn out well, that they go to the public-house too much, and that they
are idle workmen, that they swear and use foul language?  If you wish
them to grow up differently, it is of no use saying to them, "My sons,
walk straight!" you must lead the way, that they may follow.

Is it a wonder and grief to a mother that her girls become giddy,
frivolous, and unsteady, and perhaps cause her shame?  Do you want them
to be quiet, to stay at home, and be neat, modest, unselfish girls?
then do not be giddy and a gadabout yourself.  "Lead thou the way,
mother, and they will follow."

Do you, parents, find that your children ramble about the lanes with
idle companions instead of coming to Church on Sundays, that they do
not love the worship of God, that they do not fear God, and reverence
His sanctuary?  Do you want them to be God-fearing, pious, consistent
Christians?  Then do you lead the way and they will follow.

Do you want your boys and girls to hold a check on their tongues, and
not to be always wrangling and snapping at one another, scolding, and
finding fault, and quarrelling?  Then do you lead the way, that they
may follow.  Lead the way by keeping a check on your tongues, by being
gentle and forbearing--you, husband and wife, one with another, not
given to railing, but, contrariwise, to blessing.

II.  You may have observed how often in Holy Scripture the expression
recurs, "The God of your Father," or "The God of your Fathers," "The
God of my Father," or "of my Fathers."  This is a remarkable
expression.  Is God short of Names that He should be thus designated?
Might He not be better termed Almighty, Everlasting, Jehovah?  The
expression is of such frequent recurrence that it must have a
meaning--and this is what it means.  There is such a thing as an
hereditary religion.  As a man regards God, so will his children regard
Him.  If a man is reverent and devout, and shows that he honours God,
and regards Him as a just and righteous God, hating iniquity, and
rewarding all those who keep His commandments, then his children will
grow up regarding God as just and righteous; but if a man thinks of God
as indifferent to righteousness, as so ready in His kindness to forgive
everything, and let men do what they like, that He will pardon them for
any and everything they do, then his sons will grow up looking on God
as the great Author of moral disorder among men.  If a man regards God
as expecting worship and honour, then the sons will grow up with the
same idea of God, and will worship and honour Him, and if a man has no
God at all, then his sons will also have no God at all.

III.  In Exodus God threatens that He will "visit the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children, and upon the children's children, unto the
third and to the fourth generations."  In like manner He blesses a
whole posterity for the righteousness of their parents.  You see now
how and why this is.  It is because when a father and mother are
wicked, their children grow up wicked also, and their children's
children, till the whole family dies out through its vicious habits, or
there rises out of it some redeeming element of good.

In the same way good parents have good children, and these good
children marry, and have also good offspring, and so the goodness of
one pious and righteous pair goes on descending and spreading like a
fertilizing river, bearing blessings to all who are near it.  What an
encouragement this is to you parents to lead God-fearing lives!  What a
warning to those of you who are careless!  The belief of the ruler
brought belief to his whole house.   The salvation of Zacchaeus brought
salvation to his whole house also.  Righteousness may bring a blessing
to your children, and children's children, for many generations.




