
While Rome remained inactive, and while the opponents of Luther in
Germany were handicapped by the crude diplomacy of Miltitz, Luther was
gaining ground with marvellous rapidity. His success was due partly to
his own great personal gifts as a popular demagogue, and partly also
to the fact that no man knew better than he how to make capital out of
the ecclesiastical abuses of the time, and to win to his side all who
had any reason to be discontented with the existing order. He was
strengthened very much by the inactivity of the German bishops, who
seemed unwilling to take any severe measures against him, by the help
and encouragement of Frederick of Saxony, who, during the interregnum
and for some time after the election of Charles V. was the real
administrator of Germany, by his union with the leading Humanist
scholars and professors, especially Erasmus, all of whom regarded
Luther merely as the champion of liberty against the obscurantism of
the Scholastics, and by his secret alliances with discontented nobles,
such as Ulrich von Hutten and Franz von Sickingen, whose sole hope of
improving their fortunes lay in the creation of public disorder.

Johann Eck, Luther's chief opponent, realising that there was no hope
of stirring up the German authorities to take action, hastened to Rome
to impress upon the Pope and his advisers the extreme gravity of the
situation, and to urge them to proceed against the revolt with all
possible energy and despatch. Luther himself recognised clearly enough
that the crisis he had long foreseen was at hand, and he began to
prepare men's minds for complete rupture with the Church by his sermon
on excommunication in which he bade defiance to the ecclesiastical
authorities. He threw himself with renewed energy into the fray,
turning out volume after volume with feverish rapidity, each more
violent and abusive than its predecessor, and nearly all couched in
language that was as intelligible to the peasant as it was to the
professor. In his /Address to the Nobles of Germany/, in his works /On
the Mass/, /On the Improvement of Christian Morality/, and /On the
Babylonian Captivity/, he proclaimed himself a political as well as a
religious revolutionary. There was no longer any concealment or
equivocation. The veil was lifted at last, and Luther stood forth to
the world as the declared enemy of the Church and the Pope, the
champion of the Bible as the sole rule of faith, and the defender of
individual judgment as its only interpreter. In these works he
rejected the Mass, Transubstantiation, vows of chastity, pilgrimages,
fasts, the Sacraments, the powers of the priesthood, and the
jurisdiction and supremacy of the Pope. With such a man there could be
no longer any question of leniency or of compromise. The issues at
stake, namely, whether the wild and impassioned assertions of a rebel
monk should be accepted in preference to the teaching of Christ's
Church, ought to have been apparent to every thinking man; and yet so
blinded were some of his contemporaries by their sympathy with the
Humanists as against the Theologians, that even still they forced
themselves to believe Luther sought only for reform.

At Rome the trouble in Germany was one of the main subjects that
engaged the attention of the Curia. It was felt that the time had come
when decisive measures must be taken. After long and anxious
deliberations Leo X. published the Bull, /Exsurge Domine/ (June 1520),
in which forty propositions taken from Luther's writings were
condemned, his works were ordered to be burned, the full penalties of
excommunication were proclaimed against him unless he withdrew his
errors and made his submission within sixty days, while his aiders and
abettors were besought in the most touching terms to abandon the
dangerous path into which they had been betrayed. Had such a
pronouncement been issued at the beginning of the movement it might
have done much to restore peace to the Church, but, coming as it did
at a time when Luther's movement, backed by all the revolutionary
forces of Germany, had already acquired considerable dimensions, it
failed to put an end to the tumult. Besides, the papal decision was
deprived of much of its force by the fact that Eck, Caraccioli, and
Aleandro were appointed as a commission to superintend its execution.
The appointment of Eck was a great tactical blunder, as it afforded
Luther and his friends an opportunity of proclaiming that the sentence
of excommunication was procured by the intrigues and
misrepresentations of their personal enemies; while the fact that the
German bishops were disregarded in the execution of the Bull as if
they were not above suspicion themselves, was looked upon by many as
a studied insult to the entire German hierarchy. Even though Luther
had entertained any thoughts of submission, the triumph of Eck would
have created very serious obstacles; but, knowing as he did, that even
at the worst he could reckon upon the support of a certain number of
the discontented nobles who had pledged themselves to put their swords
at his disposal, he had no intention of making his submission.

The reception accorded to the papal document varied according to the
views of the local authorities and the state of public feeling in the
different cities and provinces. Thus, while its publication was
welcomed in Cologne, Mainz, Halberstadt, and Freising, it was received
with very mixed feelings at Leipzig and at Erfurt. Frederick of
Saxony, to whom Leo X. had addressed a personal appeal, refused to
abandon Luther's cause unless it were proved from the Scriptures that
he was wrong. He did, indeed, suggest that Luther should write a
respectful letter to the Pope, but his suggestion passed unheeded. At
first Luther pretended that the Bull was a forgery brought forward by
Eck to discredit him, but when this line of defence proved useless, he
boldly attacked the papal pronouncement in his pamphlet, /Against the
Bull of Anti-Christ/, in which he denounced Leo X. as a heretic and
apostate, an enemy of the Holy Scriptures, a tyrant, and a
calumniator. Lest, however, the courage of his supporters might be
overcome by the terrors of excommunication, he issued an appeal from
the sentence of the Pope to the judgment of a future General Council.
Finally, on the 10th December, 1520, in the presence of an immense
concourse of the citizens and students of Wittenberg, he burned
publicly the papal Bull and the writings of his political opponents.
On this occasion he proclaimed his intention of overthrowing the
ecclesiastical organisation, and of introducing a new theological
system. For the future it was to be war to the knife against the Pope
and the Church, and he called upon German patriots and all true
friends of personal liberty to take their stand by his side in the
conflict that had been begun.

Charles V. was apparently in a very strong position. Not since the
days of Charlemagne had any ruler claimed jurisdiction over so wide a
territory as his, comprising, as it did, Germany and Austria, the
kingdom of the two Sicilies, Spain, and the Netherlands. But in
reality the very extent of his dominions made him much less powerful
than he might have been as the sovereign of a smaller but more compact
region. It served to awaken the suspicions of his subjects, who feared
that he might abolish their distinctive national constitutions and
weld his scattered territories into one great empire, and to excite
the jealousy of the other rulers of Europe, who imagined that he might
declare himself dictator of the western world. The German princes,
having resisted successfully all the efforts made by his grandfather,
Maximilian I., to convert the loose confederation of the German States
into a united and centralised nation, were on their guard lest his
successor should attempt a similar policy with the aid of Spanish
troops and Spanish gold; the Spaniards resented the absence of the
king from Spain, where many of the lower classes were in a state
bordering on rebellion; Francis I. of France, trembling for the very
existence of his country, was willing to do all things, even to agree
to an alliance with the sons of Mohammed, if he could only lessen the
influence of his powerful rival. The Turks under Soliman I. were
determined to realise the dreams of their race by extending their
territories from the Bosphorus to the Atlantic; while even the Pope
had good reason to suspect that Charles V., unmindful of the example
of his great namesake, might seek to become the master rather than the
protector of the Church.[19]

On account of the troubles in Spain it was only late in the year 1520
that Charles V. could come to Germany to meet the electors, and to
take over formally the administration of the Empire (23 Oct.). Less
than two weeks had elapsed when the papal representative, Aleandro,
himself a distinguished Humanist, sought an interview with the new
ruler, and besought him to enforce the papal Bull against Luther with
the full weight of his imperial authority. But the wavering attitude
of many of the princes and the determined opposition of Frederick of
Saxony made the Emperor hesitate to condemn Luther without giving him
an opportunity for explanation and defence. The Diet was soon to open
at Worms, and Charles V. issued an invitation to Luther to attend,
guaranteeing at the same time his personal safety on the way to and
from Worms and during his sojourn in the city.

The Diet met in January 1521, but despite the efforts of Aleandro the
majority of the princes still failed to realise the gravity of the
situation. Feeling against Rome was running very high in Germany at
the time. Many of the princes insisted on presenting a document
embodying the grievances of Germany (/Centum Gravamina/)[20] to the
papal ambassador, while even such an orthodox supporter of the Church
as Duke George of Saxony, brought forward very serious complaints
against the clergy, accompanied by a demand that a General Council
should be summoned to restore peace to the Church. Luther,
strengthened by the safe conduct of the Emperor and by a secret
understanding with some of the princes and knights, set out from
Wittenberg for Worms, where he arrived in April 1521. On presenting
himself before the Diet he was invited to state if he were really the
author of the works published under his name, copies of which were
presented to him, and, if so, was he willing to retract the doctrines
contained in them. In reply to the former of these questions he
admitted the authorship of the volumes, but asked for time to consider
what answer he should make in regard to the latter. A day was allowed
him for consideration. When he appeared again, all traces of the
hesitation and nervousness that marked his attitude at the previous
session had disappeared. He refused to retract his opinions, and made
it clear that he no longer acknowledged the authority of the Pope or
of General Councils as a safe guide in matters religious.

Thereupon the Emperor intimated to the princes that he was determined
to take vigorous action against such a heretic and disturber of the
public peace, though at the request of some of the princes he allowed
time for private conferences between Luther and representative
Catholic theologians, notably Eck and Cochlaeus.[21] These conferences
having failed to produce any result the Emperor issued an order (25th
April) commanding Luther to depart from Worms without delay, and
forbidding him to preach to the people on his journey under pain of
forfeiting his safe conduct. A month later Charles V. published a
decree placing Luther under the ban of the Empire. He was denounced as
a public heretic whom no one should receive or support; he was to be
seized by any one who could do so, and delivered to the Emperor; his
writings were to be burned, and all persons proved guilty of
countenancing himself or his errors were liable to severe punishment.
Many hoped that the decree might put an end to the confusion, but in
reality Charles V. was powerless to enforce it, especially as the
majority of the princes were unwilling to carry out its terms in their
territories. Hence, outside the hereditary dominions of the House of
Habsburg, the lands of Joachim I. of Brandenburg and of Duke George of
Saxony, and in Bavaria, it remained a dead letter.

On the route from Worms Luther was taken prisoner by soldiers of the
Elector, Frederick of Saxony, according to arrangements that had been
made for his protection, and was brought to the castle at Wartburg
where he remained for close on a year (May 1521-March 1522) under the
assumed name of Yonker George, safe in spite of the imperial decrees.
In the silence of his retreat at Wartburg Luther had an opportunity
for reflection on the gravity of the situation that he had created. At
times he trembled, as he thought of separating himself definitely from
the great world-wide organisation which recognised the jurisdiction of
the Bishop of Rome, and of setting up his own judgment against the
faith that had been handed down for centuries, and that was supported
by the ablest scholars from the days of Clement of Rome to those of
St. Thomas and St. Bonaventure.

In his anxiety of mind he was the victim of hallucinations, believing
that the spirit of evil appeared to him in visible form, and held
commune with him in human speech. He was assailed, too, with violent
temptations of the flesh, which reduced him to a state bordering on
despair. But these moments of depression passed away, to be succeeded
by fits of wild exultation in which he rejoiced at the storm that he
had created already, and at the still greater storm he was soon to
create. He set to work with tireless energy, believing himself to be
inspired from on high as was the apostle, St. John, during his stay in
the island of Patmos. At the instigation of his friends, who urged him
to attack the celibacy of the monks and nuns, he turned his attention
to this question, and issued a work /On Monastic Vows/, in which he
declared that such vows of chastity, being opposed to the freedom of
the Gospel, were sinful and should be neglected. In his book /On the
Mass/ he assailed the Mass and the whole theory of the Christian
priesthood, declaring that every believer was in a true sense a
priest. He poured out a most violent torrent of abuse against Henry
VIII. of England, who, in his /Defence of the Seven Sacraments/, had
ventured to join issue with the German reformer. At the same time he
undertook to prepare a translation of the New Testament as a means of
advancing his propaganda. By aid of mis-translations and marginal
notes he sought to popularise his views on Faith and Justification,
and to win favour with the people by opening to them the word of God,
which he asserted falsely had been closed against them for centuries.

All his pamphlets were couched in popular language and were exactly
the kind of works likely to appeal to the masses of the people, as
well as to the debased instincts of those who had entered into the
religious state in response to the wishes of their parents or
guardians rather than in obedience to the call of God. But while
Luther thus catered for the multitude, Melanchthon sought to gain the
support of the more educated classes by throwing Luther's teaching
into scientific and systematic form in his work, /Loci Communes/
(1521), a book that remained for centuries the standard authority on
Lutheran teaching.

It would be wrong to assume that Luther developed his theological
system in its entirety before his separation from the Church. On the
question of Justification and Free-will he had arrived at views
distinctly opposed to Catholic doctrine, but his system as such took
shape only gradually in response to the attacks of his opponents or
the demands of his friends. On the one hand, imbued with the ideas of
German Pantheistic mysticism, Luther started with the fixed principle
that man's action is controlled by necessary laws, and that even after
justification man is completely devoid of free will at least in
religious matters. According to him, human nature became so
essentially maimed and corrupted by the sin of Adam that every work
which man can do is and must be sinful, because it proceeds in some
way from concupiscence. Hence it is, he asserted, that good works are
useless in acquiring justification, which can be obtained only by
faith; and by faith he understood not the mere intellectual assent to
revealed doctrines, but a practical confidence, resulting, no doubt,
from this assent, that the merits of Christ will be applied to the
soul. Through this faith the sinner seizes upon the righteousness of
Christ, and by applying to himself the justice of his Saviour his sins
are covered up. For this reason Luther explained that justification
did not mean the actual forgiveness of sin by the infusion of some
internal habit called sanctifying grace, but only the non-imputation
of the guilt on account of the merits of Christ.

Since faith alone is necessary for justification it followed as a
logical consequence that there was no place in Luther's system for the
Sacraments, though in deference to old traditions he retained three
Sacraments, Baptism, Penance, and the Eucharist. These, however, as he
took care to explain, do not produce grace in the soul. They are mere
outward pledges that the receiver has the faith without which he
cannot be justified. Having in this way rejected the sacramental
system and the sacrificial character of the Mass, it was only natural
that he should disregard the priesthood, and proclaim that all
believers were priests. In harmony with his theory on justification,
and its dependence on faith, he denounced Purgatory, Prayers for the
Dead, Indulgences, and Invocation of the Saints as being in themselves
derogatory to the merits of Christ.

On the other hand, he laid it down as the leading principle that the
Bible was the sole rule of faith, and that individual judgment was its
only interpreter. Consequently he rejected the idea of a visible
authority set up by Christ as an infallible guide in religious
affairs. In this way he sought to undermine the authority of the
Church, to depreciate the value of the decrees of the Popes and
General Councils, and to re-assure his less daring followers by
stripping ecclesiastical censures of more than half their terrors.[22]

The results of Luther's literary activity were soon apparent at
Wittenberg and other centres in Germany. The Augustinians in Luther's
own convent set aside their vows as worthless, and rejected the Mass.
Carlstadt made common cause with the most radical element in the city,
celebrated Mass on Christmas morning in the German language (1521),
and administered Holy Communion to every one who came forward to
receive, without any inquiry about their spiritual condition. Putting
himself at the head of a body of students and roughs he went round the
churches destroying the pictures, statues, confessionals, and altars.
To increase the confusion a party of men at Zwickau led by a
shoemaker, Nicholas Storch, and a preacher, Thomas Munzer, following
the principle of private judgment advocated by Luther, insisted on
faith as a condition for baptism and rejected infant baptism as
worthless. They were called Anabaptists. They claimed to be special
messengers from God, gifted with the power of working miracles, and
favoured with visions from on high. In vain did Luther attack them as
heretics, and exhort his lieutenants to suppress them as being more
dangerous than the Papists. Carlstadt, unable to answer their
arguments from Scripture, went over to their side, and even
Melanchthon felt so shaken in his opposition that he appealed to
Wartburg for guidance. The students at the university became so
restless and turbulent that Duke George of Saxony began to take the
prompt and decisive action necessary for dealing with such a dangerous
situation. Luther, alarmed for the future of his work, abandoned his
retreat at Wartburg (March 1522) and returned to Wittenberg, where he
had recourse to stern measures to put an end to the confusion. He
drove Carlstadt from the city, and even followed him to other places
where he tried to find refuge, till at last, after a very disedifying
scene between them in a public tavern, he forced him to flee from
Saxony. Carlstadt's greatest offence in the eyes of his master was his
preaching against the Real Presence of Christ in the Eucharist, though
Luther himself admitted that he should have liked to deny the Real
Presence if only to annoy the Pope, were it not that the words of
Scripture proved too strong. Carlstadt adopted a different
interpretation, but Luther was not the man to tolerate individual
judgment in the case of one of his own lieutenants. Carlstadt was
denounced as a heretic and a blasphemer, for whom no punishment could
be sufficiently severe. Munzer, too, was banished, and with the
assistance of the Elector, Luther was enabled to overcome all his
opponents.

Luther owed his success in the opening years of his campaign mainly to
his ability in gauging the feelings of the different classes whose
support he wished to obtain, as well as to his complete mastery of the
German language. In appealing to the monks and nuns, who were longing
to escape from the obligations they had contracted, he offered them
complete liberty by denouncing their vows as opposed to the freedom of
the Gospel and consequently sinful. Many of the monks and nuns
abandoned their cloisters and fled to Wittenberg to seek the pleasures
denied them hitherto, and to put in practice Luther's teaching on the
necessity of marriage. Though he encouraged bishops and priests to
marry, and though he forwarded his warmest congratulations to
Carlstadt on his betrothal to a fifteen year old maiden (1522), Luther
himself hesitated long before taking his final plunge; but at last,
against the advice of his best friends, he took as his wife Catherine
Bora, one of the escaped nuns who had sought refuge in Wittenberg. His
marriage (1525) was a source of amusement to his opponents as it was
of dismay to his supporters. Melanchthon complained bitterly of the
step his master had taken, but he consoled himself with the thought
that the marriage might out an end to his former frivolity, and might
allay the suspicions that his conduct had aroused.[23] To the princes,
the free cities, and the landless knights he appealed by holding out
hopes that they might be enriched by a division of the ecclesiastical
estates and of the goods of the monasteries and churches. With the
overthrow of the Pope and of the bishops the princes were led to
expect that they might themselves become spiritual dictators in their
own dominions. To the friends of the Humanist movement and the great
body of the professors and students he represented himself as the
champion of learning and intellectual freedom, anxious to defend them
against the obscurantism of the Scholastics and the interference of
the Roman congregations.

A large number of the leading Humanists, believing that Luther had
undertaken only a campaign against universally recognised abuses, were
inclined at first to sympathise with his movement. The friendly
attitude they adopted, and the influence employed by Erasmus and
others on his behalf during the early years of his revolt contributed
not a little to his final success. But as it became evident that his
object was the overthrow of the Church and of doctrines accepted as
dogmas of faith by the whole Christian world, his former allies fell
away one by one. On the question of free-will Erasmus, who had long
played a double role, found it necessary to take the field openly
against him.[24] Luther's answer, full of personal abuse and
invective, drew a sharp reply from Erasmus, and all friendly
intercourse between them was broken off for ever.

But it was on the mass of the people, the peasants and the artisans,
that Luther relied mainly for support, and it was to these he
addressed his most forcible appeals. The peasants of Germany, ground
down by heavy taxes and reduced to the position of slaves, were ready
to listen to the revolutionary ideas put forward by leaders like
Sickingen and von Hutten, and to respond to the call of Luther to rise
against their princes whether they were secular or ecclesiastical. In
the imagination of the peasants Luther appeared as the friend of human
liberty, determined to deliver them from the intolerable yoke that had
been laid upon them by their masters. His attacks were confined at
first to the prince-bishops and abbots, but soon realising the
strength of the weapon he wielded, he attacked the lay princes in the
pamphlets entitled /Christian Liberty/ and /The Secular Magistracy/,
and advocated the complete overthrow of all authority. It is true,
undoubtedly, that many of the peasants were already enrolled in the
secret societies, and that had there never been a Luther a popular
rising might have been anticipated; but his doctrines on evangelical
freedom and his frenzied onslaughts on the ecclesiastical and lay
rulers, turned the movement into an anti-religious channel, and
imparted to the struggle a uniformity and bitterness that otherwise it
could never have acquired.

Risings of the peasantry took place in various parts of Germany,
notably in Swabia, Thuringia, the Rhine Provinces, and Saxony (1524).
Thomas Munzer, the leader of the Anabaptists, encouraged them in their
fight for freedom. At first the attack was directed principally
against the spiritual princes. Many monasteries and churches were
plundered, and several of the nobles were put to death. Soon the lay
princes of Germany, alarmed by the course of the revolutionaries and
fearing for the safety of their own territories, assembled their
forces and marched against the insurgents. The war was carried on
mercilessly on both sides, close upon 100,000 peasants being killed in
the field, while many of their leaders, amongst them Thomas Munzer,
were arrested and condemned to death. In nearly every important
engagement the peasants, as might be expected, suffered defeat, so
that before the end of 1525 the movement was, practically speaking, at
an end. Luther, who had been consulted by both sides, and who had
tried to avoid committing himself to either, frightened by the very
violence of the storm he had been instrumental in creating, issued an
appeal to the princes calling upon them to show no mercy to the forces
of disorder,[25] and even Melanchthon, gentle and moderate as he
usually was, did not hesitate to declare that the peasants of Germany
had more liberty than should be allowed to such a rude and uncultured
people. The Peasants' War, disastrous as it was, did some good by
opening men's eyes to the dangerous consequences of Luther's
extravagant harangues, and by giving some slight indications as to the
real character and methods of the man, who was posing as a heaven-sent
reformer and at the same time as a champion of popular liberty.

But though Luther lost ground in many quarters owing to the part he
played before and during the Peasants' War, he had no intention of
abandoning the struggle in despair. During the early years of his
campaign his mind was so engrossed with the overthrow of existing
religious institutions, that he had little time to consider how he
should rebuild what he had pulled down. At first he thought that no
visible organisation was necessary, as the Church, according to his
view, consisted of all those who had true faith and charity. But soon
he abandoned this idea in favour of district or local churches that
should be left completely independent. The disturbances in Germany
during the Peasants' War taught him the hopelessness of such a scheme,
and showed him that his only chance of permanent success lay in the
organisation of state churches to be placed under the protection and
authority of the civil rulers. By this bribe he hoped to conciliate
the princes, whom he had antagonised by his attacks on their own body
as well as by his attitude during the early stages of the disturbance.
The Elector John of Saxony, who had succeeded his brother Frederick,
hesitated at first to assist him in the momentous work of setting up a
rival Christian organisation. But, at last, mindful of the advantages
that would accrue to him from being recognised as supreme head of the
Church in his own dominions, he gave a reluctant consent to the plans
formulated by Luther.

A body of visitors consisting of clerics and lawyers was appointed to
draw up a new ecclesiastical constitution, the most noteworthy feature
of which was the complete dependence of the new church on the secular
authority of each state. Episcopal jurisdiction was rejected, and in
place of the bishops, superintendents were appointed. The ordinary
administration was to be carried out by a synod of clerics and laymen
elected by the various parishes, but, in reality, the right of
appointment, of taxation, of apportioning the temporal goods, and of
deciding legal difficulties passed under the control of the sovereign.
Strange to say, though Luther insisted on individual judgment during
his campaign against the Catholic Church, he had no difficulty in
urging the civil rulers to force all their subjects to join the new
religious body. The goods of the Catholic Church were to be
appropriated, some of them being set aside for the support of the new
religious organisation, while the greater portion of them found their
way into the royal treasury. The Mass, shorn of the Elevation and of
everything that would imply the idea of sacrifice, was translated into
the German language, so that in all solemn religious services the
place of the Sacrifice was taken by the hymns, Scriptural lessons, the
sermon, and the Lord's Supper. Melanchthon wrote a Visitation Book
(1527) for the guidance of Lutheran ministers, and Luther himself
published two catechisms for the instruction of the children. The
Lutheran church was organised on a similar plan in Hesse and
Brandenburg and in many of the free cities such as Nurnberg,
Magdeburg, Bremen, Frankfurt, Ulm, etc. By these measures the
separation was completed definitely, and a certain amount of unity was
ensured for the new religion.
