transforming power of his grace.

The unbelief of his auditors was turned to mad hatred as Jesus gave two
examples from Old Testament history, both of which indicated that his
townsmen, who knew him best, were less worthy of his saving ministry than
even men of heathen nations. He even compared himself with Elijah and
Elisha and indicated that as the former brought a great blessing to one
who lived in Sidon and the latter to a prince in Syria, while the people
in Israel were suffering for their unbelief, so the nations of the world
would accept the blessed salvation of Christ while those who knew him best
would suffer for their unbelief. So maddened were his hearers by this
severe rebuke that they drove him from the city and tried to take his
life, but he, with majestic calm and divine strength, "passing through the
midst of them went his way."

It is still true that those who have enjoyed the best opportunities for
knowing Christ often reject him; but, where faith is present, broken
hearts are healed as by Elijah of old and lepers are cleansed as was
Naaman by the word of Elisha. Thus in this scene in the synagogue of
Nazareth, Jesus indicated not only the grace of his ministry but its
universal power. He came to relieve all the needs of mankind and in all
the world.



2. Jesus Performing Miracles at Capernaum. Ch. 4:31-44


    31 And he came down to Capernaum, a city of Galilee. And he was
    teaching them on the sabbath day: 32 and they were astonished at
    his teaching; for his word was with authority. 33 And in the
    synagogue there was a man, that had a spirit of an unclean demon;
    and he cried out with a loud voice, 34 Ah! what have we to do with
    thee, Jesus thou Nazarene? art thou come to destroy us? I know
    thee who thou art, the Holy One of God. 35 And Jesus rebuked him,
    saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him. And when the demon
    had thrown him down in the midst, he came out of him, having done
    him no hurt. 36 And amazement came upon all, and they spake
    together, one with another, saying, What is this word? for with
    authority and power he commandeth the unclean spirits, and they
    come out. 37 And there went forth a rumor concerning him into
    every place of the region round about.


    38 And he rose up from the synagogue, and entered into the house
    of Simon. And Simon's wife's mother was holden with a great fever;
    and they besought him for her. 39 And he stood over her, and
    rebuked the fever; and it left her: and immediately she rose up
    and ministered unto them.


    40 And when the sun was setting, all they that had any sick with
    divers diseases brought them unto him; and he laid his hands on
    every one of them, and healed them. 41 And demons also came out
    from many, crying out, and saying, Thou art the Son of God. And
    rebuking them, he suffered them not to speak, because they knew
    that he was the Christ.


    42 And when it was day, he came out and went into a desert place:
    and the multitudes sought after him, and came unto him, and would
    have stayed him, that he should not go from them. 43 But he said
    unto them, I must preach the good tidings of the kingdom of God to
    the other cities also: for therefore was I sent.


    44 And he was preaching in the synagogues of Galilee.


The Sabbath at Nazareth is placed by Luke in sudden contrast with a
Sabbath passed at Capernaum. On the former, as the story opens, Jesus was
surrounded by his friends and townsmen; as it closes, they had turned into
a fierce mob which was seeking his death. In the latter, as the scene
opens, Jesus was faced by a demon; but as it closes, he was surrounded by
an admiring throng who were eager to have him remain in their midst.

Jesus was again in a synagogue, and was awakening surprise by the
character of his message. Unlike the teachers of his day, he spoke with
authority instead of quoting reputed "authorities" as he unfolded the
Scriptures. Suddenly the service was interrupted by the cries of a man who
was possessed by an unclean spirit. Jesus rebuked the demon and compelled
him to come out of the man. There can be little doubt that the evil spirit
which Jesus thus controlled was an actual malign being who controlled the
poor sufferer whom Jesus graciously relieved; yet such an "unclean spirit"
is a type of the demoniac power of envy and of lust and of anger, and of
the whole host of debasing passions from which Christ alone can give
relief.

The second scene of this memorable Sabbath is in the home of Simon Peter;
here by a single word Jesus relieved a poor sufferer from a severe fever.
The cure was so instantaneous that the woman who had been sick immediately
"rose up and ministered unto them." It is probably true that in many homes
there are those, not afflicted by the power of evil passions, who
nevertheless are suffering from worry and anxiety and fretfulness and
unrest and so are unable to render to others the gracious service which
they might perform if they could but hear the quieting word of Christ and
feel the soothing power of his touch.

The third scene is of peculiar beauty. When the sun had set a great
multitude gathered around the home of Peter, attracted by the report of
the miracle wrought in the synagogue. They brought with them great numbers
of those who were sick or possessed by demons and Jesus healed them all.
This is a picture which in reality is being reproduced to-day. Amid the
shadows and mysteries of suffering and pain the Saviour is standing; about
him are gathered those whom sin has stricken with its disease, the sad,
the loveless, the lonely, the tempted, the hopeless, the lost. His touch
"has still its ancient power." In his mercy he is healing them all, and in
joy they are going away.

The last scene of this group is at dawn the next morning. Jesus had
withdrawn to "a desert place," but the eager multitudes had found him and
were beseeching him not to go from them. He reminded them, however, of the
other cities which needed to hear "the good tidings of the kingdom of
God." Have all of us who have felt the healing touch of Christ something
of his sympathy for those who have not yet heard the good news of his
grace?




B. The Second Period. Chs. 5:1 to 6:11



1. The Call of the First Disciples. Ch. 5:1-11


    1 Now it came to pass, while the multitude pressed upon him and
    heard the word of God, that he was standing by the lake of
    Gennesaret; 2 and he saw two boats standing by the lake: but the
    fishermen had gone out of them, and were washing their nets. 3 And
    he entered into one of the boats, which was Simon's, and asked him
    to put out a little from the land. And he sat down and taught the
    multitudes out of the boat. 4 And when he had left speaking, he
    said unto Simon, Put out into the deep, and let down your nets for
    a draught. 5 And Simon answered and said, Master, we toiled all
    night, and took nothing: but at thy word I will let down the nets.
    6 And when they had done this, they inclosed a great multitude of
    fishes; and their nets were breaking; 7 and they beckoned unto
    their partners in the other boat, that they should come and help
    them. And they came, and filled both the boats, so that they began
    to sink. 8 But Simon Peter, when he saw it, fell down at Jesus'
    knees, saying, Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord. 9
    For he was amazed, and all that were with him, at the draught of
    the fishes which they had taken; 10 and so were also James and
    John, sons of Zebedee, who were partners with Simon. And Jesus
    said unto Simon, Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men.
    11 And when they had brought their boats to land, they left all,
    and followed him.


The call of his first disciples is regarded by many as opening a new
period in the public ministry of Jesus. His work was now to assume a more
permanent form. The growing popularity of his preaching indicated that the
gospel was designed for the whole world. For such a proclamation a
definite group of workers must be prepared. The growth of Christianity
ever depends upon securing men who will publicly confess and follow
Christ.

The scene of this call is described as being "by the lake of Gennesaret."
This charming sheet of water brings to mind so many scenes in the life of
our Lord that it has been termed a "Fifth Gospel." On its western and
northern side were the cities in which most of his work was done; the
eastern shores were not inhabited and thither Jesus would resort for rest.

Those whom Jesus called were fishermen, sturdy, independent, fearless.
They were not strangers to Jesus nor had they been indifferent to
spiritual truths. They had attended the preaching of the Baptist and had
come to regard Jesus as the Messiah, but they were now called to leave
their homes and their tasks and to become his constant companions and
disciples.

On this occasion Jesus had borrowed the boat belonging to one of his
friends to use as a pulpit and from this he had addressed the crowds. When
he had finished his discourse, he gave to the four men he was about to
call an impressive object lesson of the character of the work and of the
great success which would attend their ministry if they would forsake all
and follow him. He wrought a miracle especially impressive because it was
in the sphere of their daily calling at a time and place where they were
sure it was useless to fish. They were enabled by the guidance of Jesus to
take such a draft of fishes that their nets were strained and their boats
so loaded as nearly to sink. It was so plainly a manifestation of
supernatural power that Peter felt himself to be in the presence of a
divine Being and expressed the fear which all have felt when face to face
with God. Jesus spoke the word which not only removed the terror of Peter
but gave to him and his companions courage for all the coming years, "Fear
not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men."

So to-day Jesus is calling men to become his disciples. Obedience may
involve sacrifice, but it is certain to result in the saving of human
souls.



2. Jesus Cleansing a Leper. Ch. 5:12-16


    12 And it came to pass, while he was in one of the cities, behold,
    a man full of leprosy: and when he saw Jesus, he fell on his face,
    and besought him, saying, Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me
    clean. 13 And he stretched forth his hand, and touched him,
    saying, I will; be thou made clean. And straightway the leprosy
    departed from him. 14 And he charged him to tell no man: but go
    thy way, and show thyself to the priest, and offer for thy
    cleansing, according as Moses commanded, for testimony unto them.
    15 But so much the more went abroad the report concerning him: and
    great multitudes came together to hear, and to be healed of their
    infirmities. 16 But he withdrew himself in the deserts, and
    prayed.


Leprosy was regarded as the most loathsome and terrible of diseases. It
existed in various forms but its invariable feature was its foul
uncleanness. The leper was an outcast; he was compelled to live apart from
the dwellings of men. He was required to wear a covering over his mouth
and to give warning of his approach by crying, "Unclean! Unclean!" His
case was regarded as hopeless; he was reckoned as dead. Loathsome,
insidious, corrupting, pervasive, isolating, ceremonially and physically
defiling, surely leprosy is a fitting emblem of sin; and this graphic
narrative presents a parable of the power of Christ to cleanse and to heal
and to restore. It is a vivid picture which Luke draws; the humble trust
of the poor sufferer, his pitiful cry, the sympathetic touch of Jesus, the
word of command and the instant cure. While Jesus forbade the man to
arouse excitement by telling of his healing, he commanded him to report
his case to the priest, that the highest religious authorities might have
unanswerable testimony to the divine power of Christ, and also that the
man might bring the offerings required by the Law and thus express his
gratitude to God. Our Master does expect all who have felt his healing
touch to testify of his grace and to show their gratitude by offering to
him the service of their lives.

Such miracles could not be hid. The crowds so pressed upon Jesus that he
was forced to withdraw to the desert for rest; and as the scene closed he
who had startled the multitude by the manifestation of his divine power
was left alone seeking help from God in prayer.



3. Jesus Forgiving Sins. Ch. 5:17-26


    17 And it came to pass on one of those days, that he was teaching;
    and there were Pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by, who
    were come out of every village of Galilee and Judaea and Jerusalem:
    and the power of the Lord was with him to heal. 18 And behold, men
    bring on a bed a man that was palsied: and they sought to bring
    him in, and to lay him before him. 19 And not finding by what
    _way_ they might bring him in because of the multitude, they went
    up to the housetop, and let him down through the tiles with his
    couch into the midst before Jesus. 20 And seeing their faith, he
    said, Man, thy sins are forgiven thee. 21 And the scribes and the
    Pharisees began to reason, saying, Who is this that speaketh
    blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone? 22 But Jesus
    perceiving their reasonings, answered and said unto them, Why
    reason ye in your hearts? 23 Which is easier, to say, Thy sins are
    forgiven thee; or to say, Arise and walk? 24 But that ye may know
    that the Son of man hath authority on earth to forgive sins (he
    said unto him that was palsied), I say unto thee, Arise, and take
    up thy couch, and go unto thy house. 25 And immediately he rose up
    before them, and took up that whereon he lay, and departed to his
    house, glorifying God. 26 And amazement took hold on all, and they
    glorified God; and they were filled with fear, saying, We have
    seen strange things to-day.


Leprosy was the symbol of the uncleanness of sin; paralysis of its
impotence and pain. On the occasion of healing a paralytic, Jesus,
however, did something more startling: he forgave sin. The poor sufferer
had been borne by his four friends who were discouraged by no obstacles.
When they were unable to enter the house where Jesus was, because of the
multitudes which surrounded it, they went to the roof and let the sick man
down through the tiles into the very presence of Christ. Their earnestness
is a rebuke to us who make so little effort to bring our comrades within
the healing influence of our Lord.

Jesus recognized the faith both of the man and of his friends and
responded with an utterance which occasioned his hearers more surprise
than had the opening of the roof, "Man, thy sins are forgiven thee." No
request had been made for such forgiveness, but Jesus read the heart. He
saw the yearning of the sufferer for healing not only of his body but of
his soul. He recognized his sorrow for the sin which had caused the
sickness, and the anguish of remorse and immediately he spoke the word of
pardon and of peace. Thus Jesus voiced the message which the world seems
reluctant to accept. He declared that physical ills and social evils are
less serious than the moral and spiritual maladies of which they are the
symptoms and the results; and further, he expressed his claim of divine
power to pronounce pardon and to remove guilt.

This claim at once aroused the bitter resentment of the scribes and
Pharisees who were present and they began to reason: "Who is this that
speaketh blasphemies? Who can forgive sins, but God alone?" Their
reasoning was correct. Jesus was a blasphemer worthy of death, or else he
was divine.

To prove his deity Jesus proposed an immediate test: "Which is easier, to
say, Thy sins are forgiven thee; or to say, Arise and walk?" Of course
neither is easier; either requires divine power. Therefore, when at the
word of Jesus the man arose and started for his home, "glorifying God," it
is not strange that "amazement took hold on all, and they glorified God."

Thus the miracles of Christ were real proofs of his deity as well as
expressions of his love; they were moreover parables of his ability and
willingness to deliver man from the guilt and power of sin.



4. The Call of Levi. Ch. 5:27-32

