    To serve as a charger the sun-god Frey,
      Sure, of all wild boars this the first."

            The Dwarfs, Oehlenschlaeger (Pigott's tr.).


This first piece of work successfully completed, Sindri flung some more
gold on the fire and bade his brother resume blowing, while he again
went out to secure magic assistance. This time Loki, still disguised
as a gadfly, stung the dwarf on his cheek; but in spite of the pain
Brock worked on, and when Sindri returned, he triumphantly drew
out of the flames the magic ring Draupnir, the emblem of fertility,
from which eight similar rings dropped every ninth night.


    "They worked it and turned it with wondrous skill,
      Till they gave it the virtue rare,
    That each thrice third night from its rim there fell
      Eight rings, as their parent fair."

            The Dwarfs, Oehlenschlaeger (Pigott's tr.).


Now a lump of iron was cast in the flames, and with renewed caution not
to forfeit their success by inattention, Sindri passed out, leaving
Brock to ply the bellows as before. Loki was now in desperation
and he prepared for a final effort. This time, still in the guise
of the gadfly, he stung the dwarf above the eye until the blood
began to flow in such a stream, that it prevented his seeing what
he was doing. Hastily raising his hand for a second, Brock dashed
aside the stream of blood; but short as was the interruption it had
worked irreparable harm, and when Sindri drew his work out of the
fire he uttered an exclamation of disappointment for the hammer he
had fashioned was short in the handle.


    "Then the dwarf raised his hand to his brow for the smart,
      Ere the iron well out was beat,
    And they found that the haft by an inch was too short,
      But to alter it then 'twas too late."

            The Dwarfs, Oehlenschlaeger (Pigott's tr.).


Notwithstanding this mishap, Brock was sure of winning the wager and
he did not hesitate to present himself before the gods in Asgard,
where he gave Odin the ring Draupnir, Frey the boar Gullin-bursti,
and Thor the hammer Mioelnir, whose power none could resist.

Loki in turn gave the spear Gungnir to Odin, the ship Skidbladnir to
Frey, and the golden hair to Thor; but although the latter immediately
grew upon Sif's head and was unanimously declared more beautiful than
her own locks had ever been, the gods decreed that Brock had won
the wager, on the ground that the hammer Mioelnir, in Thor's hands,
would prove invaluable against the frost giants on the last day.


            "And at their head came Thor,
    Shouldering his hammer, which the giants know."

            Balder Dead (Matthew Arnold).


In order to save his head, Loki fled precipitately, but was overtaken
by Thor, who brought him back and handed him over to Brock, telling
him, however, that although Loki's head was rightfully his, he
must not touch his neck. Hindered from obtaining full vengeance,
the dwarf determined to punish Loki by sewing his lips together,
and as his sword would not pierce them, he borrowed his brother's
awl for the purpose. However, Loki, after enduring the gods' gibes
in silence for a little while, managed to cut the string and soon
after was as loquacious as ever.

In spite of his redoubtable hammer, Thor was not held in dread as
the injurious god of the storm, who destroyed peaceful homesteads
and ruined the harvest by sudden hail-storms and cloud-bursts. The
Northmen fancied he hurled it only against ice giants and rocky walls,
reducing the latter to powder to fertilise the earth and make it
yield plentiful fruit to the tillers of the soil.

In Germany, where the eastern storms are always cold and blighting,
while the western bring warm rains and mild weather, Thor was supposed
to journey always from west to east, to wage war against the evil
spirits which would fain have enveloped the country in impenetrable
veils of mist and have bound it in icy fetters.



Thor's Journey to Joetun-heim

As the giants from Joetun-heim were continually sending out cold
blasts of wind to nip the tender buds and hinder the growth of the
flowers, Thor once made up his mind to go and force them to behave
better. Accompanied by Loki he set out in his chariot, and after
riding for a whole day the gods came at nightfall to the confines of
the giant-world, where, seeing a peasant's hut, they resolved to stay
for rest and refreshment.

Their host was hospitable but very poor, and Thor, seeing that he
would scarcely be able to supply the necessary food to satisfy his
by no means small appetite, slew both his goats, which he cooked and
made ready to eat, inviting his host and family to partake freely of
the food thus provided, but cautioning them to throw all the bones,
without breaking them, into the skins of the goats which he had spread
out on the floor.

The peasant and his family ate heartily, but his son Thialfi,
encouraged by mischievous Loki, ventured to break one of the bones
and suck out the marrow, thinking his disobedience would not be
detected. On the morrow, however, Thor, ready to depart, struck the
goat skins with his hammer Mioelnir, and immediately the goats sprang up
as lively as before, except that one seemed somewhat lame. Perceiving
that his commands had been disregarded, Thor would have slain the whole
family in his wrath. The culprit acknowledged his fault, however,
and the peasant offered to compensate for the loss by giving the
irate god not only his son Thialfi, but also his daughter Roskva,
to serve him for ever.

Charging the man to take good care of the goats, which he left there
until he should return, and bidding the young peasants accompany
him, Thor now set out on foot with Loki, and after walking all day
found himself at nightfall in a bleak and barren country, which was
enveloped in an almost impenetrable grey mist. After seeking for
some time, Thor saw through the fog the uncertain outline of what
looked like a strangely-shaped house. Its open portal was so wide and
high that it seemed to take up all one side of the house. Entering
and finding neither fire nor light, Thor and his companions flung
themselves wearily down on the floor to sleep, but were soon disturbed
by a peculiar noise, and a prolonged trembling of the ground beneath
them. Fearing lest the main roof should fall during this earthquake,
Thor and his companions took refuge in a wing of the building, where
they soon fell sound asleep. At dawn, the god and his companions
passed out, but they had not gone very far ere they saw the recumbent
form of a sleeping giant, and perceived that the peculiar sounds
which had disturbed their rest were produced by his snores. At that
moment the giant awoke, arose, stretched himself, looked about him
for his missing property, and a second later picked up the object
which Thor and his companions had mistaken in the darkness for a
house. They then perceived with amazement that this was nothing more
than a huge mitten, and that the wing in which they had all slept
was the separate place for the giant's great thumb! Learning that
Thor and his companions were on their way to Utgard, as the giants'
realm was also called, Skrymir, the giant, proposed to be their guide;
and after walking with them all day, he brought them at nightfall to
a spot where he proposed to rest. Ere he composed himself for sleep,
however, he offered them the provisions in his wallet. But, in spite
of strenuous efforts, neither Thor nor his companions could unfasten
the knots which Skrymir had tied.


    "Skrymir's thongs
    Seemed to thee hard,
    When at the food thou couldst not get,
    When, in full health, of hunger dying."

            Saemund's Edda (Thorpe's tr.).



Utgard-loki

Angry because of his snoring, which kept them awake, Thor thrice
dealt him fearful blows with his hammer. These strokes, instead of
annihilating the monster, merely evoked sleepy comments to the effect
that a leaf, a bit of bark, or a twig from a bird's nest overhead had
fallen upon his face. Early on the morrow, Skrymir left Thor and his
companions, pointing out the shortest road to Utgard-loki's castle,
which was built of great ice blocks, with huge glittering icicles
as pillars. The gods, slipping between the bars of the great gate,
presented themselves boldly before the king of the giants, Utgard-loki,
who, recognising them, immediately pretended to be greatly surprised
at their small size, and expressed a wish to see for himself what
they could do, as he had often heard their prowess vaunted.

Loki, who had fasted longer than he wished, immediately declared
he was ready to eat for a wager with any one. So the king ordered
a great wooden trough full of meat to be brought into the hall, and
placing Loki at one end and his cook Logi at the other, he bade them
see which would win. Although Loki did wonders, and soon reached the
middle of the trough, he found that, whereas he had picked the bones
clean, his opponent had devoured both them and the trough.

Smiling contemptuously, Utgard-loki said that it was evident they
could not do much in the eating line, and this so nettled Thor that
he declared if Loki could not eat like the voracious cook, he felt
confident he could drain the biggest vessel in the house, such was
his unquenchable thirst. Immediately a horn was brought in, and,
Utgard-loki declaring that good drinkers emptied it at one draught,
moderately thirsty persons at two, and small drinkers at three,
Thor applied his lips to the rim. But, although he drank so deep
that he thought he would burst, the liquid still came almost up to
the rim when he raised his head. A second and third attempt to empty
this horn proved equally unsuccessful. Thialfi then offered to run
a race, but a young fellow named Hugi, who was matched against him,
soon outstripped him, although Thialfi ran remarkably fast.

Thor proposed next to show his strength by lifting weights, and was
challenged to pick up the giant's cat. Seizing an opportunity to
tighten his belt Megin-gioerd, which greatly enhanced his strength,
he tugged and strained but was able only to raise one of its paws
from the floor.


    "Strong is great Thor, no doubt, when Megingarder
    He braces tightly o'er his rock-firm loins."

            Viking Tales of the North (R. B. Anderson).


A last attempt on his part to wrestle with Utgard-loki's old nurse
Elli, the only opponent deemed worthy of such a puny fellow, ended
just as disastrously, and the gods, acknowledging they were beaten,
were hospitably entertained. On the morrow they were escorted to the
confines of Utgard, where the giant politely informed them that he
hoped they would never call upon him again, as he had been forced
to employ magic against them. He then went on to explain that he
was the giant Skrymir, and that had he not taken the precaution
to interpose a mountain between his head and Thor's blows, while
he seemingly lay asleep, he would have been slain, as deep clefts
in the mountain side, to which he pointed, testified to the god's
strength. Next he informed them that Loki's opponent was Logi (wild
fire); that Thialfi had run a race with Hugi (thought), than which no
swifter runner exists; that Thor's drinking horn was connected with
the ocean, where his deep draughts had produced a perceptible ebb;
that the cat was in reality the terrible Midgard snake encircling the
world, which Thor had nearly pulled out of the sea; and that Elli,
his nurse, was old age, whom none can resist. Having finished these
explanations and cautioned them never to return or he would defend
himself by similar delusions, Utgard-loki vanished, and although Thor
angrily brandished his hammer, and would have destroyed his castle,
such a mist enveloped it that it could not be seen, and the thunder
god was obliged to return to Thrud-vang without having administered
his purposed salutary lesson to the race of giants.


        "The strong-armed Thor
    Full oft against Jotunheim did wend,
    But spite his belt celestial, spite his gauntlets,
    Utgard-Loki still his throne retains;
    Evil, itself a force, to force yields never."

            Viking Tales of the North (R. B. Anderson).



Thor and Hrungnir

Odin himself was once dashing through the air on his eight-footed steed
Sleipnir, when he attracted the attention of the giant Hrungnir,
who proposed a race, declaring that Gullfaxi, his steed, could
rival Sleipnir in speed. In the heat of the race, Hrungnir did not
notice the direction in which they were going, until, in the vain
hope of overtaking Odin, he urged his steed to the very gates of
Valhalla. Discovering then where he was, the giant grew pale with
fear, for he knew he had jeopardised his life by venturing into the
stronghold of the gods, his hereditary foes.

The AEsir, however, were too honourable to take even an enemy at a
disadvantage, and, instead of doing him harm, they asked him into their
banqueting-halls, where he proceeded to indulge in liberal potations
of the heavenly mead set before him. He soon grew so excited that he
began to boast of his power, declaring he would come some day and take
possession of Asgard, which he would destroy, together with the gods,
save only Freya and Sif, upon whom he gazed with an admiring leer.

The gods, knowing he was not responsible, let him talk unmolested;
but Thor, coming home just then from one of his journeys, and
hearing his threat to carry away the beloved Sif, flew into a
terrible rage. He furiously brandished his hammer, with intent to
annihilate the boaster. This the gods would not permit, however, and
they quickly threw themselves between the irate Thunderer and their
guest, imploring Thor to respect the sacred rights of hospitality,
and not to desecrate their peace-stead by shedding blood.

Thor was at last induced to bridle his wrath, but he demanded that
Hrungnir should appoint a time and place for a holmgang, as a Northern
duel was generally called. Thus challenged, Hrungnir promised to meet
Thor at Griottunagard, the confines of his realm, three days later,
and departed somewhat sobered by the fright he had experienced. When
his fellow giants heard how rash he had been, they chided him sorely;
but they took counsel together in order to make the best of a bad
situation. Hrungnir told them that he was to have the privilege of
being accompanied by a squire, whom Thialfi would engage in fight,
wherefore they proceeded to construct a creature of clay, nine
miles long, and proportionately wide, whom they called Mokerkialfi
(mist wader). As they could find no human heart big enough to put in
this monster's breast, they secured that of a mare, which, however,
kept fluttering and quivering with apprehension. The day of the duel
arrived. Hrungnir and his squire were on the ground awaiting the
arrival of their respective opponents. The giant had not only a flint
heart and skull, but also a shield and club of the same substance,
and therefore deemed himself well-nigh invincible. Thialfi came
before his master and soon after there was a terrible rumbling and
shaking which made the giant apprehensive that his enemy would come
up through the ground and attack him from underneath. He therefore
followed a hint from Thialfi and stood upon his shield.

A moment later, however, he saw his mistake, for, while Thialfi
attacked Mokerkialfi with a spade, Thor came with a rush upon the scene
and flung his hammer full at his opponent's head. Hrungnir, to ward
off the blow, interposed his stone club, which was shivered into pieces
that flew all over the earth, supplying all the flint stones thereafter
to be found, and one fragment sank deep into Thor's forehead. As the
god dropped fainting to the ground, his hammer crashed against the
head of Hrungnir, who fell dead beside him, in such a position that
one of his ponderous legs was thrown over the recumbent god.


    "Thou now remindest me
    How I with Hrungnir fought,
    That stout-hearted Jotun,
    Whose head was all of stone;
    Yet I made him fall
    And sink before me."

            Saemund's Edda (Thorpe's tr.).


Thialfi, who, in the meanwhile, had disposed of the great clay giant
with its cowardly mare's heart, now rushed to his master's assistance,
but his efforts were unavailing, nor could the other gods, whom he
quickly summoned, raise the pinioning leg. While they were standing
there, helplessly wondering what they should do next, Thor's little
son Magni came up. According to varying accounts, he was then only
three days or three years old, but he quickly seized the giant's
foot, and, unaided, set his father free, declaring that had he only
been summoned sooner he would easily have disposed of both giant and
squire. This exhibition of strength made the gods marvel greatly,
and helped them to recognise the truth of the various predictions,
which one and all declared that their descendants would be mightier
than they, would survive them, and would rule in their turn over the
new heaven and earth.

To reward his son for his timely aid, Thor gave him the steed Gullfaxi
(golden-maned), to which he had fallen heir by right of conquest,
and Magni ever after rode this marvellous horse, which almost equalled
the renowned Sleipnir in speed and endurance.



Groa, the Sorceress

After vainly trying to remove the stone splinter from his forehead,
Thor sadly returned home to Thrud-vang, where Sif's loving efforts
were equally unsuccessful. She therefore resolved to send for Groa
(green-making), a sorceress, noted for her skill in medicine and for
the efficacy of her spells and incantations. Groa immediately signified
her readiness to render every service in her power to the god who had
so often benefited her, and solemnly began to recite powerful runes,
under whose influence Thor felt the stone grow looser and looser. His
delight at the prospect of a speedy deliverance made Thor wish to
reward the enchantress forthwith, and knowing that nothing could give
greater pleasure to a mother than the prospect of seeing a long-lost
child, he proceeded to tell her that he had recently crossed the
Elivagar, or ice streams, to rescue her little son Orvandil (germ) from
the frost giants' cruel power, and had succeeded in carrying him off
in a basket. But, as the little rogue would persist in sticking one of
his bare toes through a hole in the basket, it had been frost-bitten,
and Thor, accidentally breaking it off, had flung it up into the sky,
to shine as a star, known in the North as "Orvandil's Toe."

Delighted with these tidings, the prophetess paused in her incantations
to express her joy, but, having forgotten just where she left off,
she was unable to continue her spell, and the flint stone remained
embedded in Thor's forehead, whence it could never be dislodged.

Of course, as Thor's hammer always did him such good service, it was
the most prized of all his possessions, and his dismay was very great
when he awoke one morning and found it gone. His cry of anger and
disappointment soon brought Loki to his side, and to him Thor confided
the secret of his loss, declaring that were the giants to hear of it,
they would soon attempt to storm Asgard and destroy the gods.


    "Wroth waxed Thor, when his sleep was flown,
    And he found his trusty hammer gone;
    He smote his brow, his beard he shook,
    The son of earth 'gan round him look;
    And this the first word that he spoke:
    'Now listen what I tell thee, Loke;
    Which neither on earth below is known,
    Nor in heaven above: my hammer's gone."

            Thrym's Quida (Herbert's tr.).



Thor and Thrym

Loki declared he would try to discover the thief and recover the
hammer, if Freya would lend him her falcon plumes, and he immediately
hastened off to Folkvang to borrow them. His errand was successful and
in the form of a bird he then winged his flight across the river Ifing,
and over the barren stretches of Joetun-heim, where he suspected that
the thief would be found. There he saw Thrym, prince of the frost
giants and god of the destructive thunder-storm, sitting alone on a
hill-side. Artfully questioning him, he soon learned that Thrym had
stolen the hammer and had buried it deep underground. Moreover, he
found that there was little hope of its being restored unless Freya
were brought to him arrayed as a bride.


    "I have the Thunderer's hammer bound
    Fathoms eight beneath the ground;
    With it shall no one homeward tread
    Till he bring me Freya to share my bed."

            Thrym's Quida (Herbert's tr.).


Indignant at the giant's presumption, Loki returned to Thrud-vang,
but Thor declared it would be well to visit Freya and try to prevail
upon her to sacrifice herself for the general good. But when the AEsir
told the goddess of beauty what they wished her to do, she flew into
such a passion that even her necklace burst. She told them that she
would never leave her beloved husband for any god, much less to marry
a detested giant and dwell in Joetun-heim, where all was dreary in the
extreme, and where she would soon die of longing for the green fields
and flowery meadows, in which she loved to roam. Seeing that further
persuasions would be useless, Loki and Thor returned home and there
deliberated upon another plan for recovering the hammer. By Heimdall's
advice, which, however, was only accepted with extreme reluctance,
Thor borrowed and put on Freya's clothes together with her necklace,
and enveloped himself in a thick veil. Loki, having attired himself as
handmaiden, then mounted with him in the goat-drawn chariot, and the
strangely attired pair set out for Joetun-heim, where they intended to
play the respective parts of the goddess of beauty and her attendant.


    "Home were driven
    Then the goats,
    And hitched to the car;
    Hasten they must--
    The mountains crashed,
    The earth stood in flames:
    Odin's son
    Rode to Joetun-heim."

            Norse Mythology (R. B. Anderson).


Thrym welcomed his guests at the palace door, overjoyed at the thought
that he was about to secure undisputed possession of the goddess
of beauty, for whom he had long sighed in vain. He quickly led them
to the banqueting-hall, where Thor, the bride elect, distinguished
himself by eating an ox, eight huge salmon, and all the cakes and
sweets provided for the women, washing down these miscellaneous viands
with the contents of two barrels of mead.

The giant bridegroom watched these gastronomic feats with amazement,
whereupon Loki, in order to reassure him, confidentially whispered
that the bride was so deeply in love with him that she had not been
able to taste a morsel of food for more than eight days. Thrym then
sought to kiss the bride, but drew back appalled at the fire of her
glance, which Loki explained as a burning glance of love. The giant's
sister, claiming the usual gifts, was not even noticed; wherefore
Loki again whispered to the wondering Thrym that love makes people
absent-minded. Intoxicated with passion and mead, which he, too,
had drunk in liberal quantities, the bridegroom now bade his servants
produce the sacred hammer to consecrate the marriage, and as soon as
it was brought he himself laid it in the pretended Freya's lap. The
next moment a powerful hand closed over the short handle, and soon
the giant, his sister, and all the invited guests, were slain by the
