Elohe of Jacob, hath sent me unto you.... Go and gather the elders of
Israel together, and say unto them, Jehovah Elohe of your fathers, the
Elohe of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob, _appeared_ unto me, saying, I
have surely visited you and seen that which is done to you in Egypt."
But it was the Messenger Jehovah who _appeared_ to him, and speaking
from the midst of the bush said, "I am the Elohe of thy father, the
Elohe of Abraham, the Elohe of Isaac, and the Elohe of Jacob.... I have
surely seen the affliction of _my people_ which are in Egypt, and have
heard their cry."

Again: "The elders of Israel shall hearken to thy voice, and thou shalt
come, thou and the elders of Israel, unto the king of Egypt, and ye
shall say unto him, Jehovah Elohe of the Hebrews hath _met_ with us....
And now let us go that we may sacrifice to Jehovah our Elohe." Jehovah
Elohe of the Hebrews, and the Angel Jehovah who appeared to Moses, is
therefore one and the same Person. The Messenger Jehovah, the Person who
locally and visibly met with Moses, was the Elohe of the patriarchial
dispensation.

In what follows, chap. iv., for the encouragement and confirmation of
Moses, the power of working miracles is imparted to him by Jehovah, that
the people might "believe that Jehovah Elohe of their fathers, the Elohe
of Abraham, and the Elohe of Isaac, and the Elohe of Jacob, hath
appeared unto thee." By thus demonstrating the reality of the
appearance, he would no less conclusively show that the appearance of
the Messenger Jehovah was no other than the appearance locally and
personally of the Elohe of their fathers.

Jehovah, still conversing with Moses, said, (verse 11,) "Who hath made
man's mouth, or who maketh the dumb, or deaf, or the seeing, or the
blind? Have not I, Jehovah? Now therefore go, and I will be with thy
mouth, and teach thee what thou shalt say." Here the same Person, the
Messenger, asserts the prerogatives of Creator, and the office of
prophet or teacher. When Moses and Aaron had gathered the elders of
Israel, "Aaron spake all the words which Jehovah had spoken unto Moses,
and did the signs in the sight of the people. And the people believed;
and when they heard that Jehovah," that is, the Messenger, "had visited
the children of Israel, and that he had looked upon their afflictions,"
which the Messenger asserted of himself, "then they bowed their heads
and worshipped."

In the progress of the narrative, and throughout the writings of Moses,
the use of the same Divine appellations as in chap. iii. and iv.,
indifferently and interchangeably, with reference to the same acts,
leaves no room to doubt but that the same Divine personage is uniformly
referred to. Generally, that Person is called Jehovah when he speaks to
Moses. When he appears visibly, as in the cloudy pillar, he is called
the Messenger Jehovah. When his attributes or relations, as in covenant,
are referred to, he is called the Elohe. In all cases alike he is the
official Person, the Messiah, the Messenger of the Covenant. Hence
Stephen, Acts vii., referring to the whole period of Moses' intercourse
with him, says, "This Moses is he that was in the church in the
wilderness with _the Messenger_ which spake to him in the mount Sinai,
and with our fathers, who received the lively oracles to give unto us."
Thus it was the Messenger who spoke to Moses and to the elders and
people at mount Sinai, though he is there called Jehovah and Elohim.
"And Jehovah said unto Moses, Lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud,
that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee for
ever.... And Jehovah came down upon mount Sinai on the top of the
mount.... And Elohim spake all these words, saying, I am Jehovah thy
Elohe, which have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, &c.... And the
people [at the close of the scene] said unto Moses, Speak thou with us,
and we will hear, but let not Elohim speak with us lest we die." Exod.
xix., xx. Here the several Divine appellations are by Moses employed to
designate the Person whom Stephen calls the Messenger. And Moses, Deut.
v., says, "Jehovah talked with you face to face in the mount, out of the
midst of the fire."

Once more, Exod. xiv. 19, Moses, speaking of the passage of the
Israelites through the sea, says, "The Messenger Elohim, which went
before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind them; and the pillar
of the cloud went from before their face, and stood behind them: and it
came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel, and it
was a cloud and darkness to them, but it gave light by night to these."
Here the same Person who is elsewhere called the Messenger Jehovah, is
called the Messenger Elohim. This Person, and his change of position,
are distinguished from the cloudy pillar, and its removal from the front
to the rear of the camp. The Divine acts which ensued are ascribed to
Jehovah; among which we are told that "Jehovah looked unto the host of
the Egyptians _through the pillar of fire and of the cloud_, and
troubled the host of the Egyptians." But it was the Messenger who was in
the pillar of fire, (the Shekina,) and who therefore looked through the
pillar of cloud which had been interposed between him and the
Egyptians.

Suppose the Israelites under Moses to have had a knowledge, by previous
revelations, of the truth concerning the person and work of Christ, and
the way of salvation through him. In that case, such revelations not being
committed to writing prior to Moses, but having been matter of oral
instruction, were significantly expressed in an outward and visible manner
by typical sacrifices, and other religious rites and prescriptions. By
complying with these rites, the devout Israelite expressed his faith in
the revealed truths which they were employed to recall and commemorate.
The visible types were illustrative of revealed truths already known. They
were not the medium of a revelation, but a medium through which faith in
an existing revelation and obedience to it were expressed. Their office
was not prophetic, but illustrative.

Thus, when under the Levitical economy the high priest, duly prepared
and arrayed, entered the most holy place, his official person and acts
constituted a striking visible emblem of certain truths concerning the
Messiah's person and sacerdotal work. Beholding that visible token and
illustration of these truths, the believer's faith was called into
exercise. So when the priest offered a sacrifice of atonement and
sprinkled the blood, burnt incense, or performed any other official act;
and when the worshipper laid his hand on the head of the animal to be
sacrificed, celebrated the paschal supper, or complied in any other
respect with the prescribed ritual.

This method of worship and obedience through significant tokens and
visible emblems, and types illustrative of known truths, was instituted
soon after the fall, and suited in all respects the economy of outward
and visible manifestation which prevailed down to the advent of Christ.
Thus Abel, the patriarchs and prophets, worshipped, and thus Simeon and
Anna at the time of the incarnation.

Of the patriarch Noah we read, Genesis vi.-ix., that he found grace in
the eyes of Jehovah; that he was a righteous man; that he walked with
(the) Elohim; that Elohim repeatedly spoke to him, directed him to build
an ark, and prescribed the form of it, forewarned him of the deluge and
of its object, directed him to enter the ark, and shut him in; that he
did according to all that Jehovah commanded him; that Elohim directed
him to go forth from the ark; that he built an altar unto Jehovah, took
of animals denominated clean, and offered burnt offerings on the altar,
and was accepted; that Elohim blessed Noah and his sons, prescribed
certain laws to be observed thereafter, and announced a covenant of
which the rainbow was made a perpetual token.

In all these communications, the form of address is like that of a
person locally and visibly present: "I, even I, _do bring_ a flood of
waters upon the earth to destroy all flesh.... But with thee will I
establish my covenant.... _Come_ thou and all thy house into the ark;
for thee have I seen righteous _before me_, in this generation....
Elohim spake unto Noah and to his sons with him, saying, I, behold, I
establish my covenant with you and with your seed after you." And when
Noah offered burnt offerings on the altar, "Jehovah smelled a sweet
savor." From all which, and the occasion and nature of the things said
and done, and a comparison of this with the occasions of local
appearance to Abraham and others, which are declared to have been
visible, we may without presumption conclude that He who spake to Noah
was present in a visible form. That he was one of the most eminent and
most favored of those with whom Jehovah conversed, whose righteousness
he attested, and to whom he assigned the most important services, and
imparted the highest gifts, is shown by his being named first of the
three, who, by their preeminent righteousness, might, if present, be
expected by the captive Israelites to shield them from exterminating
judgments. "Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, were in the
land, they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness,
saith Jehovah Elohim." Ezekiel xiv. And if there was, in the course of
the patriarchial or Levitical dispensations, any occasion on which the
nature and magnitude of the events were reasons for the local and
visible presence of Jehovah, surely that of the judicial destruction of
the whole race, excepting Noah and his family, may be assumed to have
been such.

The word translated altar is from a root which signifies _to kill_, _to
slaughter_ animals _for sacrifice_, _to sacrifice_; also _a sacrifice,_
the _victim_, or _thing_, _sacrificed_; and in the form translated
_altar_ it denotes the place or instrument of sacrifice, on which the
slaughtered victim (wholly or in part) was consumed by fire, and the
blood poured out or sprinkled. See Levit. viii. 21, 24, xvii. 6, and
elsewhere. Accordingly, to build an altar unto Jehovah, was to erect a
structure on which to offer to him slaughtered animals, to be consumed
(probably in all instances of acceptable worship) by fire caused
immediately by him. Such altars were, in many instances, and probably in
all, erected by his direction, and at places specified by him, and they
were places of customary worship and of Divine manifestation. It would
therefore be incongruous and preposterous to suppose that the
worshippers did not understand the doctrines and typical references
involved in the system, as well as the ritual forms and observances.

The altar of burnt offerings, above referred to as the instrument of
sacrifice by the shedding of blood, was typical of the cross as the
instrument on which our Lord offered himself a sacrifice; and to this
undoubtedly the true worshippers had reference, which implies a right
apprehension of his person and office, as well as of the necessity and
efficacy of his expiatory death, and its relation to the justification
and acceptance of believers. His personal presence, in a form adapted to
suggest such apprehensions, would seem to have been as necessary, when
typical offerings were made by Abel, Noah, and others, during the
patriarchial dispensation, as when made in the tabernacle and temple,
where he was present in the visible Shekina, as is hereafter to be more
particularly noticed. At present it may suffice to observe, that since
he is declared to have been present in the likeness of man, and as the
Melach Jehovah, on some occasions when burnt offerings were offered to
him with his sanction and acceptance, as in that relating to Isaac in
the history of Abraham, that of his appearance to Manoah, and that to
Gideon, it may reasonably be inferred that his personal presence was
equally requisite on all occasions of similar offerings.

The local personal presence of Jehovah in the form in which he was often
visible is implied and affirmed in passages like the following:

When the children of Israel at Rephidim murmured against Moses because
they had no water, Jehovah directed Moses to advance with the people
and the elders, and said, "Behold, _I will stand before thee_ upon the
rock in Horeb, and thou shalt smite the rock," &c. "And Moses called the
name of the place Massah, &c., because of the chiding of the children of
Israel, and because they tempted Jehovah, saying, Is Jehovah among us or
not?" Exod. xvii. 7; _i. e._, is he personally and locally present or
not?

After the apostasy manifested in making a molten calf, Jehovah said to
Moses, Depart with the people, &c., and I will send _an_ angel before
thee; for I will not go up in the midst of thee, lest I consume thee,
&c. Moses having removed the tabernacle out of the camp, the cloudy
pillar _descended and stood_ at the door of the tabernacle; and Jehovah
talked with Moses. And Jehovah spake unto Moses face to face, as a man
speaketh unto his friend. Moses having expressed his great anxiety at
the proposed substitution of _an_ angel, and prayed for further
instruction, Jehovah said, "My presence shall go with thee;" and he
said, "If thy presence [_i. e._, thou, thyself] go not with me, carry us
not up hence. For wherein shall it be known here that I and thy people
have found grace in _thy_ sight? Is it not in that _thou goest with us_?
So shall we be separated, I and thy people, from all the people that are
upon the face of the earth." Moses, for further assurance, desired to
see the splendor of Jehovah's person, and, in a modified degree, his
request was granted. Jehovah descended--his glory passed by, &c. Exod.
xxxiii. 34. This whole scene implies his local personal presence, in
distinction from his universal, invisible presence.

The visible Deity is intended in all such phrases as, "before the Lord,"
"being seen," "going with," "among you," "in the midst of you," &c., a
local reference being manifest.

"Ye have despised Jehovah which is among you." Numb. xi. 20.

The Egyptians "have heard that thou, Jehovah, art among this people;
that thou, Jehovah, art seen face to face; and that thy cloud standeth
over them; and that thou goest before them by day-time in a pillar of a
cloud, and in a pillar of fire by night." Numb. xiv. 14. Thus Moses
argued to avert the destruction threatened on occasion of the murmuring
at the report of the spies. The passage clearly imports that it was
Jehovah himself who was seen face to face, and who went in the cloud.

So when a portion of the people resolved presumptuously to proceed,
Moses says, Go not up, for Jehovah is not among you. Numb. xiv. 42;
Deut. i. 42.

"The Lord thy God walketh in the midst of thy camp." Deut. xxiii. 14.

In the future misery and desolation of the people they will say, "Are
not these evils come upon us because our God is not among us?" Deut.
xxxi. 17.

When the Israelites were about to cross the Jordan to Jericho, Joshua,
referring to the miracle by which they were to pass over dry-shod, says,
"Hereby ye shall know that the living God is among you."

Moses is directed to exclude lepers, "that they defile not the camp in
the midst of which I dwell." Numb. v. 3.

"The sons of God came to present themselves _before_ Jehovah; and Satan
came also amongst them." Job i. 6. The context shows that a local
personal presence is intended.

"God is in the midst of her, she shall not be moved." Ps. xlvi. 5.
"Great is the Holy One in the midst of thee." Isa. xii. 6. "I am God and
not man, the Holy One in the midst of thee." Hosea xi. 9. "Thou, O
Jehovah, art in the midst of us; leave us not." Jer. xiv. 9.

Joel, predicting the millennium, says, ii. 27, "Ye shall know that I am
in the midst of Israel, and that I am the Lord your God, and none else."
See Zeph. iii. 15-17: "The King of Israel, even Jehovah, is in the midst
of thee; thou shalt not see evil any more. The Lord thy God in the midst
of thee is mighty." And Zech. ii. 5, x. 11, and viii. 3: "For I, saith
Jehovah, will be the glory in the midst of her. Lo, I come, and I will
dwell in the midst of thee, saith Jehovah. And many nations, &c. Thus
saith Jehovah, I am _returned_ unto Zion, and will dwell in the midst of
Jerusalem; and Jerusalem shall be called, A city of truth; and the
mountain of the Lord of Hosts, The holy mountain."

Jesus himself stood in the midst, &c. Luke xxiv. 36, John, &c. In the
midst of the seven candlesticks. Rev. i. 13; ii. 1. In the midst of the
throne stood a Lamb. Rev. v. 6.

The angel Jehovah appeared in a flame of fire out of the midst of a
bush. Exod. iii. 2. Jehovah spake out of the midst of the fire. Deut.
iv. 12.

"Jehovah said unto Moses, Lo, _I come_ to thee in a thick cloud, that
the people may _hear_ when I speak with thee. Be ready, ... for the
third day Jehovah will _come down_ in the _sight_ of all the people upon
mount Sinai.... And on the third day, in the morning, there were
thunders and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount.... And Moses
brought forth the people out of the camp to _meet with the Elohim_; and
they stood at the nether part of the mount. And mount Sinai was
altogether on a smoke, because Jehovah _descended_ upon it in fire....
And ... Moses spake, and (_the_) Elohim answered him by a voice. And
Jehovah _came down_ upon mount Sinai, on the top of the mount; and
Jehovah called Moses up to the top of the mount; and Moses went up....
And Elohim spake, saying, I am Jehovah, thy Elohe.... Thou shalt have no
other Elohim before me." Exod. xix., xx.

If the acts here attributed to Moses are literally described, so also
are those of Jehovah. If Moses literally went up to the top of the
mount, the narrative no less plainly avers that Jehovah came down to the
top of Sinai. He came down visibly--in the sight of the people; was
personally and locally present.

On another occasion, chap. xxiv., he said unto Moses, "_Come up unto
Jehovah_, thou and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders,
and worship ye _afar off_; and Moses alone shall _come near Jehovah_,
but they _shall not come nigh_.... Then went up Moses and Aaron, Nadab
and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and they _saw the Elohe
of Israel_, and there was under _his feet_ as it were a paved work....
They _saw (the) Elohim_, and did eat and drink."

No terms could well express more distinctly a personal appearance, in
the form seen by Abraham and others. His person was manifest to their
senses. They ate and drank in his presence, who in the same form partook
of a repast with the patriarch, and walked and conversed with him as one
human person does with another.

"Jehovah called unto Moses out of the midst of the cloud.... And Moses
went into the midst of the cloud." Exod. xxvi. 16, 18. The cloud then
was such that Moses could subsist in and be enveloped by it.

"And Jehovah said, I will _appear_ in the cloud upon the mercy-seat."
Levit. xvi. 2. In this and similar instances a local personal appearance
