that God of His free-will created men. That they are as He would have
them, since in His act of creation He could have had them different if
He had so minded. Then why should He--being infinitely wise and
infinitely powerful, and infinitely good--for so the creeds represent
Him--why should He create by mere act of volition, beings such as men
are, not only capable of, but prone to, moral Evil? Which, in the last
analysis of things, in spite of all special pleadings to the contrary,
leaves responsibility for moral Evil with God? God's creative acts
culminating thus, the next pertinent questions are: Then what of the
decreed purpose of God to punish moral Evil? And what of the
much-vaunted justice of God in that punishment? Wherein lies the just
responsibility of man if he was so created as to love Evil and to
follow it?" It is revolting to reason, as it is shocking to piety, to
think that God, of His own free will, created some men, not only
inclined to wickedness, but desperately so inclined; while others He,
of His own volition, created with dispositions naturally inclined
toward goodness. In like manner stands it with man in relation to his
inclination to faith, and to unbelief; and yet, under the orthodox
belief all are included under one law for judgment!

On the other hand, under the conception of the existence of
independent, uncreated, self-existent Intelligences, who by the
inherent nature of them are of various degrees of intelligence,
doubtless differing from each other in many ways, yet alike in their
eternity and their freedom; with God standing in the midst of them,
"more intelligent than them all," and proposing the betterment of
their condition--progress to higher levels of being, and power through
change--under this conception of things, how stand matters? Why, ever
present through all changes, through all the processes of betterment,
is the self-existent entity of the "Intelligence" with the tremendous
fact of his consciousness and his moral freedom, and his
indestructibility--he has his choice of moving upward or downward in
every estate he occupies; often defeating, for a time, at least, even
the benevolent purposes of God respecting him, through his own
perverseness; he passes through dire experiences, suffers terribly,
yet learns by what he suffers, so that his very suffering becomes a
means to his improvement; he learns swiftly or slowly, according to
the inherent nature of him, obedience to law; he learns that "that
which is governed by law is also preserved by law, and perfected and
sanctified by the same; and that which breaketh the law and abideth
not by law, but seeketh to become a law unto itself, and willeth to
abide in sin, cannot be sanctified by law, neither by mercy, justice
nor judgment. Therefore they must remain filthy still." This
conception of things relieves God of the responsibility for the nature
and status of intelligences in all stages of their development; their
inherent nature and their volition makes them primarily what they are,
and this nature they may change, slowly, perhaps, yet change it they
may. God has put them in the way of changing it, by enlarging their
intelligence through change of environment, through experiences; the
only way God effects these self-existent beings is favorably; He
creates not their inherent nature; He is not responsible for the use
they make of their freedom; nor is He the author of their sufferings
when they fall into sin: that arises out of the violations of law, to
which the "Intelligence" subscribed, and must be endured until the
lessons of obedience to law are learned.

This conception of the order of things, as to the existence of
"Intelligences" and in the moral government of the world, discovers a
harmony in that government which at once challenges our admiration,
and bears evidence of its truth.


ETERNITY OF RELATIONSHIPS: Matching these eternal things, an eternal
universe, eternal spirit entities, eternal good, with its background
of eternal evil,--eternal law, agency and the like, is the Prophet's
doctrine of eternal relations. Intelligences are begotten spirits;
spirits are begotten men and women; these become resurrected and
exalted personages, spirit and element in them being eternally united,
whence proceeds the fulness of joy, and glory, and power. The Prophet
taught that these relations, under which such begettings proceed in
celestial worlds, are themselves eternal. The marriage covenant which
united immortal beings is eternal, hence the eternity of the marriage
covenant which Joseph Smith introduced in our dispensation, called the
"New and Everlasting Covenant of Marriage," by which marriages, under
the law of God, are made in our sacred places for time and eternity.
Thus the relationships of exalted Intelligences is also a thing
regulated and sanctified by law; and from these relations come the
family, a permanent, eternal institution; whence spring, also, all
other relationships existing among the exalted Intelligences of all
worlds and world-systems; until, indeed, all are bound and united
together in bonds of relationships founded on mutual covenants and
agreements, and sanctified by love and sympathy.

We may not persue this division of our subject further now. I merely
call your attention to these doctrines of the Prophet, without making
any attempt to weave them into a system of philosophy of things, or of
sentient existences; but I am persuaded that these doctrines set forth
by the Prophet-Teacher of our dispensation, not indeed as the result
of his own, human meditation, but based upon knowledge which God
revealed to him--therefore, coming with divine sanction--I am
persuaded, I say, that these doctrines contain the elements of a
physical, moral and spiritual philosophy that will be the accepted
philosophy of the New Age now dawning upon our world; a philosophy
that will supersede all other philosophies and remain steadfast in
both the beliefs and affections of mankind. The elements, I say, are
here in these doctrines; they await only some future Spencer to weave
them into synthetic completeness, that shall be as beautiful as it
will be true, to make that philosophy acceptable to the higher
intellects of our age.




VII.

THE PROPHET'S GENERALIZATIONS.


A word in relation to the manner of the Prophet's teaching. It was
unique in its way. He may scarcely be said to have made any attempt at
creating a system of philosophy however much may be said for his
system of religion and of ecclesiastical government. His philosophical
principles were flung off in utterances without reference to any
arrangement or orderly sequence; and in the main were taught in
independent aphorisms, which is a remarkably effective way of
teaching, for an aphorism resembles the proverb, and is a form in
which Truth is bound to live. It is the American philosopher Emerson,
I think, who describes a proverb to be the language of absolute
Truth--the statement of Truth without qualification. It is the
literature of power. Fortunate, indeed, is the man who gives a people
or nation a proverb; and so, too, is the nation or people fortunate
who receive it. Like mercy, it is twice blessed, it blesseth him that
gives and him that takes. Usually proverbs are produced by a race's
experience. Proverbs come up out of the tribulations of a people. They
are produced slowly and represent the hived wisdom of the ages. Books
of proverbs are not written by men, to whom they are sometimes
ascribed, they represent a collection slowly produced through
centuries. Such are the proverbs of our Bible; proverbs of the Chinese
classics; and the proverbs of the Hindoo literature. Joseph Smith gave
to his age many of these generalized truths, more, I think, than has
fallen to the lot of any other teacher, save Jesus, the Christ. I can
but repeat a few of these as examples:

    "The glory of God is intelligence."

    "It is impossible for a man to be saved in ignorance."

    "A man is saved no faster than he gets knowledge."

    "Knowledge saves a man, and in the world of spirits no man can be
    exalted but by knowledge."

    "Whatsoever principle of intelligence we attain unto in this life
    will rise with us in the resurrection."

    "If one man, by his diligence, obtains more knowledge than
    another, he will have so much the advantage in the world to come."

    "There is a law irrevocably decreed in heaven before the
    foundations of this world, upon which all blessings are
    predicated; and when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by
    obedience to that law on which it is predicated."

    "Adam fell that man might be, and men are that they might have
    joy."

    "This is the glory of God--to bring to pass the immortality and
    the eternal life of man."

    "The elements are eternal, yea, the elements are the tabernacle of
    God. Man is the tabernacle of God, even temples."

    "The elements are eternal, and spirit and element, inseparably
    united, receive a fulness of joy  [Hence the importance of man's
    earth life in which spirit is united to earthly elements.]

    "If men do not comprehend the character of God, they do not
    comprehend themselves."

    "God Himself was once as we are now; and is an exalted Man; for
    Adam was created in the very fashion, image and likeness of God."

    "The spirit of man is not a created being; it existed from
    eternity, and will exist to eternity. Anything created cannot be
    eternal."

    "The spirit and the body is the soul of man; and the resurrection
    from the dead is the redemption of the soul."

    "It is the first principle of the Gospel to know for a certainty
    the character of God, and to know that we may converse with Him as
    one man converses with another."

    "Jesus was in the beginning with the Father. * * * Man was also in
    the beginning with God. Intelligence, or the light of truth, was
    not created or made, neither indeed can be."

    "Jesus treads in the footsteps of His Father, and inherits what
    God did before; and God is thus glorified and exalted in the
    salvation and exaltation of all His children."

    "The things of God are of deep import; and time and experience and
    careful and ponderous and solemn thoughts can only find them out.
    Thy mind, O man, if thou wilt lead a soul unto salvation, must
    stretch as high as the utmost heavens and search into and
    contemplate the darkest abyss and the broad expanse of
    eternity--_thou must commune with God_!"

The Prophet represents God as saying: "I give unto men weaknesses that
they might be humble, and my grace is sufficient for all those who
humble themselves before me."

To one who inquired how he governed men so well, he said: "I do not
govern them: I teach men correct principles, and they govern
themselves."

These sayings, with many others of like character, in the future
literature of America, philosophical and religious, will make its
pages blaze with glory. They are destined to become generally accepted
principles of truth. They will become household aphorisms. They are
words spoken by inspiration of God. They come from what Carlyle calls,
