The usual channel for all spiritual fluids, whether holy or impure, in
their operations upon the human system, or in their passage from one
animal body to another, is the nerves.

A person commissioned of Jesus Christ, and filled with this spiritual
substance, can impart of the same to another, provided there is a
preparation of heart, and faith on the part of the receiver. Or if, as
in cases of healing, casting out devils, &c., it happens that the
receiver has no command of his own mind--as in cases of little
children, persons swooned, fainted, deranged, or dead, then the faith
of the administrator alone, or in connexion with other friends and
agents, in his behalf, is sufficient, in many cases, to perform the
work.

However, the touch, or laying on of hands, is not the only means of
communicating the gift of healing. A word spoken, a mandate issued, or
even a handkerchief, apron, or other garment, worn or touched by a
person full of this Spirit, and conveyed to another, has, according to
sacred history, and also the experience of the present age, proved
sufficient to communicate the spiritual fluid, between minds of strong
and mutual faith. So well acquainted was the Prophet Elisha with this
principle, that he sent his servant to lay his staff upon a dead
child, in order to raise it from the dead; but, in this instance, the
undertaking failed. The Prophet could only resuscitate the child by
placing face on face, eye to eye, mouth to mouth, hand to hand, &c.,
so as to give the greatest possible effect to the imparting of the
spirit of life.

For the holy and divine fluid, or spiritual element, to control all
other elements, agreeable to its own will, and the will of others, who
are in communication or in perfect unison with itself, is just as
natural as for the greater to control the less, or the strong the
weak. It is upon the same principle that a higher intelligence is able
to comprehend, circumscribe, and instruct that which is less.

Hence, when the worlds were framed, God spake, and this divine fluid
went forth and executed the mandate, by controlling the elements, in
accordance with the will, pattern, or design, formed in the mind of
Him that spake, and it that executed. Wisdom pondered the pattern of
all created things, weighed their properties, attributes and uses in
the balance of mature intellect. Every minute portion and member of
the several departments of life and being, every adaptation to their
natural use, was clearly conceived, formed in the mind, and matured,
ere the mandate was issued. And the whole was executed in exact
accordance with the pattern matured in the Divine Mind.

By this divine Spirit all things were designed and formed. By this
divine Substance all things live, move, and have a being. By this
agency Moses controlled the sea; Joshua, the motions of the earth;
Daniel, the mouths of the lions; and his brethren, the flames. By
this, the heavens were opened, and were shut; the rain or the dearth
prevailed; armies were subdued; the sick healed, or the dead raised;
and all in accordance with the laws of nature, it being perfectly
natural for the subordinate elements to obey the supreme, all
controlling, all pervading element, which contains in itself the
innate, and inalienable, controlling power.

The modern world, called "_Christian_" claims to have perpetuated the
system called "Christianity," while, at the same time, it declares,
that the miraculous gifts of the Spirit have ceased.

With as much propriety it might be contended, that the magnet had been
perpetuated, but had lost its magnetic properties; that water was
perpetuated with all its virtues, but had lost its power to quench
thirst, or seek its own level; that fire was still fire, but had lost
its heat.

How, we inquire, can Christianity have been perpetuated, while its
virtues, its legitimate powers, its distinguishing features, its very
life and essence have ceased from among men? Or, of what possible use
is it if it does exist? Is a compass of use when its needle has lost
its magnetic attraction? Is water of use when it no longer seeks its
level, or quenches thirst? Is fire of use when it loses its heat? Is a
sun dial of use in a dark and cloudy day; or, a watch without a
mainspring?

Or, are the mere forms and ceremonies of any system of use, when the
divine, or legitimate powers, for which such forms were instituted,
are withdrawn?

O man! be no longer deceived by solemn mockeries of things sacred, or
by great and holy names applied to corrupt and degenerate systems.

When the miracles and gifts of the divine Spirit ceased from among
men, Christianity ceased, the Christian ministry ceased, the Church of
Christ ceased.

That ministry which sets aside modern inspiration, revelation,
prophecy, angels, visions, healings, &c., is not ordained of God; but
is Anti-Christian in spirit. In short, it is that spirit of
priestcraft and kingcraft, by which the world, for many ages, has been
ruled as with a rod of iron.

The sooner the present generation lose all reverence and respect for
modern "_Christianity_," with all its powerless forms and solemn
mockeries, the sooner they will be prepared to receive the kingdom of
God. The sooner the treasuries of nations, and the purses of
individuals, are relieved from the support of priestcraft and
superstitions, so much sooner will they be able and willing to devote
their means and influence to print and publish the glad tidings of the
fulness of the Gospel, restored in this age, to assist in the
gathering of the house of Israel, and in the building of the cities
and temples of Zion and Jerusalem.




CHAPTER XII.

ANGELS AND SPIRITS.


    Boast not your lightning wires to bear the news,
    Such tardy means the Saints would never choose;
    Too slow your fluid, and too short your wires
    For heavenly converse, such as love inspires.
    If man would fain commune with worlds above,
    Angels transport the news on wings of love.

    "_Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for
    them who shall be heirs of salvation?_" Heb. i. 14.

Angels are of the same race as men. They are, in fact, men who have
passed from the rudimental state to the higher spheres of progressive
being. They have died and risen again to life, and are consequently
possessed of a divine, human body of flesh and bones, immortal and
eternal. They eat, drink, sing and converse like other men. Some of
them hold the keys of Apostleship and Priesthood, by which they teach,
instruct, bless, and perform miracles and many mighty works.
Translated men, like Enoch, Elijah, John the Apostle, and three of the
Apostles of the Western Hemisphere, are also like the angels.

Angels are ministers, both to men upon the earth, and to the world of
spirits. They pass from one world to another with more ease, and in
less time than we pass from one city to another. They have not a
single attribute which man has not. But their attributes are more
matured, or more developed, than the attributes of men in this present
sphere of existence.

Whenever the keys of Priesthood, or, in other words, the keys of the
science of Theology, are enjoyed by man on the earth, the people thus
privileged, are entitled to the ministering of angels, whose business
with men on the earth, is to restore the keys of the Apostleship, when
lost; to ordain men to the Apostleship, when there has been no
Apostolic succession; to commit the keys of a new dispensation; to
reveal the mysteries of history; the facts of present or past times;
and to unfold the events of a future time. They are, sometimes,
commissioned also to execute judgments upon individuals, cities or
nations. They can be present in their glory, or, they can come in the
form and appearance of other men. They can also be present without
being visible to mortals.

When they come as other men, they will perhaps eat and drink, and wash
their feet; and lodge with their friends. Hence, it is written--"_Be
not forgetful to entertain strangers: for thereby some have
entertained angels unawares_."

Their business is, also, to comfort and instruct individual members of
the Church of the Saints; to heal them by the laying on of hands in
the name of Jesus Christ, or to tell them what means to use in order
to get well; to teach them good things, to sing them a good song, to
warn them of approaching danger, or, to deliver them from prison, or
from death.

These blessings have always been enjoyed by the people, or Church of
the Saints, whenever such Church has existed on our planet. They are
not peculiar to one dispensation more than another.

They were busy in the Patriarchal dispensation, in the Mosaic, and in
the Gospel dispensations. They delivered Lot and destroyed Sodom.

They were busy with Moses and the Prophets. They foretold to Zechariah
the birth of John. They predicted to Mary her conception, and the
birth of Jesus Christ. They informed Joseph, her husband, of her
situation. They announced the birth of Jesus to the shepherds of
Judea, and sang an anthem of peace on earth and good will to man, to
hail him welcome. They attended on his footsteps, in all his sojourn
on the earth. In fact, an angel was the instrument to open the gloomy
prison of the sepulchre, and to call forth the sleeping body of the
Messiah, the first to exclaim, "He is not here, but is risen." Two
angels in white raiment, were the first to announce his second advent,
while he ascended up in the presence of his disciples. Thus, being
delivered from the personal attendance on their Master on the earth,
they turned their attention to the Apostles, opened the way for their
ministry among Jew and Gentile, delivering them from prison and from
danger, and revealing the mysteries which God saw fit to make known to
the Saints of that age. And when all the other Apostles had fallen
asleep, and the Apostle John had been banished, to dig in the coal
mines of the lone isle of Patmos, they still were faithful to their
charge. They followed him there, and there unfolded to him the events
of all ages and generations.

The darkness of the middle ages; the corruptions of Anti-Christ, under
the name of Christianity; the rivers of blood, and the oceans of
tears, which would flow during eighteen centuries of error; the mighty
angel who should again commit the Gospel to the earth, for every
nation, kindred, tongue, and people; the judgments of God, in the
downfall of error and mystery; the restitution or restoration of the
Church of the Saints; their final triumph and dominion over the earth;
the descent of Jesus Christ to reign over all kingdoms; the
resurrection of the Saints, and their reign over the earth; the end of
death, and sorrow, and tears, and weeping; were all, _all_ foretold by
the angel to the last of the Twelve.

Again, in the present age, have angels restored the Gospel. Again have
they committed the keys of Apostleship. Again have they opened some of
the events of the past, present, and future.

Again have they attended upon the footsteps of Apostles, Prophets, and
holy Martyrs, from the cradle to the grave. Again have they aided in
the ministry, and assisted to deliver from prisons, and from
persecutions and death, the Saints of the Most High. And again are
they about to execute vengeance on great and notable cities and
nations of the earth.

O what an unspeakable blessing is the ministry of angels to mortal
man! What a pleasing thought, that many who minister to us, and watch
over us, are our near kindred--our fathers who have died and risen
again in former ages, and who watch over their descendants with all
the parental care and solicitude which characterize affectionate
fathers and mothers on the earth.

Thrice happy are they who have lawful claim on their guardianship, and
whose conduct does not grieve them, and constrain them to depart from
their precious charge.

SPIRITS are those who have departed this life, and have not yet been
raised from the dead.

These are of two kinds, viz.--Good and evil.

These two kinds also include many grades of good and evil.

The good spirits, in the superlative sense of the word, are they who,
in this life, partook of the Holy Priesthood, and of the fulness of
the Gospel.

This class of spirits minister to the heirs of salvation, both in this
world and in the world of spirits. They can appear unto men, when
permitted; but not having a fleshly tabernacle, they cannot hide their
glory. Hence, an unembodied spirit, if it be a holy personage, will be
surrounded with a halo of resplendent glory, or brightness, above the
brightness of the sun.

Whereas, spirits not worthy to be glorified will appear without this
brilliant halo; and, although they often attempt to pass as angels of
light, there is more or less of darkness about them.

Many spirits of the departed, who are unhappy, linger in lonely
wretchedness about the earth, and in the air, and especially about
their ancient homesteads, and the places rendered dear to them by the
memory of former scenes. The more wicked of these are the kind spoken
of in Scripture, as "_foul spirits_," "_unclean spirits_," spirits who
afflict persons in the flesh, and engender various diseases in the
human system. They will sometimes enter human bodies, and will
distract them, throw them into fits, cast them into the water, into
the fire, &c. They will trouble them with dreams, nightmare,
hysterics, fever, &c. They will also deform them in body and in
features, by convulsions, cramps, contortions, &c., and will sometimes
compel them to utter blasphemies, horrible curses, and even words of
other languages. If permitted, they will often cause death. Some of
these spirits are adulterous, and suggest to the mind all manner of
lasciviousness, all kinds of evil thoughts and temptations.

A person, on looking another in the eye, who is possessed of an evil
spirit, will feel a shock--a nervous feeling, which will, as it were,
make his hair stand on end; in short, a shock resembling that produced
in a nervous system by the sight of a serpent.

Some of these foul spirits, when possessing a person, will cause a
disagreeable smell about the person thus possessed, which will be
plainly manifest to the senses of those about him, even though the
person thus afflicted should be washed and change his clothes every
few minutes.

There are, in fact, most awful instances of the spirit of lust, and of
bawdy and abominable words and actions, inspired and uttered by
persons possessed of such spirits, even though the persons were
virtuous and modest so long as they possessed their own agency.

Some of these spirits cause deafness, others dumbness, &c.

We can suggest no remedy for these multiplied evils, to which poor
human nature is subject, except a good life, while we are in
possession of our faculties, prayers and fastings of good and holy
men, and the ministry of those who have power given them to rebuke
evil spirits, and cast out devils, in the name of Jesus Christ.

Among the diversified spirits abroad in the world here are many
religious spirits, which are not of God, but which deceive those who
have not the keys of Apostleship and Priesthood, or, in other words,
the keys of the science of Theology to guide them. Some of these
spirits are manifested in the camp-meetings of certain sects, and in
nearly all the excitements and confusions in religious meetings
falsely called "_revivals_." All the strange extacies, swoonings,
screamings, shoutings, dancings, jumpings, and a thousand other
ridiculous and unseemly manifestations, which neither edify nor
instruct, are the fruits of these deceptive spirits.

We must, however, pity, rather than ridicule, or despise, the subjects
or advocates of these deceptions. Many of them are honest, but they
have no Apostles, nor other officers, nor gifts to detect evil, or to
keep them from being led by every delusive spirit.

Real visions, or inspirations which _would_ edify and instruct, they
are taught to deny. Should Peter or Paul, or an angel from heaven,
come among them, they would denounce him as an impostor, with the
assertion that Apostles and angels were no longer needed.

There is still another class of unholy spirits at work in the
world--spirits diverse from all these, far more intelligent, and, if
possible, still more dangerous. These are, the spirit of divination,
vision, foretelling, familiar spirits, "Animal Magnetism,"
"Mesmerism," &c., which reveal many and great truths mixed with the
greatest errors, and also display much intelligence, but have not the
keys of the science of Theology--the Holy Priesthood.

These spirits, generally, deny the divinity of Christ, and the great
truths of the atonement, and of the resurrection of the body. Of such
are the Shakers of the United States, and their revelations. They deny
the resurrection of the body. From this source are the revelations of
Emmanuel Swedenborg, which also deny the resurrection. From this
source, also, are the revelations of Andrew Jackson Davis, of
Poughkeepsie, New York, which deny the resurrection and the atonement.
From this source are all the revelations which deny the ordinances of
the Gospel, and the keys and gifts of the Holy Apostleship.

Last of all, these are they who climb up in some other way, besides
the door, into the sheepfold; and who prophesy or work in their own
name, and not in the name of Jesus Christ.

No man can do a miracle in the name and by the authority of Jesus
Christ, except he be a good man, and authorized by him.




CHAPTER XIII.

DREAMS.


    Mysterious power, whence hope ethereal springs!
    Sweet heavenly relic of eternal things!
    Inspiring oft deep thoughts of things divine:
    The past, the present, and the future thine.
    Thy reminiscences transport the soul
    To memory's Paradise--its future goal.

    "_For God speaketh once, yea twice, yet man perceiveth it
    not. In a dream, in a vision of the night, when deep sleep
    falleth upon men, in slumberings upon the bed: then he
    openeth the ears of men, and sealeth their instruction_." Job
    xxxiii. 14, 15, 16.

In all ages and dispensations God has revealed many important
instructions and warnings to men by means of dreams.

When the outward organs of thought and perception are released from
their activity, the nerves unstrung, and the whole of mortal humanity
lies hushed in quiet slumbers, in order to renew its strength and
vigour, it is then that the spiritual organs are at liberty, in a
certain degree, to assume their wonted functions, to recall some faint
outlines, some confused and half defined recollections, of that
heavenly world, and those endearing scenes of their former estate,
from which they have descended in order to obtain and mature a
tabernacle of flesh. Their kindred spirits, their guardian angels then
hover about them with the fondest affection, the most anxious
solicitude. Spirit communes with spirit, thought meets thought, soul
blends with soul, in all the raptures of mutual, pure, and eternal
love.

In this situation, the spiritual organs are susceptible of converse
with Deity, or of communion with angels, and the spirits of just men
made perfect.

In this situation, we frequently hold communication with our departed
father, mother, brother, sister, son or daughter; or with the former
husband or wife of our bosom, whose affection for us, being rooted and
grounded in the eternal elements, or issuing from under the sanctuary
of Love's eternal fountain, can never be lessened or diminished by
death, distance of space, or length of years.

We may, perhaps, have had a friend of the other sex, whose pulse beat
in unison with our own; whose every thought was big with the
aspirations, the hopes of a bright future in union with our own; whose
happiness in time or in eternity, would never be fully consummated
without that union. Such a one, snatched from time in the very bloom of
youth, lives in the other sphere, with the same bright hope, watching
our every footstep, in our meanderings through the rugged path of
life, with longing desires for our eternal happiness, and eager for
our safe arrival in the same sphere.

With what tenderness of love, with what solicitude of affection will
they watch over our slumbers, hang about our pillow, and seek, by
means of the spiritual fluid, to communicate with our spirits, to warn
us of dangers or temptation, to comfort and soothe our sorrow, or to
ward off the ills which might befall us, or perchance to give us some
kind token of remembrance or undying love!

It is the pure in heart, the lovers of truth and virtue, that will
appreciate these remarks, for they know, by at least a small degree of
experience, that these things are so.

Those who are habitually given to vice, immorality and abomination;
those who walk in the daily indulgence of unlawful lust; those who
neither believe in Jesus Christ, nor seek to pray to him, and keep his
commandments; those who do not cultivate the pure, refined and holy
joys of innocent and heavenly affection, but who would sacrifice every
finer feeling at the shrine of lawless pleasure and brutal
desires--those persons will not understand and appreciate these views,
because their good angels, their kindred spirits have long since
departed, and ceased to attend them, being grieved and disgusted with
their conduct.

The Spirit of the Lord has also been grieved, and has left them to
themselves, to struggle alone amid the dangers and sorrows of life; or
to be the associates of demons and impure spirits. Such persons dream
of adultery, gluttony, debauchery, and crimes of every kind. Such
persons have the foreshadowings of a doleful death, and of darkness,
and the buffetings of fiends and malicious spirits.

But, blessed are they who forfeit not their claims to the watchful
care and protection of, and communion with, the heavenly powers, and
pure and lovely spirits.

We can only advise the other classes of mankind, and entreat them, by
the joys of love, by all the desires of life, by all the dread of
death, darkness, and a dreary hereafter, yea, by the blood of Him who
died, by the victory of him who rose in triumph from the grave, by
their regard for those kindred spirits which would gladly love them in
worlds without end, to turn from their sinful course of life, to obey
the ordinances and commandments of Jesus Christ, that the Spirit of
God may return to them, and their good angels and spirits again return
to their sacred charge.

O what a comfort it is, in this dreary world, to be loved and cared
for by all-powerful, warm-hearted, and lovely friends!

_A Dream!_

What have not dreams accomplished?

Dreams and their interpretation brought the beloved son of Jacob from
his dungeon, made him prime minister of Egypt, and the saviour of a
nation, and of his father's house.

Dreams, and the interpretation of dreams, raised a Daniel from slavery
or degrading captivity in Babylon, to wear a royal chain of gold, and
to teach royalty how to rule, whilst himself presided over the
governors and presidents of more than a hundred provinces.

Dreams, and the interpretation of dreams, have opened the future,
pointed out the course of empire through all the troublous times of
successive ages, till Saints alone shall rule, and immortality alone
endure.

Oh, what a doleful situation was Saul the king of Israel placed in,
when the army of the Philistines stood in battle array against him,
and the Lord answered him not, either by dream, by Prophet, by vision,
or by Urim and Thummim!

He sought the unlawful gift of familiar spirits, or "Magnetism." He
there learned his doom, and rushed to battle with the desperation of
hopeless despair.

Himself, his sons, and the hosts of Israel, fell in battle in that
awful day; while David, to whom these gifts had been transferred by
the ordination and holy anointing of Samuel, arose by their use to the
throne of Israel.

A dream announced to Joseph that his virgin wife should have a son. A
dream forewarned him to flee into Egypt with the young child and his
mother. A dream announced to him in Egypt the death of Herod, and
warned him to return to his native land.

A dream warned the wise men from the east to return home another way,
and not return to Herod to betray the young child.

Dreams and visions warned Paul, and the Apostles, and the Saints of
his day, of various dangers, shipwrecks, persecutions and deaths, and
pointed out the means of escape.

Dreams and visions attended and guided them, more or less, in their
whole ministry and sojourn on the earth.




CHAPTER XIV.

THE WORLD OF SPIRITS.


    Ye worlds of light and life, beyond our sphere;
    Mysterious country! let your light appear.
    Ye angels, lift the vail, the truth unfold,
    And give our Seers a glimpse of that bright world;
    Tell where ye live, and what are your employ,
    Your present blessing, and your future joy.
    Say, have you learn'd the name, and tun'd the lyre,
    And hymn'd the praise of him--the great Messiah?
    Have love's emotions kindl'd in your breast,
    And hope enraptur'd seiz'd the promis'd rest?
    Or wait ye still the resurrection day,
    That higher promise of Millennial sway?
    When Saints and angels come to earth again,
    And in the Mesh with King Messiah reign?
    The spirits answer'd as they soar'd away--
    "We're happy now, but wait a greater day,
    When sin and death, and hell, shall conquer'd be,
    And _earth_, with heaven, enjoy the victory."

The spirit of man consists of an organization, or embodiment of the
elements of spiritual matter, in the likeness and after the pattern of
the fleshly tabernacle. It possesses, in fact, all the organs and
parts exactly corresponding to the outward tabernacle.

The entrance of this spirit into its embryo tabernacle of flesh, is
called quickening. The infallible evidence of its presence is
voluntary motion, which implies a degree of independent agency, or
inherent will, which individual identity alone possesses.

