    Reorganization alike. The same class of facts justify both, or
    condemn both.[B]

[Footnote A: Meaning the organization on the 6th of April, 1830.]

[Footnote B: Life of Joseph the Prophet, Josephite edition, p. 601.]

There is one important fact in the history of the organization of the
church in 1830, which the authors of the above quoted pamphlet have
overlooked. It is a fact, too, which destroys all likeness between the
organization of the church and its alleged reorganization, and all the
fine-spun theories about the lesser ordaining the greater. That
overlooked fact is that Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery held the
apostleship on the 6th of April, 1830, and by its power, and not by
the power of the Aaronic priesthood--as alleged by the Josephite
writers--organized the church of Christ. In proof of this I submit the
following:

When Joseph and Oliver were ordained to the Aaronic priesthood by John
the Baptist, May 15th, 1829, they were informed by John that he
operated under the direction of the apostles Peter, James and John,
who held the keys of the Melchisedek priesthood, which, in due time,
the heavenly messenger said, would be conferred upon them.[A] Here
then is a promise made to them of the Melchisedek priesthood.

[Footnote A: Hist. Joseph Smith, _Mill. Star_, Vol. XIV, p. 15,
supplement.]

In an address written to the saints by the prophet Joseph, under date
of September 6th, 1842, he says:

    Again what do we hear? . . . . The voice of Peter, James and John
    in the wilderness between Harmony, Susquehanna county, and
    Colesville, Broome county, on the Susquehanna River, declaring
    themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom and of the
    dispensation of the fullness of times.

This doubtless fixes the place where the apostleship was conferred
upon the prophet. Now as to the time. In a revelation given in
September, 1830, referring to Joseph and Oliver, and speaking of
partaking of the sacrament again on earth, the Lord said:--

    The hour cometh that I will drink of the fruit of the vine with
    you on the earth, and with Moroni . . . . . and also with John the
    son of Zacharias . . . . and also with Peter, James and John whom
    I have sent unto you, by whom I have ordained you and confirmed
    you apostles, and especial witnesses of my name.[A]

[Footnote A: Doc. and Cov. sec. xxvii.]

In another revelation dated June, 1829, the Lord says:--

    And now, Oliver Cowdery, I speak unto you and also unto David
    Whitmer, by the way of commandment; for behold, I command all men
    everywhere to repent, and I speak unto you, even as unto Paul mine
    Apostle, _for you are called even with that same calling with
    which he was called_.[A]

[Footnote A: Doc. and Cov. Sec. xviii.]

This revelation is the one which informed these men that Twelve
Apostles would be called and foretold that Oliver Cowdery and David
Whitmer would be appointed to select them. From the above quotation it
is evident that Oliver and David had received the apostleship at that
time, and, of course, Joseph had received it also.[A] This revelation,
let it be remembered, was given in June, 1829, ten months before the
organization of the church in April, 1830. And it was by virtue and
power of that apostleship which holds the keys of the Melchisedek
priesthood, that the church of Christ was organized; elders, high
priests, seventies, and apostles ordained; high councils and stakes of
Zion organized; and the whole church of Christ set in order. It was
not the lesser ordaining the higher--as claimed by Josephite
writers--that is not the order in the church, nor the manner in which
the church was organized on the 6th of April, 1830. It is true that
Joseph and Oliver ordained each other elders "of the church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints," on the day the church was organized; but
they did not do that by virtue of the Aaronic priesthood which had
been conferred upon them, but by virtue of the apostleship they had
received. Joseph and Oliver had just been accepted by their brethren
to be the presiding elders in the church, and proceeded to ordain each
other to that office.[B] Whereupon Josephite writers rush to the
conclusion that by virtue of their ordination to the lesser
priesthood, they proceeded to ordain each other elders in the higher
or Melchisedek priesthood, and that that "eldership ordained high
priests, and apostles," and that the "high priesthood," thus brought
into existence, "by commandment ordained the President of the high
priesthood--the highest office in the church." That is the order of
things by which the Josephite reorganization was brought into
existence; that is, the lesser ordaining the greater! This argument in
support of their proceeding commits them forever to that position,
they cannot escape it, and it damns their organization beyond all hope
of redemption; for nothing can be clearer than the self-evident
proposition that a man cannot give that which he does not possess.
Besides the contention is straight against the statement of the
prophet Joseph himself as to how we in this generation came by the
priesthood, even as published in Josephite works:--

[Footnote A: While in this revelation which refers to Oliver and David
as apostles, Joseph is not called an apostle, yet we know he was such
for in the revelation which commanded that the church be organized on
the 6th of April, 1830, it is said: "Which commandments were given to
Jesus Christ, to be the first elder of this church; and to Oliver
Cowdery, who was called of God an apostle of Jesus Christ, to be the
second elder of the church, and ordained under his hand."--Doc. and
Cov., sec. xx, 2, 3.]

[Footnote B: His. Joseph Smith, Mill. Star, Vol. XIV (Supplement), p.
26.]

    "The Savior, Moses, and Elias gave the keys of the priesthood to
    Peter, James and John on the mount, when they were transfigured
    before him. . . . How have we come at the Priesthood in the last
    days? It came down in regular succession. Peter, James and John
    had it given to them, and they gave it to others"--presumably
    referring to himself and Oliver Cowdery.[A]

[Footnote A: Life of Joseph the Prophet, Josephite edition, p. 493.]

There is no similarity between the organization of the church of
Christ on the 6th of April, 1830, and the alleged reorganization in
1853. The first was organized by men holding the keys of the holy
Melchisedek priesthood--the apostleship--which possesses the power to
organize the church, ordain all the officers therein and set all
things pertaining to it in order. But the "reorganization" is
accomplished by men of very questionable standing and authority as to
their priesthood; and apparently conscious of the inadequacy of even
the priesthood they claim to have possessed to perform the task before
them--virtually the organization of the church of Christ--they fly to
the untenable position, as false in philosophy as it is in fact, that
the lesser can ordain the greater, until that greater thus created can
ordain a still greater, even the greatest of all! Investigated, then,
"in the rigid character of the facts in the first organization," the
"reorganization" is found strewn along the sharp-edged rocks of
absurdity; and the conviction is forced upon the mind of the
investigator that Mr. Smith was not ordained to be "President of the
church" by those holding legal authority.

Josephites lay much stress upon the following passage in one of the
revelations:

    I say unto you that ye have received a commandment for a law unto
    my church through him whom I have appointed unto you to receive
    commandments and revelations from my hand. And this ye shall know
    assuredly, that there is none other appointed unto you to receive
    commandments and revelations until he be taken, if he abide in me.
    But verily, verily, I say unto you, that none else shall be
    appointed unto this gift except it be through him, for if it be
    taken from him, he shall not have power, except to appoint another
    in his stead; and this shall be a law unto you, that ye receive
    not the teachings of any that shall come before you as revelations
    and commandments; and this I give unto you that you may not be
    deceived, that you may know that they are not of me. For verily I
    say unto you, that he that is ordained of me, shall come in at the
    gate and be ordained, as I have told you before, to teach those
    revelations which you have received, and shall receive through him
    whom I have appointed.[A]

[Footnote A: Doc. and Cov. sec. xliii.]

Josephites insist that this revelation provides that the successor of
the prophet Joseph must be appointed by him. Following is their
reasoning upon the passage:

    We find in a former commandment, given February, 1831, . . . these
    very pertinent and instructive words in respect to _how_ and _by
    whom_ the successor of Joseph the Seer would be selected and
    appointed. It says: "But verily, verily, I say unto you, that none
    else shall be appointed unto this gift [of revelator, seer,
    prophet, etc., for the church, to receive 'commandments and
    revelations' for a 'law' unto the church--Ed] except it be through
    him [Joseph the Seer];" and it then adds that even if the Lord
    should take that "gift" from Joseph, he shall not have power
    _except_ to appoint another in his stead; so that in any event the
    successor in the office of chief presiding seer, prophet and
    revelator to the church (which always carries with it the
    presidency of the church and its priesthood), must be selected and
    appointed through and by the predecessor--Joseph the Seer.[A]

[Footnote A: _The Saints' Herald_, Vol. XXXIX, p. 358, the words in
italics are all the Josephite writer's.]

The circumstances under which the revelation above quoted was given
are these: There came to the church at Kirtland in 1831 a woman making
great pretentions to the power of revealing laws and commandments to
the church; and some of the saints were much perplexed to know in what
light to regard her and her alleged revelations. Joseph, to set their
minds at rest, inquired of the Lord and received the revelation from
which the passage under consideration is taken.[A] The revelation read
in the light of these facts means simply this: First the Lord gives
the saints to understand that He has appointed Joseph Smith, the
prophet, to receive revelations as laws and commandments for His
church and no one else but him, until he should be taken from the
earth, provided he remained faithful to the Lord; second, in the event
of the prophet Joseph not being faithful, even then he shall still
have power to ordain some one else to take his place; third, the one
who succeeds to the position of the prophet Joseph, must come in at
the gate, and be ordained as the Lord had before instructed the
church--that is, he must be accepted by the church, and be ordained by
the direction of a general conference.[B]

[Footnote A: Hist. of Joseph, _Mill. Star_, Vol. XIV, p. 60,
supplement.]

[Footnote B: The revelation teaching that none but Joseph should be
the law-giver to the church until he be taken from the earth if he
remained faithful, etc., was given February, 1831, but before this the
Lord had made it the law of the church that "no person is to be
ordained to any office in this church, where there is a regularly
organized branch of the same, without the vote of that church. . . .
Every president of the high priesthood (or presiding elder) . . . is
to be ordained by the direction of a high council or general
conference."--(Rev. given April, 1830, Doc. and Cov. sec. xx.) The
"president of the high priesthood" is also the President of the
church, hence the foregoing law applies to the President as well as
other officers of the church--he must be sustained by the church and
if he is not, he cannot act in that position.]

The information thus given officially to the church was calculated to
preserve the saints from following unauthorized "law-givers." Through
it they learned that Joseph, if he remained faithful, would be the
law-giver to Israel; if he transgressed he should retain sufficient of
the power of revelation to designate whom the Lord would have to
succeed him; and in that or any other event the man who becomes
President must come in at the gate and be ordained as described in one
of the laws of the church previously given. There was surely no need
after this that any should be deceived. But to argue from what is set
down in this revelation that the only possible way for a successor "in
any event," to be appointed to the church was through Joseph Smith the
prophet, is clearly an error; for the only provision made in this
revelation for him to appoint his successor is in the event of his own
transgression; and I affirm that Joseph Smith was faithful to God and
the church up to the day of his death. Never in his life was he more
faithful, more favored by God, or more powerful, or fruitful in
revelation or intelligence than in the closing year of his life. He
was God's mouthpiece to the church of Christ on earth to the very
moment that he sealed his testimony with his blood at Carthage,
Illinois.

Having received premonitions of his approaching fate, he desired that
his brother Hyrum who had shared his toils, dangers and
responsibilities, and who under all circumstances however trying had
been true and just and merciful--he desired that this brother should
succeed him in leading the church. It so happened, however, in the
providences of God that Hyrum fell a martyr before Joseph; and
therefore the man whom the prophet desired to succeed him, as well as
himself, were taken from the earth. So that notwithstanding the fact
that Joseph desired Hyrum to succeed to the Presidency, and had
appointed him to that place, both himself and the one he appointed
being taken away by the hand of death--the question confronts us just
as it would have done had Joseph never intimated that he wanted Hyrum
to succeed him. And I now ask, in the absence of both Joseph and
Hyrum, where was the authority lodged to lead the church and carry on
the work of God? Was the church disorganized? Had God been so
shortsighted, so unlike himself, as to establish his church in such a
manner that at the death of two of his servants it crumbled to pieces?
Can it be that God, with whom all things are as present, had not
foreseen this fate which overtook his servants Joseph and Hyrum, and
failed to provide for such an emergency? O, charge not the Lord with
such lack of wisdom, or his church with such imperfection in its
organization!




VII.


In the church there are three general presiding councils, of equal
authority. These are the First Presidency; the traveling presiding
high council, or Twelve Apostles; and the first quorum of Seventy. In
proof of the assertion, I quote the Doctrine and Covenants:

    Of the Melchisedek priesthood, three presiding high priests,
    chosen by the body, appointed and ordained to that office, and
    upheld by the confidence, faith and prayer of the church, form a
    quorum of the Presidency of the church.

    The twelve traveling counselors are called to be the Twelve
    Apostles, or special witnesses of the name of Christ in all the
    world; thus differing from other officers in the church in the
    duties of their calling. _And they form a quorum, equal in
    authority and power to the three Presidents previously mentioned_.

    The Seventy are also called to preach the gospel and to be
    especial witnesses unto the Gentiles and in all the world. Thus
    differing from other officers in the church in the duties of their
    calling; _and they form a quorum equal in authority to that of the
    Twelve special witnesses or Apostles just named_.[A]

[Footnote A: Doc. and Cov., sec. cvii]

It is the order of the law of God, however, that the Twelve act under
the direction of the First Presidency, and the Seventy under the
direction of the Twelve. It is also provided that in the decisions of
either the Twelve or the Seventy, those quorums must be
unanimous--"every member in each quorum must be agreed to its
decisions," in order for said decisions to be entitled to the same
blessings that the decisions of a quorum of three Presidents receive.
However, when circumstances render it impossible to be otherwise, a
majority of the members may form a quorum.[A]

[Footnote A: Doc. and Cov., sec. xvii.]

The decisions of these quorums or either of them are to be made in all
righteousness, in holiness, and lowliness of heart, meekness and long
suffering; and in that event their decisions are final. But if their
decisions are unrighteous they may be brought before a general
assembly of the several quorums which constitute the spiritual
authorities of the church--in no other way can there be an appeal from
their decisions.[A]

[Footnote A: Ibid, verses 27-33.]

These are the limitations set to the equality of these quorums and the
only limitations, and now in case of the absence, destruction or
rejection of the first of these three great councils, upon whom does
the duty and responsibility of Presidency fall? We could well-nigh let
the Josephites themselves answer that question. They say:

    Now let us examine the order of Presidency in the Church.
    Supposing the First President is absent, who presides in council
    or in conference? The counselors, both or either of them. And why?
    Because they are the highest authority present. True. Then here is
    the key to unlock the whole secret of the Presidency of the
    Church. Hear it then! _The highest authority presides always._[A]

[Footnote A: From the pamphlet issued by the Reorganization, entitled
"A Word of Consolation to the Scattered Saints," quoted by Tullidge.
Life of Joseph, Josephite edition, pp. 589-90.]

The closing assertion is made well-nigh as strong as type can be made
to say it; and to it I respond: that is true. Now let us consider the
situation at Nauvoo after the death of the prophet Joseph, and then
see where the Presidency of the church would fall according to this
Josephite doctrine that "the highest authority presides always."

The prophet Joseph, his brother Hyrum and Sidney Rigdon constituted
the First Presidency at the time of the martyrdom. Joseph and Hyrum
being taken, Sidney Rigdon alone was left of that great quorum. We
have already spoken of the delinquency of Mr. Rigdon in the
performance of his duty during the five years preceding the prophet's
death, of Joseph's efforts to be rid of him and of his standing in his
quorum at the time his two associates were assassinated at Carthage.
He sought to be appointed Guardian of the church, but was unanimously
rejected by the assembled quorums of priesthood and the saints at
Nauvoo. This was clearly their right, and when the unfaithfulness of
Sidney Rigdon and his unfitness for the place is taken into account,
not even Josephites can say the church did wrong in rejecting him. In
the very meetings where he sought to be appointed "Guardian of the
church" there stood the man whom the prophet Joseph had ordained to
take his place--Amasa Lyman. But Elder Lyman had never been presented
to the people to be sustained by their vote, and hence his appointment
was not completed, and he had no claim even to the counselorship to
the Presidency. The death of the prophets, Joseph and Hyrum, and the
rejection of the unworthy Sidney Rigdon, removed the First Presidency
from the church. In Hyrum Smith there fell by martyrdom the only man
that the prophet Joseph had designated to succeed him in the
Presidency; so that not only was the First Presidency removed from the
church, but the only man concerning whom the prophet had expressed a
desire to succeed him was also removed. Then upon whom devolved the
Presidency? Upon the next highest authority in the church--the Twelve
Apostles. And as they possessed equal authority with the First
Presidency, there was nothing the First Presidency could do but what
the Twelve could do. So long as the First Presidency existed the
Twelve could only operate under their direction, but now that there
was no First Presidency in existence, the Twelve stood in their place,
with full power and authority to act as the presiding quorum in the
church.

The church was no more disorganized by the death of Joseph and Hyrum
and the rejection of Sidney Rigdon than the government of the United
States becomes disorganized when the president dies, or is impeached.
The Twelve possessing equal power and authority with the First
Presidency, in case of the death or removal of that Presidency, have
all the keys and authority necessary to preside over all the church,
direct in all the affairs thereof, and move right on with the work of
God.

When the Lord stretched forth his hand to establish his church in
these last days, and for the last time, committing unto men the keys
of his kingdom, and a dispensation of the gospel for the last time;
and for the fullness of times, in the which God will gather together
in one, all things, both which are in heaven and which are in
earth--it is not to be supposed, I say,[A] that in a few years he
would permit that church thus brought forth out of obscurity to become
disorganized, and fall back into darkness. The thought is
preposterous. There is nothing in all that God has revealed to
indicate that he ever contemplated its disorganization; but on the
contrary, there is every encouragement to believe that it will go on
from grace to grace, from faith to faith, from one victory to another
until, like the little stone of Daniel's vision, it shall become a
great mountain and fill the whole earth.

[Footnote A: Doc. and Cov. sec. xxvii, 13.]

The position of Josephite writers that it was an usurpation for the
Twelve to assume the Presidency of the church when the First
Presidency was removed by the death of Joseph and Hyrum and the
rejection of Sidney Rigdon, is false. The other position that the high
council at Nauvoo was the proper authority to succeed to the functions
of the Presidency is equally false.[A]

[Footnote A: In proof that Josephite writers assume both these
positions, see _The Saints' Herald_, Vol. XXXIX, pp. 407-8]

In support of their first position, viz., that it was an usurpation
for the Twelve to assume the Presidency of the church at Nauvoo after
the death of the prophet, Josephites rely upon the following:

    The Twelve will have no right to go into Zion, or any of her
    stakes, and there undertake to regulate the affairs thereof where
    there is a standing high council; but it is their duty to go
    abroad and regulate all matters relative to the different branches
    of the church. When the Twelve are together, or a quorum of them,
    in any church, they will have authority to act independently, and
    make decisions, and those decisions will be valid. But where there
    is not a quorum they will have to do business by the voice of the
    church. No standing high council has authority to go into the
    churches abroad and regulate the matters thereof, for this belongs
    to the Twelve.[A]

[Footnote A: Hist. Joseph Smith, _Mill. Star_, Vol. XV, p. 261. The
instructions are from the prophet Joseph.]

Wherein the usurpation lies, according to Josephite argument, is in
this: The Twelve came to Nauvoo, where there was a regularly organized
stake, and undertook to regulate the affairs thereof. The reply to
that sophistry--no, it is not even sophistry--it is simply an
inaccurate, not to say untrue, statement. The Twelve did not come to
Nauvoo to regulate the affairs of that stake independent of its
standing high council. Their action was in relation to the whole
church of Christ, and not to the affairs of Nauvoo stake. It was a
matter which affected all the stakes of Zion and all the branches of
the church throughout the world, as much those branches scattered
throughout the United States and Great Britain as those in the stake
at Nauvoo, that the Twelve came to Nauvoo to regulate. Matters of such
high importance were considered and decided upon which the Twelve and
the Twelve only, in the absence of the First Presidency, could deal
with; and in those matters the Twelve not only consulted with the high
council of the Nauvoo stake, but they called a general assembly of all
the quorums and arranged them in their order[A] to act as the highest
spiritual authorities in the church. The quorums sustained the action
of the Twelve in every particular, and from the united action of the
assembled quorums of the priesthood _there is no appeal_.[B]

[Footnote A: _Mill. Star_, Vol. XXV. Nos. 14, 15, 16.]

[Footnote B: Doc. and Cov., sec. cvii.]

In support of the Josephite assumption that the high council at Nauvoo
was the proper authority to regulate the affairs of the church and not
the Twelve, the following is quoted:

    The standing high councils, at the Stakes of Zion, form a quorum
    _equal_ in authority, _in the affairs of the Church_, in _all_
    their decisions, to the quorum of the Presidency, or to the
    traveling high council.[A]

[Footnote A: Doc. and Cov. sec. cvii, 36.]

The answer to this assumption is, first, that the high council is a
judicial and not a presiding or executive council, as is proven by the
following:

    The high council was appointed by revelation for the purpose of
    settling important difficulties which might arise in the Church,
    which could not be settled by the Church or the bishop's
    council[A] to the satisfaction of the parties.[B]

[Footnote A: That is, court.]

[Footnote B: Doc. and Cov. sec. cii, 2.]

Hence the "equality" here referred to must have reference to judicial
not to administrative affairs in the church. The second answer to the
assumption is that the standing high council in a stake of Zion is a
local council, limited in its operations to the particular district of
country comprising the stake. If any proof were needed to sustain the
statement it would be found in the words of the prophet Joseph:

    No standing high council has authority to go into the churches
    abroad and regulate the matters thereof, for this belongs to the
    Twelve.[A]
