bright nature in which God had clothed me?

4 Where is the divine nature you promised to give me?  Where is that
slick speech of yours that you had with us at first, when we were in
the garden?"

5 Then Satan said to Adam, "Do you think that when I have promised one
something that I would actually deliver it to him or fulfil my word?
Of course not.  For I myself have never even thought of obtaining what
I promised.

6 Therefore I fell, and I made you fall by that for which I myself
fell; and with you also, whosoever accepts my counsel, falls thereby.

7 But now, O Adam, because you fell you are under my rule, and I am
king over you; because you have obeyed me and have transgressed against
your God.  Neither will there be any deliverance from my hands until
the day promised you by your God."

8 Again he said, "Because we do not know the day agreed on with you by
your God, nor the hour in which you shall be delivered, for that reason
we will multiply war and murder on you and your descendants after you.

9 This is our will and our good pleasure, that we may not leave one of
the sons of men to inherit our orders in heaven.

10 For as to our home, O Adam, it is in burning fire; and we will not
stop our evil doing, no, not one day nor one hour.  And I, O Adam,
shall set you on fire when you come into the cave to live there."

11 When Adam heard these words he cried and mourned, and said to Eve,
"Hear what he said; that he won't fulfil any of what he told you in the
garden.  Did he really then become king over us?

12 But we will ask God, who created us, to deliver us out of his hands."




Chapter LVIII - "About sunset on the 53rd day. . ."

1 Then Adam and Eve spread their hands before God, praying and begging
Him to drive Satan away from them so that he can't harm them or force
them to deny God.

2 Then God sent to them at once, His angel, who drove away Satan from
them.  This happened about sunset, on the fifty-third day after they
had come out of the garden.

3 Then Adam and Eve went into the cave, and stood up and turned their
faces to the ground, to pray to God.

4 But before they prayed Adam said to Eve, "Look, you have seen what
temptations have befallen us in this land.  Come, let us get up, and
ask God to forgive us the sins we have committed; and we will not come
out until the end of the day next to the fortieth.  And if we die in
here, He will save us."

5 Then Adam and Eve got up, and joined together in entreating God.

6 They continued praying like this in the cave; neither did they come
out of it, by night or by day, until their prayers went up out of their
mouths, like a flame of fire.




Chapter LIX - Eighth apparition of Satan of Satan to Adam and Eve.

1 But Satan, the hater of all good, did not allow them to finish their
prayers.  For he called to his hosts, and they came, all of them.  Then
he said to them, "Since Adam and Eve, whom we deceived, have agreed
together to pray to God night and day, and to beg Him to deliver them,
and since they will not come out of the cave until the end of the
fortieth day.

2 And since they will continue their prayers as they have both agreed
to do, that He will deliver them out of our hands, and restore them to
their former state, see what we shall do to them."  And his hosts said
to him, "Power is thine, O our lord, to do what you list."

3 Then Satan, great in wickedness, took his hosts and came into the
cave, in the thirtieth night of the forty days and one; and he beat
Adam and Eve, until he left them dead.

4 Then came the Word of God to Adam and Eve, who raised them from their
suffering, and God said to Adam, "Be strong, and be not afraid of him
who has just come to you."

5 But Adam cried and said, "Where were you, O my God, that they should
punish me with such blows, and that this suffering should come over us;
over me and over Eve, Your handmaiden?"

6 Then God said to him, "O Adam, see, he is lord and master of all you
have, he who said, he would give you divinity.  Where is this love for
you?  And where is the gift he promised?

7 Did it please him just once, O Adam, to come to you, comfort you,
strengthen you, rejoice with you, or send his hosts to protect you;
because you have obeyed him, and have yielded to his counsel; and have
followed his commandment and transgressed Mine?"

8 Then Adam cried before the Lord, and said, "O Lord because I
transgressed a little, You have severely punished me in return for it,
I ask You to deliver me out of his hands; or else have pity on me, and
take my soul out of my body now in this strange land."

9 Then God said to Adam, "If only there had been this sighing and
praying before, before you transgressed!  Then would you have rest from
the trouble in which you are now."

10 But God had patience with Adam, and let him and Eve remain in the
cave until they had fulfilled the forty days.

11 But as to Adam and Eve, their strength and flesh withered from
fasting and praying, from hunger and thirst; for they had not tasted
either food or drink since they left the garden; nor were the functions
of their bodies yet settled; and they had no strength left to continue
in prayer from hunger, until the end of the next day to the fortieth.
They were fallen down in the cave; yet what speech escaped from their
mouths, was only in praises.




Chapter LX - The Devil appears like an old man.  He offers "a place of
rest."

1 Then on the eighty-ninth day, Satan came to the cave, clad in a
garment of light, and girt about with a bright girdle.

2 In his hands was a staff of light, and he looked most awful; but his
face was pleasant and his speech was sweet.

3 He thus transformed himself in order to deceive Adam and Eve, and to
make them come out of the cave, before they had fulfilled the forty
days.

4 For he said within himself, "Now that when they had fulfilled the
forty days' fasting and praying, God would restore them to their former
state; but if He did not do so, He would still be favorable to them;
and even if He had not mercy on them, would He yet give them something
from the garden to comfort them; as already twice before."

5 Then Satan drew near the cave in this fair appearance, and said:--

6 "O Adam, get up, stand up, you and Eve, and come along with me, to a
good land; and don't be afraid.  I am flesh and bones like you; and at
first I was a creature that God created.

7 And it was so, that when He had created me, He placed me in a garden
in the north, on the border of the world.

8 And He said to me, 'Stay here!'  And I remained there according to
His Word, neither did I transgress His commandment.

9 Then He made a slumber to come over me, and He brought you, O Adam,
out of my side, but did not make you stay with me.

10 But God took you in His divine hand, and placed you in a garden to
the eastward.

11 Then I worried about you, for that while God had taken you out of my
side, He had not let you stay with me.

12 But God said to me: 'Do not worry about Adam, whom I brought out of
your side; no harm will come to him.

13 For now I have brought out of his side a help-meet* for him; and I
have given him joy by so doing.'"

14 Then Satan said again, "I did not know how it is you are in this
cave, nor anything about this trial that has come over you--until God
said to me, 'Behold, Adam has transgressed, he whom I had taken out of
your side, and Eve also, whom I took out of his side; and I have driven
them out of the garden; I have made them live in a land of sorrow and
misery, because they transgressed against Me, and have obeyed Satan.
And look, they are in suffering until this day, the eightieth.'

15 Then God said to me, 'Get up, go to them, and make them come to your
place, and suffer not that Satan come near them, and afflict them.  For
they are now in great misery; and lie helpless from hunger.'

16 He further said to me, 'When you have taken them to yourself, give
them to eat of the fruit of the Tree of Life, and give them to drink of
the water of peace; and clothe them in a garment of light, and restore
them to their former state of grace, and leave them not in misery, for
they came from you.  But grieve not over them, nor repent of that which
has come over them.

17 But when I heard this, I was sorry; and my heart could not patiently
bear it for your sake, O my child.

18 But, O Adam, when I heard the name of Satan, I was afraid, and I
said within myself, I will not come out because he might trap me as he
did my children, Adam and Eve.

19 And I said, 'O God, when I go to my children, Satan will meet me in
the way, and war against me, as he did against them.'

20 Then God said to me, 'Fear not; when you find him, hit him with the
staff that is in thine hand, and don't be afraid of him, for you are of
old standing, and he shall not prevail against you.'

21 Then I said, 'O my Lord, I am old, and cannot go.  Send Your angels
to bring them.'

22 But God said to me, 'Angels, verily, are not like them; and they
will not consent to come with them.  But I have chosen you, because
they are your offspring and are like you, and they will listen to what
you say.'

23 God said further to me, 'If you don't have enough strength to walk,
I will send a cloud to carry you and set you down at the entrance of
their cave; then the cloud will return and leave you there.

24 And if they will come with you, I will send a cloud to carry you and
them.'

25 Then He commanded a cloud, and it bear me up and brought me to you;
and then went back.

26 And now, O my children, Adam and Eve, look at my old gray hair and
at my feeble state, and at my coming from that distant place.  Come,
come with me, to a place of rest."

27 Then he began to cry and to sob before Adam and Eve, and his tears
poured on the ground like water.

28 And when Adam and Eve raised their eyes and saw his beard, and heard
his sweet talk, their hearts softened towards him; they obeyed him, for
they believed he was true.

29 And it seemed to them that they were really his offspring, when they
saw that his face was like their own; and they trusted him.


* The existence of the two words helpmeet and helpmate, meaning exactly
the same thing, is a comedy of errors.  God's promise to Adam, as
rendered in the King James version of the Bible, was to give him  an
help meet for him  (that is, a helper fit for him). In the 17th century
the two words help and meet in this passage were mistaken for one word,
applying to Eve, and thus helpmeet came to mean  a wife.  Then in the
18th century, in a misguided attempt to make sense of the word, the
spelling helpmate was introduced. Both errors are now beyond recall,
and both spellings are acceptable.




Chapter LXI - They begin to follow Satan.

1 Then he took Adam and Eve by the hand, and began to bring them out of
the cave.

2 But when they had come a little ways out of it, God knew that Satan
had overcome them, and had brought them out before the forty days were
ended, to take them to some distant place, and to destroy them.

3 Then the Word of the Lord God again came and cursed Satan, and drove
him away from them.

4 And God began to speak to Adam and Eve, saying to them, "What made
you come out of the cave, to this place?"

5 Then Adam said to God, "Did you create a man before us?  For when we
were in the cave there suddenly came to us a friendly old man who said
to us, 'I am a messenger from God to you, to bring you back to some
place of rest.'

6 And we believed, O God, that he was a messenger from you; and we came
out with him; and knew not where we should go with him."

7 Then God said to Adam, "See, that is the father of evil arts, who
brought you and Eve out of the Garden of Delights.  And now, indeed,
when he saw that you and Eve both joined together in fasting and
praying, and that you came not out of the cave before the end of the
forty days, he wished to make your purpose vein, to break your mutual
bond; to cut off all hope from you, and to drive you to some place
where he might destroy you.

8 Because he couldn't do anything to you unless he showed himself in
the likeness of you.

9 Therefore he came to you with a face like your own, and began to give
you tokens as if they were all true.

10 But because I am merciful and am favorable to you, I did not allow
him to destroy you; instead I drove him away from you.

11 Now, therefore, O Adam, take Eve, and return to your cave, and
remain in it until the morning after  the fortieth day.  And when you
come out, go towards the eastern gate of the garden."

12 Then Adam and Eve worshipped God, and praised and blessed Him for
the deliverance that had come to them from Him.  And they returned
towards the cave.  This happened in the evening of the thirty-ninth day.

13 Then Adam and Eve stood up and with a fiery passion, prayed to God,
to give them strength; for they had become weak because of  hunger and
thirst and prayer.  But they watched the whole of that night praying,
until morning.

14 Then Adam said to Eve, "Get up, let us go towards the eastern gate
of the garden as God told us."

15 And they said their prayers as they were accustomed to do every day;
and they left the cave to go near to the eastern gate of the garden.

16 Then Adam and Eve stood up and prayed, and appealed to God to
strengthen them, and to send them something to satisfy their hunger.

17 But after they finished their prayers, they were too weak to move.

18 Then came the Word of God again, and said to them, "O Adam, get up,
go and bring the two figs here."

19 Then Adam and Eve got up, and went until they came near to the cave.




Chapter LXII - Two fruit trees.

1 But Satan the wicked was envious, because of the consolation God had
given them.

2 So he prevented them, and went into the cave and took the two figs,
and buried them outside the cave, so that Adam and Eve should not find
them.  He also had in his thoughts to destroy them.

3 But by God's mercy, as soon as those two figs were in the ground, God
defeated Satan's counsel regarding them; and made them into two fruit
trees, that overshadowed the cave.  For Satan had buried them on the
eastern side of it.

4 Then when the two trees were grown, and were covered with fruit,
Satan grieved and mourned, and said, "It would have been better to have
left those figs where they were; for now, behold, they have become two
fruit trees, whereof Adam will eat all the days of his life.  Whereas I
had in mind, when I buried them, to destroy them entirely, and to hide
them forever.

5 But God has overturned my counsel; and would not that this sacred
fruit should perish; and He has made plain my intention, and has
defeated the counsel I had formed against His servants."

6 Then Satan went away ashamed because he hadn't thought his plans all
the way through.




Chapter LXIII - The first joy of trees.

1 But Adam and Eve, as they got closer to the cave, saw two fig trees,
covered with fruit, and overshadowing the cave.

2 Then Adam said to Eve, "It seems to me that we have gone the wrong
way.  When did these two trees grow here?  It seems to me that the
enemy wishes to lead us the wrong way.  Do you suppose that there is
another cave besides this one in the earth?

3 Yet, O Eve, let us go into the cave, and find in it the two figs; for
this is our cave, in which we were.  But if we should not find the two
figs in it, then it cannot be our cave."

4 They went then into the cave, and looked into the four corners of it,
but found not the two figs.

5 And Adam cried and said to Eve, "Did we go to the wrong cave, then, O
Eve?  It seems to me these two fig trees are the two figs that were in
the cave."  And Eve said, "I, for my part, do not know."

6 Then Adam stood up and prayed and said, "O God, You commanded us to
come back to the cave, to take the two figs, and then to return to you.

7 But now, we have not found them.  O God, have you taken them, and
sown these two trees, or have we gone astray in the earth; or has the
enemy deceived us?  If it be real, then, O God, reveal to us the secret
of these two trees and of the two figs."

8 Then came the Word of God to Adam, and said to him, "O Adam, when I
sent you to fetch the figs, Satan went before you to the cave, took the
figs, and buried them outside, eastward of the cave, thinking to
destroy them; and not sowing them with good intent.

9 Not for his mere sake, then, have these trees grown up at once; but I
had mercy on you and I commanded them to grow.  And they grew to be two
large trees, that you be overshadowed by their branches, and find rest;
and that I made you see My power and My marvelous works.

10 And, also, to show you Satan's meanness, and his evil works, for
ever since you came out of the garden, he has not ceased, no, not one
day, from doing you some harm.  But I have not given him power over
you."

11 And God said, "From now on, O Adam, rejoice on account of the trees,
you and Eve; and rest under them when you feel weary.  But do not eat
any of their fruit or come near them."

12 Then Adam cried, and said, "O God, will You again kill us, or will
You drive us away from before Your face, and cut our life from off the
face of the earth?

13 O God, I beg you, if You know that there be in these trees either
death or some other evil, as at the first time, root them up from near
our cave, and with them; and leave us to die of the heat, of hunger and
of thirst.

14 For we know Your marvelous works, O God, that they are great, and
that by Your power You can bring one thing out of another, without
one's wish.  For Your power can make rocks to become trees, and trees
to become rocks."




Chapter LXIV - Adam and Eve partake of the first earthly food.

1 Then God looked at Adam and at his strength of mind, at his endurance
of hunger and thirst, and of the heat.  And He changed the two fig
trees into two figs, as they were at first, and then said to Adam and
to Eve, "Each of you may take one fig."  And they took them, as the
Lord commanded them.

2 And He said to them, "You must now go into the cave and eat the figs,
and satisfy your hunger, or else you will die."

3 So, as God commanded them, they went into the cave about sunset.  And
Adam and Eve stood up and prayed during the setting sun.

4 Then they sat down to eat the figs; but they knew not how to eat
them; for they were not accustomed to eat earthly food.  They were
afraid that if they ate, their stomach would be burdened and their
flesh thickened, and their hearts would take to liking earthly food.

5 But while they were thus seated, God, out of pity for them, sent them
His angel, so they wouldn't perish of hunger and thirst.

6 And the angel said to Adam and Eve, "God says to you that you do not
have the strength that would be required to fast until death; eat,
therefore, and strengthen your bodies; for you are now animal flesh and
cannot subsist without food and drink."

7 Then Adam and Eve took the figs and began to eat of them.  But God
had put into them a mixture as of savory bread and blood.

8 Then the angel went from Adam and Eve, who ate of the figs until they
had satisfied their hunger.  Then they put aside what was left; but by
the power of God, the figs became whole again, because God blessed them.

9 After this Adam and Eve got up, and prayed with a joyful heart and
renewed strength, and praised and rejoiced abundantly the whole of that
night.  And this was the end of the eighty-third day.




Chapter LXV - Adam and Eve acquire digestive organs.  Final hope of
returning to the Garden is lost.

1 And when it was day, they got up and prayed, after their custom, and
then went out of the cave.

2 But they became sick from the food they had eaten because they were
not used to it, so they went about in the cave saying to each other:--

3 "What has our eating caused to happen to us, that we should be in
such pain?  We are in misery, we shall die!  It would have been better
for us to have died keeping our bodies pure than to have eaten and
defiled them with food."

4 Then Adam said to Eve, "This pain did not come to us in the garden,
neither did we eat such bad food there.  Do you think, O Eve, that God
will plague us through the food that is in us, or that our innards will
come out; or that God means to kill us with this pain before He has
