twenty-fourth. But every year on the eve of the feast of Saint Charles
just before midnight a ghostly procession wended its way to San Carlos
Mission, for all the missionaries, Spaniards, or their descendants who
had ever lived in California would arise from their graves and with
them all the Christian Indians of the mission towns joined the "ghostly
throng" to San Carlos where Junipero Serra would arise from his tomb and
celebrate mass while the spirits sang their ancient hymns, after which
all the scene vanished like silver fumes of smoke, and this continued
for one hundred years. This most unlikely legend has been told in
beautiful Spanish and English poetry, and for all its unlikelihood has
found its way with its weird charm into many homes.



A True Story



Somewhere in the eighteen fifties a non-catholic of very irreligious
character, made targets of the eyes of a statue of Saint Benedict,
belonging to San Carlos Mission, taking advantage of the neglected
condition of the place at the time. A few days after this proceeding
the man was struck blind. This incident is no legend, but within the
remembrance of many old residents of Monterey. The unfortunate man later
acknowledged that his calamity was a direct visitation of Almighty God
for his gross and intentional irreverence to the image of a saint. The
writer refrains from giving the name of this man who has long ere this
passed to the "Great Beyond" but many Montereyans, who will read this
sketch will know it.

Countless stories and legends of mission times are told and written
without the least foundation for veracity, for example the story of
"The Lost Pearls of Loretto;" others are founded on facts but distorted
beyond recognition. Still this is not startling in a land as full of
sentiment and romance as California, where so many writers, (most of
them "New-comers") have given vent to their poetical imaginations,
and it is not hard to believe that the eventful history of the state
contained many authentic stories, and legends with some ground of truth.



Hymn to the Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary [6].



     "Para dar vida mortal
     A Un Dios Autor de la vida
     Sois Maria concebida
     Sin pecado original."

     "Para humillar la serpiente
     Que con su mortal veneno
     Dejo todo el mundo lleno
     De su aliento pestilente
     Que marco a todo viviente
     Con el sello mas fatal
     Sois Maria concebida
     Sin pecado original."

     "Como Ester la mas amada
     Del mas generoso Asuero
     Gracia recibes primero
     Que estes del crimen manchada
     Pues para no ser contada
     En la indignacion real
     Sois Maria concebida
     Sin pecado original."

     "Ciudad fuerte y mas hermosa
     Que de Asirio acometida
     No lograra verte herida
     Su saeta ponzonosa
     Pues para ser victoriosa
     De su poder infernal
     Sois Maria concebida
     Sin pecado original."

     "Luna llena de esplandor
     Sin ser nunca eclipsada
     Porque fuiste iluminada
     De un sol de poder, y amor
     Pues por no ver el horror
     De un eclipse criminal
     Sois Maria concebida
     Sin pecado original."

     "Mujer heroica y valiente
     Que con divino valor
     Pisas gloriosa el furor
     De la enganosa serpiente
     Pues por no temer el diente
     De aqeste monstro infernal
     Sois Maria concebida
     Sin pecado original."

     "Virgen que de nuestro suelo
     Subes vestida de estrellas
     Mas bela que las mas bellas
     A ser la gloria del cielo
     Pues para tan alto vuelo
     Con un favor sin igual
     Sois Maria concebida
     Sin pecado original."

     "Patrona la mas amada
     De nuestro suelo Espanol
     Nuestro mas luciente sol
     En la noche desgraciada
     Pues para ser proclamada
     Con el voto mas cordial
     Sois Maria concebida
     Sin pecado original."

     "Concede en fin Madre amada
     A tus hijos este dia
     La mas cristiana alegria
     Y la muerte deseada
     Para que seas cantada
     En la patria celestial
     Sois Maria concebida
     Sin pecado original."




Chapter VIII


     Retrospection of the work of the Spanish Missionaries,
     Explorers and Settlers and their place in California's
     Appreciation


We have followed the venerable band of missionaries from their homes in
Spain, where fired with zeal for the conversion of the savage heathen of
the New World they set out for the comparatively newly discovered land
of Mexico, where Spain had already a few establishments and churches, an
archbishopric in the city of Mexico, and the Franciscan Fathers a well
equipped monastery and mission at San Fernando in the northern part of
the country. We have seen the Spanish Franciscans' zeal in the land of
the Aztec, and we have also seen the noble cooperation given them by the
government and civil authorities of Catholic Spain. We have traced
the missionaries' steps, followed by gallant Portola, and his fellow
officers and men, and have sympathized and rejoiced with them in their
hardships and joys. We have no doubt, often marveled at the stupendous
work of the Sons of Saint Francis in the conversion of the unenlightened
heathen, and have seen the Indian tribes turn from the worship of idols
to the altar of the one true God.

Let us now give a brief glance at the work so nobly done by the immortal
heroes which Catholic Spain sent to these shores. Many a time, winter
blasts of misunderstanding and wrong have been cast upon them, and many
a time have noble sympathizers fought just battles with prejudice in
their behalf, with the blessed result that the thickest clouds of errors
and "threadbare calumnies" have almost entirely disappeared, and with
them the remaining mists of wrong are fast vanishing at the powerful
approach of truth's sun, so that in relating the glories of that legion
of splendid characters whose names are so tenderly clasped about the
fondest memories of mission times, we shall not forget their friends and
champions of later years.

But first let us see what the brave Spanish pioneers did for California.
We will begin with the missionaries. To them we owe the conversion of
the heathen and savage Indians, which work was super-human in
itself, and which contrary to the statements of libelers, the fathers
accomplished with heroic patience and charity, teaching the Indians
besides religion, useful trades, civilizing them, and taking such
conscientious care of them that they made a nightly round of their
quarters, not with whip in hand to punish imaginary misdemeanor, but
to see that the spiritual and temporal welfare of their converts and
neophytes, was guarded, and so great was the attachment of the Indians
to the fathers that if a father was called on business from one mission
to another, the Indians would follow him a long distance weeping. Very
few of the Indians were taught the art of reading, not because the
fathers were in any way unwilling to teach it, but because for this one
art most of the Indians showed no desire or willingness to learn, yet
this has given the ever ready, unscrupulous writer food for saying
that "the fathers endeavored to keep the Indians in ignorance" and the
healthy rule of the fathers with its hours of prayer, labor, instruction
and recreation for the Indian families in the mission quarters, has been
distorted by erroneous histories, and statements have been made by
some writers to the effect that "the Indians were treated harshly and
oppressed." Whereas under what nation were Indians or unenlightened
natives christianized, allowed to remain in their lands or treated
with more humanity than under Spain or her missionaries, wherever they
explored and wherever they went?

"Harsh, oppressive, endeavoring to keep the Indians in ignorance," if
such actions mean all that these saintly missionaries accomplished, if
they mean their leaving refinement, christianity, fond home and kindred
in distant Spain to brave untold hardships, nay, martyrdom, to rescue
souls from paganism, and if such conduct as "harshness, oppression,
endeavoring to keep the Indians in ignorance" could be compatible with
the practice of heroic virtue and acts of mortification of mind and body
which to the spiritual man or woman appear beyond words of admiration,
to the scoffer and frivolous (but for this latter class we are not
writing) foolish and impossible. The missions too, with their honest
wealth and industry were California's first centers of enlightenment and
refinement. The Spanish missionaries were scholars as well as religious,
and their institutions were California's cradles of literature, music
and learning hand in hand with religion. To these early fathers we owe
the first paintings and statues brought to California, while their well
equipped missions, even contained medicine chests and medical books, to
them we also owe the first architecture in the building of the missions,
the first agricultural implements, even the first system of irrigation,
in the state; to these we may add the first stock of sheep, cattle,
horses, the first fruits, vineyards and teeming grain fields, yes, even
the first roses of California were brought here by them, and it was
from the missions that Dr. Robert Semple borrowed the printing type,
wherewith he printed the first newspaper in California, which appeared
in Monterey in 1846, making the letter "w" by joining two vs as the
Spanish alphabet contains twenty-five letters, "w" excepted.

And if the Spanish missionaries did so much what did the Spanish civil
and military authorities and settlers do? To Spanish explorers we
owe the discovery and exploration of California, as well as of South
America, Mexico and other portions of the New World, including the
Pacific Ocean; indeed is it not to Spain and her good Queen Isabella the
Catholic, to whom we really owe the discovery of America by Columbus?
But not to deviate from Spain's work in California, it was the early
Spanish governors who first framed laws and drew up a constitution in
California, and it was they who made the first land grants, it was by
Spanish explorers too that the first maps of California were drawn,
under Spanish rule were many of the present towns and cities founded,
from Spain came the first dawn of refinement and civilization, the first
army and navy, the first artists, musicians, physicians and skilled
workmen, in fine the first white child born in California was born of
Spanish parents settled in Monterey. And what was the record of Spain's
dominion in California? Setting aside unfounded calumnies as absurd as
the one which claims that Philip II passed a law sentencing to death any
foreigner who set foot on Spain's dominions in the New World,
relegating such lies to where they belong, Spain's rule in her New World
possessions, including California was marked by humanity as well as
energy. Cortes, Pizzaro, Vizcaino, Coronado, Menendez, Ponce de Leon,
Cabeza de Vaca, Balboa, as well as the later "pathfinders" governors
and viceroys of Catholic Spain, were men of honor, and sobriety to whose
names no "butcheries and cruelties" may be justly attached.

Perhaps one of the best proofs of Catholic Spanish humanity is the
fact of the preservation of the aborigines of the land wherever Spanish
conquests were made. Take for example, the statistics of the last
census of Mexico which reveal that of a population of 15,000,000 souls
7,000,000 are pure Indian 5,000,000 mestizos or of mixed Indian and
foreign extraction and only 3,000,000 foreigners or of Mexican birth but
of purely foreign extraction. Take, California, Arizona, New Mexico
and other former Spanish possessions of whom the same may be said in
proportion. In these places no Indian reservations are seen as where
the Puritans held sway. If Spain were guilty of the cruelties so
falsely imputed to her, Mexico in particular would be a Spanish or
Latin-American Republic, as it is, she may hardly be termed as such.
But Catholic Spain acted as explorer, civilizer and with her venerable
missionaries sponsor to the conversion of the heathen tribes of her
New World colonies, leaving in them the traces of her enlightenment and
christianity, yes, leaving them monuments of her humanity!

On the absurd and ludicrous application of the term "Spanish" in our
midst to many persons who have no claim to it by either birth or descent
we will not dwell, as we would not cheapen our sketch by stooping to
discuss such ignorance or insult our intelligent readers by writing on
such foolishness, we will only ask their permission to say that many
so-called intelligent people have no conception of the Spanish type,
race or character, but these we will leave "a la luna de Valencia" as an
ancient Spanish saying would express such cases. The California families
of Spanish descent are comparatively few, this being noted especially by
Spanish visitors to California.

But what of Spanish generosity at home, when the missionaries were
toiling for souls in the New World? Many a pious Spaniard in Spain and
in Mexico subscribed immense sums for the missions of California, both
for the Jesuit and the Franciscan missions. Thus we find the pious
Marquis de Villa Puente subscribing $200,000 for "missions, vessels
and other necessities of California." The Duchess of Gandia subscribed
$60,000 for the same purpose in 1767 and many others followed the same
example until the "Pius Fund of the Missions of California" amounted
to over two million dollars. At the time of the Secularization of the
Missions, the Mexican Government confiscated a large remaining portion
of this "Pious Fund." In 1853 the Spanish Archbishop Alemany, then
Bishop of Monterey and successor of Bishop Diego from whom the "Pious
Fund" had been taken, started a litigation which was continued in turn
by his worthy successor Archbishop Patrick Riordan of the archdiocese of
San Francisco, with the good result that Mexico was made to pay the sum
of $43,050 in Mexican currency annually as the interest at six per cent
on the sum of $1,460,682 of the "Pious Fund" which the national treasury
of Mexico had appropriated on the promise of Mexico to act as trustee of
the fund and pay an interest of six per cent which it had failed to pay
