called a 'holiness crank.'"

[Illustration: ]

A few days afterward Robert Goodman received a large package from an
unknown friend containing a warm overcoat and three pairs of shoes. His
father also received a present. It came through the mail and was an
honest confession of a wrong done him, also a check for one hundred
dollars. One year later this church gave a unanimous call to Brother
Goodman and the revival which broke out that winter was unprecedented
in the annals of that church. Verily, "A little child shall lead them."


--Luella Watson Kinder, in _Christian Witness_



CARLETTA AND THE MERCHANT

"If I could only have your faith, gladly would I--but I was born a
skeptic. I cannot look upon God and the future as _you_ do."

So said John Harvey as he walked with a friend under a dripping umbrella.
John Harvey was a skeptic of thirty years standing and apparently hardened
in his unbelief. Everybody had given him up as hopeless. Reasoning ever
so calmly made no impression on the rocky soil of his heart. Alas! it
was sad, very sad!

But one friend had never given him up. When spoken to about him--
"I will talk with and pray for that man until I die," he said; "and I
will have faith that he may yet come out of darkness into the marvelous
light."

And thus whenever he met him (John Harvey was always ready for a "talk,")
Mr. Hawkins pressed home the truth. In answer, on that stormy night, he
said: "God can change a skeptic, John. He has more power over your heart
than you, and I mean still to pray for you."

"Oh, I have no objections, none in the world--seeing is believing, you
know. I'm ready for any miracle; but I tell you it would take nothing
short of a miracle to convince me. Let's change the subject. I'm hungry
and it's too far to go up town to supper on this stormy night. Here's a
restaurant: let us stop here."

How warm and pleasant it looked in the long, brilliant dining saloon!

The two merchants had eaten, and were just on the point of rising when
a strain of soft music came through the open door--a child's sweet voice.

"'Pon my word, that is pretty," said John Harvey; "what purity in those
tones!"

"Out of here, you little baggage!" cried a hoarse voice, and one of the
waiters pointed angrily to the door.

"Let her come in," said John Harvey.

"We don't allow them in this place, sir," said the waiter, "but she can
go into the reading-room."

"Well, let her go somewhere. I want to hear her," responded the gentleman.

All this time the two had seen the shadow of something hovering backwards
and forwards on the edge of the door; now they followed a slight little
figure, wrapped in a patched cloak, patched hood, and leaving the mark
of wet feet as she walked. Curious to see her face--she was very
small--John Harvey lured her to the farthest part of the great room where
there were but few gentlemen, and then motioned her to sing. The little
one looked timidly up. Her cheek was of olive darkness, but a flush
rested there, and out of the thinnest face, under the arch of broad
temples, deepened by masses of the blackest hair looked two eyes whose
softness and tender pleading would have touched the hardest heart.

"That little thing is sick, I believe," said John Harvey, compassionately.
"What do you sing, child?" he added.

"I sing Italian or a little English."

John Harvey looked at her shoes. "Why," he exclaimed, and his lips
quivered, "her feet are wet to her ankles; she will catch her death of
cold."

By this time the child had begun to sing, pushing back her hood, and
folding before her her little thin fingers. Her voice was wonderful; and
simple and common as were both air and words, the pathos of the tones
drew together several of the merchants in the reading-room. The little
song commenced thus:

  "There is a happy land,
  Far, far away."

Never could the voice, the manner, of that child be forgotten. There
almost seemed a halo around her head; and when she had finished, her
great speaking eyes turned toward John Harvey.

"Look here, child; where did you learn that song?" he asked.

"At the Sunday School, Sir."

"And you don't suppose there is a happy land?"

"I know there is; I'm going to sing there," she said, so quickly, so
decidedly that the men looked at each other.

"Going to sing there?"

"Yes, sir. Mother said so. She used to sing to me until she was very
sick. Then she said she wasn't going to sing any more on earth, but up
in heaven."

"Well--and what then?"

"And then she died, sir," said the child; tears brimming down the dark
cheek now ominously flushed scarlet.

John Harvey was silent for a few moments.

Presently he said: "Well, if she died, my little girl, you may live, you
know."

"Oh, no, sir! no, sir! I'd rather go there; and be with mother. Sometimes
I have a dreadful pain in my side and cough as she did. There won't be
any pain up there, sir; it's a beautiful world!"

"How do you know?" faltered on the lips of the skeptic.

"My mother told me so, sir."

Words how impressive! manner how child-like, and yet so wise!

John Harvey had had a praying mother. His chest labored for a moment--
the sobs that struggled for utterance could be heard even in their
depths--and still those large, soft, lustrous eyes, like magnets impelled
his glance toward them.

"Child you must have a pair of shoes." John Harvey's voice was husky.

Hands were thrust in pockets, purses pulled out, and the astonished child
held in her little palm more money than she had ever seen before.

"Her father is a poor, consumptive organ-grinder," whispered one. "I
suppose he's too sick to be out tonight."

Along the soggy street went the child, under the protection of John
Harvey, but not with shoes that drank the water at every step. Warmth
and comfort were hers now. Down in the deep den-like lanes of the city
walked the man, a little cold hand in his. At an open door they stopped;
up broken, creaking stairs they climbed. Another doorway was opened, and
a wheezing voice called out of the dim arch, "Carletta!"

"O Father! Father! see what I have brought you! Look at me! Look at me"
and down went the silver, and venting her joy, the poor child fell;
crying and laughing together, into the old man's arms.

Was he a man?

A face dark and hollow, all overgrown with hair black as night and
uncombed--a pair of wild eyes--a body bent nearly double--hands like claws.

"Did he give you all this, my child?"

"They all did, Father; now you shall have soup and oranges."

"Thank you, sir--I'm sick, you see--all gone, sir!--had to send the poor
child out, or we'd starve. God bless you, sir! I wish I was well enough
to play you a tune," and he looked wistfully towards the corner where
stood the old organ, baize-covered, the baize in tatters.

One month after that the two men met again as if by agreement, and walked
slowly down town. Treading innumerable passages they came to the gloomy
building where lived Carletta's father.

No--not _lived there_, for as they paused a moment out came two or
three men bearing a pine coffin. In the coffin slept the old organ-grinder.

"It was very sudden, sir," said a woman, who recognized his benefactor.
"Yesterday the little girl was took sick and it seemed as if he drooped
right away. He died at six last night."

The two men went silently up stairs. The room was empty of everything
save a bed, a chair and a nurse provided by John Harvey. The child lay
there, not white, but pale as marble, with a strange polish on her brow.


"Well my little one, are you better?"

"Oh no, sir; Father is gone up there and I am going."

Up _there_! John Harvey turned unconsciously towards his friend.

"Did you ever hear of Jesus?" asked John Harvey's friend.

"Oh yes."

"Do you know who he was?"

"_Good Jesus_," murmured the child.

"Hawkins, this breaks me down," said John Harvey and he placed his
handkerchief to his eyes.

"Don't cry, don't cry; I can't cry, I'm so glad," said the child
exultingly.

"What are you glad for, my dear?" asked John Harvey's friend.

"To get away from here," she said deliberately. "I used to be so cold
in the winter, for we didn't have fire sometimes; but mother used to hug
me close and sing about heaven. Mother told me to never mind and kissed
me and said if I was His, the Savior would love me and one of these days
would give me a better home, and so I gave myself to Him, for I wanted
a better home. And, oh, I shall sing there and be so happy!"

With a little sigh she closed her eyes.

"Harvey, are faith and hope nothing?" asked Mr. Hawkins.

"Don't speak to me, Hawkins; to be as that little child I would give all
I have."

"And to be like her you need give nothing--only your stubborn will, your
skeptical doubts, and the heart that will never know rest till at the
feet of Christ."

There was no answer. Presently the hands moved, the arms were raised,
the eyes opened--yet, glazed though they were they turned still upward.


[Illustration]

"See!" she cried; "Oh, there is mother! and angels! and they are all
singing." Her voice faltered, but the celestial brightness lingered yet
on her face.

"There is no doubting the soul-triumph there," whispered Mr. Hawkins.

"It is wonderful," replied John Harvey, looking on both with awe and
tenderness. "Is she gone?"

He sprang from his chair as if he would detain her; but the chest and
forehead were marble now, the eyes had lost the fire of life; she must
have died as she lay looking at them.

"She was always a sweet little thing," said the nurse softly.

John Harvey stood as if spell-bound. There was a touch on his arm; he
started.

"John," said his friend, with an affectionate look, "shall we pray?"

[Illustration]

For a minute there was no answer--then came tears; the whole frame of
the subdued skeptic shook as he said--it was almost a cry: "Yes, pray,
pray!"

And from the side of the dead child went up agonizing pleadings to the
throne of God. And that prayer was answered--the miracle was wrought--
the lion became a lamb--the doubter a believer--the skeptic a Christian!


--A Tract.



HOW THREE SUNDAY SCHOOL CHILDREN MET THEIR FATE

[Illustration: "The children saw their fate. They then knelt down and
commenced to pray."]

When the Lawrence Mills were on fire a number of years ago--I don't mean
on fire, but when the mill fell in--the great mill fell in, and after
it had fallen in, the ruins caught fire, there was only one room left
entire, and in it were three Mission Sunday School children imprisoned.
The neighbors and all hands got their shovels and picks and crowbars and
were working to set the children free. It came on night and they had not
yet reached the children. When they were near them, by some mischance
the lantern broke, and the ruins caught fire. They tried to put it out,
but could not succeed. They could talk with the children, and even pass
to them some refreshments, and encourage them to keep up. But, alas, the
flames drew nearer and nearer to the prison. Superhuman were the efforts
made to rescue the children; the men bravely fought back the flames; but
the fire gained fresh strength, and returned to claim its victims. Then
piercing shrieks arose when the spectators saw that the efforts of the
firemen were hopeless. The children saw their fate. They then knelt down
and commenced to sing the little hymn we have all been taught in our
Sunday School days. Oh! how sweet: "Let others seek a home below, which
flames devour and waves overflow." The flames had now reached them; the
stifling smoke began to pour into their little room, and they began to
sink, one by one, upon the floor. A few moments more and the fire circled
around them, and their souls were taken into the bosom of Christ. Yes,
let others seek a home below if they will, but seek ye the Kingdom of
God with all your hearts.

--Moody's Anecdotes



HE BLESSES GOD FOR THE FAITH OF HIS LITTLE GIRL

"I came home one night very late," says Brother Matthew Hale Smith (in
his "Marvels of Prayer"), "and had gone to bed to seek needed rest. The
friend with whom I boarded awoke me out of my first refreshing sleep,
and informed me that a little girl wanted to see me. I turned over in
bed and said:

"'I am very tired, tell her to come in the morning and I will see her.'


"My friend soon returned and said:

"'I think you had better get up. The girl is a poor little suffering
thing. She is thinly clad, is without bonnet or shoes. She has seated
herself on the doorstep and says she must see you and will wait till you
get up.'

"I dressed myself and opening the outside door I saw one of the most
forlorn-looking little girls I ever beheld. Want, sorrow, suffering,
neglect, seemed to struggle for the mastery. She looked up to my face
and said:

"'Are you the man that preached last night and said that Christ could
save to the uttermost?'

"'Yes.'

"'Well, I was there, and I want you to come right down to my house and
try to save my poor father.'

"'What's the matter with your father?'

"'He's a very good father when he don't drink. He's out of work and he
drinks awfully. He's almost killed my poor mother; but if Jesus can save
to the uttermost, He can save him. And I want you to come right to our
house now.'

"I took my hat and followed my little guide who trotted on before, halting
as she turned the corners to see that I was coming. Oh, what a miserable
den her home was! A low, dark, underground room, the floor all slush and
mud--not a chair, table, or bed to be seen. A bitter cold night and not
a spark of fire on the hob and the room not only cold but dark. In the
corner on a little dirty straw lay a woman. Her head was bound up, and
she was moaning as if in agony. As we darkened the doorway a feeble voice
said: 'Oh, my child! my child! why have you brought a stranger into this
horrible place?' Her story was a sad one, but soon told. Her husband,
out of work, maddened with drink and made desperate, had stabbed her
because she did not provide him with a supper that was not in the house.
