too, that the most loving familiarity never forgets the fathomless gulf
between God and it. Abraham remembers that he is 'dust and ashes'; he
knows that he is venturing much in speaking to God. His pertinacious
prayers have a recurring burden of lowly recognition of his place.
Twice he heralds them with 'I have taken upon me to speak unto the
Lord'; twice with 'Oh let not the Lord be angry.' Perfect love casts
out fear and deepens reverence. We may come with free hearts, from
which every weight of trembling and every cloud of doubt has been
lifted. But the less the dread, the lower we shall bow before the
Loftiness which we love. We do not pray aright until we tell God
everything. The 'boldness' which we as Christians ought to have, means
literally a frank speaking out of all that is in our hearts. Such
'boldness and access with confidence' will often make short work of
so-called seemly reverence, but it will never transgress by so much as
a hair's-breadth the limits of lowly, trustful love.

Abraham's persistency may teach us a lesson. If one might so say, he
hangs on God's skirt like a burr. Each petition granted only encourages
him to another. Six times he pleads, and God waits till he has done
before He goes away; He cannot leave His friend till that friend has
said all his say. What a contrast the fiery fervour and unwearying
pertinacity of Abraham's prayers make to the stiff formalism of the
intercessions one is familiar with! The former are like the successive
pulses of a volcano driving a hot lava stream before it; the latter,
like the slow flow of a glacier, cold and sluggish. Is any part of our
public or private worship more hopelessly formal than our prayers for
others? This picture from the old world may well shame our languid
petitions, and stir us up to a holy boldness and persistence in prayer.
Our Saviour Himself teaches that 'men ought always to pray, and not to
faint,' and Himself recommends to us a holy importunity, which He
teaches us to believe is, in mysterious fashion, a power with God. He
gives room for such patient continuance in prayer by sometimes delaying
the apparent answer, not because He needs to be won over to bless, but
because it is good for us to draw near, and to keep near, the Lord. He
is ever at the door, ready to open, and if sometimes, like Rhoda to
Peter, He does not open immediately, and we have to keep knocking, it
is that our desires may increase by delay, and so He may be able to
give a blessing, which will be the greater and sweeter for the tarrying.

So the friendship is manifested on both sides: on God's, by disclosure
of His purpose and compliance with His friend's request; on Abraham's,
by speech which is saved from irreverence by love, and by prayer which
is acceptable to God by its very importunity. Jesus Christ has promised
us the highest form of such friendship, when He has said, 'I have
called you friends: for all things that I have heard of My Father I
have made known unto you'; and again, 'If ye abide in Me, ... ye shall
ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you.'




THE SWIFT DESTROYER


    'And when the morning arose, then the angels hastened
    Lot, saying, Arise, take thy wife, and thy two daughters,
    which are here; lest them be consumed in the iniquity of
    the city. And while he lingered, the men laid hold upon
    his hand, and upon the hand of his wife, and upon the
    hand of his two daughters; the Lord being merciful unto
    him: and they brought him forth, and set him without
    the city. And it came to pass, when they had brought
    them forth abroad, that He said, Escape for thy life;
    look not behind thee, neither stay thou in all the plain;
    escape to the mountain, lest thou be consumed. And Lot
    said unto them, Oh, not so, my Lord: Behold now, Thy
    servant hath found grace in Thy sight, and Thou hast
    magnified Thy mercy, which Thou hast shewed unto me in
    saving my life; and I cannot escape to the mountain, lest
    some evil take me, and I die: Behold now, this city is
    near to flee unto, and it is a little one: Oh, let me
    escape thither, (is it not a little one?) and my soul
    shall live. And He said unto him, See, I have accepted
    thee concerning this thing also, that I will not overthrow
    this city, for the which thou hast spoken. Haste thee,
    escape thither; for I cannot do any thing till thou be
    come thither. Therefore the name of the city was called
    Zoar. The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered
    into Zoar. Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and upon
    Gomorrah brimstone and fire from the Lord out of heaven;
    And He overthrew those cities, and all the plain, and
    all the inhabitants of the cities, and that which grew
    upon the ground. But his wife looked back from behind
    him, and she became a pillar of salt.'--GENESIS xix. 15-26.

The religious significance of this solemn page of revelation is but
little affected by any of the interesting questions which criticism
raises concerning it, so that I am free to look at the whole narrative
for the purpose of deducing its perennial lessons. There are four
clearly marked stages in the story: the lingering of Lot in the doomed
city, and the friendly force which dragged him from it; the prayer of
abject fear, and the wonderful answer; the awful catastrophe; and the
fate of the wretched woman who looked back.

1. Lot's lingering and rescue by force. Second thoughts are not always
best. When great resolves have to be made, and when a clear divine
command has to be obeyed, the first thought is usually the nobler; and
the second, which pulls it back, and damps its ardour, is usually of
the earth, earthy. So was it with Lot. Overnight, in the excitement of
the terrible scene enacted before his door, Lot had been not only
resolved himself to flee, but his voice had urged his sons-in-law to
escape from the doom which he then felt to be imminent. But with the
cold grey light of morning his mood has changed. The ties which held
him in Sodom reassert their power. Perhaps daylight made his fears seem
less real. There was no sign in the chill Eastern twilight that this
day was to be unlike the other days. Perhaps the angels' summons roused
him from sleep, and their 'arise' is literally meant. It might have
given wings to his flight. Urgent, and resonant, like the morning
bugle, it bids him be stirring lest he be swept away 'in the punishment
of the city.' Observe that the same word means 'sin' and
'punishment,'--a testimony to the profound truth that at bottom they
are one, sin being pain in the root, pain being sin in the flower. So
our own word 'evil' covers all the ground, and means both sin and
sorrow. But even that pealing note does not shatter his hesitation. He
still lingers. What kept him? That which had first taken him
there--material advantages. He had struck root in Sodom. The tent life
which he had kept to at first has been long given up; we find him
sitting in the gate of the city, the place for gossip and friendly
intercourse. He has either formed, or is going to form, marriage
alliances for his daughters with men of the city who are as black as
the rest. Perhaps his wife, whom the story will not name, for pity or
for horror, was a Sodomite. To escape meant to leave all this and his
wealth behind. If he goes out, he goes out a pauper. So his heart,
which is where his treasure is, makes his movements slow. What insanity
his lingering must have seemed to the angels! I wonder if we, who cling
so desperately to the world, and who are so slow to go where God would
have us to be for our own safety, if thereby we shall lose anything of
this world's wealth, seem very much wiser to eyes made clear-sighted
with the wisdom of heaven. This poor hesitating lingerer, too much at
home in the city of destruction to get out of it even to save his life,
has plenty of brothers to-day. Every man who lets the world hold him by
the skirts when Christ is calling him to salvation, and every man who
is reluctant to obey any clear call to sacrifice and separation from
godless men, may see his own face in this glass, and perhaps get a
glimpse of its ugliness.

What a homely picture, full of weighty truth, the story gives us, of
the angels each taking two of the reluctant four by the hand, and
dragging them with some degree of kindly force from destruction into
safety! So, in a great fire, domestic animals and horses seem to find a
strange fascination in the flames, and have to be carried out of
certain death by main force. They 'set him'--or we might read, 'made
him rest'--outside the city. It was but a little distance, for these
'cities' were tiny places, and the walls were soon reached. But it was
far enough to change Lot's whole feelings. He passes to feeble despair
and abject fear, as we shall see. That forlorn group, homeless,
friendless, stripped of everything, shivering outside the gate in the
cold morning air, may teach us how wise and prudent the man is who
seeks the kingdom of God second, and the other things first.

2. There was a pause outside the city. A new voice speaks now to Lot.
'They' brought him forth; but 'He' said 'escape.' The same 'Lord' to
whom Abraham had prayed, has now rejoined the mysterious pair whom He
had sent to Sodom. And Lot's entreaty is addressed to Him whom he calls
'my Lord.' He uses singular pronouns throughout, although the narrator
says that he 'said unto _them_.' There seems to be here the same idea
as is embodied in the word 'Elohim'; namely, that the divine powers are
regarded as in some sense separable, and yet all inhering in a personal
unity. At all events, we have here a distinct representation of an
intercourse between God and man, in which thoughts are conveyed to the
human spirit direct from the divine, and desires pass from the human to
the divine. The manner of the intercourse we do not know, but the
possibility of the fact can scarcely be denied by any believer in a
God; and, however we may call this miraculous or abnormal, the essence
of the event can be repeated in the experience of each of us. God still
speaks to men, and men may still plead with God. Unless our religion is
communion, it is nothing.

The divine voice reiterates the angels' urgent command in still more
stringent words: 'Escape for thy life.' There is to be no more
angel-leading, but Lot's feet are to be made as hinds' feet by the
thought of the flaming death that is pursuing. His lingering looks are
sternly forbidden, since they would delay his flight and divide his
heart. The direction of his flight is for the first time pointed out.
The fertile plain, which had lured him down from the safe hills, is
prohibited. Only on the mountain-side, probably the eastern mountains,
where the morning red was beginning to blush, is there safety.

Lot's answer shows a complete change of feeling. He is too fully
alarmed now. His fright is so desperate that it has killed faith and
common sense. The natural conclusion from God's mercy, which he
acknowledges, would have been trust and obedience. 'Therefore I can
escape,' not 'but I cannot escape,' would have been the logic of faith.
The latter is the irrationality of fear. When a man who has been
cleaving to this fleeting life of earthly good wakes up to believe his
danger, he is ever apt to plunge into an abyss of terror, in which
God's commands seem impossible, and His will to save becomes dim. The
world first lies to us by 'You are quite safe where you are. Don't be
in a hurry to go.' Then it lies, 'You never can get away now.' Reverse
Lot's whimpering fears, and we get the truth. Are not God's directions
how to escape, promises that we shall escape? Will He begin to build,
and not be able to finish? Will the judgments of His hand overrun their
commission, like a bloodhound which, in its master's absence, may rend
his friend? 'We have all of us one human heart,' and this swift leap
from unreasoning carelessness to as unreasoning dread, this failure to
draw the true conclusion from God's past mercy, and this despairing
recoil from the path pointed for us, and craving for easier ways,
belongs to us. 'A strange servant of God was this,' say we. Yes, and we
are often quite as strange. How many people awakened to see their
danger are so absorbed by the sight that they cannot see the cross, or
think they can never reach it!

God answered the cry, whatever its fault, and that may well make us
pause in our condemnation. He hears even a very imperfect petition, and
can see the tiniest germ of faith buried under thick clods of doubt and
fear. This stooping readiness to meet Lot's weakness comes in wonderful
contrast with the terrible revelation of judgment which follows. What a
conception of God, which had room for this more than human patience
with weakness, and also for the flashing, lurid glories of destructive
retribution! Zoar is spared, not for the unworthy reason which Lot
suggested--because its minuteness might buy impunity, as some noxious
insect too small to be worth crushing--but in accordance with the
principle which was illustrated in Abraham's intercession, and even in
Lot's safety; namely, that the righteous are shields for others, as
Paul had the lives of all that sailed with him given to him.

God's 'cannot' answers Lot's 'cannot.' His power is limited by His own
solemn purpose to save His faltering servant. The latter had feared
that, before he could reach the mountain, 'the evil' would overtake
him. God shows him that his safety was a condition precedent to its
outburst. Lot barred the way. God could not 'let slip the dogs of'
judgment, but held them in the leash until Lot was in Zoar. Very awful
is the command to make haste, based on this impossibility, as if God
were weary of delay, and more than ready to smite. However we may find
anthropomorphism in these early narratives, let us not forget that,
when the world has long been groaning under some giant evil, and the
bitter seed is grown up into a waving forest of poison, there is
something in the passionless righteousness of God which brooks no
longer delay, but seeks to make 'a short work' on the earth.

3. So we are brought face to face with the grim story of the
destruction. There is a world of tragic meaning in the simple note of
time given. 'The sun was risen upon the earth when Lot entered into
Zoar.' The low-lying cities of the plain would lie in shadow for some
time before the sun topped the eastern hills. What a dawn! At that
joyous hour, just when the sunshine struck down on the smiling plain,
and lake and river gleamed like silver, and all things woke to new
hopes and fresh life, then the sky darkened, and the earth sank, and
horrible rain of fiery bitumen fell from the black pall, salt mud
poured in streams, and over all hung a column of fat, oily smoke. It is
not my province to discuss the physical cause of the destruction; but I
may refer to the suggestions of Sir J. W. Dawson, in his _Egypt and
Syria_, and in _The Expositor_ for May 1886, in which he shows that
great beds of bituminous limestone extend below the Jordan valley and
much of the Dead Sea, and that the escape of inflammable gag from these
through the opening of a fissure along a great 'line of fault,' is
capable of producing all the effects described. The 'brimstone' of the
Authorised Version is probably rather some form of bituminous matter
which would be carried into the air by such an escape of gas, and a
thick saline mud would accompany the eruption, encrusting anything it
reached. Subsidence would follow the ejection of quantities of such
matter; and hence the word 'overthrew,' which seems inappropriate to a
mere conflagration, would be explained.

But, however this may be, we have to recognise a supernatural element
in the starting of the train of natural causes, as well as in the
timing of the catastrophe, and a divine purpose of retribution, which
turns the catastrophe, however effected, into a judgment.

So regarded, the event has a double meaning. In the first place, it is
a revelation of an element in the divine character and of a feature in
the divine government. To the men of that time, it might be a warning.
To Abraham, and through him to his descendants, and through them to us,
it preaches a truth very unwelcome to many in this day: that there is
in God that which constrains Him to hate, fight against, and punish,
evil. The temper of this generation turns away from such thoughts, and,
in the name of the truth that 'God is love,' would fain obliterate the
truth that He does and will punish. But if the punitive element be
suppressed, and that in God which makes it necessary ignored or
weakened, the result will be a God who has not force enough to love,
but only weakly to indulge. If He does not hate and punish, He does not
pardon. For the sake of the love of God, we must hold firm by the
belief in the judgments of God. The God who destroyed Sodom is not
merely the God of an earlier antiquated creed. 'Is He the God of the
Jews only? Is He not also of the Gentiles? Yea, of the Gentiles also.'

Again, this event is a prophecy. So our Lord has employed it; and much
of the imagery in which the last judgment is represented is directly
drawn from this narrative. So far from this story showing to us only
the superstitions of a form of belief which we have long outgrown, its
deepest meaning lies far ahead, and closes the history of man on the
earth. We know from the lips which cannot lie, that the appalling
suddenness of that destruction foreshadows the swiftness of the coming
of that last 'day of the Lord.' We know that in literality some of the
physical features shall be reproduced; for the fire which shall burn up
the world and all its works is no figure, nor is it proclaimed only by
such non-authoritative voices as those of Jesus and His apostles, but
also by the modern possessors of infallible certitude, the men of
science. We know that that day shall be a day of retribution. We know,
too, that the crime of Sodom, foul and unnatural as it was, is not the
darkest, but that its inhabitants (who have to face that judgment too)
will find their doom more tolerable, and their sins lighter, than some
who have had high places in the Church, than the Pharisees and wise men
who have not taken Christ for their Saviour.

4. The fate of the loiterer. Her backward look must have been more than
momentary, for the destruction of the cities did not begin till Lot was
safe in Zoar. She must have lingered far behind, and been overtaken by
the eruption of liquid saline mud, which, as Sir J. W. Dawson has
shown, would attend or follow the outburst of bituminous matter, so
that her fate was the natural consequence of her heart being still in
Sodom. As to the 'pillar of salt' which has excited cavils on the one
hand and foolish legends on the other, probably we are to think rather
of a heap than of a pillar. The word does not occur in either meaning
elsewhere, but its derivation implies something raised above the level
of the ground; and a heap, such as would be formed by a human body
encrusted with salt mud, would suit the requirements of the expression.
Like a man who falls in a snowstorm, or, still more accurately, just as
some of the victims at Pompeii stumbled in their flight, and were
buried under the ashes, which still keep the outline of their figures,
so Lot's wife was covered with the half-liquid slimy mud. Granted the
delay in her flight, the rest is perfectly simple and natural. She was
buried in a horrible tomb; and, in pity to her memory, no name has been
written upon it. She remains to all generations, in a far truer sense
than superstition dreamed of when it pointed to an upright salt rock as
her prison and her monument, a warning of the danger of the backward
look, which betrays the true home of the heart, and may leave us
unsheltered in the open plain when the fiery storm bursts. 'Remember
Lot's wife.'

When the angels awoke Lot, the day was breaking. By the time that
Abraham had risen 'early in the morning,' and reached the place by his
tent from which he had yesterday looked on the smiling plain, all was
over, and the heavy smoke cloud wrapped the dead with its pall-like
folds. So swift and sudden is to be the coming of the Son of man,--as
the lightning which rushes in one fierce blinding flash from one side
of heaven to the other. Wherefore, God calls to each of us: 'Escape for
thy life; look not behind thee.'




FAITH TESTED AND CROWNED


    'And it came to pass after these things, that God did
    tempt Abraham, and said unto him, Abraham: and he said,
    Behold, here I am. And He said, Take now thy son, thine
    only son Isaac, whom thou lovest, and get thee into the
    land of Moriah; and offer him there for a burnt offering
    upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of. And
    Abraham rose up early in the morning, and saddled his
    ass, and took two of his young men with him, and Isaac
    his son, and clave the wood for the burnt offering, and
    rose up, and went unto the place of which God had told
    him. Then on the third day Abraham lifted up his eyes,
    and saw the place afar off. And Abraham said unto his
    young men, 'Abide ye here with the ass; and I and the
    lad will go yonder and worship, and come again to you.
    And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering, and laid
    it upon Isaac his son; and he took the fire in his hand,
    and a knife; and they went both of them together. And
    Isaac spake unto Abraham his father, and said, My father:
    and he said, Here am I, my son. And he said, Behold the
    fire and the wood: but where is the lamb for a burnt
    offering! And Abraham said, My son, God will provide
    Himself a lamb for a burnt offering: so they went both
    of them together. And they came to the place which God
    had told him of; and Abraham built an altar there, and
    laid the wood in order, and bound Isaac his son, and
    laid him on the altar upon the wood. And Abraham stretched
    forth his hand, and took the knife to slay his son. And
    the angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven,
    and said, Abraham, Abraham: and he said, Here am I. And
    He said, Lay not thine hand upon the lad, neither do
    thou any thing unto him: for now I know that thou fearest
    God, seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only
    son from Me. And Abraham lifted up his eyes, and looked,
    and behold behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his
    horns: and Abraham went and took the ram, and offered
    him up for a burnt offering in the stead of his son.
    And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-jireh:
    as it is said to this day, In the mount of the Lord it
    shall be seen.'--GENESIS xxii. 1-14.


I


A life of faith and self-denial has usually its sharpest trials at or
near its beginning. A stormy day has generally a calm close. But
Abraham's sorest discipline came all sudden, like a bolt from blue sky.
Near the end, and after many years of peaceful, uneventful life, he had
to take a yet higher degree in the school of faith. Sharp trial means
increased possession of God. So his last terrible experience turned to
his crowning mercy.

1. The very first words of this solemn narrative raise many questions.
We have God appointing the awful trial. The Revised Version properly
replaces 'tempt' by 'prove.' The former word conveys the idea of
appealing to the worse part of a man, with the wish that he may yield
and do the wrong. The latter means an appeal to the better part of a
man, with the desire that he should stand. Temptation says: 'Do this
pleasant thing; do not be hindered by the fact that it is wrong.'
Trial, or proving, says: 'Do this right and noble thing; do not be
hindered by the fact that it is painful.' The one is 'a sweet,
beguiling melody,' breathing soft indulgence and relaxation over the
soul; the other is a pealing trumpet-call to high achievements.

God's proving does not mean that He stands by, watching how His child
will behave. He helps us to sustain the trial to which He subjects us.
Life is all probation; and because it is so, it is all the field for
the divine aid. The motive of His proving men is that they may be
strengthened. He puts us into His gymnasium to improve our physique. If
we stand the trial, our faith is increased; if we fall, we learn
self-distrust and closer clinging to Him. No objection can be raised to
the representation of this passage as to God's proving Abraham, which
does not equally apply to the whole structure of life as a place of
probation that it may be a place of blessing. But the manner of the
trial here presents a difficulty. How could God command a father to
kill his son? Is that in accordance with His character? Well, two
considerations deserve attention. First, the final issue; namely,
Isaac's deliverance, was an integral part of the divine purpose from
the beginning of the trial; so that the question really is, Was it
accordant with the divine character to require readiness to sacrifice
even a son at His command? Second, that in Abraham's time, a father's
right over his child's life was unquestioned, and that therefore this
command, though it lacerated Abraham's heart, did not wound his
conscience as it would do were it heard to-day. It is impossible to
conceive of a divine injunction such as this being addressed to us. We
have learned the inalienable sacredness of every life, and the awful
prerogative and burden of individuality. God's command cannot enforce
sin. But it was not wrong in Abraham's eyes for a father to slay his
son; and God might shape His message to the form of the existing
morality without derogation from His character, especially when the
result of the message would be, among other things, to teach His
abhorrence of human sacrifices, and so to lift the existing morality to
a higher level.

2. The great body of the history sets before us Abraham standing the
terrible test. What unsurpassable beauty is in the simple story! It is
remarkable, even among the scriptural narratives, for the entire
absence of anything but the visible facts. There is not a syllable
about the feelings of father or of son. The silence is more pathetic
than many words. We look as into a magic crystal, and see the very
event before our eyes, and our own imaginations tell us more of the
world of struggle and sorrow raging under that calm outside than the
highest art could do. The pathos of reticence was never more perfectly
illustrated. Observe, too, the minute, prolonged details of the slow
progress to the dread instant of sacrifice. Each step is told in
precisely the same manner, and the series of short clauses, coupled
together by an artless 'and,' are like the single strokes of a passing
bell, or the slow drops of blood heard falling from a fatal wound. The
homely preparations for the journey are made by Abraham himself. He
makes no confidante of Sarah; only God and himself knew what that
bundle of wood meant. What thoughts must have torn his soul throughout
these weary days! How hard to keep his voice round and full while he
spoke to Isaac! How much the long protracted tension of the march
increased the sharpness of the test! It is easier to reach the height
of obedient self-sacrifice in some moment of enthusiasm, than to keep
up there through the commonplace details of slowly passing days. Many a
faith, which could even have slain its dearest, would have broken down
long before the last step of that sad journey was taken.

The elements of the trial were two: first, Abraham's soul was torn
asunder by the conflict of fatherly love and obedience to God. The
narrative intimates this struggle by continually insisting on the
relationship between the two. The command dwells with emphasis on it:
'thy son, thine only son Isaac, whom thou lovest.' He takes with him
'Isaac his son'; lays the wood on 'Isaac his son.' Isaac 'spake unto
Abraham his father'; Abraham answers, 'Here am I, my son'; and again,
'My son, God will provide.' He bound 'Isaac his son'; he 'took the
knife to slay his son'; and lastly, in the glad surprise at the end, he
offers the ram 'in the stead of his son.' Thus, at every turn, the
tender bond is forced on our notice, that we may feel how terrible was
the task laid on him--to cut it asunder with his own hand. The friend
of God must hold all other love as less than His, and must be ready to
yield up the dearest at His bidding. Cruel as the necessity seems to
flesh and blood, and specially poignant as his pain was, in essence
Abraham's trial only required of him what all true religion requires of
us. Some of us have been called by God's providence to give up the
light of our eyes, the joy of our homes, to Him. Some of us have had to
make the choice between earthly and heavenly love. All of us have to
throne God in our hearts, and to let not the dearest usurp His place.
In our weakness we may well shrink from such a test. But let us not
forget that the trial of Abraham was not imposed by his own mistaken
conceptions of duty, nor by a sterner God than the New Testament
reveals, but is distinctly set before every Christian in essence,
though not in form, by the gentle lips from which flowed the law of
love more stringent and exclusive in its claims than any other: 'He
that loveth father or mother more than Me is not worthy of Me.'

The conflict in Abraham's soul had a still more painful aspect in that
it seemed to rend his very religion into two. Faith in the promise on
which he had been living all his life drew one way; faith in the later
command, another. God seemed to be against God, faith against faith,
promise against command. If he obeys now, what is to become of the
hopes that had shone for years before him? His whole career will be
rendered nugatory, and with his own hand he will crush to powder his
life's work. That wonderful short dialogue which broke the stern
silence of the journey seems to throw light on his mood. There is
nothing in literature sacred or secular, fact or fiction, poetry or
prose, more touching than the innocent curiosity of Isaac's boyish
question, and the yearning self-restraint of the father's desperate and
yet calm answer. But its value is not only in its pathos. It seems to
show that, though he knew not how, still he held by the hope that
somehow God would not forget His promise. Out of his very despair, his
faith struck, out of the flint of the hard command, a little spark
which served to give some flicker of light amid the darkness. His
answer to his boy does not make his sacrifice less, but his faith more.
The writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews gives a somewhat different
turn to his hopes, when he tells us that he offered up the heir of the
promises, 'accounting that God was able to raise him from the dead.'
Both ways of clinging to the early promise, even while obeying the
later command, seem to have passed through his mind. The wavering from
the one to the other is natural. He is sure that God had not lied
before, and means what He commands now. He is sure that there is some
point of reconciliation--perhaps this, perhaps that, but certainly
somewhat. So he goes straight on the road marked for him, quite sure
that it will not end in a blind alley, from which there is no exit.
That is the very climax of faith--to trust God so absolutely, even when
His ways seem contradictory, as to be more willing to believe apparent
impossibilities than to doubt Him, and to be therefore ready for the
hardest trial of obedience. We, too, have sometimes to take courses
which seem to annihilate the hope and aims of a life. The lesson for us
is to go straight on the path of clear duty wherever it leads. If it
seem to bring us up to inaccessible cliffs, we may be sure that when we
get there we shall find some ledge, though it may be no broader than a
chamois could tread, which will suffice for a path. If it seem to bring
us to a deep and bridgeless stream, we shall find a ford when we get to
the water's edge. If the mountains seem to draw together and bar a
passage, we shall find, when we reach them, that they open out; though
it may be no wider than a canyon, still the stream can get through, and
our boat with it.

3. So we have the climax of the story--faith rewarded. The first great
lesson which the interposition of the Divine voice teaches us, is that
obedience is complete when the inward surrender is complete. The
outward act was needless. Abraham would have done no more if the
flashing knife had buried itself in Isaac's heart. Here is the first
great proclamation of the truth which revolutionises morality and
religion, the beginnings of the teaching which culminates in the ethics
of the Sermon on the Mount, and in the gospel of salvation, not by
deeds, but through faith. The will is the man, the true action is the
submission of the will. The outward deed is only the coarse medium
through which it is made visible for men: God looks on purpose as
performance.

Again, faith is rewarded by God's acceptance and approval. 'I know that
thou fearest God,' not meaning that He learned the heart by the
conduct, but that, on occasion of the conduct, He breathes into the
obedient heart that calm consciousness of its service as recognised and
accepted by Him, which is the highest reward that His friend can know.
'To be well pleasing to Him' is our noblest aim, which, cherished,
makes sacrifice sweet, and all difficult things easy. 'Nor know we
anything more fair Than is the smile upon Thy face.'

Again, faith is rewarded by a deeper insight into God's will. Much has
been said about the sacrifice of Isaac in its bearing upon the custom
of human sacrifice. We do not believe that Abraham was led to his act
by a mistaken idea, borrowed from surrounding idolatries. His position
as the sole monotheist amid these, the absence of evidence that human
sacrifice was practised then among his neighbours, and, above all, the
fact of the divine approval of his intention, forbid our acceptance of
that theory. Nor can we regard the condemnation of such sacrifices as
the main object of the incident. But no doubt an incidental result,
and, we may perhaps say, a subsidiary purpose of it, was to stamp all
such hideous usages with the brand of God's displeasure. The mode of
thought which led to them was deeply rooted in the consciousness of the
Old World, and corresponded to a true conception of the needs of
humanity. The dark sense of sin, the conviction that it required
expiation, and that procurable only by death, drove men to these horrid
rites. And that ram, caught in the thicket, thorn-crowned and
substituted for the human victim, taught Abraham and his sons that God
appointed and provided a lamb for an offering. It was a lesson won by
faith. Nor need we hesitate to see some dim forecast of the great
Substitute whom God provided, who bears the sins of the world.

Again, faith is rewarded by receiving back the surrendered blessing,
made more precious because it has been laid on the altar. How strange
and solemn must have been the joy with which these two looked in each
other's faces! What thankful wonder must have filled Abraham's heart as
he loosed the cord that had bound his son! It would be many days before
the thrill of gratitude died away, and the possession of his son seemed
to Abraham, or that of life seemed to Isaac, a common thing. He was
doubly now a child of wonder, born by miracle, delivered by miracle. So
is it ever. God gives us back our sacrifices, tinged with a new beauty,
and purified from earthly alloy.

We never know how sweet our blessings are till we have yielded them to
Him. 'There is no man that hath left' anything or any person for
Christ's sake and the gospel's who will not 'receive a hundred-fold
more in this life, and in the world to come life everlasting.'

Lastly, Abraham was rewarded by being made a faint adumbration, for all
time, of the yet more wondrous and awful love of the divine Father,
who, for our sakes, has surrendered His only-begotten Son, whom He
loved. Paul quotes the very words of this chapter when he says: 'He
that _spared_ not His _own Son_, but delivered Him up for us all.' Such
thoughts carry us into dim regions, in which, perhaps, silence is best.
Did some shadow of loss and pain pass over the divine all-sufficiency
and joy, when He sent His Son? Was the unresisting innocence of the son
a far-off likeness of the willing eagerness of the sinless Sufferer who
chose to die? Was the resolved surrender of the father a faint prelude
of the deep divine love which gave His only Son for us? Shall we not
say, 'Now I know that Thou lovest me, because Thou hast not withheld
Thy Son, Thine only Son, from me'? Shall we not recognise this as the
crown of Abraham's reward, that his act of surrender of his dearest to
God, his Friend, has been glorified by being made the mirror of God's
unspeakable gift of His Son to us, His enemies?




THE CROWNING TEST AND TRIUMPH OF FAITH


II


The first words of this lesson give the keynote for its meaning. 'God
did prove Abraham'; the strange command was a test of his faith. In
recent times the incident has been regarded chiefly as embodying a
protest against child-sacrifices, and no doubt that is part of its
intention, and their condemnation was part of its effect, but the other
is the principal thing. Abraham, as the 'Father of the Faithful,' has
his faith tested by a series of events from his setting out from Haran,
and they culminate in this sharpest of all, the command to slay his
son. The life of faith is ever a life of testing, and very often the
fire that tries increases in heat as life advances. The worst conflicts
are not always at the beginning of the war.

Our best way of knowing ourselves is to observe our own conduct,
especially when it is hard to do nobly. We may easily cheat ourselves
about what is the basis and ruling motive of our lives, but our actions
will show it us. God does not 'test' us as if He did not know what was
gold and what base metal, but the proving is meant to make clear to
others and ourselves what is the worth and strength of our religion.
The test is also a means of increasing the faith which it demonstrates,
so that the exhortation to 'count it all joy' to have faith tried is no
overstrained counsel of perfection.

The narrative plainly declares that the command to sacrifice his son
was to Abraham unmistakably divine. The explanation that Abraham,
living beside peoples who practised child-sacrifice, heard but the
voice of his own conscience asking, 'Canst thou do for Jehovah what
these do for Moloch?' does not correspond to the record. No doubt God
does speak through conscience; but what sent Abraham on his terrible
journey was a command which he knew did not spring up within, but came
to him from above. We may believe or disbelieve the possibility or the
actuality of such direct and distinguishable commands from God, but we
do not face the facts of this narrative unless we recognise that it
asserts that God made His will known to Abraham, and that Abraham knew
that it was God's will, not his own thought.

But is it conceivable that God should ever bid a man commit a crime? To
the question put in that bald way, of course there can be but one
answer, No. But several conditions have to be taken into account.
First, it is conceivable that God should test a man's willingness to
surrender what is most precious to him, and what all his hopes are
fixed on; and this command was given with the purpose that it should
not be obeyed in fact, if the willingness to obey it was proved. Again,
the stage of development of the moral sense at which Abraham stood has
to be remembered. The child-sacrifices around him were not regarded as
crimes, but as worship, and, while his affections were the same as
ours, and his father's heart was wrung, to slay Isaac did not present
itself to him as a crime in the way in which it does so to us. God
deals with men on the moral and spiritual level to which they have
attained, and, by descending to it, raises them higher.

The purpose of the command was to test faith, even more than to test
whether earthly love or heavenly obedience were the stronger. There is
a beautiful and instructive climax in the designations of Isaac in
verse 2, where four times he is referred to, 'thy son, thine only son,'
in whom all the hopes of fulfilment of the divine promise were
concentrated, so that, if this fruit from the aged tree were cut off,
no other could ever grow; 'whom thou lovest,'--there the sharp point
pierces the father's heart; 'even Isaac,' in which name all the ties
that knit him to Abraham are gathered up. Each word heightens the
greatness of the sacrifice demanded, and is a fresh thrust of the
dagger into Abraham's very life. Each suggests a reason for not slaying
Isaac, which sense might plead. God does not hide the painfulness of
surrender from us. The more precious the treasure is, the more are we
bound to lay it on the altar. But it was Abraham's faith even more than
his love that was tested. The Epistle to the Hebrews lays hold on this
as the main element in the trial, that he who 'had received the
promises' was called to do what seemed to blast all hope of their being
fulfilled. What a cruel position to have God's command and God's
promise apparently in diametrical opposition! But faith loosened even
that seemingly inextricable tangle of contradiction, and felt that to
obey was for man, and to keep His promise was for God. If we do our
duty, He will see to the consequences. 'Tis mine to obey; 'tis His to
provide.'

Nothing in literature is more tenderly touched or more truly imagined
than that long, torturing journey--Abraham silent, Isaac silently
wondering, the servants silently following. And, like a flash, at last
'the place' was seen afar off. How calmly Abraham speaks to the two
followers, mastering his heart's throbbing even then! 'We will worship,
and come again to you'--was that a 'pious fraud' or did it not rather
indicate that a ray of hope, like pale light from a shrouded sun, shone
for him? He 'accounted that God was able to raise him up even from the
dead.' Somehow, he knew not how, Isaac slain was still to live and
inherit the promises. Anything was possible, but that God's word should
fail was impossible. That picture of the father and son alone, the one
bearing the wood, the other the fire and the knife, exchanging no word
but once, when the innocent wonder of Isaac's question must have shaken
Abraham's steadfastness, and made it hard for him to steady his voice
to answer, touches the deepest springs of pity and pathetic sublimity.
But the answer is in the same spirit as that to the servants, and
indicates the same hope. 'God will provide Himself a lamb, my son.' He
does not know definitely what he expects; he is ready to slay Isaac,
but his faith is not quenched, though the end seems so inevitable and
near. Faith was never more sharply tested, and never more triumphantly
stood the test.

The divine solution of the riddle was kept back till the last moment,
as it usually is. The place is slowly reached, the hill slowly climbed,
the altar built, the unresisting Isaac bound (with what deep thoughts
in each, who can tell?), the steady hand holding the glittering knife
lifted--a moment more and it will be red with heart's blood, and not
till then does God speak. It is ever so. The trial has 'its perfect
work.' Faith is led to the edge of the precipice, one step farther and
all is over. Then God speaks, all but just too late, and yet 'right
early.' The willingness to make the sacrifice is tested to the utmost,
and being proved, the sacrifice is not required.

Abraham had said to Isaac, 'God will provide a lamb,' and the word
'provide' is that which appears in the name he gave to the
place--Jehovah-_jireh_. The name, then, commemorated, not the servant's
faith but the Lord's mercy, and the spirit of it was embodied in what
became a popular saying, 'In the mount of the Lord it shall be
provided.' If faith dwells there, its surrenders will be richly
rewarded. How much more dear was Isaac to Abraham as they journeyed
back to Beersheba! And whatever we lay on God's altar comes back a
'hundred-fold more in this life,' and brings in the world to come life
everlasting.




JEHOVAH-JIREH


    'And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-jireh;
    (that is, The Lord will provide).'-GENESIS xxii. 14.

As these two, Abraham and Isaac, were travelling up the hill, the son
bearing the wood, and the father with the sad burden of the fire and
the knife, the boy said: 'Where is the lamb?' and Abraham, thrusting
down his emotion and steadying his voice, said: 'My son, God will
provide Himself a lamb.' When the wonderful issue of the trial was
plain before him, and he looked back upon it, the one thought that rose
in his mind was of how, beyond his meaning, his words had been true. So
he named that place by a name that spoke nothing of his trial, but
everything of God's provision--'The Lord will see,' or 'The Lord will
provide.'

1. The words have become proverbial and threadbare as a commonplace of
Christian feeling. But it may be worth our while to ask for a moment
what it was exactly that Abraham expected the Lord to provide. We
generally use the expression in reference to outward things, and see in
