Sauti, on hearing these words, began to relate according to what was
written in the Sastras.

Sauti said, "Vasuki, desirous of bestowing his sister upon the Rishi
Jaratkaru, gave the snakes (necessary) orders. But days went on, yet that
wise Muni of rigid vows, deeply engaged in ascetic devotions, did not seek
for a wife. That high-souled Rishi, engaged in studies and deeply devoted
to asceticism, his vital seed under full control, fearlessly wandered over
the whole earth and had no wish for a wife.

"Afterwards, once upon a time, there was a king, O Brahmana, of the name
of Parikshit, born in the race of the Kauravas. And, like his great-
grandfather Pandu of old, he was of mighty arms, the first of all bearers
of bows in battle, and fond of hunting. And the monarch wandered about,
hunting deer, and wild boars, and wolves, and buffaloes and various other
kinds of wild animals. One day, having pierced a deer with a sharp arrow
and slung his bow on his back, he penetrated into the deep forest,
searching for the animal here and there, like the illustrious Rudra
himself of old pursuing in the heavens, bow in hand, the deer which was
Sacrifice, itself turned into that shape, after the piercing. No deer that
was pierced by Parikshit had ever escaped in the wood with life. This deer,
however wounded as before, fled with speed, as the (proximate) cause of
the king's attainment to heaven. And the deer that Parikshit--that king of
men--had pierced was lost to his gaze and drew the monarch far away into
the forest. And fatigued and thirsty, he came across a Muni, in the forest,
seated in a cow-pen and drinking to his fill the froth oozing out of the
mouths of calves sucking the milk of their dams. And approaching him
hastily, the monarch, hungry and fatigued, and raising his bow, asked that
Muni of rigid vows, saying, 'O Brahmana, I am king Parikshit, the son of
Abhimanyu. A deer pierced by me hath been lost. Hast thou seen it?' But
that Muni observing then the vow of silence, spoke not unto him a word.
And the king in anger thereupon placed upon his shoulder a dead snake,
taking it up with the end of his bow. The Muni suffered him to do it
without protest. And he spoke not a word, good or bad. And the king seeing
him in that state, cast off his anger and became sorry. And he returned to
his capital but the Rishi continued in the same state. The forgiving Muni,
knowing that the monarch who was a tiger amongst kings was true to the
duties of his order, cursed him not, though insulted. That tiger amongst
monarchs, that foremost one of Bharata's race, also did not know that the
person whom he had so insulted was a virtuous Rishi. It was for this that
he had so insulted him.

"That Rishi had a son by name Sringin, of tender years, gifted with great
energy, deep in ascetic penances, severe in his vows, very wrathful, and
difficult to be appeased. At times, he worshipped with great attention and
respect his preceptor seated with ease on his seat and ever engaged in the
good of creatures.

"And commanded by his preceptor, he was coming home when, O best of
Brahmanas, a companion of his, a Rishi's son named Krisa in a playful mood
laughingly spoke unto him. And Sringin, wrathful and like unto poison
itself, hearing these words in reference to his father, blazed up in rage.

"And Krisa said, 'Be not proud, O Sringin, for ascetic as thou art and
possessed of energy, thy father bears on his shoulders a dead snake.
Henceforth speak not a word to sons of Rishis like ourselves who have
knowledge of the truth, are deep in ascetic penances, and have attained
success. Where is that manliness of thine, those high words of thine
begotten of pride, when thou must have to behold thy father bearing a dead
snake? O best of all the Munis, thy father too had done nothing to deserve
this treatment, and it is for this that I am particularly sorry as if the
punishment were mine.'"


SECTION XLI

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "Being thus addressed, and hearing that his sire was bearing
a dead snake, the powerful Sringin burned with wrath. And looking at Krisa,
and speaking softly, he asked him, 'Pray, why doth my father bear today a
dead snake?' And Krisa replied, 'Even as king Parikshit was roving, for
purpose of hunting, O dear one, he placed the dead snake on the shoulder
of thy sire.'

"And Sringin asked, 'What wrong was done to that wicked monarch by my
father? O Krisa, tell me this, and witness the power of my asceticism.'

"And Krisa answered, 'King Parikshit, the son of Abhimanyu, while hunting,
had wounded a fleet stag with an arrow and chased it alone. And the king
lost sight of the animal in that extensive wilderness. Seeing then thy
sire, he immediately accosted him. Thy sire was then observing the vow of
silence. Oppressed by hunger, thirst and labour, the prince again and
again asked thy sire sitting motionless, about the missing deer. The sage,
being under the vow of silence, returned no reply. The king thereupon
placed the snake on thy sire's shoulder with the end of his bow. O Sringin,
thy sire engaged in devotion is in the same posture still. And the king
also hath gone to his capital which is named after the elephant!'"

Sauti continued, "Having heard of a dead snake placed upon his (father's)
shoulders, the son of the Rishi, his eyes reddened with anger, blazed up
with rage. And possessed by anger, the puissant Rishi then cursed the king,
touching water and overcome with wrath.

"And Sringin said, 'That sinful wretch of a monarch who hath placed a dead
snake on the shoulders of my lean and old parent, that insulter of
Brahmanas and tarnisher of the fame of the Kurus, shall be taken within
seven nights hence to the regions of Yama (Death) by the snake Takshaka,
the powerful king of serpents, stimulated thereto by the strength of my
words!'"

Sauti continued, "And having thus cursed (the king) from anger, Sringin
went to his father, and saw the sage sitting in the cow-pen, bearing the
dead snake. And seeing his parent in that plight, he was again inflamed
with ire. And he shed tears of grief, and addressed his sire, saying,
'Father, having been informed of this thy disgrace at the hands of that
wicked wretch, king Parikshit, I have from anger even cursed him; and that
worst of Kurus hath richly deserved my potent curse. Seven days hence,
Takshaka, the lord of snakes, shall take the sinful king to the horrible
abode of Death.' And the father said to the enraged son, 'Child, I am not
pleased with thee. Ascetics should not act thus. We live in the domains of
that great king. We are protected by him righteously. In all he does, the
reigning king should by the like of us be forgiven. If thou destroy Dharma,
verily Dharma will destroy thee. If the king do not properly protect us,
we fare very ill; we cannot perform our religious rites according to our
desire. But protected by righteous sovereigns, we attain immense merit,
and they are entitled to a share thereof. Therefore, reigning royalty is
by all means to be forgiven. And Parikshit like unto his great-grandsire,
protecteth us as a king should protect his subjects. That penance-
practising monarch was fatigued and oppressed with hunger. Ignorant of my
vow (of silence) he did this. A kingless country always suffereth from
evils. The king punisheth offenders, and fear of punishments to peace;
and people do their duties and perform their rites undisturbed. The king
establisheth religion--establisheth the kingdom of heaven. The king
protecteth sacrifices from disturbance, and sacrifices to please the gods.
The gods cause rain, and rain produceth grains and herbs, which are always
useful to man. Manu sayeth, a ruler of the destinies of men is equal (in
dignity) to ten Veda-studying priests. Fatigued and oppressed with hunger,
that penance-practising prince hath done this through ignorance of my vow.
Why then hast thou rashly done this unrighteous action through
childishness? O son, in no way doth the king deserve a curse from us.'"


SECTION XLII

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "And Sringin then replied to his father, saying, 'Whether
this be an act of rashness, O father, or an improper act that I have done,
whether thou likest it or dislikest it, the words spoken by me shall never
be in vain. O father, I tell thee (a curse) can never be otherwise. I have
never spoken a lie even in jest.'

"And Samika said, 'Dear child, I know that thou art of great prowess, and
truthful in speech. Thou hast never spoken falsehood before, so that thy
curse shall never be falsified. The son, even when he attaineth to age,
should yet be always counselled by the father, so that crowned with good
qualities he may acquire great renown. A child as thou art, how much more
dost thou stand in need of counsel? Thou art ever engaged in ascetic
penances. The wrath of even the illustrious ones possessing the six
attributes increaseth greatly. O thou foremost of ordinance-observing
persons, seeing that thou art my son and a minor too, and beholding also
thy rashness, I see that I must counsel thee. Live thou, O son, inclined
to peace and eating fruits and roots of the forest. Kill this thy anger
and destroy not the fruit of thy ascetic acts in this way. Wrath surely
decreaseth the virtue that ascetics acquire with great pains. And then for
those deprived of virtue, the blessed state existeth not. Peacefulness
ever giveth success to forgiving ascetics. Therefore, becoming forgiving
in thy temper and conquering thy passions, shouldst thou always live. By
forgiveness shalt thou obtain worlds that are beyond the reach of Brahman
himself. Having adopted peacefulness myself, and with a desire also for
doing good as much as lies in my power, I must do something; even must I
send to that king, telling him, "O monarch, thou hast been cursed by my
son of tender years and undeveloped intellect, in wrath, at seeing thy act
of disrespect towards myself."'"

Sauti continued, "And that great ascetic, observer of vows, moved by
kindness, sent with proper instructions a disciple of his to king
Parikshit. And he sent his disciple Gaurmukha of good manners and engaged
also in ascetic penances, instructing him to first enquire about the
welfare of the king and then to communicate the real message. And that
disciple soon approached that monarch, the head of the Kuru race. And he
entered the king's palace having first sent notice of his arrival through
the servant in attendance at the gate.

"And the twice-born Gaurmukha was duly worshipped by the monarch. And
after resting for a while, he detailed fully to the king, in the presence
of his ministers, the words of Samika, of cruel import, exactly as he had
been instructed.

"And Gaurmukha said, 'O king of kings, there is a Rishi, Samika, by name,
of virtuous soul, his passions under control, peaceful, and given up to
hard ascetic devotions, living in thy dominions! By thee, O tiger among
men, was placed on the shoulders of that Rishi observing at present the
vow of silence, a dead snake, with the end of thy bow! He himself forgave
thee that act. But his son could not. And by the latter hast thou today
been cursed, O king of kings, without the knowledge of his father, to the
effect that within seven nights hence, shall (the snake) Takshaka cause
thy death. And Samika repeatedly asked his son to save thee, but there is
none to falsify his son's curse. And because he hath been unable to pacify
his son possessed by anger, therefore have I been sent to thee, O king,
for thy good!'

"And that king of the Kuru race, himself engaged in ascetic practices,
having heard these cruel words and recollecting his own sinful act, became
exceedingly sorry. And the king, learning that foremost of Rishis in the
forest had been observing the vow of silence, was doubly afflicted with
sorrow and seeing the kindness of the Rishi Samika, and considering his
own sinful act towards him, the king became very repentant. And the king
looking like a very god, did not grieve so much for hearing of his death
as for having done that act to the Rishi.

"And then the king sent away Gaurmukha, saying, 'Let the worshipful one
(Samika) be gracious to me!' And when Gaurmukha had gone away, the king,
in great anxiety, without loss of time, consulted his ministers. And
having consulted them, the king, himself wise in counsels, caused a
mansion to be erected upon one solitary column. It was well-guarded day
and night. And for its protection were placed there physicians and
medicines, and Brahmanas skilled in mantras all around. And the monarch,
protected on all sides, discharged his kingly duties from that place
surrounded by his virtuous ministers. And no one could approach that best
of kings there. The air even could not go there, being prevented from
entering.

"And when the seventh day had arrived, that best of Brahmanas, the learned
Kasyapa was coming (towards the king's residence), desirous of treating
the king (after the snake-bite). He had heard all that had taken place,
viz., that Takshaka, that first of snakes, would send that best of
monarchs to the presence of Yama (Death). And he thought, 'I would cure the
monarch after he is bit by that first of snakes. By that I may have wealth
and may acquire virtue also.' But that prince of snakes, Takshaka, in the
form of an old Brahmana, saw Kasyapa approaching on his way, his heart set
upon curing the king. And the prince of snakes then spake unto that bull
among Munis, Kasyapa, saying, 'Whither dost thou go with such speed? What,
besides, is the business upon which thou art intent?'

"And Kasyapa, thus addressed, replied, 'Takshaka, by his poison, will
today burn king Parikshit of the Kuru race, that oppressor of all enemies.
I go with speed, O amiable one, to cure, without loss of time, the king of
immeasurable prowess, the sole representative of the Pandava race, after
he is bit by the same Takshaka like to Agni himself in energy.' And
Takshaka answered, 'I am that Takshaka, O Brahmana, who shall burn that
lord of the earth. Stop, for thou art unable to cure one bit by me.' And
Kasyapa rejoined, 'I am sure that, possessed (that I am) of the power of
learning, going thither I shall cure that monarch bit by thee.'"


SECTION XLIII

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "And Takshaka, after this, answered, 'If, indeed, thou art
able to cure any creature bitten by me, then, O Kasyapa, revive thou this
tree bit by me. O best of Brahmanas, I burn this banian in thy sight. Try
thy best and show me that skill in mantras of which thou hast spoken.'

"And Kasyapa said, 'If thou art so minded, bite thou then, O king of
snakes, this tree. O snake, I shall revive it, though bit by thee.'"

Sauti continued, "That king of snakes, thus addressed by the illustrious
Kasyapa, bit then that banian tree. And that tree, bit by the illustrious
snake, and penetrated by the poison of the serpent, blazed up all around.
And having burnt the banian so, the snake then spake again unto Kasyapa,
saying, 'O first of Brahmanas, try thy best and revive this lord of the
forest.'"

Sauti continued, "The tree was reduced to ashes by the poison of that
king of snakes. But taking up those ashes, Kasyapa spoke these words. 'O
king of snakes, behold the power of my knowledge as applied to this lord
of the forest! O snake, under thy very nose I shall revive it.' And then
that best of Brahmanas, the illustrious and learned Kasyapa, revived, by
his vidya, that tree which had been reduced to a heap of ashes. And first
he created the sprout, then he furnished it with two leaves, and then he
made the stem, and then the branches, and then the full-grown tree with
leaves and all. And Takshaka, seeing the tree revived by the illustrious
Kasyapa, said unto him, 'It is not wonderful in thee that thou shouldst
destroy my poison or that of any one else like myself. O thou whose wealth
is asceticism, desirous of what wealth, goest thou thither? The reward
thou hopest to have from that best of monarchs, even I will give thee,
however difficult it may be to obtain it. Decked with fame as thou art,
thy success may be doubtful on that king affected by a Brahmana's curse
and whose span of life itself hath been shortened. In that case, this
blazing fame of thine that hath overspread the three worlds will disappear
like the Sun when deprived of his splendour (on the occasion of the
eclipse).'

"Kasyapa said, 'I go there for wealth, give it unto me, O snake, so that
taking thy gold, I may return.' Takshaka replied, 'O best of regenerate
ones, even I will give thee more than what thou expectest from that king.
Therefore do not go.'"

Sauti continued, "That best of Brahmanas, Kasyapa, of great prowess and
intelligence, hearing those words of Takshaka, sat in yoga meditation over
the king. And that foremost of Munis, viz., Kasyapa, of great prowess and
gifted with spiritual knowledge, ascertaining that the period of life of
that king of the Pandava race had really run out, returned, receiving from
Takshaka as much wealth as he desired.

"And upon the illustrious Kasyapa's retracing his steps, Takshaka at the
proper time speedily entered the city of Hastinapura. And on his way he
heard that the king was living very cautiously, protected by means of
poison-neutralising mantras and medicines."

Sauti continued, "The snake thereupon reflected thus, 'The monarch must
be deceived by me with power of illusion. But what must be the means?'
Then Takshaka sent to the king some snakes in the guise of ascetics taking
with them fruits, kusa grass, and water (as presents). And Takshaka,
addressing them, said, 'Go ye all to the king, on the pretext of pressing
business, without any sign of impatience, as if to make the monarch only
accept the fruits and flowers and water (that ye shall carry as presents
unto him).'"

Sauti continued, "Those snakes, thus commanded by Takshaka, acted
accordingly. And they took to the king, Kusa grass and water, and fruits.
And that foremost of kings, of great prowess, accepted those offerings.
And after their business was finished, he said upto them, 'Retire.' Then
after those snakes disguised as ascetics had gone away, the king addressed
his ministers and friends, saying, 'Eat ye, with me, all these fruits of
excellent taste brought by the ascetics.' Impelled by Fate and the words
of the Rishi, the king, with his ministers, felt the desire of eating
those fruits. The particular fruit, within which Takshaka had entered, was
taken by the king himself for eating. And when he was eating it, there
appeared, O Saunaka, an ugly insect out of it, of shape scarcely
discernible, of eyes black, and of coppery colour. And that foremost of
kings, taking that insect, addressed his councillors, saying, 'The sun is
setting; today I have no more fear from poison. Therefore, let this insect
become Takshaka and bite me, so that my sinful act may be expiated and the
words of the ascetic rendered true.' And those councillors also, impelled
by Fate, approved of that speech. And then the monarch smiled, losing his
senses, his hour having come. And he quickly placed that insect on his
neck. And as the king was smiling, Takshaka, who had (in the form of that
insect) come out of the fruit that had been offered to the king, coiled
himself round the neck of the monarch. And quickly coiling round the
king's neck and uttering a tremendous roar, Takshaka, that lord of snakes,
bit that protector of the earth."


SECTION XLIV

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "Then the councillors beholding the king in the coils of
Takshaka, became pale with fear and wept in exceeding grief. And hearing
the roar of Takshaka, the ministers all fled. And as they were flying away
in great grief, they saw Takshaka, the king of snakes, that wonderful
serpent, coursing through the blue sky like a streak of the hue of the
lotus, and looking very much like the vermilion-coloured line on a woman's
crown dividing the dark masses of her hair in the middle.

"And the mansion in which the king was living blazed up with Takshaka's
poison. And the king's councillors, on beholding it, fled away in all
directions. And the king himself fell down, as if struck by lightning.

"And when the king was laid low by Takshaka's poison, his councillors with
the royal priest--a holy Brahmana--performed all his last rites. All the
citizens, assembling together, made the minor son of the deceased monarch
their king. And the people called their new king, that slayer of all
enemies, that hero of the Kuru race, by the name of Janamejaya. And that
best of monarchs, Janamejaya, though a child, was wise in mind. And with
his councillors and priest, the eldest son Parikshita, that bull amongst
the Kurus, ruled the kingdom like his heroic great-grand-father
(Yudhishthira). And the ministers of the youthful monarch, beholding that
he could now keep his enemies in check, went to Suvarnavarman, the king of
Kasi, and asked him his daughter Vapushtama for a bride. And the king of
Kasi, after due inquiries, bestowed with ordained rites, his daughter
Vapushtama on that mighty hero of Kuru race. And the latter, receiving his
bride, became exceedingly glad. And he gave not his heart at any time to
any other woman. And gifted with great energy, he wandered in pursuit of
pleasure, with a cheerful heart, on expanses of water and amid woods and
flowery fields. And that first of monarchs passed his time in pleasure as
Pururavas of old did, on receiving the celestial damsel Urvasi. Herself
fairest of the fair, the damsel Vapushtama too, devoted to her lord and
celebrated for her beauty having gained a desirable husband, pleased him
by the excess of her affection during the period he spent in the pursuit
of pleasure."


SECTION XLV

(Astika Parva continued)

"Meanwhile the great ascetic Jaratkaru wandered over the whole earth
making the place where evening fell his home for the night. And gifted
with ascetic power, he roamed, practising various vows difficult to be
practised by the immature, and bathing also in various sacred waters. And
the Muni had air alone for his food and was free from desire of worldly
enjoyment. And he became daily emaciated and grew lean-fleshed. And one
day he saw the spirits of his ancestors, heads down, in a hole, by a cord
of virana roots having only one thread entire. And that even single thread
was being gradually eaten away by a large rat dwelling in that hole. And
the Pitris in that hole were without food, emaciated, pitiable, and
eagerly desirous of salvation. And Jaratkaru, approaching the pitiable
ones, himself in humble guise, asked them, 'Who are ye hanging by this cord
of virana roots? The single weak root that is still left in this cord of
virana roots already eaten away by the rat, dwelling in this hole, is
itself being gradually eaten away by the same rat with his sharp teeth.
The little that remains of that single thread will soon be cut away. It is
clear ye shall then have to fall down into this pit with faces downwards.
Seeing you with faces downwards, and overtaken by this great calamity, my
pity hath been excited. What good can I do to you. Tell me quickly whether
this calamity can be averted by a fourth, a third, or even by the
sacrifice of a half of this my asceticism, O, relieve yourselves even with
the whole of my asceticism. I consent to all this. Do ye as ye please.'

"The Pitris said, 'Venerable Brahmacharin, thou desirest to relieve us.
But, O foremost of Brahmanas, thou canst not dispel our affliction by thy
asceticism. O child, O first of speakers, we too have the fruits of our
asceticism. But, O Brahmana, it is for the loss of children that we are
falling down into this unholy hell. The grandsire himself hath said that a
son is a great merit. As we are about to be cast in this hole, our ideas
are no longer clear. Therefore, O child, we know thee not, although thy
manhood is well-known on earth. Venerable thou art and of good fortune,
thou who thus from kindness grievest for us worthy of pity and greatly
afflicted. O Brahmana, listen, who we are. We are Rishis of the Yayavara
sect, of rigid vows. And, O Muni, from loss of children, we have fallen
down from a sacred region. Our severe penances have not been destroyed; we
have a thread yet. But we have only one thread now. It matters little,
however, whether he is or is not. Unfortunate as we are, we have a thread
in one, known as Jaratkaru. The unfortunate one has gone through the Vedas
and their branches and is practising asceticism alone. He being one with
soul under complete control, desires set high, observant of vows, deeply
engaged in ascetic penances, and free from greed for the merits of
asceticism, we have been reduced to this deplorable state. He hath no wife,
no son, no relatives. Therefore, do we hang in this hole, our
consciousness lost, like men having none to take care of them. If thou
meetest him, O, tell him, from thy kindness to ourselves. "Thy Pitris, in
sorrow, are hanging with faces downwards in a hole. Holy one, take a wife
and beget children. O thou of ascetic wealth, thou art, O amiable one, the
only thread that remaineth in the line of thy ancestors." O Brahmana, the
cord of virana roots that thou seest we are hanging by, is the cord
representing our multiplied race. And, O Brahmana, these threads of the
cord of virana roots that thou seest as eaten away, are ourselves who have
been eaten up by Time. This root thou seest hath been half-eaten and by
which we are hanging in this hole is he that hath adopted asceticism alone.
The rat that thou beholdest is Time of infinite strength. And he (Time) is
gradually weakening the wretch Jaratkaru engaged in ascetic penances
tempted by the merits thereof, but wanting in prudence and heart. O
excellent one, his asceticism cannot save us. Behold, our roots being torn,
cast down from higher regions, deprived of consciousness by Time, we are
going downwards like sinful wretches. And upon our going down into this
hole with all our relatives, eaten up by Time, even he shall sink with us
into hell. O child, whether it is asceticism, or sacrifice, or whatever
else there be of very holy acts, everything is inferior. These cannot
count with a son. O child, having seen all, speak unto that Jaratkaru of
ascetic wealth. Thou shouldst tell him in detail everything that thou hast
beheld. And, O Brahmana, from thy kindness towards us, thou shouldst tell
him all that would induce him to take a wife and beget children. Amongst
his friends, or of our own race, who art thou, O excellent one, that thus
grievest for us all like a friend? We wish to hear who thou art that
stayest here.'"


SECTION XLVI

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "Jaratkaru, hearing all this, became excessively dejected.
And from sorrow he spoke unto those Pitris in words obstructed by tears.
And Jaratkaru said, 'Ye are even my fathers and grand-fathers gone before.
Therefore, tell me what I must do for your welfare. I am that sinful son
of yours, Jaratkaru! Punish me for my sinful deeds, a wretch that I am.'

"The Pitris replied, saying, 'O son, by good luck hast thou arrived at
this spot in course of thy rambles. O Brahmana, why hast thou not taken a
wife?'

"Jaratkaru said. 'Ye Pitris, this desire hath always existed in my heart
that I would, with vital seed drawn up, carry this body to the other world.
My mind hath been possessed with the idea that I would not take a wife.
But ye grandsires, having seen you hanging like birds, I have diverted my
mind from the Brahmacharya mode of life. I will truly do what you like. I
will certainly marry, if ever I meet with a maiden of my own name. I shall
accept her who, bestowing herself of her own accord, will be as alms unto
me, and whom I shall not have to maintain. I shall marry if I get such a
one; otherwise, I shall not. This is the truth, ye grandsires! And the
offspring that will be begot upon her shall be your salvation. And ye
Pitris of mine, ye shall live for ever in blessedness and without fear.'"

Sauti continued, "The Muni, having said so unto the Pitris, wandered over
the earth again. And, O Saunaka, being old, he obtained no wife. And he
grieved much that he was not successful. But directed (as before) by his
ancestors, he continued the search. And going into the forest, he wept
loudly in great grief. And having gone into the forest, the wise one,
moved by the desire of doing good to his ancestors, said, 'I will ask for
a bride,' distinctly repeating these words thrice. And he said, 'Whatever
creatures are here, mobile and immobile, so whoever there be that are
invisible, O, hear my words! My ancestors, afflicted with grief, have
directed me that am engaged in the most severe penances, saying, "Marry
thou for (the acquisition of) a son." O ye, being directed by my
ancestors, I am roaming in poverty and sorrow, over the wide world for
wedding a maiden that I may obtain as alms. Let that creature, amongst
those I have addressed, who hath a daughter, bestow on me that am roaming
far and near. Such a bride as is of same name with me, to be bestowed on
me as alms, and whom, besides, I shall not maintain, O bestow on me!' Then
those snakes that had been set upon Jaratkaru's track, ascertaining his
inclination, gave information to Vasuki. And the king of the snakes,
hearing their words, took with him that maiden decked with ornaments, and
went into the forest unto that Rishi. And, O Brahmana, Vasuki, the king of
the snakes, having gone there, offered that maiden as alms unto that high-
souled Rishi. But the Rishi did not at once accept her. And the Rishi,
thinking her not to be of the same name with himself, and seeing that the
question of her maintenance also was unsettled, reflected for a few
moments, hesitating to accept her. And then, O son of Bhrigu, he asked
Vasuki the maiden's name, and also said unto him, 'I shall not maintain
her.'"


SECTION XLVII

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "Then Vasuki spake unto the Rishi Jaratkaru these words, 'O
best of Brahmanas, this maiden is of the same name with thee. She is my
sister and hath ascetic merit. I will maintain thy wife; accept her. O
thou of ascetic wealth, I shall protect her with all my ability. And, O
foremost of the great Munis, she hath been reared by me for thee.' And the
Rishi replied, 'This is agreed between us that I shall not maintain her;
and she shall not do aught that I do not like. If she do, I leave her!'"

Sauti continued, "When the snake had promised, saying, 'I shall maintain
my sister,' Jaratkaru then went to the snake's house. Then that first of
mantra-knowing Brahmanas, observing rigid vows, that virtuous and veteran
ascetic, took her hand presented to him according to shastric rites. And
taking his bride with him, adored by the great Rishi, he entered the
delightful chamber set apart for him by the king of the snakes. And in
that chamber was a bed-stead covered with very valuable coverlets. And
Jaratkaru lived there with his wife. And the excellent Rishi made an
agreement with his wife, saying, 'Nothing must ever be done or said by
thee that is against my liking. And in case of thy doing any such thing, I
will leave thee and no longer continue to stay in thy house. Bear in mind
these words that have been spoken by me.'

"And then the sister of the king of the snakes in great anxiety and
grieving exceedingly, spoke unto him, saying, 'Be it so.' And moved by the
desire of doing good to her relatives, that damsel, of unsullied
reputation, began to attend upon her lord with the wakefulness of a dog,
the timidity of a deer, and knowledge of signs possessed by the crow. And
one day, after the menstrual period, the sister of Vasuki, having purified
herself by a bath according to custom, approached her lord the great Muni.
And thereupon she conceived. And the embryo was like unto a flame of fire,
possessed of great energy, and resplendent as fire itself. And it grew
like the moon in the bright fortnight.

"And one day, within a short time, Jaratkaru of great fame, placing his
head on the lap of his wife, slept, looking like one fatigued. And as he
was sleeping, the sun entered his chambers in the Western mountain and was
about to set. And, O Brahmana, as the day was fading, she, the excellent
sister of Vasuki, became thoughtful, fearing the loss of her husband's
virtue. And she thought, 'What should I now do? Shall I wake my husband or
not? He is exacting and punctilious in his religious duties. How can I act
as not to offend him? The alternatives are his anger and the loss of
virtue of a virtuous man. The loss of virtue, I ween, is the greater of
the two evils. Again, if I wake him, he will be angry. But if twilight
passeth away without his prayers being said, he shall certainly sustain
loss of virtue.'

"And having resolved at last, the sweet-speeched Jaratkaru, the sister of
Vasuki, spake softly unto that Rishi resplendent with ascetic penances,
and lying prostrate like a flame of fire, 'O thou of great good fortune,
awake, the sun is setting. O thou of rigid vows, O illustrious one, do
your evening prayer after purifying yourself with water and uttering the
name of Vishnu. The time for the evening sacrifice hath come. Twilight, O
lord, is even now gently covering the western side.'

"The illustrious Jaratkaru of great ascetic merit, thus addressed, spake
unto his wife these words, his upper lip quivering in anger, 'O amiable
one of the Naga race, thou hast insulted me. I shall no longer abide with
thee, but shall go where I came from. O thou of beautiful thighs, I
believe in my heart that the sun hath no power to set in the usual time,
if I am asleep. An insulted person should never live where he hath met
with the insult, far less should I, a virtuous person, or those that are
like me.' Jaratkaru, the sister of Vasuki, thus addressed by her lord,
began to quake with terror, and she spake unto him, saying, 'O Brahmana, I
have not waked thee from desire of insult; but I have done it so that thy
virtue may not sustain any loss.'

"The Rishi Jaratkaru, great in ascetic merit, possessed with anger and
desirous of forsaking his spouse, thus addressed, spake unto his wife,
saying, 'O thou fair one, never have I spoken a falsehood. Therefore, go I
shall. This was also settled between ourselves. O amiable one, I have
passed the time happily with thee. And, O fair one, tell thy brother, when
I am gone, that I have left thee. And upon my going away, it behoveth thee
not to grieve for me.'

"Thus addressed Jaratkaru, the fair sister of Vasuki, of faultless
features, filled with anxiety and sorrow, having mustered sufficient
courage and patience, though her heart was still quaking, then spake unto
Rishi Jaratkaru. Her words were obstructed with tears and her face was
pale with fear. And the palms of her hands were joined together, and her
eyes were bathed in tears. And she said, 'It behoveth thee not to leave me
without a fault. Thou treadest over the path of virtue. I too have been in
the same path, with heart fixed on the good of my relatives. O best of
Brahmanas, the object for which I was bestowed on thee hath not been
accomplished yet. Unfortunate that I am, what shall Vasuki say unto me? O
excellent one, the offspring desired of by my relatives afflicted by a
mother's curse, do not yet appear! The welfare of my relatives dependeth
on the acquisition of offspring from thee. And in order that my connection
with thee may not be fruitless, O illustrious Brahmana, moved by the
desire of doing good to my race do I entreat thee. O excellent one, high-
souled thou art; so why shall thou leave me who am faultless? This is what
is not just clear to me.'

"Thus addressed, the Muni of great ascetic merit spake unto his wife
Jaratkaru these words that were proper and suitable to the occasion. And
he said, 'O fortunate one, the being thou hast conceived, even like unto
Agni himself is a Rishi of soul highly virtuous, and a master of the Vedas
and their branches.'

"Having said so, the great Rishi, Jaratkaru of virtuous soul, went away,
his heart firmly fixed on practising again the severest penances."


SECTION XLVIII

(Astika Parva continued)

Sauti said, "O thou of ascetic wealth, soon after her lord had left her,
Jaratkaru went to her brother. And she told him everything that had
happened. And the prince of snakes, hearing the calamitous news, spake
unto his miserable sister, himself more miserable still.

"And he said, 'Thou knowest, O amiable one, the purpose of thy bestowal,
the reason thereof. If, from that union, for the welfare of the snakes, a
son be born, then he, possessed of energy, will save us all from the snake-
sacrifice. The Grandsire had said so, of old, in the midst of the gods. O
fortunate one, hast thou conceived from thy union with that best of
Rishis? My heart's desire is that my bestowal of thee on that wise one may
not be fruitless. Truly, it is not proper for me to ask thee about this.
But from the gravity of the interests I ask thee this. Knowing also the
obstinacy of thy lord, ever engaged in severe penances, I shall not follow
him, for he may curse me. Tell me in detail all that thy lord, O amiable
one, hath done, and extract that terribly afflicting dart that lies
implanted for a long time past in my heart.'

"Jaratkaru, thus addressed, consoling Vasuki, the king of the snakes, at
length replied, saying, 'Asked by me about offspring, the high-souled and
mighty ascetic said, "There is,"--and then he went away. I do not remember
him to have ever before speak even in jest aught that is false. Why should
he, O king, speak a falsehood on such a serious occasion? He said, "Thou
shouldst not grieve, O daughter of the snake race, about the intended
result of our union. A son shall be born to thee, resplendent as the
blazing sun." O brother, having said this to me, my husband of ascetic
wealth went away--Therefore, let the deep sorrow cherished in thy heart
disappear.'"

Sauti continued, "Thus addressed, Vasuki, the king of the snakes,
accepted those words of his sister, and in great joy said, 'Be it so!' And
the chief of the snakes then adored his sister with his best regards, gift
of wealth, and fitting eulogies. Then, O best of Brahmanas, the embryo
endued with great splendour, began to develop, like the moon in the
heavens in the bright fortnight.

"And in due time, the sister of the snakes, O Brahmana, gave birth to a
son of the splendour of a celestial child, who became the reliever of
the fears of his ancestors and maternal relatives. The child grew up there
in the house of the king of the snakes. He studied the Vedas and their
branches with the ascetic Chyavana, the son of Bhrigu. And though but a
boy, his vows were rigid. And he was gifted with great intelligence, and
with the several attributes of virtue, knowledge, freedom from the world's
indulgences, and saintliness. And the name by which he was known to the
world was Astika. And he was known by the name of Astika (whoever is)
because his father had gone to the woods, saying. 'There is', when he was
in the womb. Though but a boy, he had great gravity and intelligence. And
he was reared with great care in the palace of the snakes. And he was like
the illustrious lord of the celestials, Mahadeva of the golden form, the
wielder of the trident. And he grew up day by day, the delight of all the
snakes."


SECTION XLIX

(Astika Parva continued)

Saunaka said, "Tell me again, in detail,--all that king Janamejaya had
asked his ministers about his father's ascension to heaven."

Sauti said, "O Brahmana, hear all that the king asked his ministers, and
all that they said about the death of Parikshit.

"Janamejaya asked, 'Know ye all that befell my father. How did that famous
king, in time, meet with his death? Hearing from you the incidents of my
father's life in detail, I shall ordain something, if it be for the
benefit of the world. Otherwise, I shall do nothing.'

"The minister replied, 'Hear, O monarch, what thou hast asked, viz., an
account of thy illustrious father's life, and how also that king of kings
left this world. Thy father was virtuous and high-souled, and always
protected his people. O monarch, hear, how that high-souled one conducted
himself on earth. Like unto an impersonation of virtue and justice, the
monarch, cognisant of virtue, virtuously protected the four orders, each
engaged in the discharge of their specified duties. Of incomparable
prowess, and blessed with fortune, he protected the goddess Earth. There
was none who hated him and he himself hated none. Like unto Prajapati
(Brahma) he was equally disposed towards all creatures. O monarch,
Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and Vaisyas and Sudras, all engaged contentedly in
the practice of their respective duties, were impartially protected by that
king. Widows and orphans, the maimed and the poor, he maintained. Of
handsome features, he was unto all creatures like a second Soma. Cherishing
his subjects and keeping them contented, blessed with good fortune, truth-
telling, of immense prowess, he was the disciple of Saradwat in the
science of arms. And, O Janamejaya, thy father was dear unto Govinda. Of
great fame, he was loved by all men. And he was born in the womb of Uttara
when the Kuru race was almost extinct. And, therefore, the mighty son of
Abhimanyu came to be called Parikshit (born in an extinct line). Well-
versed in the interpretation of treatises on the duties of kings, he was
gifted with every virtue. With passions under complete control,
intelligent, possessing a retentive memory, the practiser of all virtues,
the conqueror of his six passions of powerful mind, surpassing all, and
fully acquainted with the science of morality and political science, thy
father had ruled over these subjects for sixty years. And he then died,
mourned by all his subjects. And, after him, O first of men, thou hast
acquired this hereditary kingdom of the Kurus for the last thousand years.
Thou wast installed while a child, and art thus protecting every
creature.'

"Janamejaya said, 'There hath not been born in our race a king who hath
not sought the good of his subjects or been loved by them. Behold
especially the conduct of my grandsires ever engaged in great achievements.
How did my father, blessed with many virtues, meet with his death?
Describe everything to me as it happened. I am desirous of hearing it from
you!'"

Sauti continued, "Thus directed by the monarch, those councillors, ever
solicitous of the good of the king, told him everything exactly as it had
occurred.

"And the councillors said, 'O king, that father of thine, that protector
of the whole earth, that foremost of all persons obedient to the
scriptures, became addicted to the sports of the field, even as Pandu of
mighty arms, that foremost of all bearers of the bow in battle. He made
over to us all the affairs of state from the most trivial to the most
important. One day, going into the forest, he pierced a deer with an arrow.
And having pierced it he followed it quickly on foot into the deep woods,
armed with sword and quiver. He could not, however, come upon the lost
deer. Sixty years of age and decrepit, he was soon fatigued and became
hungry. He then saw in the deep woods a high-souled Rishi. The Rishi was
then observing the vow of silence. The king asked him about the deer, but,
though asked, he made no reply. At last the king, already tired with
exertion and hunger, suddenly became angry with that Rishi sitting
motionless like a piece of wood in observance of his vow of silence.
Indeed, the king knew not that he was a Muni observing the vow of silence.
Swayed by anger, thy father insulted him. O excellent one of the Bharata
