how it happened, senor.

"It was many years ago, yes, nearly twenty years. We were both young
then, and we worked on the Escorpion, for Don Guillermo. My father used
to work for him too: he was a foreman on the ranch: and when Pedro and I
were old enough to ride after the cattle he made us vaqueros. Pedro was
strong in those days, yes, stronger than I am now, and quite tall. There
was no one who could ride like Pedro on the Escorpion. To see him now!
ay de mi! Well, senor, one day some steers were missing, twelve or
fifteen or more, and my father sent us, Pedro and me, to find them and
bring them in. We hunted for them one day, two days, and could not find
them. The range was getting poor on the Escorpion, but it was still good
in the hills, and my father said the cattle must have gone up to the
Sim'. So the next morning we started toward the Sim', and it was not
long before we found their tracks, coming toward the hills. We followed
them all that day, and nearly at night we found them. It was in a little
valley that is quite near here: you will go through it to-morrow, senor.

"We had brought food with us, for we knew we might be more than one day
out, and when we had found the cattle we looked for a place to camp. We
headed the steers down the creek, and came out into this canon. And here
we saw the house, the same house, senor: so you see it is quite old, but
it was old then, too. We were surprised, for we did not know there was a
house there at all, and we had been born at San Fernando, and we thought
we knew everybody that lived this way as far as Ventura. It was nearly
dark, and there was no light in the house nor anybody about, though the
house did not look quite as if no one lived there. We should have liked
to use it to sleep in, but we thought some one must live there, and
might come in, so we made a camp on the creek. Just about here, where
your camp is, is where we slept.

"In the morning, after we had eaten, Pedro said he was going to look
inside the house. I was saddling the horses and did not go with him.
In a few minutes I heard him call, so I went to the house. Pedro was
standing at the door, and he looked white and frightened. 'There are
dead people here,' he said: 'they are all dead.' He went in and I went
in after him. In the back room there was a bad sight, a very bad sight,
senor: a lot of bones lying all about the room, and there were three
skulls among them. In the middle of the room was that box you saw, with
the lid open. There was a big bone, like a leg bone, lying right across
it, I remember. Zape! a bad sight that was.

"It must have been a long time since they had died, months, perhaps
years, two or three, from the look of the place and the bones. The
coyotes had been in, and nothing but the bones and some bits of clothing
was left. They had all been men, at least I think so, because there were
no women's clothes. In the box there were pieces of money, twenty or
thirty, or perhaps more. I did not like to touch it, with the dead men
all about there: but Pedro, he was always one who cared for nothing. He
said it was lucky to find them: the money wasn't dead, he said, and he
laughed at me. He picked up one of the coins: it was a silver peso of
Spain, very old. Was it not strange, senor? All the money was the same,
all pesos and all old. I. have never seen any more like them."

"Well, Pedro said we ought to take the money. The dead men could not
spend it, he said, so it was foolish to leave it. But I would not touch
it, not one piece. I wanted to burn the bones, and at last Pedro helped
me. We picked them all up, the skulls and all. Diantre! it was bad work!
I wanted to put them in the box, and burn all together, and bury the
money. But Pedro would not: he wanted the money, and he said he would
have the box too. So instead of burning them, we buried them, that is,
the bones. We found an old spade, and dug a place behind the house,
among the sycamores on the hill--you will see to-morrow--and buried
them.

"Then we had to go to take the cattle back to the ranch. Pedro would
take the money: he put it in his clothes. It was quite heavy, and you
could hear it, so he put some in his shoes and in other places. I asked
him what he would do with the box, because he would not burn it. He said
he wanted it because it had been good luck to find it: he would get it
someday and keep it. Then we went away with the cattle. Pedro said we
should not tell anybody about what we had found, nor about the dead
people; and there was no one to tell, I mean the officers, unless we
went to Los Angeles. So I did not say anything, and Pedro did not,
because he had taken the money."

"It was not long before he had used it up. I don't know where he spent
it, for there was no money like it, and people would ask where he got
it: but somehow he spent it, all but two pesos. Then one day he asked
me to come with him to the place again: he wanted to see if the box was
there, and if anybody lived in the house. I did not want to see the box,
but I wanted to know if any one lived there, so I came with him. It was
about a year after we had found the dead men and the money. It was
a Sunday, and we got to the place about noon, for we started early.
Everything was like we had left it, and it did not look as if any one
had been to the house. The box was there, and it was open; and then I
noticed that there was some writing on a piece of paper inside the
lid. It must have been there when we saw the box before, but we had not
noticed it. It was very old and yellow, and torn, too, and we could not
read it. They did not seem like Spanish words. We stayed an hour, maybe,
and then I said we should go, so as to get back before night. Then Pedro
said to me, why shouldn't we come and live here in the house. We each
had a few head of cattle of our own by that time, nearly twenty all
together, and the range here was very good. He was tired of working on
the Escorpion, he said. The place didn't belong to anybody, as far as
we could tell, and we could make a good home here and do well with our
cattle.

"I forgot to say that I had got married a little time before, and I
said my wife would not come so far away from her people. They lived
at Calabasas. I didn't like the idea of living in that house, though
I liked the land and wanted to have a place of my own, now that I was
married. So we were talking about it when we got on our horses to ride
back. We rode past the sycamore trees, where we had buried the bones of
the dead men. Just when we passed the place, my brother's horse jumped
at something, and threw him off. He fell against a sharp rock that hurt
him in the back. He was quite still, and I thought he was dead. For a
long time he did not move, but I could see he was breathing. I got water
and threw it on him many times, and at last he opened his eyes. But he
could not move, senor, nor speak either: the rock had hurt his backbone,
and his legs were like dead. He was a paral'tico, and he has never been
able to move, any more than you saw him move, nor talk either.

"I did not know what to do. It was many miles to the ranch, and there
was no one that lived anywhere nearer. My brother was in much pain, so
I could not put him on his horse: I was afraid of hurting him more. He
could not talk, but he pointed at the house, for me to take him there.
There was nothing else to do, and at last I got him there. Then I said
I must go and get help to take him away, but he shook his head and
would not let me go. I think he thought he might as well die there as
anywhere, and he was half dead anyway. But I had to go to get food, and
I thought I could bring a doctor also. I left him some water, and got
on my horse and rode--cielo, how I rode!--for I thought he might be dead
when I got back. It was dark most of the way, and it was midnight when
I got to the ranch. I got help, and sent for a doctor to come from Los
Angeles. My wife--she is a good woman, my wife, Elena, senor--she said
she would come with me to nurse Pedro if he could not be brought away.
We were back at the house the next day early, two cousins of mine and my
wife and myself. Pedro was lying where I had left him, but he was out of
his head. Whenever he saw the box he would try to get up and go to it,
so I put it where he could not see it. I had never told my wife about
the box and the money: I thought it would only do harm to talk about it.

"The doctor came the next day. He said Pedro would never be able to
walk; he might be able to speak after a while; but he never has. The
doctor told us he ought not to be moved for a long while. And so we
stayed, senor, and we have never gone away. Don Guillermo was very good:
I think God makes people good to one when one is in trouble, is it not
so, senor? He gave me ten more cattle; two of them were good milch
cows. That made thirty head we had all together. And he sent us a lot of
flour, and coffee and frijoles; and then he found who owned the land the
house was on: it was an American, who lived in San Francisco and never
came here at all; and Don Guillermo told him about my brother getting
hurt, and he promised that we could have the house and the grazing for
nothing for three years, and then pay a little when we could. After
about ten years I bought the place, about fifty acres, and now it is my
own."

"So it was bad fortune the box brought us, as I said, senor, but good
fortune, too. Did you see what my brother has round his neck, senor? It
is one of the pesos. He had two of them left when he was hurt: he had
always said he would keep those two for more luck, as he called it. One
day, after he was hurt, I saw him making a hole in one of them, and he
hung it round his neck. He gave me the other. I did not want to take it,
so I put it on the shelf for Our Lady. You can see it in the morning,
and you can see the box, too. My wife would like to burn it, and so
would I, but Pedro will not let us, and he always sits on it. There
is carving on it, an 'F' and a 'Y,' I think, and there is the writing
inside, though much of it is gone now. Perhaps you can tell what the
writing says: I should like to know, if there is enough left to tell
by."

"Well, it is late, and Elena will be going to bed. I am sorry that we
have no room for you to sleep in, senor, but the house is small, and we
are so many women and sick. Buenas noches, senor."

I was much interested in the strange story I had heard, and lay for some
time awake, trying to fit a working theory to the black chest and the
Spanish dollars, but with no success. It was a puzzle that was worth a
good deal of trouble to unlock if it could be done, and I was eager for
daylight, to get a good view of the box. Probably the invalid would
not be up so early as the rest of the family, who had breakfast, I had
learned, at six o'clock. I was prompt upon the hour, and while waiting
a few minutes before the meal was ready, I examined the silver piece and
the chest. The coin was a large one, Spanish, as my host had said, and
bore the inscription of Carlos III, with the date 1787, and the arms
of Castile and Le-n. The box I examined with special attention. It was
exceedingly heavy for its size, which was about thirty inches long by
fourteen wide and ten deep, and was made of the dark, hard wood of some
tropical tree that had withstood decay wonderfully. On the upper side
of the lid were cut the letters "F Y" in plain, deep carving, encircled
with an elaborate scroll, this somewhat defaced and broken in
outline. Three heavy strips of iron were fastened round the shorter
circumference, one near each end of the box and one at the middle. At
the ends were strong wrought-iron handles, and there was a curious lock,
also of wrought-iron. I opened the lid, and there, as Leandro had said,
were the remains of a sheet of parchment, vellum, or heavy hand-made
paper, which had been glued to the wood, but the greater part of which
was torn or worn away. It was evident that the writing was too much
defaced to allow of more than a mere guess at its purport, but by the
not very good light I copied what I could decipher of the inscription.
This is what I made out:--

  hac ar   osit    unt num    tria mi   et qu    enti qui
  pert    anc Mi         Sanc            in cujus fini
  utelam ob lat        hoc lito   atis com
  arca absco   a est.
  rra.

  Oc 1824

I had hardly finished my transcription when my hostess entered saying
that breakfast was ready in the kitchen: so no attempt at working out
the puzzle could be made at the time. Pedro's food was taken to him by
Carlota, and he did not appear before I left. During the pleasant meal,
I looked with added respect at the woman whose goodness of heart had led
her willingly to undertake, and to carry day by day for many years, the
burden of a hopeless, and I fear an ungrateful, invalid (though, indeed,
from my experience of the kindliness, and especially the strength of the
family bond among the Mexican people, I might well have been prepared
for such magnanimity).

Soon after breakfast I bade them farewell, Leandro accompanying me a
short distance to show me my road. When we came to part, no further word
had been said regarding Pedro or the mysterious chest. I said nothing,
for I had no theory to offer. When we shook hands, after thanking him
heartily I remarked that I hoped we might meet again, adding, as an
afterthought, "and in a luckier house." "Yes, senor," he said, "but it
is not the house that is unlucky: Our Lady attends to that. It was the
money, and, you see," with a smile--"I gave her the half of what was
left. Do you know, senor, sometimes I think the money was stolen from
the Church. That would account for all, is it not so? They say the
churches had much money once. Quien sabe? Adios senor."

As I turned Pancho into the trail that would bring me to the Ventura
road, my mind was busy at a clue that Leandro's parting words had
started. "F Y," the letters carved on the chest--somehow they seemed
to link up with something in my memory. Who was that Padre of whom
Robinson, in his "Life in California," spoke with a good deal of
disparagement? The surname initial was surely a "Y," and it seemed to
me that San Fernando was the Mission where the depreciated Father dwelt.
Yorba, Ybarronda, Ybaez, Ybarra--yes, that was it: Ybarra, sure enough,
and the first name was Francisco, it seemed to me; and I felt sure
now that it was at San Fernando that Robinson encountered him. All
circumstantial evidence, no doubt, but highly interesting. To try
another link--did the scraps of writing give any support to my idea?
I took out my notebook: unmistakably there were the letters "rra"
remaining where naturally the signature would be written. All the rest
of the name was gone except a fragment of rubric, but that embellishment
again made it plain that the letters were part of a name.

With that I had to be satisfied, both then and now. Matters of more
