what pleases you best.  I shall call it goodness.  That is the only
life of the soul.  And why?  Because it is the life of Christ.  That
is the only wisdom of the soul.  And why?  Because it is the mind of
Christ.  That is the living water.  And why?  Because it flows
eternally from Christ.

For who is Christ, but the likeness of God, and the glory of God?
And what is the likeness of God, but goodness; and what is the glory
of God, but goodness?  Therefore Christ is goodness itself, as it is
written, 'Now the Lord is that Spirit.'  Yes, if you will believe
it, Christ, the only-begotten Son, co-equal and co-eternal, is the
very and essential goodness of the Father, coming out everlastingly
in action and in life, in himself, and in his people, who are his
mystical body, filled with the Spirit of him and his Father; who is
the Holy Spirit, the spirit of goodness.  From Christ, and not from
any created being, comes all goodness in man or angel.  Comes from
Christ?  It were more right, and more according to St. Paul's own
words, to say, that all goodness _is_ Christ; Christ dwelling in a
man, Christ forming himself in a man, little by little, step by
step, as he grows in grace, in purity, in self-control, in
experience, in knowledge, in wisdom, in strength, in patience, in
love, in charity; till he comes to the stature of a perfect man, to
the measure of the fulness of Christ.

Meanwhile, let the good which a man does be much, or be it little,
he must say, 'The good which I do, _I_ do not, but Christ who
dwelleth in me.'

For in every age of man, it is Christ who is awakening in him the
hunger and thirst after righteousness, and then satisfying it with
the only thing which can satisfy them, namely, his most blessed
self.

Yes, believe it.  It is Christ in the child which makes it speak the
truth; Christ in the child which makes it shrink from whatever it
has been told is wrong.  It is Christ in the young man, which fills
him with lofty aspirations, hopes of bettering the world around him,
hopes of training his soul to be all that it can be, and of putting
forth all his powers in the service of Christ.  It is Christ in the
middle-aged man, which makes him strong in good works, labouring
patiently, wisely, and sturdily; so that having drunk of the living
waters himself, they may flow out of him again to others in good
deeds; a fountain springing up in him to an eternal life of
goodness.  It is Christ in the old man, which makes him look on with
calm content while his own body and mind decay, knowing that the
kingdom of God cannot decay; for Christ is ruling it in
righteousness; and all will be well with him, and with his children
after him, and with all mankind, and all heaven and earth, if they
themselves only will it, long after he has been gathered to his
fathers.

Yes, such a man knows in whom he has believed.  He knows that the
spiritual Rock has been following him through all his wanderings in
this weary world; and that that Rock is Christ.  He can recollect
how, again and again, at his Sabbath haltings in his life's journey,
it was to him in the Holy Communion as to the Israelites of old in
their haltings in the wilderness, when the priests of Jehovah cried
to the mystic rock, 'Flow forth, O fountain,' and the waters flowed.
So can he recollect how, in Holy Communion, there flowed into his
soul streams of living water, the water of life, quenching that
thirst of his soul, which no created thing could slake; the water of
life; of Christ's life, which is the light of men, shewing them what
they ought to be and do; the life which is the light; the life which
is according to the eternal and divine reason; the life of wisdom;
which is the life of love; which is the life of justice; which is
the life of Christ; which is the life of God.

But if these things are so--and so they are, for Christ has said it,
St. Paul has said it, St. John has said it--but if these things are
so, will they not teach us much about Holy Communion, how we may
receive it worthily, and how unworthily?

If what we receive in the Communion be Christ himself, the good
Christ who is to make us good; then how can we receive it worthily,
if we do not hunger and thirst after goodness?  If we do not come
thither, longing to be made good, and sanctified, then we come for
the wrong thing, to the wrong place.  We are like those Corinthians
who came to the Lord's supper not to be made good men, but to exalt
their own spiritual self-conceit; and so only ate and drank their
own damnation, not discerning the Lord's body, that it was a holy
body, a body of righteousness and goodness.

But if we come hungering and thirsting to be made good men, then we
come for the right thing, to the right place.  Then we need not stay
away, because we feel ourselves intolerably burdened with many sins;
that will be our very reason for coming, that we may be cleansed
from our sins--cleansed not only from their guilt, but from their
power; and cry, in spirit and in truth, as we kneel at that holy
table--


Rock of ages, cleft for me,
Let me hide myself in thee;
By the water and the blood,
From thy riven side which flowed,
Be of sin the double cure,
Cleanse me from its guilt and power.


Yes, from its guilt and from its power also.  Let us all pray, each
in his own fashion:--

Oh Lamb eternal, beyond all place and time!  Oh Lamb slain
eternally, before the foundation of the world!  Oh Lamb, which liest
slain eternally, in the midst of the throne of God!  Let the blood
of life, which flows from thee, procure me pardon for the past; let
the water of life, which flows from thee, give me strength for the
future.  I come to cast away my own life, my life of self and
selfishness, which is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, that
I may live it no more; and to receive thy life, which is created
after the likeness of God, in righteousness and true holiness, that
I may live it for ever and ever, and find it a well of life
springing up in me to everlasting life.  Eternal Goodness, make me
good like thee.  Eternal Wisdom, make me wise like thee.  Eternal
Justice, make me just like thee.  Eternal Love, make me loving like
thee.  Then I shall hunger no more, and thirst no more; for


Thou, O Christ, art all I want;
More than all in thee I find;
Raise me, fallen; cheer me, faint;
Heal me, sick; and lead me, blind.
Thou of life the fountain art;
Freely let me take of thee;
Spring thou up within my heart;
Rise to all eternity.


Oh come to Holy Communion with the words of that glorious hymn not
merely on your lips, but in your hearts; and you will never come
amiss.



SERMON XV.  ANTIPATHIES



(Tenth Sunday after Trinity.)

1 Cor. xii. 3, 4, 5, 6.  Wherefore, I give you to understand, that
no man speaking by the Spirit of God calleth Jesus accursed:  and
that no man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.
Now there are diversities of gifts, but the same Spirit.  And there
are differences of administrations, but the same Lord.  And there
are diversities of operations, but it is the same God which worketh
all in all.

We are to come to the Communion this day in love and charity with
all men.  But are we in love and charity with all men?

I do not mean, are there any persons whom we hate; against whom we
bear a spite; whom we should be glad to see in trouble or shame?
God forbid, my friends, God forbid.  There are, indeed, devil's
tempers.  And yet more easy for us to keep in the bottom of our
hearts, and more difficult to root them out, than we fancy.

It is easy enough for us to forgive (in words at least) a man who
has injured us.  Easy enough to make up our minds that we will not
revenge ourselves.  Easy enough to determine, even, that we will
return good for evil to him, and do him a kindness when we have a
chance.  Yes, we would not hurt him for the world:  but what if God
hurt him?  What if he hurt himself?  What if he lost his money?
What if his children turned out ill?  What if he made a fool of
himself, and came to shame?  What if he were found out and exposed,
as we fancy that he deserves?  Should we be so very sorry?  We
should not punish him ourselves.  No.  But do we never catch
ourselves thinking whether God may not punish him; thinking of that
with a base secret satisfaction; almost hoping for it, at last?  Oh
if we ever do, God forgive us!  If we ever find those devil's
thoughts rising in us, let us flee from them as from an adder; flee
to the foot of Christ's Cross, to the cross of him who prayed for
his murderers, Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do;
and there cry aloud for the blood of life, which shall cleanse us
from the guilt of those wicked thoughts, and for the water of life,
which shall cleanse us from the power of them:  lest they get the
dominion over us, and spring up in us, and spread over our whole
hearts; not a well of life, but a well of poison, springing up in us
to everlasting damnation.  Oh let us pray to him to give us truth in
our inward parts; that we may forgive and love, not in word only,
but in deed and in truth.

I could not help saying this in passing.  But it is not what the
text is speaking of; not what I want to speak of myself to-day.  I
want to speak of a matter which is smaller, and not by any means so
sinful:  and which yet in practice is often more tormenting to a
truly tender conscience, because it is more common and more
continual.

How often, when one examines oneself, whether one be in love and
charity with all men, one must recollect that there are many people
whom one does not like.  I do not mean that one hates them.  Not in
the least:  but they do not suit one.  There is something in them
which we cannot get on with, as the saying is.  Something in their
opinions, manners, ways of talking; even--God forgive us--merely in
their voice, or their looks, or their dress, which frets us, and
gives us what is called an antipathy to them.  And one dislikes
them; though they never have harmed us, or we them; and we know
them, perhaps, to be better people than ourselves.  Now, are we in
love and charity with these people?  I am afraid not.

I know one is tempted to answer; but I am afraid the answer is worth
very little--Why not?  We cannot help it.  You cannot expect us to
like people who do not suit us:  any more than you can expect us to
like a beetle or a spider.  We know the beetle or the spider will
not harm us.  We know that they are good in their places, and do
good, as all God's creatures are and do; and there is room enough in
the world for them and us:  but we have a natural dislike to them,
and cannot help it; and so with these people.  We mean no harm in
disliking them.  It is natural to us; and why blame us for it.

Now what is the mistake here?  Saying that it is _natural_ to us.
We are not meant to live according to nature, but according to
grace; and grace must conquer nature, my friends, if we wish to save
our souls alive.  It is nature, brute nature, which makes some dogs
fly at every strange dog they meet.  It is nature, brute nature,
which makes a savage consider every strange savage as his enemy, and
try to kill him.  But unless nature be conquered in that savage, it
will end, where following brute nature always ends, in death; and
the savages will (as all savages are apt to do) destroy each other
off the face of the earth, by continual war and murder.  It is brute
nature which makes low and ignorant persons hate foreign people,
because their dress and language seem strange.  But unless that
natural feeling had been in most of us conquered by the grace of
God, which is the spirit of justice and of love, then England would
have remained alone in conceit and ignorance, hated by all the
nations; instead of being what, thank God! she is--the Sanctuary of
the world; to which all the oppressed of the earth may flee; and
find a welcome, and safety, and freedom, and justice, and peace.

And so with us, my friends.  It is natural, and according to the
brute nature of the old Adam, to dislike this person and that, just
because they do not suit us.  But it is according to grace, and the
new Adam, who is the Lord from heaven, to honour all men; to love
the brotherhood; to throw away our own private fancies and personal
antipathies; and, like the Lord Jesus Christ, copy the all-embracing
charity of God.  And no one has a right to answer, 'But I must draw
the line somewhere.'  Thou must not.  I am afraid that thou _wilt_,
and that I shall, too, God forgive us both! because we are sinful
human beings.  We may, but we _must_ not, draw a line as to whom we
shall endure in charity.  For Christ draws no line.  Is it not
written, 'No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy
Ghost.'  Is not the Spirit of Christ in a Christian man, unless he
be a reprobate? and who is reprobate, we know not, and dare not try
to know; for it is written, 'Judge not, and ye shall not be judged:
condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned.'

But what has the text to do with all this?

My friends, is not this just what the text is telling us?  I said
this moment, that the Spirit of Christ was in a Christian man,
unless he be a reprobate.  And the text says further, that there are
diversities of gifts in Christian men:  but the same spirit in all
of them.

Yes:  people _will_ be different one from another.  There are
diversities of gifts.  Differences in talents, in powers, in
character, in kinds of virtue and piety; so that you shall find no
two good men, no two useful men, like each other.  But there is the
same Spirit.  The same Spirit of God is in each, though bearing
different fruit in each.  And there are differences of
administrations, of offices, in God's kingdom.  God sets one man to
do one work, and another to do another:  but it is the same Lord who
puts each man in his place, and shows him his work, and gives him
power to do it.  And there are diversities of operations, that is,
of ways of working; so that if you put any two men to do the same
thing, they will most probably do it each in a different way, and
yet both do it well.  But it is the same God, who is working in them
both; the God who works all in all, and has his work done by a
thousand different hands, by a thousand different ways.

And it is right and good that people should be so different from
each other.  'For the manifestation of the Spirit is given to every
man to profit withal.'  To profit, to be of use.  If all men were
alike, no one could learn from his neighbour.  If all mankind were
as like each other as a flock of sheep, there would be no more work,
no more progress, no more improvement in mankind, than there is in a
flock of sheep.  Now each man can bring his own little share of
knowledge or usefulness into the common stock.  Each man has, or
ought to have, something to teach his neighbour.  Each man can learn
something from his neighbour:  at least he can learn this--to have
patience with his neighbour.  To live and let live.  To bear with
what in him seems odd and disagreeable, trusting that God may have
put it there; that God has need of it; that God will make use of it.
God makes use of many things which look to us ugly and disagreeable.
He makes use of the spider and of the beetle.  How much more of our
brethren, members of Christ, children of God, inheritors of the
kingdom of heaven.  Shall they be to us, even if they be odd or
disagreeable in some things--shall they be to us as the beetle or
the spider, or any other merely natural things?  They are men and
women, in whom is the Spirit of the living God.  And my friends, if
they are good enough for God, they are good enough for us.  Think
but one moment.  God the Father adopts a man as his child, God the
Son dies for that man, God the Holy Ghost inspires that man; and
shall we be more dainty than God?  If, in spite of the man's little
weaknesses and oddities, God shall condescend to come down and dwell
in that man, making him more or less a good man, doing good work;
shall we pretend that we cannot endure what God endures?  Shall we
be more dainty, I ask again, than the holy and perfect God?  Oh my
friends, let us pray to him to take out of our hearts all
selfishness, fancifulness, fastidiousness, and hasty respect of
persons, of all which there is none in God.  Let us ask for his
Spirit, the Spirit of Charity, which sees God in all, and all in
God, and therefore sees good in all, and sees all in love.

Then we shall see how much more there is in our neighbours to like,
than to dislike.  Then all these little differences will seem to us
trifles not to be thought of, before the broad fact of a man's
being, after all, a man, an Englishman, a Christian, and a good
Christian, doing good work where God has put him.  Then we shall be
ashamed of our old narrowness of heart; ashamed of having looked so
much at the little evil in our neighbours, and not at the great good
in them.  Then we shall go about the world cheerfully; and our
neighbour's faces will seem to us full of light:  instead of seeming
full of darkness, because our own eyes and minds are dark for want
of charity.  Then we shall come to the Communion, not with hearts
narrowed and shut up, perhaps, from the very person who kneels next
to us:  but truly open-hearted; with hearts as wide--ah God, that it
were possible!--as the sacred heart of Christ, in which is room for
all mankind.  And so receiving his body, which is the blessed
company of all faithful people, we shall receive Christ, who
dwelleth in them, and they in him.



SERMON XVI.  ST. PAUL



(Eleventh Sunday after Trinity.)

1 Cor. xv. 8.  Last of all he was seen of me, also, as of one born
out of due time.  For I am the least of the Apostles, that am not
meet to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of
God.

You heard in this text (part of the epistle for this day) St. Paul's
opinion of himself.  You heard, also, in the Second Lesson for this
day, the ninth chapter of Acts, the extraordinary story of his
conversion.

And what may we learn from that story?  We may learn many lessons;
lessons without number.

We may learn, first; not to be astonished, if we have to change our
opinions as we grow older.  When we are young, we are very positive
about this thing and that, as St. Paul was; violent in favour of our
own opinions; ready to quarrel with any one who differs from us, as
St. Paul was.  But let ten years, twenty years, roll over our heads,
and we may find our opinions utterly changed, as St. Paul did, and
look back with astonishment on ourselves, for having been foolish
enough to believe what we did, as St. Paul looked back; and with
shame, as did St. Paul likewise, at having said so many violent and
unjust things against people, who, we now see, were in the right
after all.

Next; we may learn not to be ashamed of changing our minds:  but if
we find ourselves in the wrong, to confess it boldly and honestly,
as St. Paul did.  What a fearful wrench to his mind and his heart;
what a humiliation to his self-conceit, to have to change his mind
once for all on all matters in heaven and earth.  What must it not
have cost him to throw up at once all his friends and relations; to
part himself from all whom he loved and respected on earth, to feel
that henceforth they must look upon him as a madman, an infidel, an
enemy.  To an affectionate man, and St. Paul was an extremely
affectionate man, what a bitter struggle that must have cost him.
But he faced that struggle, and conquered in it, like a brave and
honest man.  And the consequence was, that he had, in time, and
after many lonely years, many Christian friends for each Jewish
friend that he had lost; and to him was fulfilled (as it will be to
all men) our Lord's great saying, 'There is no man that hath left
house, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or
children, or lands for my sake, and the gospel's, but he shall
receive an hundredfold now in this time, . . . and in the world to
come eternal life.'

Next; we may take comfort, in the hope that God will not impute to
us these early follies and mistakes of ours; if only there be in us,
as there was in St. Paul, the honest and good heart; that is, the
heart which longs to know what is true and right, and bravely acts
up to what it knows.  St. Paul did so.  God, when he set him apart,
as he says, from his very birth, gave him a great grace, even the
honest and good heart; and he was true to it, and used it.  He tried
to learn his best, and do his best.  He profited in the Jews'
religion, beyond all his fellows.  He was, touching the
righteousness which was in the law, blameless.  He was so zealous
for what he thought right, that he persecuted the Church of Christ,
as the Pharisees, his teachers, had taught him to do.  In all
things, whether right or wrong in each particular case, he was an
honest, earnest seeker after truth and righteousness.  And therefore
Christ, instead of punishing him, fulfilled to him his own great
saying,--'To him that hath shall be given, and he shall have
abundance.'  He had not yet, as he himself says, again and again,
the grace of Christ, which is love to his fellow-men; and therefore
his works were not pleasing to God, and had, as the article says,
the nature of sin.  His empty forms and ceremonies could not please
God.  His persecuting the Church had plainly the nature of sin.  But
there was something which God had put in him, and which God would
not lose sight of, or suffer to be lost; and that was, the honest
and good heart, of which our Lord speaks in the parable of the
sower.  In that Christ sowed the word of God, even himself, and his
grace and Holy Spirit; and, behold, it sprang up and bore fruit a
hundredfold, over all Christian nations to this day.

Keep, therefore, if you have it, the honest and good heart.  If you
have it not, pray for it earnestly.  Determine to learn what is
true, whatever be the trouble; and to do what is right, whatever be
the cost; and then, though you may make many mistakes, and have more
than once, perhaps, to change your mind in shame and confusion, yet
all will come right at last, for the grace of Christ, sooner or
later, will lead you into all truth which you require for this world
and all worlds to come.

Again, we may learn from St. Paul this lesson.  That though God has
forgiven a man, that is no reason that he should forgive himself.
That may seem a startling saying just now.  For the common teaching
now is, that if a man finds, or fancies, that God has forgiven him,
he may forgive himself at once; that if he gets assurance that his
sins are washed away in Christ's blood, he may go swaggering and
boasting about the world (I can call it no less), as if he had never
sinned at all; that he may be (as you see in these revivals, from
which God defend us!) one moment in the deepest agonies of
conscience, and dread of hell-fire, and the next moment in raptures
of joy, declaring himself to be in heaven.  Alas, alas! such people
forget that sin leaves behind it wounds, which even the grace of
Christ takes a long time in healing, and which then remain as ugly,
but wholesome scars, to remind us of the fools which we have been.
They are like a man who is in great bodily agony, and gets sudden
relief from a dose of laudanum.  The pain stops; and he feels
himself, as he says, in heaven for the time:  but he is too apt to
forget that the cause of the pain is still in his body, and that if
he commits the least imprudence, he will bring it back again; just
as happens, I hear, in too many of these hasty and noisy conversions
now-a-days.

That is one extreme.  The opposite extreme is that of many old Roman
Catholic saints and hermits who could not forgive themselves at all,
but passed their whole lives in fasting, poverty, and misery,
