"Meanwhile, the spies employed by Dhritarashtra's son, having searched
various villages and towns and kingdoms and done all that they had been
commanded to do and completed their examination, in the manner directed,
of the countries indicated in their orders, returned to Nagarupa,
gratified with at least one thing that they had learnt.[20] And seeing
Dhritarashtra's son king Duryodhana of the Kuru race seated in his court
with Drona and Karna and Kripa, with the high-souled Bhishma, his own
brothers, and those great warriors--the Trigartas, they addressed him,
saying, 'O lord of men, great hath been the care always bestowed by us
in the search after the sons of Pandu in that mighty forest. Searched
have we through the solitary wilderness abounding with deer and other
animals and overgrown with trees and creepers of diverse kind. Searched
have we also in arbours of matted woods and plants and creepers of every
species, but we have failed in discovering that track by which Pritha's
son of irrepressible energy may have gone. Searched have we in these and
other places for their foot-prints. Searched have we closely, O king, on
mountain tops and in inaccessible fastnesses, in various kingdoms and
provinces teeming with people, in encampments and cities. No trace have
yet been found of the sons of Pandu. Good betide thee, O bull among men,
it seems that they have perished without leaving a mark behind. O
foremost of warriors, although we followed in the track of those
warriors, yet, O best of men, we soon lost their footprints and do not
know their present residence. O lord of men, for some time we followed
in the wake of their charioteers. And making our inquiries duly, we
truly ascertained what we desired to know. O slayer of foes, the
charioteers reached Dwaravati without the sons of Pritha among them. O
king, neither the sons of Pandu, nor the chaste Krishna, are in that
city of Yadavas. O bull of the Bharata race, we have not been able to
discover either their track or their present abode. Salutations to thee,
they are gone for good. We are acquainted with the disposition of the
sons of Pandu and know something of the feats achieved by them. It
behoveth thee, therefore, O lord of men, to give us instructions, O
monarch, as to what we should next do in the search after the sons of
Pandu. O hero, listen also to these agreeable words of ours, promising
great good to thee. King Matsya's commander, Kichaka of wicked soul, by
whom the Trigartas, O monarch, were repeatedly vanquished and slain with
mighty force, now lieth low on the ground with all his brothers, slain,
O monarch, by invisible Gandharvas during the hours of darkness, O thou
of unfading glory. Having heard this delightful news about the
discomfiture of our enemies, we have been exceedingly gratified, O
Kauravya. Do thou now ordain what should next be done.'"

    [20] _Krita-krita_--Nilakantha explains this to mean 'imagining
    themselves to have achieved success in their mission' for having
    learnt of Kichaka's death, they could readily guess the presence
    of the Pandavas there. This is too far-fetched and does not at
    all agree with the spirit of their report to Duryodhana below.
    And then the same word occurs in the very last line of the
    Section. I take it that in both places the word has been used in
    the same sense.


SECTION XXVI

(_Go-harana Parva_)

Vaisampayana said, "Having listened to these words of his spies, king
Duryodhana reflected inwardly for some time and then addressed his
courtiers, saying, 'It is difficult to ascertain the course of events
definitely. Discern ye all, therefore, whither the sons of Pandu have
gone, of this thirteenth year which they are to pass undiscovered by us
all, the greater part hath already expired. What remains is by much the
smaller. If, indeed, the sons of Pandu can pass undiscovered what
remains of this year, devoted to the vow of truth as they are, they will
then have fulfilled their pledge. They will then return like mighty
elephants with temporal juice trickling down, or like snakes of virulent
poison. Filled with wrath, they will, without doubt, be inflicters of
terrible chastisement on the Kurus. It behoveth ye, therefore, to make
such efforts without loss of time as may induce the sons of Pandu,
acquainted as they are with the proprieties of time, and staying as they
now are in painful disguise, to re-enter the woods suppressing their
rage. Indeed, adopt ye such means as may remove all causes of quarrel
and anxiety from the kingdom, making it tranquil and foeless and
incapable of sustaining a diminution of territory.' Hearing these words
of Duryodhana, Karna said, 'Let other spies, abler and more cunning, and
capable of accomplishing their object, quickly go hence, O Bharata. Let
them, well-disguised, wander through swelling kingdoms and populous
provinces, prying into assemblies of the learned and delightful retreats
of provinces. In the inner apartments of palaces, in shrines and holy
spots, in mines and diverse other regions, the sons of Pandu should be
searched after with well-directed eagerness. Let the sons of Pandu who
are living in disguise be searched after by well-skilled spies in large
numbers, devoted to their work, themselves well-disguised, and all
well-acquainted with the objects of their search. Let the search be made
on the banks of rivers, in holy regions, in villages and towns, in
retreats of ascetics, in delightful mountains and mountain-caves.' When
Karna ceased, Duryodhana's second brother Duhsasana, wedded to a sinful
disposition, then addressed his eldest brother and said, 'O monarch, O
lord of men, let those spies only in whom we have confidence, receiving
their rewards in advance, once more go after the search. This and what
else hath been said by Karna have our fullest approval. Let all the
spies engage themselves in the search according to the directions
already given. Let these and others engage in the search from province
to province according to approved rules. It is my belief, however, that
the track the Pandavas have followed or their present abode or
occupation will not be discovered. Perhaps, they are closely concealed;
perhaps, they have gone to the other side of the ocean. Or, perhaps,
proud as they are of their strength and courage, they have been devoured
by wild beasts; or perhaps, having been overtaken by some unusual
danger, they have perished for eternity. Therefore, O prince of the Kuru
race, dispelling all anxieties from thy heart, achieve what thou wilt,
always acting according to thy energy.'"


SECTION XXVII

Vaisampayana said, "Endued with mighty energy and possessed of great
discernment, Drona then said, 'Persons like the sons of Pandu never
perish nor undergo discomfiture. Brave and skilled in every science,
intelligent and with senses under control, virtuous and grateful and
obedient to the virtuous Yudhishthira, ever following in the wake of
their eldest brother who is conversant with the conclusions of policy
and virtue and profit, who is attached to them as a father, and who
strictly adhereth to virtue and is firm in truth,--persons like them
that are thus devoted to their illustrious and royal brother, who gifted
with great intelligence, never injureth any body and who in his turn
himself obeyeth his younger brothers, never perish in this way. Why,
then, should not (Yudhishthira) the son of Pritha possessing a knowledge
of policy, be able to restore the prosperity of his brothers who are so
obedient and devoted and high-souled? It is for this that they are
carefully waiting for the arrival of their opportunity. Men such as
these never perish. This is what I see by my intellect. Do, therefore,
quickly and without loss of time, what should now be done, after proper
reflection. And let also the abode which the sons of Pandu with souls
under control as regards every purpose of life, are to occupy, be now
settled. Heroic and sinless and possessed of ascetic merit, the Pandavas
are difficult to be discovered (within the period of non-discovery).
Intelligent and possessed of every virtue, devoted to truth and versed
in the principles of policy, endued with purity and holiness, and the
embodiment of immeasurable energy, the son of Pritha is capable of
consuming (his foes) by a glance alone of his eyes. Knowing all this, do
what is proper. Let us, therefore, once more search after them, sending
Brahmanas and _Charanas_, ascetics crowned with success, and others of
this kind who may have a knowledge of those heroes!'"


SECTION XXVIII

Vaisampayana said, "Then that grandsire of the Bharatas, Bhishma the son
of Santanu, conversant with the _Vedas_, acquainted with the
proprieties of time and place, and possessing a knowledge of every duty
of morality, after the conclusion of Drona's speech, applauded the words
of the preceptor and spake unto the Bharatas for their benefit these
words consistent with virtue, expressive of his attachment to the
virtuous Yudhishthira, rarely spoken by men that are dishonest, and
always meeting with the approbation of the honest. And the words that
Bhishma spake were thoroughly impartial and worshipped by the wise. And
the grandsire of the Kurus said, 'The words that the regenerate Drona
acquainted with the truth of every affair hath uttered, are approved by
me. I have no hesitation in saying so. Endued with every auspicious
mark, observant of virtuous vows, possessed of Vedic lore, devoted to
religious observances, conversant with various sciences, obedient to the
counsels of the aged, adhering to the vow of truth, acquainted with the
proprieties of time, observant of the pledge they have given (in respect
of their exile), pure in their behaviour, ever adhering to the duties of
the Kshatriya order, always obedient to Kesava, high-souled, possessed
of great strength, and ever-bearing the burthens of the wise, those
heroic ones can never wither under misfortune. Aided by their own
energy, sons of Pandu who are now leading a life of concealment in
obedience to virtue, will surely never perish. It is even this that my
mind surmiseth. Therefore, O Bharata, I am for employing the aid of
honest counsel in our behaviour towards the sons of Pandu. It would not
be the policy of any wise man to cause them to be discovered now by
means of spies,[21] what we should do unto the sons of Pandu, I shall
say, reflecting with the aid of the intellect. Know that I shall say
nothing from ill will to thee. People like me should never give such
counsels to him that is dishonest, for only counsels (like those I would
give) should be offered unto them that are honest. Counsels, however,
that are evil, should under no circumstances be offered. He, O child,
that is devoted to truth and obedient to the aged, he, indeed, that is
wise, while speaking in the midst of an assembly, should under all
circumstances speak the truth, if the acquisition of virtue be an object
with him. I should, therefore, say that I think differently from all
those people here, in respect of the abode of Yudhishthira the just in
this the thirteenth year of his exile. The ruler, O child, of the city
or the province where king Yudhishthira resides cannot have any
misfortune. Charitable and liberal and humble and modest must the people
be of the country where king Yudhishthira resides. Agreeable in speech,
with passions under control, observant of truth, cheerful, healthy, pure
in conduct, and skilful in work must the people be of the country where
king Yudhishthira resides. The people of the place, where Yudhishthira
is, cannot be envious or malicious, or vain, or proud, but must all
adhere to their respective duties. Indeed, in the place where
Yudhishthira resides, Vedic hymns will be chanted all around, sacrifices
will be performed, the last full libations will always be poured,[22]
and gifts to Brahmanas will always be in profusion. There the clouds,
without doubt, pour abundant rain, and furnished with good harvest the
country will ever be without fear. There the paddy will not be without
grain, fruits will not be bereft of juice, floral garlands will not be
without fragrance, and the conversation of men will always be full of
agreeable words. There where king Yudhishthira resides, the breezes will
be delicious, the meetings of men will always be friendly, and cause of
fear there will be none. There kine will be plentiful, without any of
them being lean-fleshed or weak, and milk and curds and butter will all
be savoury and nutritious. There where king Yudhishthira resides, every
kind of corn will be full of nutrition and every edible full of flavour.
There where king Yudhishthira resides, the objects of all the senses,
viz.,--taste, touch, smell, and hearing, will be endued with excellent
attributes. There where king Yudhishthira resides, the sights and scenes
will be gladdening. And the regenerate ones of that place will be
virtuous and steady in observing their respective duties. Indeed, in the
country where the sons of Pandu may have taken up their abode during
this thirteenth year of their exile, the people will be contented and
cheerful, pure in conduct and without misery of any kind. Devoted to
gods and guests and the worship of these with their whole soul, they
will be fond of giving away, and filled with great energy, they will all
be observant of eternal virtue. There where king Yudhishthira resides,
the people, eschewing all that is evil, will be desirous of achieving
only what is good. Always observant of sacrifices and pure vows, and
hating untruth in speech, the people of the place where king
Yudhishthira may reside will always be desirous of obtaining what is
good, auspicious and beneficial. There where Yudhishthira resides, the
people will certainly be desirous of achieving what is good, and their
hearts will always incline towards virtue, and their vows being
agreeable they themselves are ever-engaged in the acquisition of
religious merit. O child, that son of Pritha in whom are intelligence
and charity, the highest tranquillity and undoubted forgiveness, modesty
and prosperity, and fame and great energy and a love for all creatures,
is incapable of being found out (now that he hath concealed himself)
even by Brahmanas, let alone ordinary persons. The wise Yudhishthira is
living in close disguise in regions whose characteristics I have
described. Regarding his excellent mode of life, I dare not say anything
more. Reflecting well upon all this, do without loss of time what thou
mayst think to be beneficial, O prince of the Kuru race, if indeed, thou
hast any faith in me.'"

    [21] This is a very difficult sloka. I am not sure that I have
    understood it alright. Both Nilakantha and Arjuna Misra are
    silent. Instead of depending, however, on my own intelligence, I
    have consulted several friends who have read the _Mahabharata_
    thoroughly. The grammatical structure is easy. The only
    difficulty consists in the second half of the sloka. The
    meaning, however, I have given is consistent with the tenor of
    Bhishma's advice.

    [22] Indicating the unobstructed completion of the sacrifice.


SECTION XXIX

Vaisampayana said, "Then Saradwata's son, Kripa said, 'What the aged
Bhishma hath said concerning the Pandavas is reasonable, suited to the
occasion, consistent with virtue and profit, agreeable to the ear,
fraught with sound reason, and worthy of him. Listen also to what I
would say on this subject. It behoveth thee to ascertain the track they
have followed and their abode also by means of spies,[23] and to adopt
that policy which may bring about thy welfare. O child, he that is
solicitous of his welfare should not disregard even an ordinary foe.
What shall I say, then, O child, of the Pandavas who are thorough
masters of all weapons in battle. When, therefore, the time cometh for
the reappearance of the high-souled Pandavas, who, having entered the
forest,[24] are now passing their days in close disguise, thou shouldst
ascertain thy strength both in thy own kingdom and in those of other
kings. Without doubt, the return of the Pandavas is at hand. When their
promised term of exile is over, the illustrious and mighty sons of
Pritha, endued with immeasurable prowess, will come hither bursting with
energy. Do thou, therefore, in order to conclude an advantageous treaty
with them, have recourse to sound policy and address thyself to increase
thy forces and improve thy treasury. O child, ascertaining all these,
reckon thou thy own strength in respect of all thy allies weak and
strong.[25] Ascertaining the efficiency, and weakness, and indifference
of thy forces, as also who amongst them are well-affected and who are
disaffected, we should either fight the foe or make treaty with him.
Having recourse to the arts of conciliation, disunion, chastisement,
bribery, presents and fair behaviour, attack thy foes and subdue the
weak by might, and win over thy allies and troops and by soft speeches.
When thou hast (by these means) strengthened thy army and filled thy
treasury, entire success will be thine. When thou hast done all this,
thou wilt be able to fight with powerful enemies that may present
themselves, let alone the sons of Pandu deficient in troops and animals
of their own. By adopting all these expedients according to the customs
of thy order, thou wilt, O foremost of men, attain enduring happiness in
due time!'"

    [23] The word _tirtha_ here means, as Nilakantha rightly
    explains spies and not holy spots.

    [24] _Satram_ is explained by Nilakantha to mean here 'false
    disguise.' I think, however, such an interpretation to be
    far-fetched. It evidently means 'forest',--the use of
    'pravisteshu' in connection with it almost settles the point.

    [25] This sloka is not correctly printed in any of the texts
    that I have seen. The reading that I adopt is that the second
    word is the participle of the root _budh_ and not the
    instrumental of _budhi_; the last word again of the second line
    is a compound of _valavatsu_ and _avaleshu_ instead of (as
    printed in many books) _valavatswavaleshu_. Any other reading
    would certainly be incorrect. I have not consulted the Bombay
    text.


SECTION XXX

Vaisampayana said, "Discomfited before, O monarch, many a time and oft
by Matsya's _Suta_ Kichaka aided by the Matsyas and the Salyas, the
mighty king of the Trigartas, Susarman, who owned innumerable cars,
regarding the opportunity to be a favourable one, then spoke the
following words without losing a moment. And, O monarch, forcibly
vanquished along with his relatives by the mighty Kichaka, king
Susarman, eyeing Karna in askance, spoke these words unto Duryodhana,
'My kingdom hath many a time been forcibly invaded by the king of the
Matsyas. The mighty Kichaka was that king's generalissimo. Crooked and
wrathful and of wicked soul, of prowess famed over all the world, sinful
in deeds and highly cruel, that wretch, however, hath been slain by the
Gandharvas. Kichaka being dead, king Virata, shorn of pride and his
refuge gone, will, I imagine, lose all courage. I think we ought now to
invade that kingdom, if it pleases thee, O sinless one, as also the
illustrious Karna and all the Kauravas. The accident that hath happened
is, I imagine, a favourable one for us. Let us, therefore, repair to
Virata's kingdom abounding in corn. We will appropriate his gems and
other wealth of diverse kinds, and let us go to share with each other as
regards his villages and kingdom. Or, invading his city by force, let us
carry off by thousands his excellent kine of various species. Uniting, O
king, the forces of the Kauravas and the Trigartas, let us lift his
cattle in droves. Or, uniting our forces well, we will check his power
by forcing him to sue for peace. Or, destroying his entire host, we will
bring Matsya under subjection. Having brought him under subjection by
