eyes are upon us to bring us to nought; yea, they desire to
destroy the inheritance, that hath been thine from the
beginning.

AddEsth 13:16
Despise not the portion, which thou hast delivered out of
Egypt for thine own self.

AddEsth 13:17
Hear my prayer, and be merciful unto thine inheritance: turn
our sorrow into joy, that we may live, O Lord, and praise thy
name: and destroy not the mouths of them that praise thee, O
Lord.

AddEsth 13:18
All Israel in like manner cried most earnestly unto the Lord,
because their death was before their eyes.

AddEsth 14:1
Queen Esther also, being in fear of death, resorted unto the
Lord:

AddEsth 14:2
And laid away her glorious apparel, and put on the garments
of anguish and mourning: and instead of precious ointments, she
covered her head with ashes and dung, and she humbled her body
greatly, and all the places of her joy she filled with her torn
hair.

AddEsth 14:3
And she prayed unto the Lord God of Israel, saying, O my
Lord, thou only art our King: help me, desolate woman, which
have no helper but thee:

AddEsth 14:4
For my danger is in mine hand.

AddEsth 14:5
From my youth up I have heard in the tribe of my family that
thou, O Lord, tookest Israel from among all people, and our
fathers from all their predecessors, for a perpetual
inheritance, and thou hast performed whatsoever thou didst
promise them.

AddEsth 14:6
And now we have sinned before thee: therefore hast thou given
us into the hands of our enemies,

AddEsth 14:7
Because we worshipped their gods: O Lord, thou art righteous.

AddEsth 14:8
Nevertheless it satisfieth them not, that we are in bitter
captivity: but they have stricken hands with their idols,

AddEsth 14:9
That they will abolish the thing that thou with thy mouth
hast ordained, and destroy thine inheritance, and stop the mouth
of them that praise thee, and quench the glory of thy house, and
of thine altar,

AddEsth 14:10
And open the mouths of the heathen to set forth the praises
of the idols, and to magnify a fleshly king for ever.

AddEsth 14:11
O Lord, give not thy sceptre unto them that be nothing, and
let them not laugh at our fall; but turn their device upon
themselves, and make him an example, that hath begun this
against us.

AddEsth 14:12
Remember, O Lord, make thyself known in time of our
affliction, and give me boldness, O King of the nations, and
Lord of all power.

AddEsth 14:13
Give me eloquent speech in my mouth before the lion: turn his
heart to hate him that fighteth against us, that there may be an
end of him, and of all that are likeminded to him:

AddEsth 14:14
But deliver us with thine hand, and help me that am desolate,
and which have no other help but thee.

AddEsth 14:15
Thou knowest all things, O Lord; thou knowest that I hate the
glory of the unrighteous, and abhor the bed of the
uncircumcised, and of all the heathen.

AddEsth 14:16
Thou knowest my necessity: for I abhor the sign of my high
estate, which is upon mine head in the days wherein I shew
myself, and that I abhor it as a menstruous rag, and that I wear
it not when I am private by myself.

AddEsth 14:17
And that thine handmaid hath not eaten at Aman's table, and
that I have not greatly esteemed the king's feast, nor drunk the
wine of the drink offerings.

AddEsth 14:18
Neither had thine handmaid any joy since the day that I was
brought hither to this present, but in thee, O Lord God of
Abraham.

AddEsth 14:19
O thou mighty God above all, hear the voice of the forlorn
and deliver us out of the hands of the mischievous, and deliver
me out of my fear.

AddEsth 15:1
And upon the third day, when she had ended her prayers, she
laid away her mourning garments, and put on her glorious
apparel.

AddEsth 15:2
And being gloriously adorned, after she had called upon God,
who is the beholder and saviour of all things, she took two
maids with her:

AddEsth 15:3
And upon the one she leaned, as carrying herself daintily;

AddEsth 15:4
And the other followed, bearing up her train.

AddEsth 15:5
And she was ruddy through the perfection of her beauty, and
her countenance was cheerful and very amiable: but her heart was
in anguish for fear.

AddEsth 15:6
Then having passed through all the doors, she stood before
the king, who sat upon his royal throne, and was clothed with
all his robes of majesty, all glittering with gold and precious
stones; and he was very dreadful.

AddEsth 15:7
Then lifting up his countenance that shone with majesty, he
looked very fiercely upon her: and the queen fell down, and was
pale, and fainted, and bowed herself upon the head of the maid
that went before her.

AddEsth 15:8
Then God changed the spirit of the king into mildness, who in
a fear leaped from his throne, and took her in his arms, till
she came to herself again, and comforted her with loving words
and said unto her,

AddEsth 15:9
Esther, what is the matter? I am thy brother, be of good
cheer:

AddEsth 15:10
Thou shalt not die, though our our commandment be general:
come near.

AddEsth 15:11
And so be held up his golden sceptre, and laid it upon her
neck,

AddEsth 15:12
And embraced her, and said, Speak unto me.

AddEsth 15:13
Then said she unto him, I saw thee, my lord, as an angel of
God, and my heart was troubled for fear of thy majesty.

AddEsth 15:14
For wonderful art thou, lord, and thy countenance is full of
grace.

AddEsth 15:15
And as she was speaking, she fell down for faintness.

AddEsth 15:16
Then the king was troubled, and ail his servants comforted
her.

AddEsth 16:1
The great king Artexerxes unto the princes and governors of
an hundred and seven and twenty provinces from India unto
Ethiopia, and unto all our faithful subjects, greeting.

AddEsth 16:2
Many, the more often they are honoured with the great bounty
of their gracious princes, the more proud they are waxen,

AddEsth 16:3
And endeavour to hurt not our subjects only, but not being
able to bear abundance, do take in hand to practise also against
those that do them good:

AddEsth 16:4
And take not only thankfulness away from among men, but also
lifted up with the glorious words of lewd persons, that were
never good, they think to escape the justice of God, that seeth
all things and hateth evil.

AddEsth 16:5
Oftentimes also fair speech of those, that are put in trust
to manage their friends' affairs, hath caused many that are in
authority to be partakers of innocent blood, and hath enwrapped
them in remediless calamities:

AddEsth 16:6
Beguiling with the falsehood and deceit of their lewd
disposition the innocency and goodness of princes.

AddEsth 16:7
Now ye may see this, as we have declared, not so much by
ancient histories, as ye may, if ye search what hath been
wickedly done of late through the pestilent behaviour of them
that are unworthily placed in authority.

AddEsth 16:8
And we must take care for the time to come, that our kingdom
may be quiet and peaceable for all men,

AddEsth 16:9
Both by changing our purposes, and always judging things that
are evident with more equal proceeding.

AddEsth 16:10
For Aman, a Macedonian, the son of Amadatha, being indeed a
stranger from the Persian blood, and far distant from our
goodness, and as a stranger received of us,

AddEsth 16:11
Had so far forth obtained the favour that we shew toward
every nation, as that he was called our father, and was
continually honoured of all the next person unto the king.

AddEsth 16:12
But he, not bearing his great dignity, went about to deprive
us of our kingdom and life:

AddEsth 16:13
Having by manifold and cunning deceits sought of us the
destruction, as well of Mardocheus, who saved our life, and
continually procured our good, as also of blameless Esther,
partaker of our kingdom, with their whole nation.

AddEsth 16:14
For by these means he thought, finding us destitute of
friends to have translated the kingdom of the Persians to the
Macedonians.

AddEsth 16:15
But we find that the Jews, whom this wicked wretch hath
delivered to utter destruction, are no evildoers, but live by
most just laws:

AddEsth 16:16
And that they be children of the most high and most mighty,
living God, who hath ordered the kingdom both unto us and to our
progenitors in the most excellent manner.

AddEsth 16:17
Wherefore ye shall do well not to put in execution the
letters sent unto you by Aman the son of Amadatha.

AddEsth 16:18
For he that was the worker of these things, is hanged at the
gates of Susa with all his family: God, who ruleth all things,
speedily rendering vengeance to him according to his deserts.

AddEsth 16:19
Therefore ye shall publish the copy of this letter in all
places, that the Jews may freely live after their own laws.

AddEsth 16:20
And ye shall aid them, that even the same day, being the
thirteenth day of the twelfth month Adar, they may be avenged on
them, who in the time of their affliction shall set upon them.

AddEsth 16:21
For Almighty God hath turned to joy unto them the day,
wherein the chosen people should have perished.

AddEsth 16:22
Ye shall therefore among your solemn feasts keep it an high
day with all feasting:

AddEsth 16:23
That both now and hereafter there may be safety to us and the
well affected Persians; but to those which do conspire against
us a memorial of destruction.

AddEsth 16:24
Therefore every city and country whatsoever, which shall not
do according to these things, shall be destroyed without mercy
with fire and sword, and shall be made not only unpassable for
men, but also most hateful to wild beasts and fowls for ever.




The First Book of the Maccabees



1 Mac 1:1
And it happened, after that Alexander son of Philip, the
Macedonian, who came out of the land of Chettim, had smitten
Darius king of the Persians and Medes, that he reigned in his
stead, the first over Greece,

1 Mac 1:2
And made many wars, and won many strong holds, and slew the
kings of the earth,

1 Mac 1:3
And went through to the ends of the earth, and took spoils of
many nations, insomuch that the earth was quiet before him;
whereupon he was exalted and his heart was lifted up.

1 Mac 1:4
And he gathered a mighty strong host and ruled over
countries, and nations, and kings, who became tributaries unto
him.

1 Mac 1:5
And after these things he fell sick, and perceived that he
should die.

1 Mac 1:6
Wherefore he called his servants, such as were honourable,
and had been brought up with him from his youth, and parted his
kingdom among them, while he was yet alive.

1 Mac 1:7
So Alexander reigned twelves years, and then died.

1 Mac 1:8
And his servants bare rule every one in his place.

1 Mac 1:9
And after his death they all put crowns upon themselves; so
did their sons after them many years: and evils were multiplied
in the earth.

1 Mac 1:10
And there came out of them a wicked root Antiochus surnamed
Epiphanes, son of Antiochus the king, who had been an hostage at
Rome, and he reigned in the hundred and thirty and seventh year
of the kingdom of the Greeks.

1 Mac 1:11
In those days went there out of Israel wicked men, who
persuaded many, saying, Let us go and make a covenant with the
heathen that are round about us: for since we departed from them
we have had much sorrow.

1 Mac 1:12
So this device pleased them well.

1 Mac 1:13
Then certain of the people were so forward herein, that they
went to the king, who gave them licence to do after the
ordinances of the heathen:

1 Mac 1:14
Whereupon they built a place of exercise at Jerusalem
according to the customs of the heathen:

1 Mac 1:15
And made themselves uncircumcised, and forsook the holy
covenant, and joined themselves to the heathen, and were sold to
do mischief.

1 Mac 1:16
Now when the kingdom was established before Antiochus, he
thought to reign over Egypt that he might have the dominion of
two realms.

1 Mac 1:17
Wherefore he entered into Egypt with a great multitude, with
chariots, and elephants, and horsemen, and a great navy,

1 Mac 1:18
And made war against Ptolemee king of Egypt: but Ptolemee was
afraid of him, and fled; and many were wounded to death.

1 Mac 1:19
Thus they got the strong cities in the land of Egypt and he
took the spoils thereof.

1 Mac 1:20
And after that Antiochus had smitten Egypt, he returned again
in the hundred forty and third year, and went up against Israel
and Jerusalem with a great multitude,

1 Mac 1:21
And entered proudly into the sanctuary, and took away the
golden altar, and the candlestick of light, and all the vessels
thereof,

1 Mac 1:22
And the table of the shewbread, and the pouring vessels, and
the vials, and the censers of gold, and the veil, and the crown,
and the golden ornaments that were before the temple, all which
he pulled off.

1 Mac 1:23
He took also the silver and the gold, and the precious
vessels: also he took the hidden treasures which he found.

1 Mac 1:24
And when he had taken all away, he went into his own land,
having made a great massacre, and spoken very proudly.

1 Mac 1:25
Therefore there was a great mourning in Israel, in every
place where they were;

1 Mac 1:26
So that the princes and elders mourned, the virgins and young
men were made feeble, and the beauty of women was changed.

1 Mac 1:27
Every bridegroom took up lamentation, and she that sat in the
marriage chamber was in heaviness,

1 Mac 1:28
The land also was moved for the inhabitants thereof, and all
the house of Jacob was covered with confusion.

1 Mac 1:29
And after two years fully expired the king sent his chief
collector of tribute unto the cities of Juda, who came unto
Jerusalem with a great multitude,

1 Mac 1:30
And spake peaceable words unto them, but all was deceit: for
when they had given him credence, he fell suddenly upon the
city, and smote it very sore, and destroyed much people of
Israel.

1 Mac 1:31
And when he had taken the spoils of the city, he set it on
fire, and pulled down the houses and walls thereof on every
side.

1 Mac 1:32
But the women and children took they captive, and possessed
the cattle.

1 Mac 1:33
Then builded they the city of David with a great and strong
wall, and with mighty towers, and made it a strong hold for
them.

1 Mac 1:34
And they put therein a sinful nation, wicked men, and
fortified themselves therein.

1 Mac 1:35
They stored it also with armour and victuals, and when they
had gathered together the spoils of Jerusalem, they laid them up
there, and so they became a sore snare:

1 Mac 1:36
For it was a place to lie in wait against the sanctuary, and
an evil adversary to Israel.

1 Mac 1:37
Thus they shed innocent blood on every side of the sanctuary,
and defiled it:

1 Mac 1:38
Insomuch that the inhabitants of Jerusalem fled because of
them: whereupon the city was made an habitation of strangers,
and became strange to those that were born in her; and her own
children left her.

1 Mac 1:39
Her sanctuary was laid waste like a wilderness, her feasts
were turned into mourning, her sabbaths into reproach her honour
into contempt.

1 Mac 1:40
As had been her glory, so was her dishonour increased, and
her excellency was turned into mourning.

1 Mac 1:41
Moreover king Antiochus wrote to his whole kingdom, that all
should be one people,

1 Mac 1:42
And every one should leave his laws: so all the heathen
agreed according to the commandment of the king.

1 Mac 1:43
Yea, many also of the Israelites consented to his religion,
and sacrificed unto idols, and profaned the sabbath.

1 Mac 1:44
For the king had sent letters by messengers unto Jerusalem
and the cities of Juda that they should follow the strange laws
of the land,

1 Mac 1:45
And forbid burnt offerings, and sacrifice, and drink
offerings, in the temple; and that they should profane the
sabbaths and festival days:

1 Mac 1:46
And pollute the sanctuary and holy people:

1 Mac 1:47
Set up altars, and groves, and chapels of idols, and
sacrifice swine's flesh, and unclean beasts:

1 Mac 1:48
That they should also leave their children uncircumcised, and
make their souls abominable with all manner of uncleanness and
profanation:

1 Mac 1:49
To the end they might forget the law, and change all the
ordinances.

1 Mac 1:50
And whosoever would not do according to the commandment of
the king, he said, he should die.

1 Mac 1:51
In the selfsame manner wrote he to his whole kingdom, and
appointed overseers over all the people, commanding the cities
of Juda to sacrifice, city by city.

1 Mac 1:52
Then many of the people were gathered unto them, to wit every
one that forsook the law; and so they committed evils in the
land;

1 Mac 1:53
And drove the Israelites into secret places, even wheresoever
they could flee for succour.

1 Mac 1:54
Now the fifteenth day of the month Casleu, in the hundred
forty and fifth year, they set up the abomination of desolation
upon the altar, and builded idol altars throughout the cities of
Juda on every side;

1 Mac 1:55
And burnt incense at the doors of their houses, and in the
streets.

1 Mac 1:56
And when they had rent in pieces the books of the law which
they found, they burnt them with fire.

1 Mac 1:57
And whosoever was found with any the book of the testament,
or if any committed to the law, the king's commandment was, that
they should put him to death.

1 Mac 1:58
Thus did they by their authority unto the Israelites every
month, to as many as were found in the cities.

1 Mac 1:59
Now the five and twentieth day of the month they did
sacrifice upon the idol altar, which was upon the altar of God.

1 Mac 1:60
At which time according to the commandment they put to death
certain women, that had caused their children to be circumcised.

1 Mac 1:61
And they hanged the infants about their necks, and rifled
their houses, and slew them that had circumcised them.

1 Mac 1:62
Howbeit many in Israel were fully resolved and confirmed in
themselves not to eat any unclean thing.

1 Mac 1:63
Wherefore the rather to die, that they might not be defiled
with meats, and that they might not profane the holy covenant:
so then they died.

1 Mac 1:64
And there was very great wrath upon Israel.

1 Mac 2:1
In those days arose Mattathias the son of John, the son of
Simeon, a priest of the sons of Joarib, from Jerusalem, and
dwelt in Modin.

1 Mac 2:2
And he had five sons, Joannan, called Caddis:

1 Mac 2:3
Simon; called Thassi:

1 Mac 2:4
Judas, who was called Maccabeus:

1 Mac 2:5
Eleazar, called Avaran: and Jonathan, whose surname was
Apphus.

1 Mac 2:6
And when he saw the blasphemies that were committed in Juda
and Jerusalem,

1 Mac 2:7
He said, Woe is me! wherefore was I born to see this misery
of my people, and of the holy city, and to dwell there, when it
was delivered into the hand of the enemy, and the sanctuary into
the hand of strangers?

1 Mac 2:8
Her temple is become as a man without glory.

1 Mac 2:9
Her glorious vessels are carried away into captivity, her
infants are slain in the streets, her young men with the sword
of the enemy.

1 Mac 2:10
What nation hath not had a part in her kingdom and gotten of
her spoils?

1 Mac 2:11
All her ornaments are taken away; of a free woman she is
become a bondslave.

1 Mac 2:12
And, behold, our sanctuary, even our beauty and our glory, is
laid waste, and the Gentiles have profaned it.

1 Mac 2:13
To what end therefore shall we live any longer?

1 Mac 2:14
Then Mattathias and his sons rent their clothes, and put on
sackcloth, and mourned very sore.

1 Mac 2:15
In the mean while the king's officers, such as compelled the
people to revolt, came into the city Modin, to make them
sacrifice.

1 Mac 2:16
And when many of Israel came unto them, Mattathias also and
his sons came together.

1 Mac 2:17
Then answered the king's officers, and said to Mattathias on
this wise, Thou art a ruler, and an honourable and great man in
this city, and strengthened with sons and brethren:

1 Mac 2:18
Now therefore come thou first, and fulfil the king's
commandment, like as all the heathen have done, yea, and the men
of Juda also, and such as remain at Jerusalem: so shalt thou and
thy house be in the number of the king's friends, and thou and
thy children shall be honoured with silver and gold, and many
rewards.

1 Mac 2:19
Then Mattathias answered and spake with a loud voice, Though
all the nations that are under the king's dominion obey him, and
fall away every one from the religion of their fathers, and give
consent to his commandments:

1 Mac 2:20
Yet will I and my sons and my brethren walk in the covenant
of our fathers.

1 Mac 2:21
God forbid that we should forsake the law and the ordinances.

1 Mac 2:22
We will not hearken to the king's words, to go from our
religion, either on the right hand, or the left.

1 Mac 2:23
Now when he had left speaking these words, there came one of
the Jews in the sight of all to sacrifice on the altar which was
at Modin, according to the king's commandment.

1 Mac 2:24
Which thing when Mattathias saw, he was inflamed with zeal,
and his reins trembled, neither could he forbear to shew his
anger according to judgment: wherefore he ran, and slew him upon
the altar.

1 Mac 2:25
Also the king's commissioner, who compelled men to sacrifice,
he killed at that time, and the altar he pulled down.

1 Mac 2:26
Thus dealt he zealously for the law of God like as Phinees
did unto Zambri the son of Salom.

1 Mac 2:27
And Mattathias cried throughout the city with a loud voice,
saying, Whosoever is zealous of the law, and maintaineth the
covenant, let him follow me.

1 Mac 2:28
So he and his sons fled into the mountains, and left all that
ever they had in the city.

1 Mac 2:29
Then many that sought after justice and judgment went down
into the wilderness, to dwell there:

1 Mac 2:30
Both they, and their children, and their wives; and their
cattle; because afflictions increased sore upon them.

1 Mac 2:31
Now when it was told the king's servants, and the host that
was at Jerusalem, in the city of David, that certain men, who
had broken the king's commandment, were gone down into the
secret places in the wilderness,

1 Mac 2:32
They pursued after them a great number, and having overtaken
them, they camped against them, and made war against them on the
sabbath day.

1 Mac 2:33
And they said unto them, Let that which ye have done hitherto
suffice; come forth, and do according to the commandment of the
king, and ye shall live.

1 Mac 2:34
But they said, We will not come forth, neither will we do the
king's commandment, to profane the sabbath day.

1 Mac 2:35
So then they gave them the battle with all speed.

1 Mac 2:36
Howbeit they answered them not, neither cast they a stone at
them, nor stopped the places where they lay hid;

1 Mac 2:37
But said, Let us die all in our innocency: heaven and earth
will testify for us, that ye put us to death wrongfully.

1 Mac 2:38
So they rose up against them in battle on the sabbath, and
they slew them, with their wives and children and their cattle,
to the number of a thousand people.

1 Mac 2:39
Now when Mattathias and his friends understood hereof, they
mourned for them right sore.

1 Mac 2:40
And one of them said to another, If we all do as our brethren
have done, and fight not for our lives and laws against the
heathen, they will now quickly root us out of the earth.

1 Mac 2:41
At that time therefore they decreed, saying, Whosoever shall
come to make battle with us on the sabbath day, we will fight
against him; neither will we die all, as our brethren that were
murdered im the secret places.

1 Mac 2:42
Then came there unto him a company of Assideans who were
mighty men of Israel, even all such as were voluntarily devoted
unto the law.

1 Mac 2:43
Also all they that fled for persecution joined themselves
unto them, and were a stay unto them.

1 Mac 2:44
So they joined their forces, and smote sinful men in their
anger, and wicked men in their wrath: but the rest fled to the
heathen for succour.

1 Mac 2:45
Then Mattathias and his friends went round about, and pulled
down the altars:

1 Mac 2:46
And what children soever they found within the coast of
Israel uncircumcised, those they circumcised valiantly.

1 Mac 2:47
They pursued also after the proud men, and the work prospered
in their hand.

1 Mac 2:48
So they recovered the law out of the hand of the Gentiles,
and out of the hand of kings, neither suffered they the sinner
to triumph.

1 Mac 2:49
Now when the time drew near that Mattathias should die, he
said unto his sons, Now hath pride and rebuke gotten strength,
and the time of destruction, and the wrath of indignation:

1 Mac 2:50
Now therefore, my sons, be ye zealous for the law, and give
your lives for the covenant of your fathers.

1 Mac 2:51
Call to remembrance what acts our fathers did in their time;
so shall ye receive great honour and an everlasting name.

1 Mac 2:52
Was not Abraham found faithful in temptation, and it was
imputed unto him for righteousness?

1 Mac 2:53
Joseph in the time of his distress kept the commandment and
was made lord of Egypt.

1 Mac 2:54
Phinees our father in being zealous and fervent obtained the
covenant of an everlasting priesthood.

1 Mac 2:55
Jesus for fulfilling the word was made a judge in Israel.

1 Mac 2:56
Caleb for bearing witness before the congregation received
the heritage of the land.

1 Mac 2:57
David for being merciful possessed the throne of an
everlasting kingdom.

1 Mac 2:58
Elias for being zealous and fervent for the law was taken up
into heaven.

1 Mac 2:59
Ananias, Azarias, and Misael, by believing were saved out of
the flame.

1 Mac 2:60
Daniel for his innocency was delivered from the mouth of
lions.

1 Mac 2:61
And thus consider ye throughout all ages, that none that put
their trust in him shall be overcome.

1 Mac 2:62
Fear not then the words of a sinful man: for his glory shall
be dung and worms.

1 Mac 2:63
To day he shall be lifted up and to morrow he shall not be
found, because he is returned into his dust, and his thought is
come to nothing.

1 Mac 2:64
Wherefore, ye my sons, be valiant and shew yourselves men in
the behalf of the law; for by it shall ye obtain glory.

1 Mac 2:65
And behold, I know that your brother Simon is a man of
counsel, give ear unto him alway: he shall be a father unto you.

1 Mac 2:66
As for Judas Maccabeus, he hath been mighty and strong, even
from his youth up: let him be your captain, and fight the battle
of the people.

1 Mac 2:67
Take also unto you all those that observe the law, and avenge
ye the wrong of your people.

1 Mac 2:68
Recompense fully the heathen, and take heed to the
commandments of the law.

1 Mac 2:69
So he blessed them, and was gathered to his fathers.

1 Mac 2:70
And he died in the hundred forty and sixth year, and his sons
buried him in the sepulchres of his fathers at Modin, and all
Israel made great lamentation for him.

1 Mac 3:1
Then his son Judas, called Maccabeus, rose up in his stead.

1 Mac 3:2
And all his brethren helped him, and so did all they that
held with his father, and they fought with cheerfulness the
battle of Israel.

