The ever-present providence of God, the possible safety of the nation,
even when in captivity, the preservation of every servant of God who
turns to the Lord in his chastisement, the exhibition of penitence as
the way of deliverance, are the purposes for which the miracle was
wrought and told. Flippant sarcasms are cheap. A devout insight yields a
worthy meaning. Jesus Christ employed this incident as a symbol of His
Death and Resurrection. That use of it seems hard to reconcile with any
view but that the story is true. But it does not seem necessary to
suppose that our Lord regarded it as an intended type, or to seek to
find in Jonah's history further typical prophecy of Him. The salient
point of comparison is simply the three days' entombment; and it is
rather an illustrative analogy than an intentional prophecy. The
subsequent action of the Prophet in Nineveh, and the effect of it, were
true types of the preaching of the Gospel by the risen Lord, through His
servants, to the Gentiles, and of their hearing the Word. But it
requires considerable violence in manipulation to force the bestowing
of Jonah, for safety and escape from death, in the fish's maw, into a
proper prophecy of the transcendent fact of the Resurrection.


'LYING VANITIES'

     'They that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy.'--JONAH
     11. 8.

Jonah's refusal to obey the divine command to go to Nineveh and cry
against it is best taken, not as prosaic history, but as a poetical
representation of Israel's failure to obey the divine call of witnessing
for God. In like manner, his being cast into the sea and swallowed by
the great fish, is a poetic reproduction, for homiletical purposes, of
Israel's sufferings at the hands of the heathen whom it had failed to
warn. The song which is put into Jonah's mouth when in the fish's belly,
of which our text is a fragment, represents the result on the part of
the nation of these hard experiences. 'Lying vanities' mean idols, and
'their own mercy' means God. The text is a brief, pregnant utterance of
the great truth which had been forced home to Israel by sufferings and
exile, that to turn from Jehovah to false gods was to turn from the sure
source of tender care to lies and emptiness. That is but one case of the
wider truth that an ungodly life is the acme of stupidity, a tragic
mistake, as well as a great sin.

In confirmation and enforcement of our text we may consider:--

I. The illusory vanity of the objects pursued.

The Old Testament tone of reference to idols is one of bitter contempt.
Its rigid monotheism was intensified and embittered by the universal
prevalence of idolatry; and there is a certain hardness in its tone in
reference to the gods of the nations round about, which has little room
for pity, and finds expression in such names as those of our
text--'vanities,' 'lies,' 'nothingness,' and the like. To the Jew,
encompassed on all sides by idol-worshippers, the alternative was
vehement indignation or entire surrender. The Mohammedan in British
India exhibits much the same attitude to Vishnu and Siva as the Jew did
to Baal and Ashtoreth. It is easy to be tolerant of dead gods, but it
becomes treason to Jehovah to parley with them when they are alive.

But the point which we desire to insist upon here is somewhat wider than
the vanity of idols. It is the emptiness of all objects of human pursuit
apart from God. These last three words need to be made very prominent;
for in itself 'every creature of God is good,' and the emptiness does
not inhere in themselves, but first appears when they are set in His
place. He, and only He, can, and does, satisfy the whole nature--is
authority for the will, peace for the conscience, love for the heart,
light for the understanding, rest for all seeking. He, and He alone, can
fill the past with the light in which is no regret, the present with a
satisfaction rounded and complete, the future with a hope certain as
experience, to which we shall ever approximate, and which we can never
exhaust and outgrow. Any, or all, the other objects of human endeavour
may be won, and yet we may be miserable. The inadequacy of all these
ought to be pressed home upon us more than it is, not only by their
limitations whilst they last, but by the transiency of them all. 'The
fashion of this world passeth away,' as the Apostle John puts it, in a
forcible expression which likens all this frame of things to a panorama
being unwound from one roller and on to another. The painted screen is
but paint at the best, and is in perpetual motion, which is not arrested
by the vain clutches of hands that would fain stop the irresistible and
tragic gliding past.

These vanities are 'lying vanities.' There is only one aim of life
which, being pursued and attained, fulfils the promises by which it drew
man after it. It is a bald commonplace, reiterated not only by preachers
but by moralists of every kind, and confirmed by universal experience,
that a hope fulfilled is a hope disappointed. There is only one thing
more tragic than a life which has failed in its aims, and it is a life
which has perfectly succeeded in them, and has found that what promised
to be bread turns to ashes. The word of promise may be kept to the ear,
but is always broken to the hope. Many a millionaire loses the power to
enjoy his millions by the very process by which he gains them. The old
Jewish thinker was wise not only in taking as the summing up of all
worldly pursuits the sad sentence, 'All is vanity,' but in putting it
into the lips of a king who had won all he sought. The sorceress draws
us within her charmed circle by lying words and illusory charms, and
when she has so secured the captives, her mask is thrown off and her
native hideousness displayed.

II. The hard service which lying vanities require.

The phrase in our text is a quotation, slightly altered, from Psalm
xxxi. 6: 'I hate them that regard lying vanities; but I trust in the
Lord.' The alteration in the form of the verb as it occurs in Jonah
expresses the intensity of regard, and gives the picture of watching
with anxious solicitude, as the eyes of a servant turned to his master,
or those of a dog to its owner. The world is a very hard master, and
requires from its servants the concentration of thought, heart, and
effort. We need only recall the thousand sermons devoted to the
enforcement of 'the gospel of getting on,' which prosperous worldlings
are continually preaching. A chorus of voices on every side of us is
dinning into the ears of every young man and woman the necessity for
success in life's struggle of taking for a motto, 'This one thing I do.'
How many a man is there, who in the race after wealth or fame, has flung
away aspirations, visions of noble, truthful love to life, and a hundred
other precious things? Browning tells a hideous story of a mother
flinging, one after another, her infants to the wolves as she urged her
sledge over the snowy plain. No less hideous, and still more maiming,
are the surrenders that men make when once their hearts have been filled
with the foolish ambitions of worldly success. Let us fix it in our
minds, that nothing that time and sense can give is worth the price that
it exacts.

    'It is only heaven that can be had for the asking;
     It is only God that is given away.'

All sin is slavery. Its yoke presses painfully on the neck, and its
burden is heavy indeed, and the rest which it promises never comes.

III. The self-inflicted loss.

Our text suggests that there are two ways by which we may learn the
folly of a godless life--One, the consideration of what it turns to, the
other, the thought of what it departs from.

'They forsake their own Mercy,' that is God. The phrase is here almost
equivalent to 'His name'; and it carries the blessed thought that He has
entered into relations with every soul, so that each man of us--even if
he have turned to 'lying vanities'--can still call Him, 'my own Mercy.'
He is ours; more our own than is anything without us. He is ours,
because we are made for Him, and He is all for us. He is ours by His
love, and by His gift of Himself in the Son of His love. He is ours; if
we take Him for ours by an inward communication of Himself to us in the
innermost depths of our being. He becomes 'the Master-Light of all our
seeing.' In the mysterious inwardness of mutual possession, the soul
which has given itself to God and possesses Him, has not only communion,
but may even venture to claim as its own the deeper and more mysterious
_union_ with God. Those multiform mercies, 'which endure for ever,' and
speed on their manifold errands into every remotest region of His
universe, gather themselves together, as the diffused lights of some
nebulae concentrate themselves into a sun. That sun, like the star that
led the wise men from the East, and finally stood over one poor house in
an obscure village, will shine lambent above, and will pass into, the
humblest heart that opens for it. They who can say, as we all can if we
will, 'My God,' can never want.

And if we turn to the alternative in our text, and consider who they are
to whom we turn when we turn from God, there should be nothing more
needed to drive home the wholesome conviction of the folly of the
wisest, who deliberately prefers shadow to substance, lying vanities to
the one true and only reality. I beseech you to take that which is your
own, and which no man can take from you. Weigh in the scales of
conscience, and in the light of the deepest necessities of your nature,
the whole pile of those emptinesses that have been telling you lies ever
since you listened to them; and place in the other scale the mercy of
God, and the Christ who brings it to you, and decide which is the
weightier, and which it becomes you to take for your pattern for ever.


THREEFOLD REPENTANCE

     'And the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the second time, saying,
     2. Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great city, and preach unto it the
     preaching that I bid thee. 3. So Jonah arose, and went unto
     Nineveh, according to the word of the Lord. Now Nineveh was an
     exceeding great city of three days' journey. 4. And Jonah began to
     enter into the city a day's journey, and he cried, and said, Yet
     forty days, and Nineveh shall he overthrown. 5. So the people of
     Ninoveh believed God, and proclaimed a fast, and put on sackcloth,
     from the greatest of them even to the least of them. 6. For word
     came unto the king of Nineveh, and he arose from his throne, and he
     laid his robe from him, and covered him with sackcloth, and sat in
     ashes. 7. And he caused it to be proclaimed and published through
     Nineveh by the decree of the king and his nobles, saying, Let
     neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste anything; let them not
     feed, nor drink water: 8. But let man and beast be covered with
     sackcloth, and cry mightily unto God; yea, let them turn every one
     from his evil way, and from the violence that is in their hands. 9.
     Who can tell if God will turn and repent, and turn away from His
     fierce anger, that we perish not? 10. And God saw their works, that
     they turned from their evil way; and God repented of the evil, that
     He had said that He would do unto them; and He did it not.'--JONAH
     iii. 1-10.

This passage falls into three parts: Jonah's renewed commission and new
obedience (vs. 1-4), the repentance of Nineveh (vs. 5-9), and the
acceptance thereof by God (ver. 10). We might almost call these three
the repentance of Jonah, of Nineveh, and of God. The evident intention
of the narrative is to parallel the Ninevites turning from their sins,
and God's turning from His anger and purpose of destruction; and if the
word 'repentance' is not applied to Jonah, his conduct sufficiently
shows the thing.

I. Note the renewed charge to the penitent Prophet, and his new
eagerness to fulfil it. His deliverance and second commission are put as
if all but simultaneous, and his obedience was swift and glad. Jonah did
not venture to take for granted that the charge which he had shirked was
still continued to him. If God commands to take the trumpet, and we
refuse, we dare not assume that we shall still be honoured with the
delivery of the message. The punishment of dumb lips is often dumbness.
Opportunities of service, slothfully or faintheartedly neglected, are
often withdrawn. We can fancy how Jonah, brought back to the better mind
which breathes in his psalm, longed to be honoured by the trust of
preaching once more, and how rapturously his spirit would address itself
to the task. Duties once unwelcome become sweet when we have passed
through the experience of the misery that comes from neglecting them. It
is God's mercy that gives us the opportunity of effacing past
disobedience by new alacrity.

The second charge is possibly distinguishable from the first as being
less precise. It may be that the exact nature of 'the preaching that I
bid thee' was not told Jonah till he had to open his mouth in Nineveh;
but, more probably, the second charge was identical with the first.

The word rendered 'preach' is instructive. It means 'to cry' and
suggests the manner befitting those who bear God's message. They should
sound it out loudly, plainly, urgently, with earnestness and marks of
emotion in their voice. Languid whispers will not wake sleepers. Unless
the messenger is manifestly in earnest, the message will fall flat. Not
with bated breath, as if ashamed of it; nor with hesitation, as if not
quite sure of it; nor with coldness, as if it were of little
urgency,--is God's Word to be pealed in men's ears. The preacher is a
crier. The substance of his message, too, is set forth. 'The preaching
which I bid thee'--not his own imaginations, nor any fine things of his
own spinning. Suppose Jonah had entertained the Ninevites with
dissertations on the evidences of his prophetic authority, or submitted
for their consideration a few thoughts tending to show the agreement of
his message with their current opinions in religion, or an argument for
the existence of a retributive Governor of the world, he would not have
shaken the city. The less the Prophet shows himself, the stronger his
influence. The more simply he repeats the stern, plain, short message,
the more likely it is to impress. God's Word, faithfully set forth, will
prove itself. The preacher or teacher of this day has substantially the
same charge as Jonah had; and the more he suppresses himself, and
becomes but a voice through which God speaks, the better for himself,
his hearers, and his work.

Nineveh, that great aggregate of cities, was full, as Eastern cities
are, of open spaces, and might well be a three days' journey in
circumference. What a task for that solitary stranger to thunder out his
loud cry among all these crowds! But he had learned to do what he was
bid; and without wasting a moment, he 'began to enter into the city a
day's journey,' and, no doubt, did not wait till the end of the day to
proclaim his message. Let us learn that there is an element of
threatening in God's most merciful message, and that the appeal to
terror and to the desire for self-preservation is part of the way to
preach the Gospel. Plain warnings of coming evil may be spoken tenderly,
and reveal love as truly as the most soothing words. The warning comes
in time. 'Forty days' of grace are granted. The gospel warns us in time
enough for escape. It warns us because God loves; and they are as
untrue messengers of His love as of His justice who slur over the
declaration of His wrath.

II. Note the repentance of Nineveh (vs. 5-9). The impression made by
Jonah's terrible cry is perfectly credible and natural in the excitable
population of an Eastern city, in which even now any appeal to terror,
especially if associated with religious and prophetic claims, easily
sets the whole in a frenzy. Think of the grim figure of this foreign
man, with his piercing voice and half-intelligible speech, dropped from
the clouds as it were, and stalking through Nineveh, pealing out his
confident message, like that gaunt fanatic who walked Jerusalem in its
last agony, crying, 'Woe! woe unto the bloody city!' or that other, who,
with flaming fire on his head and madness in his eyes, affrighted London
in the plague. No wonder that alarm was kindled, and, being kindled,
spread like wildfire. Apparently the movement was first among the
people, who began to fast before the news penetrated to the seclusion of
the palace. But the contagion reached the king, and the popular
excitement was endorsed and fanned by a royal decree. The specified
tokens of repentance are those of ordinary mourning, such as were common
all over the East, with only the strange addition, which smacks of
heathen ideas, that the animals were made sharers in them.

There is great significance in that 'believed God' (ver. 5). The
foundation of all true repentance is crediting God's word of
threatening, and therefore realising the danger, as well as the
disobedience, of our sin. We shall be wise if we pass by the human
instrument, and hear God speaking through the Prophet. Never mind about
Jonah, believe God.

We learn from the Ninevites what is true repentance They brought no
sacrifices or offerings, but sorrow, self-abasement, and amendment. The
characteristic sin of a great military power would be 'violence,' and
that is the specific evil from which they vow to turn. The loftiest
lesson which prophets found Israel so slow to learn, 'A broken and a
contrite heart Thou wilt not despise,' was learned by these heathens. We
need it no less. Nineveh repented on a peradventure that their
repentance might avail. How pathetic that 'Who can tell?' (ver. 9) is!
We _know_ what they _hoped_. Their doubt might give fervour to their
cries, but our certainty should give deeper earnestness and confidence
to ours.

The deepest meaning of the whole narrative is set forth in our Lord's
use of it, when He holds up the men of Nineveh as a condemnatory
instance to the hardened consciences of His hearers. Probably the very
purpose of the book was to show Israel that the despised and yet dreaded
heathen were more susceptible to the voice of God than they were: 'I
will provoke you to jealousy by them which are no people.' The story was
a smiting blow to the proud exclusiveness and self-complacent contempt
of prophetic warnings, which marked the entire history of God's people.
As Ezekiel was told: 'Thou are not sent ... to many peoples of a strange
speech and of an hard language.... Surely, if I sent thee to them, they
would hearken unto thee. But the house of Israel will not hearken unto
thee.' It is ever true that long familiarity with the solemn thoughts of
God's judgment and punishment of sin abates their impression on us. Our
Puritan forefathers used to talk about 'gospel-hardened sinners,' and
there are many such among us. The man who lives by Niagara does not
hear its roar as a stranger does. The men of Nineveh will rise in the
judgment with other generations than that which was 'this generation' in
Christ's time; and that which is 'this generation' to-day will, in many
of its members, be condemned by them.

But the wave of feeling soon retired, and there is no reason to believe
that more than a transient impression was made. It does not seem certain
that the Ninevites knew what 'God' they hoped to appease. Probably their
pantheon was undisturbed, and their repentance lasted no longer than
their fear. Transient repentance leaves the heart harder than before, as
half-melted ice freezes again more dense. Let us beware of frost on the
back of a thaw. 'Repentance which is repented of' is worse than none.

III. We note the repentance of God (ver. 10). Mark the recurrence of the
word 'turn,' employed in verses 8, 9, and 10 in reference to men and to
God. Mark the bold use of the word 'repent,' applied to God, which,
though it be not applied to the Ninevites in the previous verses, is
implied in every line of them. The same expression is found in Exodus
xxxii. 14, which may be taken as the classical passage warranting its
use. The great truth involved is one that is too often lost sight of in
dealing with prophecy; namely, that all God's promises and threatenings
are conditional. Jeremiah learned that lesson in the house of the
potter, and we need to keep it well in mind. God threatens, precisely in
order that He may not have to perform His threatenings. Jonah was sent
to Nineveh to cry, 'Yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown,' in
order that it might not be overthrown. What would have been the use of
proclaiming the decree, if it had been irreversible? There is an
implied 'if' in all God's words. 'Except ye repent' underlies the most
absolute threatenings of evil. 'If we hold fast the beginning of our
confidence firm unto the end,' is presupposed in the brightest and
broadest promises of good.

The word 'repent' is denied and affirmed to have application to God. He
is not 'a son of man, that He should repent,' inasmuch as His
immutability and steadfast purpose know no variableness. But just
because they cannot change, and He must ever be against them that do
evil, and ever bless them that turn to Him with trust, therefore He
changes His dealings with us according to our relation to Him, and
because He cannot repent, or be other than He was and is, 'repents of
the evil that He had said that He would do' unto sinners when they
repent of the evil that they have done against Him, inasmuch as He
leaves His threatening unfulfilled, and 'does it not.'

So we might almost say that the purpose of this book of Jonah is to
teach the possibility and efficacy of repentance, and to show how the
penitent man, heathen or Jew, ever finds in God changed dealings
corresponding to his changed heart. The widest charity, the humbling
lesson for people brought up in the blaze of revelation, that dwellers
in the twilight or in the darkness are dear to God and may be more
susceptible of divine impressions than ourselves, the rebuke of all
pluming ourselves on our privileges, the boundlessness of God's mercy,
are among the other lessons of this strange book; but none of them is
more precious than its truly evangelic teaching of the blessedness of
true penitence, whether exemplified in the renegade Prophet returning
to his high mission, or the fierce Ninevites humbled and repentant, and
finding mercy from the God of the whole earth.

        *        *        *        *        *


MICAH


IS THE SPIRIT OF THE LORD STRAITENED?

     'O thou that art named the house of Jacob, is the Spirit of the
     Lord straitened? Are these His doings?'--MICAH ii. 7.

The greater part of so-called Christendom is to-day[1] celebrating the
gift of a Divine Spirit to the Church; but it may well be asked whether
the religious condition of so-called Christendom is not a sad satire
upon Pentecost. There seems a woful contrast, very perplexing to faith,
between the bright promise at the beginning and the history of the
development in the future. How few of those who share in to-day's
services have any personal experience of such a gift! How many seem to
think that that old story is only the record of a past event, a
transient miracle which has no kind of relation to the experience of the
Christians of this day! There were a handful of believers in one of the
towns of Asia Minor, to whom an Apostle came, and was so startled at
their condition that he put to them in wonder the question that might
well be put to multitudes of so-called Christians amongst us: 'Did you
receive the Holy Ghost when you believed?' And their answer is only too
true a transcript of the experience of large masses of people who call
themselves Christians: 'We have not so much as heard whether there be
any Holy Ghost.'

[1] Whitsunday

I desire, then, dear brethren, to avail myself of this day's
associations in order to press upon your consciences and upon my own
some considerations naturally suggested by them, and which find voice in
those two indignant questions of the old Prophet:--'Is the Spirit of the
Lord straitened?' 'Are these'--the phenomena of existing popular
Christianity--'are these His doings?' And if we are brought sharp up
against the consciousness of a dreadful contrast, it may do us good to
ask what is the explanation of so cloudy a day following a morning so
bright.

I. First, then, I have to ask you to think with me of the promise of the
Pentecost.

What did it declare and hold forth for the faith of the Church? I need
not dwell at any length upon this point. The facts are familiar to you,
and the inferences drawn from them are commonplace and known to us all.
But let me just enumerate them as briefly as may be.

'Suddenly there came a sound, as of the rushing of a mighty wind, and it
filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared cloven
tongues as of fire, and it sat upon each of them; and they were all
filled with the Holy Ghost.'

What lay in that? First, the promise of a Divine Spirit by symbols which
express some, at all events, of the characteristics and wonderfulness of
His work. The 'rushing of a mighty wind' spoke of a power which varies
in its manifestations from the gentlest breath that scarce moves the
leaves on the summer trees to the wildest blast that casts down all
which stands in its way.

The natural symbolism of the wind, to popular apprehension the least
material of all material forces, and of which the connection with the
immaterial part of a man's personality has been expressed in all
languages, points to a divine, to an immaterial, to a mighty, to a
life-giving power which is free to blow whither it listeth, and of which
men can mark the effects, though they are all ignorant of the force
itself.

The other symbol of the fiery tongues which parted and sat upon each of
them speaks in like manner of the divine influence, not as destructive,
but full of quick, rejoicing energy and life, the power to transform and
to purify. Whithersoever the fire comes, it changes all things into its
own substance. Whithersoever the fire comes, there the ruddy spires
shoot upwards towards the heavens. Whithersoever the fire comes, there
all bonds and fetters are melted and consumed. And so this fire
transforms, purifies, ennobles, quickens, sets free; and where the fiery
Spirit is, there are energy, swift life, rejoicing activity,
transforming and transmuting power which changes the recipient of the
flame into flame himself.

Then, still further, in the fact of Pentecost there is the promise of a
Divine Spirit which is to influence all the moral side of humanity.
This is the great and glorious distinction between the Christian
doctrine of inspiration and all others which have, in heathen lands,
partially reached similar conceptions--that the Gospel of Jesus Christ
has laid emphasis upon the _Holy_ Spirit, and has declared that holiness
of heart is the touchstone and test of all claims of divine inspiration.
Gifts are much, graces are more. An inspiration which makes wise is to
be coveted, an inspiration which makes holy is transcendently better.
There we find the safeguard against all the fanaticisms which have
sometimes invaded the Christian Church, namely, in the thought that the
Spirit which dwells in men, and makes them free from the obligations of
outward law and cold morality, is a Spirit that works a deeper holiness
than law dreamed, and a more spontaneous and glad conformity to all
things that are fair and good, than any legislation and outward
commandment could ever enforce. The Spirit that came at Pentecost is not
merely a Spirit of rushing might and of swift-flaming energy, but it is
a Spirit of holiness, whose most blessed and intimate work is the
production in us of all homely virtues and sweet, unpretending
goodnesses which can adorn and gladden humanity.

Still further, the Pentecost carried in it the promise and prophecy of a
Spirit granted to all the Church. 'They were all filled with the Holy
Ghost.' This is the true democracy of Christianity, that its very basis
is laid in the thought that every member of the body is equally close to
the Head, and equally recipient of the life. There is none now who has a
Spirit which others do not possess. The ancient aspiration of the Jewish
law-giver: 'Would God that all the Lord's people were prophets, and that
the Lord would put His Spirit upon them,' is fulfilled in the
experience of Pentecost; and the handmaiden and the children, as well as
the old men and the servants, receive of that universal gift. Therefore
sacerdotal claims, special functions, privileged classes, are alien to
the spirit of Christianity, and blasphemies against the inspiring God.
If 'one is your Master, all ye are brethren,' and if we have all been
made to drink into one Spirit, then no longer hath any man dominion over
our faith nor power to intervene and to intercede with God for us.

And still further, the promise of this early history was that of a
Spirit which should fill the whole nature of the men to whom He was
granted; filling--in the measure, of course, of their receptivity--them
as the great sea does all the creeks and indentations along the shore.
The deeper the creek, the deeper the water in it; the further inland it
runs, the further will the refreshing tide penetrate the bosom of the
continent. And so each man, according to his character, stature,
circumstances, and all the varying conditions which determine his power
of receptivity, will receive a varying measure of that gift. Yet it is
meant that all shall be full. The little vessel, the tiny cup, as well
as the great cistern and the enormous vat, each contains according to
its capacity. And if all are filled, then this quick Spirit must have
the power to influence all the provinces of human nature, must touch the
moral, must touch the spiritual. The temporary manifestations and
extraordinary signs of His power may well drop away as the flower drops
when the fruit has set. The operations of the Divine Spirit are to be
felt thrilling through all the nature, and every part of the man's being
is to be recipient of the power. Just as when you take a candle and
plunge it into a jar of oxygen it blazes up, so my poor human nature
immersed in that Divine Spirit, baptized in the Holy Ghost, shall flame
in all its parts into unsuspected and hitherto inexperienced brightness.
Such are the elements of the promise of Pentecost.

II. And now, in the next place, look at the apparent failure of the
promise.

'Is the Spirit of the Lord straitened?' Look at Christendom. Look at all
the churches. Look at yourselves. Will any one say that the religious
condition of any body of professed believers at this moment corresponds
to Pentecost? Is not the gap so wide that to fill it up seems almost
impossible? Is not the stained and imperfect fulfilment a miserable
satire upon the promise? 'If the Lord be with us,' said one of the
heroes of ancient Israel, 'wherefore is all this come upon us?' I am
sure that we may say the same. If the Lord be with us, what is the
meaning of the state of things which we see around us, and must
recognise in ourselves? Do any existing churches present the final
perfect form of Christianity as embodied in a society? Would not the
best thing that could happen, and the thing that will have to happen
some day, be the disintegration of the existing organisations in order
to build up a more perfect habitation of God through the Spirit? I do
not wish to exaggerate. God knows there is no need for exaggerating. The
plain, unvarnished story, without any pessimistic picking out of the
black bits and forgetting ail the light ones, is bad enough.

Take three points on which I do not dwell and apply them to yourselves,
dear brethren, and estimate by them the condition of things around us.
First, say whether the ordinary tenor of our own religious life looks
as if we had that Divine Spirit in us which transforms everything into
its own beauty, and makes men, through all the regions of their nature,
holy and pure. Then ask yourselves the question whether the standard of
devotion and consecration in any church witnesses of the presence of a
Divine Spirit. A little handful of people, the best of them very
partially touched with the life of God, and very imperfectly consecrated
to His service, surrounded by a great mass about whom we can scarcely,
in the judgment of charity, say even so much, that is the description of
most of our congregations. 'Are these His doings?' Surely somebody
else's than His.

Take another question. Do the relations of modern Christians and their
churches to one another attest the presence of a unifying Spirit? 'We
have all been made to drink into one Spirit,' said Paul. Alas, alas!
does it seem as if we had? Look round professing Christendom, look at
the rivalries and the jealousies between two chapels in adjoining
streets. Look at the gulfs between Christian men who differ only on some
comparative trifle of organisation and polity, and say if such things
correspond to the Pentecostal promise of one Spirit which is to make all
the members into one body? 'Is the Spirit of the Lord straitened? Are
these _His_ doings?'

Take another branch of evidence. Look at the comparative impotence of
the Church in its conflict with the growing worldliness of the world. I
do not forget how much is being done all about us to-day, and how still
Christ's Gospel is winning triumphs, but I do not suppose that any man
can look thoughtfully and dispassionately on the condition, say, for
instance, of Manchester, or of any of our great towns, and mark how the
populace knows nothing and cares nothing about us and our Christianity,
and never comes into our places of worship, and has no share in our
hopes any more than if they lived in Central Africa, and that after
eighteen hundred years of nominal Christianity, without feeling that
some malign influence has arrested the leaping growth of the early
Church, and that somehow or other that lava stream, if I might so call
it, which poured hot from the heart of God in the old days has had its
flow checked, and over its burning bed there has spread a black and
wrinkled crust, whatsoever lingering heat there may still be at the
centre. 'If God be with us, why has all this come upon us?'

III. And now, lastly, let us think for a moment of the solution of the
contradiction.

The indignant questions of my text may be taken, with a little possibly
permissible violence, as expressing and dismissing some untrue
explanations. One explanation that sometimes is urged is, the Spirit of
the Lord _is_ straitened. That explanation takes two forms. Sometimes
you hear people saying, 'Christianity is effete. We have to go now to
fresh fountains of inspiration, and turn away from these broken cisterns
that can hold no water.' I am not going to argue that question. I do not
think for my part that Christianity will be effete until the world has
got up to it and beyond it in its practice, and it will be a good while
before that happens. Christianity will not be worn out until men have
copied and reduced to practice the example of Jesus Christ, and they
have not quite got that length yet. No shadow of a fear that the gospel
has lost its power, or that God's Spirit has become weak, should be
permitted to creep over our hearts. The promise is, 'I will send
another Comforter, and He shall abide with you _for ever_.' It is a
permanent gift that was given to the Church on that day. We have to
distinguish in the story between the symbols, the gift, and the
consequences of the gift. The first and the last are transient, the
second is permanent. The symbols were transient. The people who came
running together saw no tongues of fire. The consequences were
transient. The tongues and the miraculous utterances were but for a
time. The results vary according to the circumstances; but the central
thing, the gift itself, is an irrevocable gift, and once bestowed is
ever with the Church to all generations.

Another form of the explanation is the theory that God in His
sovereignty is pleased to withhold His Spirit for reasons which we
cannot trace. But it is not true that the gift once given varies in the
degree in which it is continued. There is always the same flow from God.
There are ebbs and flows in the spiritual power of the Church. Yes! and
the tide runs out of your harbours. Is there any less water in the sea
because it does? So the gift may ebb away from a man, from a community,
from an epoch, not because God's manifestation and bestowment fluctuate,
but because our receptivity changes. So we dismiss, and are bound to
dismiss, if we are Christians, the unbelieving explanation, 'The Spirit
of the Lord is straitened,' and not to sit with our hands folded, as if
an inscrutable sovereignty, with which we have nothing to do, sometimes
sent more and sometimes less of His spiritual gifts upon a waiting
Church. It is not so. 'With Him is no variableness.' The gifts of God
are without repentance; and the Spirit that was given once, according to
the Master's own word already quoted, is given that He may abide with us
for ever.

Therefore we have to come back to this, which is the point to which I
seek to bring you and myself, in lowly penitence and contrite
acknowledgment--that it is all our own fault and the result of evils in
ourselves that may be remedied, that we have so little of that divine
gift; and that if the churches of this country and of this day seem to
be cursed and blasted in so much of their fruitless operations and
formal worship, it is the fault of the churches, and not of the Lord of
the churches. The stream that poured forth from the throne of God has
not lost itself in the sands, nor is it shrunken in its volume. The fire
that was kindled on Pentecost has not died down into grey ashes. The
rushing of the mighty wind that woke on that morning has not calmed and
stilled itself into the stagnancy and suffocating breathlessness of
midday heat. The same fulness of the Spirit which filled the believers
on that day is available for us all. If, like that waiting Church of
old, we abide in prayer and supplication, the gift will be given to us
too, and we may repeat and reproduce, if not the miracles which we do
not need, yet the necessary inspiration of the highest and the noblest
days and saints in the history of the Church. 'If ye, being evil, know
how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your
Heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him?' 'Ask and ye
shall receive,' and be filled 'with the Holy Ghost and with power.'


CHRIST THE BREAKER

     'The Breaker is come up before them: they have broken up, and have
     passed through the gate, and are gone out by it: and their king
     shall pass before them, and the Lord on the head of them.'--MICAH
     ii. 13.

Micah was contemporary with Isaiah. The two prophets stand, to a large
extent, on the same level of prophetic knowledge. Characteristic of both
of them is the increasing clearness of the figure of the personal
Messiah, and the increasing fulness of detail with which His functions
are described. Characteristic of both of them is the presentation which
we find in this text of that Messiah's work as being the gathering
together of the scattered captive people and the leading them back in
triumph into the blessed land.

Such is the image which underlies my text. Of course I have nothing to
do now with questions as to any narrower and nearer historical
fulfilment, because I believe that all these Messianic prophecies which
were susceptible of, and many of which obtained, a historical and
approximate fulfilment in the restoration of the Jews from the
Babylonish captivity, have a higher and broader and more real
accomplishment in that great deliverance wrought by Jesus Christ, of
which all these earlier and partial and outward manifestations were
themselves prophecies and shadows.

So I make no apology for taking the words before us as having their only
real accomplishment in the office and working of Jesus Christ. He is
'the Breaker which is come up before us.' He it is that has broken out
the path on which we may travel, and in whom, in a manner which the
Prophet dreamed not of, 'the Lord is at the head' of us, and our King
goes before us. So that my object is simply to take that great name, the
Breaker, and to see the manifold ways in which in Scripture it is
applied to the various work of Jesus Christ in our redemption.

I. I follow entirely the lead of corresponding passages in other
portions of Scripture, and to begin with, I ask you to think of that
great work of our Divine Redeemer by which He has broken for the
captives the prison-house of their bondage.

The image that is here before us is either that of some foreign land in
which the scattered exiles were bound in iron captivity, or more
probably some dark and gloomy prison, with high walls, massive gates,
and barred windows, wherein they were held; and to them sitting hopeless
in the shadow of death, and bound in affliction and iron, there comes
one mysterious figure whom the Prophet could not describe more
particularly, and at His coming the gates flew apart, and the chains
dropped from their hands; and the captives had heart put into them, and
gathering themselves together into a triumphant band, they went out with
songs and everlasting joy upon their heads; freemen, and on the march to
the home of their fathers. 'The Breaker is gone up before them; they
have broken, and passed through the gate, and are gone out by it.'

And is not that our condition? Many of us know not the bondage in which
we are held. We are held in it all the more really and sadly because we
conceit ourselves to be free. Those poor, light-hearted people in the
dreadful days of the French Revolution, used to keep up some ghastly
mockery of society and cheerfulness in their prisons; and festooned the
bars with flowers, and made believe to be carrying on their life freely
as they used to do; but for all that, day after day the tumbrils came to
the gates, and morning after morning the jailer stood at the door of the
dungeons with the fatal list in his hand, and one after another of the
triflers was dragged away to death. And so men and women are living a
life which they fancy is free, and all the while they are in bondage,
held in a prison-house. You, my brother! are chained by guilt; you are
chained by sin, you are chained by the habit of evil with a strength of
which you never know till you try to shake it off.

And there comes to each of us a mighty Deliverer, who breaks the gates
of brass, and who cuts the bars of iron in sunder. Christ comes to us.
By His death He has borne away the guilt; by His living Spirit He will
bear away the dominion of sin from our hearts; and if the Son will make
us free we shall be free indeed. Oh! ponder that deep truth, I pray you,
which the Lord Christ has spoken in words that carry conviction in their
very simplicity to every conscience: 'He that committeth sin is the
slave of sin.' And as you feel sometimes--and you all feel
sometimes--the catch of the fetter on your wrists when you would fain
stretch out your hands to good, listen as to a true gospel to this old
word which, in its picturesque imagery, carries a truth that should be
life. To us all 'the Breaker is gone up before us,' the prison gates are
open. Follow His steps, and take the freedom which He gives; and be sure
that you 'stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made you free,
and be not entangled again with any yoke of bondage.'

Men and women! Some of you are the slaves of your own lusts. Some of you
are the slaves of the world's maxims. Some of you are held in bondage by
some habit that you abominate, but cannot get away from. Here is freedom
for you. The dark walls of the prison are round us all. 'The Scripture
hath shut up all in sin, that He might have mercy upon all.' Blessed be
His name! As the angel came to the sleeping Apostle, and to his light
touch the iron gates swung obedient on their hinges, and Roman soldiers
who ought to have watched their prey were lulled to sleep, and fetters
that held the limbs dropped as if melted; so, silently, in His meek and
merciful strength, the Christ comes to us all, and the iron gate which
leadeth out into freedom opens of its own accord at His touch, and the
fetters fall from our limbs, and we go forth free men. 'The Breaker is
gone up before us.'

II. Again, take another application of this same figure found in
Scripture, which sets forth Jesus Christ as being the Opener of the path
to God.

'I am the Way and the Truth and the Life, no man cometh to the Father
but by Me,' said He. And again, 'By a new and living way which He hath
opened for us through the veil' (that is to say, His flesh), we can have
free access 'with confidence by the faith of Him.' That is to say, if we
rightly understand our natural condition, it is not only one of bondage
to evil, but it is one of separation from God. Parts of the divine
character are always beautiful and sweet to every human heart when it
thinks about them. Parts of the divine character stand frowning before a
man who knows himself for what he is; and conscience tells us that
between God and us there is a mountain of impediment piled up by our own
evil. To us Christ comes, the Path-finder and the Path; the Pioneer who
breaks the way for us through all the hindrances, and leads us up to the
presence of God.

For we do not know God as He is except by Jesus Christ. We see
fragments, and often distorted fragments, of the divine nature and
character apart from Jesus, but the real divine nature as it is, and as
it is in its relation to me, a sinner, is only made known to me in the
face of Jesus Christ. When we see Him we see God; Christ's tears are
God's pity, Christ's gentleness is God's meekness, Christ's tender,
drawing love is not only a revelation of a most pure and sweet Brother's
heart, but a manifestation through that Brother's heart of the deepest
depths of the divine nature. Christ is the heart of God. Apart from Him,
we come to the God of our own consciences and we tremble; we come to the
God of our own fancies and we presume; we come to the God dimly guessed
at and pieced together from out of the hints and indications of His
works, and He is little more than a dead name to us. Apart from Christ
we come to a peradventure which we call a God; a shadow through which
you can see the stars shining. But we know the Father when we believe in
Christ. And so all the clouds rising from our own hearts and consciences
and fancies and misconceptions, which we have piled together between God
and ourselves, Christ clears away; and thus He opens the path to God.

And He opens it in another way too, on which I cannot dwell. It is only
the God manifest in Jesus Christ that draws men's hearts to Him. The
attractive power of the divine nature is ail in Him who has said, 'I, if
I be lifted up, will draw all men unto Me.' The God whom men know, or
think they know, outside of the revelation of divinity in Jesus Christ,
is a God before whom they sometimes tremble, who is far more often their
terror than their love, who is their 'ghastliest doubt' still more
