Christian Science, or an attempt to demonstrate the facts of this Science
other than is stated in Science and Health--is a departure from the Science
of Mind-healing. To becloud mortals, or for yourself to hide from God, is
to conspire against the blessings otherwise conferred, against your own
success and final happiness, against the progress of the human race as
well as against _honest_ metaphysical theory and practice.

Not by the hearing of the ear is spiritual truth learned and loved; nor
cometh this apprehension from the experiences of others. We glean spiritual
harvests from our own material losses. In this consuming heat false images
are effaced from the canvas of mortal mind; and thus does the material
pigment beneath fade into invisibility.

The signs for the wayfarer in divine Science lie in meekness, in unselfish
motives and acts, in shuffling off scholastic rhetoric, in ridding the
thought of effete doctrines, in the purification of the affections and
desires.

Dishonesty, envy, and mad ambition are "lusts of the flesh," which uproot
the germs of growth in Science and leave the inscrutable problem of being
unsolved. Through the channels of material sense, of worldly policy, pomp,
and pride, cometh no success in Truth. If beset with misguided emotions, we
shall be stranded on the quicksands of worldly commotion, and practically
come short of the wisdom requisite for teaching and demonstrating the
victory over self and sin.

Be temperate in thought, word, and deed. Meekness and temperance are the
jewels of Love, set in wisdom. Restrain untempered zeal. "Learn to labor
and to wait." Of old the children of Israel were saved by patient waiting.

"The kingdom of heaven suffereth violence, and the violent take it by
force!" said Jesus. Therefore are its spiritual gates not captured, nor its
golden streets invaded.

We recognize this kingdom, the reign of harmony within us, by an unselfish
affection or love, for this is the pledge of divine good and the insignia
of heaven. This also is proverbial, that though eternal justice be
graciously gentle, yet it may seem severe.

    For whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth,
    And scourgeth every son whom He receiveth.

As the poets in different languages have expressed it:--

    Though the mills of God grind slowly,
      Yet they grind exceeding small;
    Though with patience He stands waiting,
      With exactness grinds He all.

Though the divine rebuke is effectual to the pulling down of sin's
strongholds, it may stir the human heart to resist Truth, before this heart
becomes obediently receptive of the heavenly discipline. If the Christian
Scientist recognize the mingled sternness and gentleness which permeate
justice and Love, he will not scorn the timely reproof, but will so absorb
it that this warning will be within him a spring, welling up into unceasing
spiritual rise and progress. Patience and obedience win the golden
scholarship of experimental tuition.

The kindly shepherd of the East carries his lambs in his arms to the
sheepcot, but the older sheep pass into the fold under his compelling rod.
He who sees the door and turns away from it, is guilty, while innocence
strayeth yearningly.

There are no greater miracles known to earth than perfection and an
unbroken friendship. We love our friends, but ofttimes we lose them in
proportion to our affection. The sacrifices made for others are not
infrequently met by envy, ingratitude, and enmity, which smite the heart
and threaten to paralyze its beneficence. The unavailing tear is shed both
for the living and the dead.

Nothing except sin, in the students themselves, can separate them from me.
Therefore we should guard thought and action, keeping them in accord with
Christ, and our friendship will surely continue.

The letter of the law of God, separated from its spirit, tends to
demoralize mortals, and must be corrected by a diviner sense of liberty and
light. The spirit of Truth extinguishes false thinking, feeling, and
acting; and falsity must thus decay, ere spiritual sense, affectional
consciousness, and genuine goodness become so apparent as to be well
understood.

After the supreme advent of Truth in the heart, there comes an overwhelming
sense of error's vacuity, of the blunders which arise from wrong
apprehension. The enlightened heart loathes error, and casts it aside; or
else that heart is consciously untrue to the light, faithless to itself and
to others, and so sinks into deeper darkness. Said Jesus: "If the light
that is in thee be darkness, how great is that darkness!" and Shakespeare
puts this pious counsel into a father's mouth:--

    This above all: To thine own self be true;
    And it must follow, as the night the day,
    Thou canst not then be false to any man.

A realization of the shifting scenes of human happiness, and of the frailty
of mortal anticipations,--such as first led me to the feet of Christian
Science,--seems to be requisite at every stage of advancement. Though our
first lessons are changed, modified, broadened, yet their core is
constantly renewed; as the law of the chord remains unchanged, whether we
are dealing with a simple Latour exercise or with the vast Wagner Trilogy.

A general rule is, that my students should not allow their movements to be
controlled by other students, even if they are teachers and practitioners
of the same blessed faith. The exception to this rule should be very rare.

The widest power and strongest growth have always been attained by those
loyal students who rest on divine Principle for guidance, not on
themselves; and who locate permanently in one section, and adhere to the
orderly methods herein delineated.

At this period my students should locate in large cities, in order to do
the greatest good to the greatest number, and therein abide. The population
of our principal cities is ample to supply many practitioners, teachers,
and preachers with work. This fact interferes in no way with the prosperity
of each worker; rather does it represent an accumulation of power on his
side which promotes the ease and welfare of the workers. Their liberated
capacities of mind enable Christian Scientists to consummate much good or
else evil; therefore their examples either excel or fall short of other
religionists; and they must be found dwelling together in harmony, if even
they compete with ecclesiastical fellowship and friendship.

It is often asked which revision of Science and Health is the best. The
arrangement of my last revision, in 1890, makes the subject-matter clearer
than any previous edition, and it is therefore better adapted to
spiritualize thought and elucidate scientific healing and teaching. It has
already been proven that this volume is accomplishing the divine purpose to
a remarkable degree. The wise Christian Scientist will commend students and
patients to the teachings of this book, and the healing efficacy thereof,
rather than try to centre their interest on himself.

Students whom I have taught are seldom benefited by the teachings of other
students, for scientific foundations are already laid in their minds which
ought not to be tampered with. Also, they are prepared to receive the
infinite instructions afforded by the Bible and my books, which mislead no
one and are their best guides.

The student may mistake in his conception of Truth, and this error, in an
honest heart, is sure to be corrected. But if he misinterprets the text to
his pupils, and communicates, even unintentionally, his misconception of
Truth, thereafter he will find it more difficult to rekindle his own light
or to enlighten them. Hence, as a rule, the student should explain only
Recapitulation, the chapter for the class-room, and leave Science and
Health to God's daily interpretation.

Christian Scientists should take their textbook into the schoolroom the
same as other teachers; they should ask questions from it, and be answered
according to it,--occasionally reading aloud from the book to corroborate
what they teach. It is also highly important that their pupils study each
lesson before the recitation.

That these essential points are ever omitted, is anomalous, when we
consider the necessity of thoroughly understanding Science, and the present
liability of deviating from absolute Christian Science.

Centuries will intervene before the statement of the inexhaustible topics
of Science and Health is sufficiently understood to be fully demonstrated.

The teacher himself should continue to study this textbook, and to
spiritualize his own thoughts and human life from this open fount of Truth
and Love.

He who sees clearly and enlightens other minds most readily, keeps his own
lamp trimmed and burning. Throughout his entire explanations he strictly
adheres to the teachings in the chapter on Recapitulation. When closing the
class, each member should own a copy of Science and Health, and continue to
study and assimilate this inexhaustible subject--Christian Science.

The opinions of men cannot be substituted for God's revelation. In times
past, arrogant pride, in attempting to steady the ark of Truth, obscured
even the power and glory of the Scriptures,--to which Science and Health is
the Key.

That teacher does most for his students who divests himself most of pride
and self, and by reason thereof is able to empty his students' minds of
error, that they may be filled with Truth. Thus doing, posterity will call
him blessed, and the tired tongue of history be enriched.

The less the teacher personally controls other minds, and the more he
trusts them to the divine Truth and Love, the better it will be for both
teacher and student.

A teacher should take charge only of his own pupils and patients, and of
those who voluntarily place themselves under his direction; he should avoid
leaving his own regular institute or place of labor, or expending his labor
where there are other teachers who should be specially responsible for
doing their own work well.

Teachers of Christian Science will find it advisable to band together their
students into associations, to continue the organization of churches, and
at present they can employ any other organic operative method that may
commend itself as useful to the Cause and beneficial to mankind.

Of this also rest assured, that books and teaching are but a ladder let
down from the heaven of Truth and Love, upon which angelic thoughts ascend
and descend, bearing on their pinions of light the Christ-spirit.

Guard yourselves against the subtly hidden suggestion that the Son of man
will be glorified, or humanity benefited, by any deviation from the order
prescribed by supernal grace. Seek to occupy no position whereto you do not
feel that God ordains you. Never forsake your post without due deliberation
and light, but always wait for God's finger to point the way. The loyal
Christian Scientist is incapable alike of abusing the practice of
Mind-healing or of healing on a material basis.

The tempter is vigilant, awaiting only an opportunity to divide the ranks
of Christian Science and scatter the sheep abroad; but "if God be for us,
who can be against us?" The Cause, _our_ Cause, is highly prosperous,
rapidly spreading over the globe; and the morrow will crown the effort of
to-day with a diadem of gems from the New Jerusalem.




EXEMPLIFICATION


To energize wholesome spiritual warfare, to rebuke vainglory, to offset
boastful emptiness, to crown patient toil, and rejoice in the spirit and
power of Christian Science, we must ourselves be true. There is but one way
of _doing_ good, and that is to _do_ it! There is but one way of _being_
good, and that is to _be_ good!

Art thou still unacquainted with thyself? Then be introduced to this self.
"Know thyself!" as said the classic Grecian motto. Note well the falsity of
this mortal self! Behold its vileness, and remember this poverty-stricken
"stranger that is within thy gates." Cleanse every stain from this
wanderer's soiled garments, wipe the dust from his feet and the tears from
his eyes, that you may behold the real man, the fellow-saint of a holy
household. There should be no blot on the escutcheon of our Christliness
when we offer our gift upon the altar.

A student desiring growth in the knowledge of Truth, can and will obtain it
by taking up his cross and following Truth. If he does this not, and
another one undertakes to carry his burden and do his work, the duty will
_not be accomplished_. No one can save himself without God's help, and God
will help each man who performs his own part. After this manner and in no
other way is every man cared for and blessed. To the unwise helper our
Master said, "Follow me; and let the dead bury their dead."

The poet's line, "Order is heaven's first law," is so eternally true, so
axiomatic, that it has become a truism; and its wisdom is as obvious in
religion and scholarship as in astronomy or mathematics.

Experience has taught me that the rules of Christian Science can be far
more thoroughly and readily acquired by regularly settled and systematic
workers, than by unsettled and spasmodic efforts. Genuine Christian
Scientists are, or should be, the most systematic and law-abiding people on
earth, because their religion demands implicit adherence to fixed rules, in
the orderly demonstration thereof. Let some of these rules be here stated.

_First_: Christian Scientists are to "heal the sick" as the Master
commanded.

In so doing they must follow the divine order as prescribed by
Jesus,--never, in any way, to trespass upon the rights of their neighbors,
but to obey the celestial injunction, "Whatsoever ye would that men should
do to you, do ye even so to them."

In this orderly, scientific dispensation healers become a law unto
themselves. They feel their own burdens less, and can therefore bear the
weight of others' burdens, since it is only through the lens of their
unselfishness that the sunshine of Truth beams with such efficacy as to
dissolve error.

It is already understood that Christian Scientists will not receive a
patient who is under the care of a regular physician, until he has done
with the case and different aid is sought. The same courtesy should be
observed in the professional intercourse of Christian Science healers with
one another.

_Second_: Another command of the Christ, his prime command, was that his
followers should "raise the dead." He lifted his own body from the
sepulchre. In him, Truth called the physical man from the tomb to health,
and the so-called dead forthwith emerged into a higher manifestation of
Life.

The spiritual significance of this command, "Raise the dead," most concerns
mankind. It implies such an elevation of the understanding as will enable
thought to apprehend the living beauty of Love, its practicality, its
divine energies, its health-giving and life-bestowing qualities,--yea, its
power to demonstrate immortality. This end Jesus achieved, both by example
