recognized tribunal to which all Moslems may refer their doubts about
the law's proper reading, and have their disputes resolved. A fetwa, or
opinion, is all that can be given, and it applies only to the land where
it is issued. The fetwa of this great Alem in one Moslem state may be
reversed by the fetwa of another in that. The Sheykh el Islam at
Constantinople may be appealed against to the Mufti at Mecca or Cairo,
or these again, it may be, to Bokhara. None absolutely overrides the
rest. Thus while I was at Jeddah there came a deputation of Mussulmans
from Bengal, being on their way to Mecca to ask a fetwa on the disputed
point whether believers were permitted or not to use European dress. A
previous fetwa had been asked at Constantinople, but the deputation was
dissatisfied, alleging that the Sheykh el Islam there could not be
trusted and that they preferred the Meccan Mufti. Thus legal-minded
Moslems who would see their way to improvement are constantly faced with
a legal bar, the want of authority. _As things stand_ there is no remedy
for this.

An opinion, however, seems now to be gaining ground among the learned,
that a legal issue may one day be found in the restoration to the
Caliphate of what is called by them the _Saut el Hai_, the living voice
of Islam, which in its first period, and indeed till the destruction of
the Abbaside dynasty by Holagu, belonged to the successors of the
Prophet. It is certain that in the first four reigns of Abu Bekr, Omar,
Othman, and Ali, such a living power to legislate was accorded to the
Caliphs; and that on their own authority they modified at will the yet
unwritten law.

Thus it is related of Abu Bekr that in one instance he set aside a law
called the Mota, though based directly on some sentences of the Koran,
declaring it not conformable to the better tradition; and that Ali again
reversed this ruling, which has, nevertheless, been adhered to by the
Sunites. Later, too, the Ommiad and Abbaside Caliphs exercised this
right of legislation by deputy; it was in their names that the
Mujtaheddin, Abu Hanifeh and the rest, framed their first codes of law;
and to the last the words of their mouth were listened to, as in some
measure inspired utterances, by the faithful.

It was only when the sacred office passed from the sacred and legitimate
House that this feeling of reverence ceased, and the living voice of the
Caliph was disregarded in Islam. The Ottoman conqueror, when he took
upon him the title of Emir el Mumenin, did not venture to claim for
himself the power to teach, nor would Moslems have listened to any such
pretension. The House of Othman was from the first sunk in degrading
vices, and was too untaught to teach. The account given us by Bertrandon
de la Brocquiere in the fifteenth century of the court and habits of the
"Grand Turk" is evidently no exaggeration; and it is easy to conceive by
the light of it how impossible it must have been for the Arabian Ulema
to connect the notion of inspiration in any way with such personages as
the Sultans then were. As a fact the Saut el Hai was not claimed by
Selim, nor has it ever been accorded to his descendants.

The want of some voice of authority is, nevertheless, becoming daily
more generally felt by orthodox Mohammedans; and it seems to me certain
that, in some shape or other, it will before long be restored to general
recognition. Abd el Hamid, whose spiritual ambition I have described,
has, quite recently, caused a legal statement of his Caliphal rights to
be formally drawn up, and it includes this right of the _Saut el
Hai_;[17] and, though it is improbable that the faithful will, at the
eleventh hour of its rule, invest the House of Othman with so sublime a
prerogative, it is extremely likely that, when a more legitimate holder
of the title shall have been found, he will be conceded all the rights
of the sacred office. Then the legal difficulty will at last be
overcome. The dead hand of the law will be no longer dead, but will be
inspired by a living voice and will.

Since we are imagining many things we may imagine this one too,--that
our Caliph of the Koreysh, chosen by the faithful and installed at
Mecca, should invite the Ulema of every land to a council at the time of
the pilgrimage, and there, appointing a new Mujtahed, should propound to
them certain modifications of the Sheriat, as things necessary to the
welfare of Islam, and deducible from tradition. No point of doctrine
need in any way be touched, only the law. The Fakh ed din would need
hardly a modification. The Fakh esh Sheriat would, in certain chapters,
have to be rewritten. Who can doubt that an Omar or an Haroun, were they
living at the present day, would authorize such changes, or that the
faithful of their day would have accepted them as necessary and
legitimate developments of Koranic teaching?

It would be an interesting study to pursue this inquiry further, and to
see how it might be worked out in detail. The crying necessity of
civilized Islam is a legal _modus vivendi_ with Europe, and such an
adaptation of its law on points where Europe insists as shall suffice to
stave off conflict. It is evident that legal equality must now be
accorded to Christians living under Mohammedan law, and that conformity,
on the other hand, in certain points to foreign law must be allowed to
Moslems living under Christian rule.

Again, slavery must, by some means, be made illegal; and a stricter
interpretation of the Koranic permission be put on marriage,
concubinage, and divorce. That all these changes might be logically
effected by a process of reasoning from the traditions, and expanding or
minimising the interpretation of the Koran, no one need doubt who
remembers what fetwas have already been given on these very points by
some of the Azhar Ulema. At present these decisions are unsatisfactory
to the faithful at large, because those issuing them have no recognized
authority to strain the law, but with authority the same decisions would
meet with general approval. At least such is the impression of modern
Mohammedan opinion made on me by my conversation with Mohammedans. It
would be interesting to work out these points; and I hope some day to
have an opportunity of doing so, but for the present I have neither the
time nor the knowledge sufficient for the purpose. I must be content
with having suggested the method; I cannot work out the details of a
reformation.

It may, however, give an idea of the kind of material in tradition which
reformers are looking for, if I quote a document which was being
circulated last spring among the Ulema of the Azhar. It purports to be
the text of the Prophet's first treaty with the Christians of Arabia,
though I do not vouch for its authenticity, and runs as follows:--

     "Covenant of God's Apostle, Mohammed, with the Christian people,
     their monks and their bishops."--(A.D. 625.)

     "Mohammed, the Apostle of God, sent with a message of peace to all
     mankind, dictateth the words of this covenant that the cause of God
     may be a written document between him and the people of Christ.

     "He who keepeth this covenant, let him be called a true Moslem
     worthy of the religion of God, and he who departeth from it let him
     be called an enemy, be he king or subject, great or small.

     "To this have I pledged myself: I will fence in their lands with my
     horsemen, and my footmen, and my allies, throughout the world; and
     I will care for their safety and the safety of their temples, their
     churches, their oratories, and their convents, and the places of
     their pilgrimage, wheresoever I shall find them, whether by the
     land or by the sea, in the east or in the west, on the mountain or
     in the plain, in the desert or in the city. There will I stand
     behind them that no harm shall reach them, and my followers shall
     keep them from evil. This is my covenant with them. I will exempt
     them in all matters wherein the Moslems are exempt. I command also
     that no one of their bishops be expelled from his see, nor shall
     any Christian be forced from his religion, nor shall a monk be
     forced from his convent, nor a hermit from his cell. It is my will
     that none of their holy buildings be destroyed or taken from them
     for Mosques by my people or for their dwellings. Whosoever
     despiseth this command is guilty before God and despiseth the
     pledge of His Apostle. All monks and bishops, and the dependents of
     these, I declare exempt from tribute, except such as they shall of
     their free will bring. Nor shall Christian merchants, doing
     business by sea, or diving for pearls, or working in the mines for
     gold, or silver, or jewels, even the wealthy and the mighty, pay
     more than twelve drachmas of yearly tribute. This, for such
     Christian merchants as shall live in Arabia; but for travellers and
     strangers in the land, they are exempt. Likewise such as have lands
     and gardens bearing fruit, and fields for corn, shall pay no more
     than it is in their power to bring.

     "And the people to whom I have pledged my word shall not be
     required to fight for themselves. But the Moslems shall protect
     them, asking them neither for arms, nor rations, nor horses for the
     war, except such as each shall choose to bring. But if any shall
     bring money, or help the Moslems in war, it must be acknowledged
     them with thanks.

     "And this is my command. No Moslem shall molest a follower of
     Christ; and if he dispute with him it shall be with good manners.
     And if a Christian do any man wrong it shall be a duty with Moslems
     to stay the avenger and make peace between them, paying the ransom
     if the wrong demand a ransom. And it is my wish that Christians
     should not be disregarded by my followers, for I have pledged my
     word unto them before God that they shall be as Moslems in my
     sight, sharing and partaking of all things with the rest. And in
     their marriages they shall not be troubled No Moslem shall say to a
     Christian, 'Give me thy daughter,' nor take her unless he be
     willing. And if a Christian woman become a slave to a Moslem he
     shall be bound by this covenant to leave her her religion, nor
     shall he compel her to disobey her religious chiefs. This is the
     command of God, and whosoever shall deny it and disobey God shall
     hold him for a liar.

     "Moreover it shall be a duty with my followers to repair the
     churches of the Christians, rendering them the service not as a
     debt, but for God's sake and for the keeping of the covenant, made
     to them by the Apostle of God.

     "No Christian shall be compelled to go forth in time of war as an
     envoy or spy against his people.

     "These are the privileges which Mohammed, the Apostle of God, hath
     granted to the followers of Christ. In return he requested them to
     deal with him and with the Moslems as follows:--

     "1. None of them in time of war shall give assistance, either
     openly or in secret, to the enemies of Islam.

     "2. They shall not give asylum in their churches or in their houses
     to the enemies of Islam.

     "3. They shall not help them with arms, or rations, or horses, or
     men.

     "4. They shall not keep counsel with the declared enemies of Islam,
     nor receive them in their houses, nor deposit money with them.

     "5. They shall grant to all Moslems seeking their hospitality
     entertainment for at least three days. But no Moslem shall require
     of them to make special cooking for him, and he shall eat of the
     common food with his host.

     "6. If a Moslem seek asylum with a Christian, the Christian shall
     not refuse to shelter him, and shall not deliver him to his
     enemies.

     "What Christian soever shall refuse these my requests, he shall not
     partake of the privileges of this covenant which I have made with
     the bishops, monks, and the rest, the followers of Christ. And I
     call God to witness with my followers and command them to keep
     faithful to this my precept, now and till the day of judgment.

     "The above was written in the presence of the under-signed persons,
     dictated by the Apostle of God, and written down by Mawiyeh Ibn Abu
     Sofian, on Monday, at the end of the fourth month, of the fourth
     year, of the Hejira, in Medina, peace be upon its Lord.

                             (Signed)   "ABU BEKR ES SADIK.
                                        "OMAR IBN EL KHOTTUB.
                                        "OTHMAN IBN AFFAN.
                                        "ALI IBN ABU TALEB.


     And thirty-one other signatures.

     "God be witness of what hath been said in this treaty. Praised be
     God the Lord of the Earth."

In conclusion, I would urge that while it is to Mohammedans themselves
that we must look to work out their ultimate regeneration according to
the rules of their own law and conscience, Christendom can still do much
to influence immediate results. The day of religious hatred between
Moslem and Christian as such is, I hope, nearly at an end; and though
political strife is unfortunately renewing the old quarrel in North
Africa, there is no danger now of its becoming on Europe's part a
crusade. Christendom has pretty well abandoned her hopeless task of
converting Islam, as Islam has abandoned hers of conquering Europe; and
it is surely time that moral sympathy should unite the two great bodies
of men who believe in and worship the same God.

England, at least, may afford now to acknowledge Mohammedanism as
something not to be merely combated and destroyed, but to be accepted by
her and encouraged--accepted as a fact which for good or evil will exist
in the world whether she will or no--encouraged because it has in it
possibilities of good which she cannot replace by any creed or
philosophy of her own. She can do much to help these possibilities, for
they depend for the moment on her political action. There is a good
cause and a bad in Islam as elsewhere in the world, and though hitherto
England's physical help has been given all to evil, it has been through
ignorance of the issues at stake; and I am confident that as she learns
these, she will acknowledge the wrong she has unconsciously been doing,
and repair while there is yet time her error.

In my next and concluding chapter I propose to sketch a policy towards
Islam worthy of England's high sense of duty, and conformable to her
true interests.

FOOTNOTES:

[16] A remarkable coincidence of prediction, Christian and Mohammedan,
has been pointed out to me in Rohrbacher's History of the Church,
published in 1845, where by an elaborate calculation based on the Old
Testament prophecies he arrives at the conclusion that the Turkish
Empire will fall in 1882, the date assigned it also by the Mohammedan
prediction quoted in my last chapter--that is to say A.H. 1300.

[17] This claim has been endorsed by Abd el Mutalleb, who is issuing a
_Resalat rayiyeh_, or pastoral letter, this year to the pilgrims in
support of Abd el Hamid's Caliphate.




CHAPTER V.

ENGLAND'S INTEREST IN ISLAM.


Nothing now remains for me but to point the moral which these essays
were designed to draw. It will have been observed that hitherto I have
avoided as much as possible all allusion to the direct political action
which Christendom is exercising, and must ever more and more exercise,
upon the fortunes of Islam; and in this I have been guided by two
motives. I have wished, first, to give prominence to the fact that in
all great movements of the human intellect the force of progression or
decay should be looked for mainly from within, not from without; and,
secondly, to simplify my subject so as to render it more easily
intelligible to the reading public. We have reached, however, the point
now when it will be necessary to take different ground, and look at
Islam no longer as regards her internal economy, but as she is being
affected by the world at large. We must inquire what influence the
material pressure of Europe is likely to have on her in the Levant, and
what in Africa and Central Asia; and, above all, we must examine closely
our own position towards her, and the course which duty and interest
require us to pursue in regard to the vast Mussulman population of our
Indian Empire.

I take it the sentiment generally of Continental Europe--I do not speak
of England--towards Mohammedanism is still much what it has always been,
namely, one of social hostility and political aggression. In spite of
all the changes which have affected religious thought in Catholic
Europe, and of the modern doctrine of tolerance in matters of opinion,
none of the nations by which Islam is immediately confronted to the
north and west have really changed anything of their policy towards her,
since the days when they first resolved on the recovery of "Christian
lands lost to the infidel." It is true that most of them no longer put
forward religious zeal as the motive of their action, or the possession
of the Holy Sepulchre as its immediate object; but under the name of
"civilization" their crusade is no less a continuous reality, and the
direction of their efforts has not ceased to be the resumption by Europe
of political control in the whole of the provinces once forming the
Roman Empire. The sentiment in its origin was a just one, and, though
now become for the most part selfish with the various Christian states,
who see in the advantage to Christendom only an advantage to themselves,
it appeals to an ancient and respectable moral sanction which is in
itself no inconsiderable power. It is certain that the national
conscience neither of France, nor Spain, nor Italy, nor Austria would
repudiate an aggression, however unprovoked, upon any of the still
independent Mussulman states of the Mediterranean, and that the only
judgment passed on such an act by public opinion would be one dependent
on its failure or success.

Thus in estimating the future of Islam as a political body, and in view
of the disparity proved to exist at all points between modern Europe and
its ancient rival in the matter of physical strength, we must be
prepared to see the latter submit at no distant date to great
territorial losses along the whole line of its European frontier. Few, I
think, to begin from the extreme west, will be inclined to doubt that,
should the French succeed in thoroughly crushing the Arab movement which
they have provoked in Tunis, and which will in all probability be
extended next summer to Morocco and Tripoli, the beginning of the next
century will see what is left of the Barbary Coast in their possession,
or in that of Spain or Italy; and the greater part of the cultivable
lands fronting the Mediterranean occupied by their immigrants. What
France has done or attempted to do in Algiers her two neighbours may
possibly achieve with even more success in Morocco and western Tripoli,
for the Spaniards and Italians are both eminently colonizing races, and
the hill country of Barbary is little different in climate from their
own. Tripoli, on the break up of the Ottoman Empire, will certainly
tempt Italian statesmen, and Spain has already a footing on the African
coast in Tetuan. It is therefore conceivable that the better lands on
the seaboard will receive a flood of such agriculturists from either
country as now seek their fortunes on the River Plate and elsewhere.
Should such be the case, the Mohammedan population may be ousted from
their possession of the soil, and driven southwards, at least for a
time, and a considerable decrease of the political strength of Islam be
witnessed in that quarter. I do not, however, conceive that Europe will
ever obtain a sure colonial footing south of the Atlas, or that the
Mussulmans of the Sahara will lose anything of their present religious
character. At worst, Southern Morocco and Fezzan will always remain
independent Mohammedan States, the nucleuses of religious life in
Barbary, and links between the Mussulmans of Northern and Central
Africa, while further east the growing influence of Egypt will make
itself felt intellectually to the advantage of believers. It is,
however, to Central Africa that Islam must in the future look for a
centre of religious gravity westwards. There, in the conversion of the
negro race of the Tropics, already so rapidly proceeding, she has good
prospect of compensation for all losses on the Mediterranean coast; and,
screened by the Sahara and by a climate unsuited to European life, she
may retain for centuries her political as well as her religious
independence. The negro races will not only be Mohammedanised; they will
also be Arabised; and a community of language and of custom will thus
preserve for Soudan its connection with Mecca, and so with the general
life of Islam. The losses, then, to Islam in Africa will be rather
apparent than real, and may even in the end prove a source of new
strength.

Nor must we lose sight of the possibility of a French defeat I believe
that at no time during the past forty years has the military position of
"our allies" been in a graver peril in their colony than now, or the
resources of their antagonists greater. It is a weakness of the French
system in Africa that it has made no attempt to assimilate the native
population; and it is the strength of that population, in as far as it
is Arab, that it does assimilate French thought to its own advantage. It
is far from certain whether the conquest of Algiers may not some day
have for its effect the renewal of Mohammedan political vitality in all
the Barbary Coast.

A more absolute and immediate loss must be anticipated in Europe and
Western Asia. There it is pretty certain that in a very few years
Ottoman rule will have ceased, and the Turkish-speaking lands composing
the Empire been absorbed by one or other of the powerful neighbours who
have so long coveted their possession. Austria, in person or by deputy,
may be expected by the end of the present century to have inherited the
European, and Russia the Asiatic, provinces of Turkey proper, while the
fate of Syria and Egypt will only have been averted, if averted it be,
by the intervention of England. That a dissolution of the Empire may
and will be easily accomplished I have myself little doubt. The military
power of Constantinople, though still considerable for the purposes of
internal control, will hardly again venture to cope single-handed with
any European State, nor is it in the least probable that the Sultan will
receive further Christian support from without. The fall of Kars has
laid Asia Minor open to the Russian arms, and the territorial cessions
of San Stefano and Berlin have laid Roumelia open to the Austrian. On
the first occasion of a quarrel with the Porte a simultaneous advance
from both quarters would preclude the chance of even a serious struggle,
and the subjugation of the Turkish-speaking races would be effected
without more difficulty.

The weakness of the Empire from a military point of view is, that it is
dependent wholly on its command of the sea, a position which enables it
to mass what troops it has rapidly on the points required, but which
even a second-rate Mediterranean power could wrest from it. Its
communication cut by a naval blockade, the Empire would almost without
further action be dissolved. Whatever loyalty the Sultan may have lately
achieved outside his dominions, there is not only no spirit of national
resistance in Asia Minor itself, but the provinces, even the most
Mussulman, would hail an invading army as a welcome deliverer from him.
Left to themselves they would abandon without compunction the Sultan's
cause, and the next war of an European state with Turkey will not only
be her last, but it will in all likelihood hardly be fought out by her.

Nor do I conceive that the fall of the Ottoman Empire and the annexation
of its Turkish provinces would be a mere political loss of so much
territory to Islam. It would involve moral consequences far greater than
this for the whole Mussulman world of North-Western Asia. I have the
authority of the most enlightened of modern Asiatic statesmen in support
of my opinion that it would be the certain deathblow of Mohammedanism as
a permanent religious faith in all the lands west of the Caspian, and
that even among the Tartar races of the far East, the Sunite Mussulmans
of Siberia and the Khanates, and as far as the Great Wall of China, it
would be a shock from which Sunism in its present shape would with
difficulty recover. What has hitherto supported the religious constancy
of orthodox believers in those lands, formerly Ottoman, which have
become subject to Russia, has been throughout the consciousness that
there was still upon the Russian border a great militant body of men of
their own faith, ruled by its acknowledged spiritual head.

The centre of their religious pride has been Constantinople, where the
Sultan and Caliph has sat enthroned upon the Bosphorus, commanding the
two worlds of Europe and Asia, and securing to them communication with
the holy places of their devotion and the living body of true believers.
Their self-respect has been maintained by this feeling, and with it
fidelity to their traditions. Moreover, the school of St. Sophia has
been a fountain-head of religious knowledge, the university at which the
Ulema of Kazan and Tiflis and Astrachan have received their spiritual
education; while at all times religious personages from Constantinople
have travelled among them, keeping alive the recollection of their lost
allegiance. On this basis their faith has retained what it has of
loyalty in spite of the political Russianising they have undergone; but
with their political centre destroyed, they would be as sheep without a
shepherd, scattered in little groups here and there among a growing
Christian population, and shut out from the fold of their belief.

Constantinople is the assembling place of pilgrimage for all
Mohammedans west of the Ural Mountains, who reach it by the Black Sea,
and could never be replaced to them by any new centre further south
among the Arab races, with whom they have little sympathy or direct
religious connection. A Caliph at Mecca or in Egypt could do little for
them, and the Turkish-speaking Sunites would have no university open to
them nearer than Bokhara. In this respect they would find themselves in
a far worse position than the Moors, however universally these may
become subject to Europe, and their religious disintegration would be a
mere question of time. I believe, therefore, that Islam must be prepared
for a loss, not only of political power in Europe and in Western Asia,
but also of the Mohammedan population in the Ottoman lands absorbed by
Russia. It will be a strange revenge of history if the Ottoman Turks,
whom Europe has for so many centuries held to be the symbolic figure of
Mohammedanism, shall one day cease to be Mohammedan. Yet it is a revenge
our children or our grandchildren may well live to see.

How far eastward the full results of this religious disintegration may
extend, it is perhaps fanciful to speculate. The north-western
provinces of Persia, which are inhabited by Mussulmans of mixed race
speaking the Turkish language and largely interfused with Christian
Armenians, would, I am inclined to think, follow the destiny of the
West, and ultimately accept Christianity as a dominant religion. But,
east of the Caspian, Sunite Islam, though severely shaken, may yet hope
to survive and hold its ground for centuries.

The present policy of Russia, whatever it may be in Europe, is far from
hostile to Mohammedanism in Central Asia. As a religion it is even
protected there, and it is encouraged by the Government in its
missionary labours among the idolatrous tribes of the Steppes, and among
the Buddhists, who are largely accepting its doctrines in the extreme
East. Hitherto there has been no Christian colonization in the direction
of the Khanates, nor is there any indigenous form of Christianity.
Moreover, Central Asia, though connected by ties of sympathy with
Constantinople, has never been politically or even religiously dependent
on it. It has a university of its own in Bokhara, a seat of learning
still renowned throughout Asia, and it is thither and not to St. Sophia
that the Sunite Mussulmans east of the Caspian proceed for their
degrees.

Mohammedanism, therefore, in Eastern Asia is not exposed to such
immediate danger as in the West. Bokhara may lose its political
independence, but there is no probability for many generations to come
