do say that those things were devised and appointed by the holy Fathers
which never once came into their thought; and, to have the full sway of
authority, do wrest the Scriptures, which, as Camotensis saith, is an
usual custom with the Popes?  How if he have renounced the faith of
Christ, and become an apostate, as Lyranus saith many Popes have been?
And, yet for all this, shall the Holy Ghost, with turning of a hand,
knock at his breast, and even whether he will or no, yea, and wholly
against his will, kindle him a light so as he may not err?  Shall he
straightway be the head-spring of all right; and shall all treasure of
wisdom and understanding be found in him, as it were laid up in store?
or, if these things be not in him, can he give a right and apt judgment
of so weighty matters? or, if he be not able to judge, would he have that
all those matters should be brought before him alone?

What will ye say if the Pope's advocates, abbots and bishops, dissemble
not the matter, but show themselves open enemies to the Gospel, and
though they see, yet they will not see; but wry the Scriptures, and
wittingly and knowingly corrupt and counterfeit the Word of God, and
foully and wickedly apply to the Pope all the same things, which
evidently and properly be spoken of the Person of Christ only, nor by no
means can be applied to any other?  And what though they say, "The Pope
is all and above all?" or, "that he can do as much as Christ can?" and
"that one judgment-place and one council-house serve for the Pope and for
Christ both together;" or, "that the Pope is the same light which should
come into the world;" which words Christ spake of Himself alone: and
"that whoso is an evil-doer hateth and flieth from that light;" or that
all the other bishops have received of the Pope's fulness?  Shortly, what
though they make decrees expressly against God's Word, and that not in
hucker-mucker or covertly, but openly, and in the face of the world, must
it needs yet be Gospel straight whatsoever these men say?  Shall these be
God's holy army? or will Christ be at hand among them there?  Shall the
Holy Ghost flow in their tongues; or can they with truth say, "We and the
Holy Ghost have thought good so?"  Indeed, Peter Asotus and his companion
Hosius stick not to affirm, that the same council wherein our Saviour
Jesus Christ was condemned to die had both the Spirit of Prophesying, and
the Holy Ghost, and the Spirit of Truth in it; and that it was neither a
false nor a trifling saying when those bishops said, "We have a law, and
by our law He ought to die:" and that they, so saying, did light upon the
very truth of judgment (for so be Hosius' words); and that the same
plainly was a just decree whereby they pronounced that Christ was worthy
to die.  This, methinketh, is strange, that these men are not able to
speak for themselves, and to defend their own cause, but they must also
take part with Annas and Caiaphas.  For if they will call that a lawful
and a good council wherein the Son of God was most shamefully condemned
to die, what council will they then allow for false and naught?  And yet
(as all their councils, to say truth, commonly be) necessity compelled
them to pronounce these things of the council holden by Annas and
Caiaphas.

But will these men (I say) reform us the Church, being themselves both
the persons guilty and the judges too?  Will they abate their own
ambition and pride?  Will they overthrow their own matter, and give
sentence against themselves that they must leave off to be unlearned
bishops, slow bellies, heapers together of benefices, takers upon them as
princes and men of war?  Will the abbots, the Pope's dear darlings, judge
that monk for a thief which laboureth not for his living? and that it is
against all law to suffer such a one to live and to be found either in
city or in country, or yet of other men's charges? or else that a monk
ought to lie on the ground, to live hardly with herbs and pease, to study
earnestly, to argue, to pray, to work with hand, and fully to bend
himself to come to the ministry of the Church?  In faith, as soon will
the Pharisees and Scribes repair again the temple of God, and restore it
unto us a house of prayer instead of a thievish den.

There have been, I know, certain of their own selves which have found
fault with many errors in the Church, as Pope Adrian, AEneas Sylvius,
Cardinal Pole, Pighius, and others, as is aforesaid: they held afterwards
their council at Trident in the selfsame place where it is now appointed.
There assembled many bishops, and abbots, and others whom it behoved for
that matter.  They were alone by themselves; whatsoever they did, nobody
gainsaid it; for they had quite shut out and barred our side from all
manner of assemblies: and there they sat six years, feeding folks with a
marvellous expectation of their doings.  The first six months, as though
it were greatly needful, they made many determinations of the Holy
Trinity, of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, which were
godly things indeed, but not so necessary for that time.  Let us see, in
all that while, of so many, so manifest, so often confessed by them, and
so evident errors, what one error have they amended? from what kind of
idolatry have they reclaimed the people?  What superstition have they
taken away?  What piece of their tyranny and pomp have they diminished?
As though all the world may not now see that this is a conspiracy and not
a council; and that those bishops whom the Pope hath now called together
be wholly sworn and become bound to bear him their faithful allegiance,
and will do no manner of thing but that they perceive pleaseth him, and
helpeth to advance his power, and as he will have it; or that they reckon
not of the number of men's voices rather than have weight and
consideration of the same; or that might doth not oftentimes overcome
right.

And therefore we know that divers times many good men and Catholic
bishops did tarry at home, and would not come when such councils were
called, wherein men so apparently laboured to serve factions and to take
parts, because they knew they should but lose their travail, and do no
good, seeing whereunto their enemies' minds were so wholly bent.
Athanasius denied to come, when he was called by the emperor to his
council at Caesarea, perceiving plain he should but come among his
enemies, which deadly hated him.  The same Athanasius, when he came
afterward to the council at Syrmium, and foresaw what would be the end by
reason of the outrage and malice of his enemies, he packed up his
carriage and went away immediately.  John Chrysostom, although the
Emperor Constantius commanded him by four sundry letters to come to the
Arians' council, yet kept he himself at home still.  When Maximus, the
Bishop of Jerusalem, sat in the council at Palestine, the old Father
Paphnutius took him by the hand, and led him out at the doors, saying,
"It is not lawful for us to confer of these matters with wicked men."  The
bishops of the East would not come to the Syrmian council after they knew
Athanasius had gotten himself thence again.  Cyril called men back by
letters from the council of them which were named Patropassians.
Paulinus, Bishop of Triers, and many others more, refused to come to the
council at Milan when they understood what a stir and rule Auxentius kept
there: for they saw it was in vain to go thither, where not reason, but
faction, should prevail, and where folk contended not for the truth and
right judgment of the matter, but for partiality and favour.

And yet, for all those Fathers had such malicious and stiff-necked
enemies, yet if they had come they should have had free speech at least
in the councils.  But now, sithence, none of us may be suffered so much
as to sit, or once to be seen in these men's meetings, much less suffered
to speak freely our mind; and seeing the Pope's legates, patriarchs,
archbishops, bishops, and abbots--all being conspired together, all
linked together in one kind of fault, and all bound by one oath--sit
alone by themselves, and have power alone to give their consent: and, at
last, when they have all done--as though they had done nothing--bring all
their opinions to be judged at the will and pleasure of the Pope, being
but one man, to the end he may pronounce his own sentence of himself, who
ought rather to have answered to his complaint; sithence, also, the same
ancient and Christian liberty, which of all right should specially be in
Christian councils, is now utterly taken away from the council--for these
causes, I say, wise and good men ought not to marvel at this day, though
we do the like now, that they see was done in times past in like case of
so many Fathers and Catholic bishops: which is, though we choose rather
to sit at home, and leave our whole cause to God, than to journey
thither, whereas we neither shall have place nor be able to do any good;
whereas we can obtain no audience; whereas princes' ambassadors be but
used as mocking-stocks; and whereas, also, we be condemned already,
before trial, as though the matter were aforehand despatched and agreed
upon.  Nevertheless, we can bear patiently and quietly our own private
wrongs.  But wherefore do they shut out Christian kings and good princes
from their convocation?  Why do they so uncourteously, or with such
spite, leave them out, and--as though they were not either Christian men,
or else could not judge--will not have them made acquainted with the
cause of Christian religion, nor understand the state of their own
Churches?

Or if the said kings and princes happen to intermeddle in such matters,
and take upon them to do that they may do, that they be commanded to do,
and ought of duty to do, and the same things that we know both David and
Solomon and other good princes have done, that is, if they--whilst the
Pope and his prelates slug and sleep, or else mischievously withstand
them--do bridle the priests' sensuality, and drive them to do their duty,
and keep them still to it; if they do overthrow idols, if they take away
superstition, and set up again the true worshipping of God--why do they
by-and-by make an outcry upon them, that such princes trouble all, and
press by violence into another body's office, and do thereby wickedly and
malapertly?  What Scripture hath at any time forbidden a Christian prince
to be made privy to such causes?  Who but themselves alone made ever any
such law?

They will say to this, I guess: "Civil princes have learned to govern a
commonwealth, and to order matters of war, but they understand not the
secret mysteries of religion."  If that be so, what is the Pope, I pray
you, at this day other than a monarch or a prince?  Or what be the
cardinals, who must be none other nowadays, but princes and kings' sons?
What else be the patriarchs, and, for the most part, the archbishops, the
bishops, the abbots?  What be they else at this present in the Pope's
kingdom but worldly princes, but dukes and earls, gorgeously accompanied
with bands of men whithersoever they go; oftentimes also gaily arrayed
with chains and collars of gold?  They have at times, too, certain
ornaments by themselves, as crosses, pillars, hats, mitres, and
palls--which pomp the ancient bishops Chrysostom, Augustine, and Ambrose
never had.  Setting these things aside, what teach they?  What say they?
What do they?  How live they?  I say, not as may become a bishop, but as
may become even a Christian man?  Is it so great a matter to have a vain
title, and, by changing a garment only, to have the name of a bishop?

Surely to have the principal stay and effect of all matters committed
wholly to these men's hands, who neither know nor will know these things,
nor yet set a jot by any point of religion, save that which concerneth
their belly and riot; and to have them alone sit as judges, and to be set
up as overseers in the watch-tower, being no better than blind spies; of
the other side, to have a Christian prince of good understanding and of a
right judgment to stand still like a block or a stake, not to be suffered
neither to give his voice nor to show his judgment, but only to wait what
these men shall will and command, as one which had neither ears, nor
eyes, nor wit, nor heart; and whatsoever they give in charge, to allow it
without exception, blindly fulfilling their commandments, be they never
so blasphemous and wicked, yea, although they command him quite to
destroy all religion, and to crucify again Christ Himself: this surely,
besides that it is proud and spiteful, is also beyond all right and
reason, and not to be endured of Christian and wise princes.  Why, I pray
you, may Caiaphas and Annas understand these matters, and may not David
and Ezechias do the same?  Is it lawful for a cardinal, being a man of
war, and delighting in blood, to have place in a council? and is it not
lawful for a Christian emperor or a king?  We truly grant no further
liberty to our magistrates than that we know hath both been given them by
the Word of God, and also been confirmed by the examples of the very best
governed commonwealths.  For besides that a Christian prince hath the
charge of both tables committed to him by God, to the end he may
understand that not temporal matters only, but also religious and
ecclesiastical causes, pertain to his office: besides also that God by
His prophets often and earnestly commandeth the king to cut down the
groves, to break down the images and altars of idols, and to write out
the book of the law for himself: and besides that the prophet Isaiah
saith, "A king ought to be a patron and a nurse of the Church:" I say,
besides all these things, we see by histories and by examples of the best
times that good princes ever took the administration of ecclesiastical
matters to pertain to their duty.

Moses, a civil magistrate, and chief guide of the people, both received
from God, and delivered to the people, all the order for religion and
sacrifices, and gave Aaron the bishop a vehement and sore rebuke for
making the golden calf, and for suffering the corruption of religion.
Joshua also, though he were none other than a civil magistrate, yet as
soon as he was chosen by God, and set as a ruler over the people, he
received commandments specially touching religion and the service of God.
King David, when the whole religion was altogether brought out of frame
by wicked king Saul, brought home again the Ark of God; that is to say,
he restored religion again; and was not only amongst them himself as a
counsellor and furtherer of the work, but he appointed also hymns and
psalms, put in order the companies, and was the only doer in setting
forth that whole solemn show, and in effect ruled the priests.  King
Solomon built unto the Lord the Temple which his father David had but
purposed in his mind to do: and after the finishing thereof, he made a
goodly oration to the people concerning religion and the service of God:
he afterward displaced Abiathar the priest, and set Sadok in his place.
After this, when the Temple of God was in shameful wise polluted through
the naughtiness and negligence of the priests, King Hezekiah commanded
the same to be cleansed from the rubble and filth, the priests to light
up candles, to burn incense, and to do their Divine service according to
the old and allowed custom; the same king also commanded the brazen
serpent, which then the people wickedly worshipped, to be taken, down and
beaten to powder.  King Jehoshaphat overthrew and utterly made away the
hill altars and groves; whereby he saw God's honour hindered and the
people holden back with a private superstition from the ordinary Temple,
which was at Jerusalem, whereto they should by order have resorted yearly
from every part of the realm.  King Josiah with great diligence put the
priests and bishops in mind of their duties; King Joash bridled the riot
and arrogancy of the priests; Jehu put to death the wicked prophets.

And to rehearse no more examples out of the old law, let us rather
consider, since the birth of Christ, how the Church hath been governed in
the Gospel's time.  The Christian emperors in the old time appointed the
councils of the bishops.  Constantine called the council at Nice;
Theodosius the First called the council at Constantinople; Theodosius the
Second, the council at Ephesus; Martian, the council at Chalcedon; and
when Ruffine the heretic had alleged for authority a council which, as he
thought, should make for him, St. Hierom his adversary, to confute him,
"Tell us," quod he, "what emperor commanded that council to be called."
The same St. Hierom again, in his epitaph upon Paula, maketh mention of
the emperor's letters which gave commandment to call the "bishops of
Italy and Greece to Rome to a council."  Continually for the space of
five hundred years, the emperor alone appointed the ecclesiastical
assemblies, and called the councils of the bishops together.

We now therefore marvel the more at the unreasonable dealing of the
Bishop of Rome, who, knowing what was the emperor's right when the Church
was well ordered, knowing also that it is now a common right to all
princes, for so much as the kings are now fully possessed in the several
parts of the whole empire, doth so without consideration assign that
office alone to himself, and taketh it sufficient, in summoning a general
council, to make that man that is prince of the whole world no otherwise
partaker thereof than he would make his own servant.  And although the
modesty and mildness of the Emperor Ferdinand be so great that he can
bear this wrong, because, peradventure, he understandeth not well the
Pope's packing, yet ought not the Pope of his holiness to offer him that
wrong, nor to claim as his own another man's right.

But hereto some will reply: The emperor, indeed, called councils at that
time ye speak of, because the Bishop of Rome was not yet grown so great
as he is now, but yet the emperor did not then sit together with the
bishops in council, or once bare any stroke with his authority in their
consultation.  I answer, Nay, that it is not so; for, as witnesseth
Theodoret, the Emperor Constantine sat not only together with them in the
Council of Nice, but gave also advice to the bishops how it was best to
try out the matter by the Apostles' and Prophets' writings, as appeareth
by these his own words: "In disputation," saith he, "of matters of
divinity, we have set before us to follow the doctrine of the Holy Ghost.
For the Evangelists' and the Apostles' works, and the Prophets' sayings,
show us sufficiently what opinion we ought to have of the will of God."
The Emperor Theodosius, as saith Socrates, did not only sit amongst the
bishops, but also ordered the whole arguing of the cause, and tare in
pieces the heretics' books, and allowed for good the judgment of the
Catholics.  In the council at Chalcedon a civil magistrate condemned for
heretics, by the sentence of his own mouth, the bishops Dioscorus,
Juvenalis, and Thalassius, and gave judgment to put them down from their
dignities in the Church.  In the third council at Constantinople,
Constantine, a civil magistrate, did not only sit amongst the bishops,
but did also subscribe with them.  "For," saith he, "we have both read
and subscribed."  In the second council called Arausicanum, the prince's
ambassadors, being noble men born, not only spake their mind touching
religion, but set to their hands also, as well as the bishops.  For thus
it is written in the latter end of that council: "Petrus, Marcellinus,
Felix, and Liberius, being most noble men, and famous lieutenants, and
captains of France, and also peers of the realm, have given their
consent, and set to their hands."  Further: "Syagrius, Opilio,
Pantagathus, Deodatus, Cariattho, and Marcellus, men of very great
honour, have subscribed."  If it be so, then, that lieutenants, captains,
and peers have had authority to subscribe in council, have not emperors
and kings the like authority?

Truly there had been no need to handle so plain a matter as this is with
so many words, and so at length, if we had not to do with those men who,
for a desire they have to strive and to win the mastery, use of course to
deny all things, be they never so clear--yea, the very same which they
presently see and behold with their own eyes.  The Emperor Justinian made
a law to correct the behaviour of the clergy, and to cut short the
insolency of the priests.  And albeit he were a Christian and a Catholic
prince, yet put he down from their papal throne two Popes, Sylverius and
Vigilius, notwithstanding they were Peter's successors and Christ's
vicars.

Let us see, then, such men as have authority over the bishops, such men
as receive from God commandments concerning religion, such as bring home
again the Ark of God, make holy hymns, oversee the priests, build the
Temple, make orations touching Divine service, cleanse the temples,
destroy the hill altars, burn the idols' groves, teach the priests their
duties, write them out precepts how they should live, kill the wicked
prophets, displace the high priests, call together the councils of
bishops, sit together with the bishops, instructing them what they ought
to do, condemn and punish an heretical bishop, be made acquainted with
matters of religion, which subscribe and give sentence; and do all these
things, not by any other man's commission, but in their own name, and
that both uprightly and godly: shall we say it pertaineth not to such men
to have to do with religion? or shall we say a Christian magistrate,
which dealeth amongst others in these matters, doth either naughtily, or
presumptuously, or wickedly?  The most ancient and Christian emperors and
kings that ever were, did busy themselves with these matters, and yet
were they never for this cause noted either of wickedness or of
presumption.  And what is he that can find out either more Catholic
princes or more notable examples?

Wherefore, if it were lawful for them to do thus, being but civil
magistrates, and having the chief rule of commonweals, what offence have
our princes at this day made, which may not have leave to do the like,
being in the like degree? or what especial gift of learning, or of
judgment, or of holiness have these men now, that, contrary to the custom
of all the ancient and Catholic bishops, who used to confer with princes
and peers concerning religion, they do now thus reject and cast off
Christian princes from knowing of the cause, and from their meetings?
Well, thus doing, they wisely and warily provide for themselves and for
their kingdom, which otherwise they see is like shortly to come to
nought.  For if so be they whom God hath placed in greatest dignity did
see and perceive these men's practices, how Christ's commandments be
despised by them, how the light of the Gospel is darkened and quenched
out by them, and how themselves also be subtly beguiled and mocked, and
unawares be deluded by them, and the way to the kingdom of heaven stopped
up before them: no doubt they would never so quietly suffer themselves
neither to be disdained after such a proud sort, nor so despitefully to
be scorned and abused by them.  But now, through their own lack of
understanding, and through their own blindness, these men have them fast
yoked, and in their danger.

We truly for our parts, as we have said, have done nothing in altering
religion either upon rashness or arrogancy; nor nothing but with good
leisure and great consideration.  Neither had we ever intended to do it,
except both the manifest and most assured will of God, opened to us in
His Holy Scriptures, and the regard of our own salvation, had even
constrained us thereunto.  For though we have departed from that Church
which these men call Catholic, and by that means get us envy amongst them
that want skill to judge, yet is this enough for us, and ought to be
enough for every wise and good man, and one that maketh account of
everlasting life, that we have gone from that Church which had power to
err: which Christ, who cannot err, told so long before it should err; and
which we ourselves did evidently see with our eyes to have gone both from
the holy fathers, and from the Apostles, and from Christ His own self,
and from the primitive and Catholic Church; and we are come as near as we
possibly could to the Church of the Apostles and of the old Catholic
bishops and fathers; which Church we know hath hereunto been sound and
perfect, and, as Tertullian termeth it, a pure virgin, spotted as yet
with no idolatry, nor with any foul or shameful fault: and have directed,
according to their customs and ordinances, not only our doctrine, but
also the Sacraments and the form of common prayer.

And, as we know both Christ Himself and all good men heretofore have
done, we have called home again to the original and first foundation that
religion which hath been foully foreslowed, and utterly corrupted by
these men.  For we thought it meet thence to take the pattern of
reforming religion from whence the ground of religion was first taken:
because this one reason, as saith the most ancient father Tertullian,
hath great force against all heresies, "Look, whatsoever was first, that
is true; and whatsoever is latter, that is corrupt."  Irenaeus oftentimes
appealed to the oldest churches, which had been nearest to Christ's time,
and which it was hard to believe had erred.  But why at this day is not
the same respect and consideration had?  Why return we not to the pattern
of the old churches?  Why may not we hear at this time amongst us the
same saying, which was openly pronounced in times past in the council at
Nice by so many bishops and Catholic fathers, and nobody once speaking
against it [Greek text]: that is to say, "hold still the old customs!"
When Esdras went about to repair the ruins of the Temple of God, he sent
not to Ephesus, although the most beautiful and gorgeous temple of Diana
was there; and when he purposed to restore the sacrifices and ceremonies
of God, he sent not to Rome, although peradventure he had heard in that
place were the solemn sacrifices called Hecatombae, and other called
Solitaurilia, Lectisternia, and Supplicationes, and Numa Pompilius'
ceremonial books.  He thought it enough for him to set before his eyes,
and follow the pattern of the old Temple, which Solomon at the beginning
builded according as God had appointed him, and also those old customs
and ceremonies which God Himself had written out by special words for
Moses.

The prophet Aggaeus, after the temple was repaired again by Esdras, and
the people might think they had a very just cause to rejoice on their own
behalf for so great a benefit received of Almighty God, yet made he them
all burst out into tears, because that they which were yet alive and had
