the number of wicked exceed so greatly the number of good people? Why,
for every friend, does God find ten thousand enemies in a world which
depended upon Him alone to people with honest men? If it is true that
God intends to form in heaven a court of saints, of chosen ones, or of
men who have lived in this world according to His views, would He not
have had a court more numerous, more brilliant, and more honorable to
Him, if it were composed of all the men to whom, in creating them, He
could have granted the degree of goodness necessary to obtain eternal
happiness? Finally, were it not easier not to take man from nothingness
than to create him full of defects, rebellious to his Creator,
perpetually exposed to lose himself by a fatal abuse of his liberty?
Instead of creating men, a perfect God ought to have created only docile
and submissive angels. The angels, it is said, are free; a few among
them have sinned; but all of them have not sinned; all have not abused
their liberty by revolting against their Master. Could not God have
created only angels of the good kind? If God could create angels who
have not sinned, could He not create men sinless, or those who would
never abuse their liberty by doing evil. If the chosen ones are
incapable of sinning in heaven, could not God have made sinless men upon
the earth?




LXXVII.--IT IS ABSURD TO SAY THAT GOD'S CONDUCT MUST BE A MYSTERY TO MAN,
AND THAT HE HAS NO RIGHT TO EXAMINE AND JUDGE IT.

We are told that the enormous distance which separates God from men,
makes God's conduct necessarily a mystery for us, and that we have no
right to interrogate our Master. Is this statement satisfactory? But
according to you, when my eternal happiness is involved, have I not the
right to examine God's own conduct? It is but with the hope of happiness
that men submit to the empire of a God. A despot to whom men are
subjected but through fear, a master whom they can not interrogate, a
totally inaccessible sovereign, can not merit the homage of intelligent
beings. If God's conduct is a mystery to me, it is not made for me. Man
can not adore, admire, respect, or imitate a conduct of which everything
is impossible to conceive, or of which he can not form any but revolting
ideas; unless it is pretended that he should worship all the things of
which he is forced to be ignorant, and then all that he does not
understand becomes admirable.

Priests! you teach us that the designs of God are impenetrable; that His
ways are not our ways; that His thoughts are not our thoughts; that it
is folly to complain of His administration, whose motives and secret
ways are entirely unknown to us; that there is temerity in accusing Him
of unjust judgments, because they are incomprehensible to us. But do you
not see that by speaking in this manner, you destroy with your own hands
all your profound systems which have no design but to explain the ways
of Divinity that you call impenetrable? These judgments, these ways, and
these designs, have you penetrated them? You dare not say so; and,
although you season incessantly, you do not understand them more than we
do. If by chance you know the plan of God, which you tell us to admire,
while there are many people who find it so little worthy of a just,
good, intelligent, and rational being; do not say that this plan is
impenetrable. If you are as ignorant as we, have some indulgence for
those who ingenuously confess that they comprehend nothing of it, or
that they see nothing in it Divine. Cease to persecute for opinions
which you do not understand yourselves; cease to slander each other for
dreams and conjectures which are altogether contradictory; speak to us
of intelligible and truly useful things; and no longer tell us of the
impenetrable ways of a God, about which you do nothing but stammer and
contradict yourselves.

In speaking to us incessantly of the immense depths of Divine wisdom, in
forbidding us to fathom these depths by telling us that it is insolence
to call God to the tribunal of our humble reason, in making it a crime
to judge our Master, the theologians only confess the embarrassment in
which they find themselves as soon as they have to render account of the
conduct of a God, which they tell us is marvelous, only because it is
totally impossible for them to understand it themselves.




LXXVIII.--IT IS ABSURD TO CALL HIM A GOD OF JUSTICE AND GOODNESS, WHO
INFLICTS EVIL INDISCRIMINATELY ON THE GOOD AND THE WICKED, UPON THE
INNOCENT AND THE GUILTY; IT IS IDLE TO DEMAND THAT THE UNFORTUNATE
SHOULD CONSOLE THEMSELVES FOR THEIR MISFORTUNES, IN THE VERY ARMS OF THE
ONE WHO ALONE IS THE AUTHOR OF THEM.

Physical evil commonly passes as the punishment of sin. Calamities,
diseases, famines, wars, earthquakes, are the means which God employs to
chastise perverse men. Therefore, they have no difficulty in attributing
these evils to the severity of a just and good God. However, do we not
see these plagues fall indiscriminately upon the good and the wicked,
upon the impious and the pious, upon the innocent and the guilty? How
can we be made to admire, in this proceeding, the justice and the
goodness of a being, the idea of whom appears so consoling to the
unfortunate? Doubtless the brain of these unfortunate ones has been
disturbed by their misfortunes, since they forget that God is the
arbiter of things, the sole dispenser of the events of this world. In
this case ought they not to blame Him for the evils for which they would
find consolation in His arms? Unfortunate father! you console yourself
in the bosom of Providence for the loss of a cherished child or of a
wife, who made your happiness! Alas! do you not see that your God has
killed them? Your God has rendered you miserable; and you want Him to
console you for the fearful blows He has inflicted upon you.

The fantastic and supernatural notions of theology have succeeded so
thoroughly in overcoming the simplest, the clearest, the most natural
ideas of the human spirit, that the pious, incapable of accusing God of
malice, accustom themselves to look upon these sad afflictions as
indubitable proofs of celestial goodness. Are they in affliction, they
are told to believe that God loves them, that God visits them, that God
wishes to try them. Thus it is that religion changes evil into good!
Some one has said profanely, but with reason: "If the good God treats
thus those whom He loves, I beseech Him very earnestly not to think of
me." Men must have formed very sinister and very cruel ideas of their
God whom they call so good, in order to persuade themselves that the
most frightful calamities and the most painful afflictions are signs of
His favor! Would a wicked Genii or a Devil be more ingenious in
tormenting his enemies, than sometimes is this God of goodness, who is
so often occupied with inflicting His chastisements upon His dearest
friends?




LXXIX.--A GOD WHO PUNISHES THE FAULTS WHICH HE COULD HAVE PREVENTED, IS A
FOOL, WHO ADDS INJUSTICE TO FOOLISHNESS.

What would we say or a father who, we are assured, watches without
relaxation over the welfare of his feeble and unforeseeing children, and
who, however, would leave them at liberty to go astray in the midst of
rocks, precipices, and waters; who would prevent them but rarely from
following their disordered appetites; who would permit them to handle,
without precaution, deadly arms, at the risk of wounding themselves
severely? What would we think of this same father, if, instead of
blaming himself for the harm which would have happened to his poor
children, he should punish them for their faults in the most cruel way?
We would say, with reason, that this father is a fool, who joins
injustice to foolishness. A God who punishes the faults which He could
have prevented, is a being who lacks wisdom, goodness, and equity. A God
of foresight would prevent evil, and in this way would be saved the
trouble of punishing it. A good God would not punish weaknesses which He
knows to be inherent in human nature. A just God, if He has made man,
would not punish him for not being strong enough to resist his desires.
To punish weakness, is the most unjust tyranny. Is it not calumniating a
just God, to say that He punishes men for their faults, even in the
present life? How would He punish beings whom He alone could correct,
and who, as long as they had not received grace, can not act otherwise
than they do?

According to the principles of theologians themselves, man, in his
actual state of corruption, can do nothing but evil, for without Divine
grace he has not the strength to do good. Moreover, if man's nature,
abandoned to itself, of destitute of Divine help, inclines him
necessarily to evil, or renders him incapable of doing good, what
becomes of his free will? According to such principles, man can merit
neither reward nor punishment; in rewarding man for the good he does,
God would but recompense Himself; in punishing man for the evil he does,
God punishes him for not having been given the grace, without which it
was impossible for him to do better.




LXXX.--FREE WILL IS AN IDLE FANCY.

Theologians tell and repeat to us that man is free, while all their
teachings conspire to destroy his liberty. Trying to justify Divinity,
they accuse him really of the blackest injustice. They suppose that,
without grace, man is compelled to do evil: and they maintain that God
will punish him for not having been given the grace to do good! With a
little reflection, we will be obliged to see that man in all things acts
by compulsion, and that his free will is a chimera, even according to
the theological system. Does it depend upon man whether or not he shall
be born of such or such parents? Does it depend upon man to accept or
not to accept the opinions of his parents and of his teachers? If I were
born of idolatrous or Mohammedan parents, would it have depended upon me
to become a Christian? However, grave Doctors of Divinity assure us that
a just God will damn without mercy all those to whom He has not given
the grace to know the religion of the Christians.

Man's birth does not depend upon his choice; he was not asked if he
would or would not come into the world; nature did not consult him upon
the country and the parents that she gave him; the ideas he acquired,
his opinions, his true or false notions are the necessary fruits of the
education which he has received, and of which he has not been the
master; his passions and his desires are the necessary results of the
temperament which nature has given him, and of the ideas with which he
has been inspired; during the whole course of his life, his wishes and
his actions are determined by his surroundings, his habits, his
occupations, his pleasures, his conversations, and by the thoughts which
present themselves involuntarily to him; in short, by a multitude of
events and accidents which are beyond his control. Incapable of
foreseeing the future, he knows neither what he will wish, nor what he
will do in the time which must immediately follow the present. Man
passes his life, from the moment of his birth to that of his death,
without having been free one instant. Man, you say, wishes, deliberates,
chooses, determines; hence you conclude that his actions are free. It is
true that man intends, but he is not master of his will or of his
desires. He can desire and wish only what he judges advantageous for
himself; he can not love pain nor detest pleasure. Man, it will be said,
sometimes prefers pain to pleasure; but then, he prefers a passing pain
in the hope of procuring a greater and more durable pleasure. In this
case, the idea of a greater good determines him to deprive himself of
one less desirable.

It is not the lover who gives to his mistress the features by which he
is enchanted; he is not then the master to love or not to love the
object of his tenderness; he is not the master of the imagination or the
temperament which dominates him; from which it follows, evidently, that
man is not the master of the wishes and desires which rise in his soul,
independently of him. But man, say you, can resist his desires; then he
is free. Man resists his desires when the motives which turn him from an
object are stronger than those which draw him toward it; but then, his
resistance is necessary. A man who fears dishonor and punishment more
than he loves money, resists necessarily the desire to take possession
of another's money. Are we not free when we deliberate?--but has one the
power to know or not to know, to be uncertain or to be assured?
Deliberation is the necessary effect of the uncertainty in which we find
ourselves with reference to the results of our actions. As soon as we
believe ourselves certain of these results, we necessarily decide; and
then we act necessarily according as we shall have judged right or
wrong. Our judgments, true or false, are not free; they are necessarily
determined by ideas which we have received, or which our mind has
formed. Man is not free in his choice; he is evidently compelled to
choose what he judges the most useful or the most agreeable for himself.
When he suspends his choice, he is not more free; he is forced to
suspend it till he knows or believes he knows the qualities of the
objects presented to him, or until he has weighed the consequence of his
actions. Man, you will say, decides every moment on actions which he
knows will endanger him; man kills himself sometimes, then he is free. I
deny it! Has man the ability to reason correctly or incorrectly? Do not
his reason and his wisdom depend either upon opinions that he has
formed, or upon his mental constitution? As neither the one nor the
other depends upon his will, they can not in any wise prove his liberty.

If I make the wager to do or not to do a thing, am I not free? Does it
not depend upon me to do or not to do it? No; I will answer you, the
desire to win the wager will necessarily determine you to do or not to
do the thing in question. "But if I consent to lose the wager?" Then the
desire to prove to me that you are free will have become to you a
stronger motive than the desire to win the wager; and this motive will
necessarily have determined you to do or not to do what was understood
between us. But you will say, "I feel myself free." It is an illusion
which may be compared to that of the fly in the fable, which, lighting
on the shaft of a heavy wagon, applauded itself as driver of the vehicle
which carried it. Man who believes himself free, is a fly who believes
himself the master-motor in the machine of the universe, while he
himself, without his own volition, is carried on by it. The feeling
which makes us believe that we are free to do or not to do a thing, is
but a pure illusion. When we come to the veritable principle of our
actions, we will find that they are nothing but the necessary results of
our wills and of our desires, which are never within our power. You
believe yourselves free because you do as you choose; but are you really
free to will or not to will, to desire or not to desire? Your wills and
your desires, are they not necessarily excited by objects or by
qualities which do not depend upon you at all?




LXXXI.--WE SHOULD NOT CONCLUDE FROM THIS THAT SOCIETY HAS NOT THE RIGHT
TO CHASTISE THE WICKED.

If the actions of men are necessary, if men are not free, what right has
society to punish the wicked who infest it? Is it not very unjust to
chastise beings who could not act otherwise than they did? If the wicked
act from the impulse of their corrupt nature, society in punishing them
acts necessarily on its side from the desire to preserve itself. Certain
objects produce in us the feeling of pain; therefore our nature compels
us to hate them, and incites us to remove them. A tiger pressed by
hunger, attacks the man whom he wishes to devour; but the man is not the
master of his fear of the tiger, and seeks necessarily the means of
exterminating it.




LXXXII.--REFUTATION OF THE ARGUMENTS IN FAVOR OF FREE WILL.

If everything is necessary, if errors, opinions, and ideas of men are
fated, how or why can we pretend to reform them? The errors of men are
the necessary results of their ignorance; their ignorance, their
obstinacy, their credulity, are the necessary results of their
inexperience, of their indifference, of their lack of reflection; the
same as congestion of the brain or lethargy are the natural effects of
some diseases. Truth, experience, reflection, reason, are the proper
remedies to cure ignorance, fanaticism, and follies; the same as
bleeding is good to soothe congestion of the brain. But you will say,
why does not truth produce this effect upon many of the sick heads?
There are some diseases which resist all remedies; it is impossible to
cure obstinate patients who refuse to take the remedies which are given
them; the interest of some men and the folly of others naturally oppose
them to the admission of truth. A cause produces its effect only when it
is not interrupted in its action by other causes which are stronger, or
which weaken the action of the first cause or render it useless. It is
entirely impossible to have the best arguments accepted by men who are
strongly interested in error; who are prejudiced in its favor; who
refuse to reflect; but it must necessarily be that truth undeceives the
honest souls who seek it in good faith. Truth is a cause; it produces
necessarily its effect when its impulse is not interrupted by causes
which suspend its effects.




LXXXIII.--CONTINUATION.

