bodies; all that increases the amount of justice, mercy, knowledge,
refinement; all that lessens the amount of vice, cruelty, ignorance,
barbarism.  That at least must come from Christ.  That at least must be
the inspiration of the Spirit of God: unless the Pharisees were right
after all when they said, that evil spirits could be cast out by the
prince of the devils.

Be these things as they may, one comfort it will give us, to believe
firmly and actively in the changeless kingdom, and in the changeless
King.  It will give us calm, patience, faith and hope, though the heavens
and the earth be shaken around us.  For then we shall see that the
Kingdom, of which we are citizens, is a kingdom of light, and not of
darkness; of truth, and not of falsehood; of freedom, and not of slavery;
of bounty and mercy, and not of wrath and fear; that we live and move and
have our being not in a "Deus quidam deceptor" who grudges his children
wisdom, but in a Father of Light, from whom comes every good and perfect
gift; who willeth that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge
of the truth.  In His kingdom we are; and in the King whom He has set
over it we can have the most perfect trust.  For us that King stooped
from heaven to earth; for us He was born, for us He toiled, for us He
suffered, for us He died, for us He rose, for us He sits for ever at
God's right hand.  And can we not trust Him?  Let Him do what He will.
Let Him lead us whither He will.  Wheresoever He leads must be the way of
truth and life.  Whatsoever He does, must be in harmony with that
infinite love which He displayed for us upon the Cross.  Whatsoever He
does, must be in harmony with that eternal purpose by which He reveals to
men God their Father.  Therefore, though the heaven and the earth be
shaken around us, we will trust in Him.  For we know that He is the same
yesterday, to-day, and for ever; and that His will and promise is, to
lead those who trust in Him into all truth.




SERMON IX.  THE KINGDOM OF GOD.


LUKE XXI. 29-33.

   And Jesus spake to them a parable; Behold the fig tree, and all the
   trees; when they now shoot forth, ye see and know of your own selves
   that summer is now nigh at hand.  So likewise ye, when ye see these
   things come to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at hand.
   Verily I say unto you, This generation shall not pass away, till all
   be fulfilled.  Heaven and earth shall pass away: but my words shall
   not pass away.

The question which naturally suggests itself when we hear these words,
is--When were these things to take place?

If we heard one whom we regarded as at least a person of perfect virtue,
truthfulness, and earnestness, foretell that the city in which we now
stand should be destroyed.  If he told us, that when we saw it
encompassed with armies, we were to know that its desolation was at hand.
If he told us that then those who were in the surrounding country were to
flee to the mountains, and those in the city to come out of it.  If he
pronounced woe in that day on mothers and weak women who could not
escape.  If he told us, nevertheless, that when these things came to pass
we were to rejoice and lift up our heads, for our redemption was drawing
nigh.  If he told us to look at the trees in spring; for, as surely as
their budding was a sign that summer was nigh, so was the coming to pass
of these terrible woes a sign that something was nigh, which he called
the Kingdom of God.  If he told us, with a solemn asseveration, that this
generation should not pass away till all had happened.  If he went on to
warn us against profligacy, frivolity, worldliness, lest that day should
come upon us unaware.  If he bade us keep awake always, that we might be
found worthy to escape all that was coming, and to stand before Him, The
Son of Man.  If he used throughout his address the second person,
speaking to us, but never mentioning our descendants; giving the signs,
the warnings, the counsels to us only, should we not, even if he had not
solemnly told us that the present generation should not pass away till
all was fulfilled--should we not, I say, suppose naturally that he spoke
of events which in his opinion our own eyes would see; which would, in
his opinion, occur during our lifetime?

Whether he were right in his expectation, or wrong, still it would be
clear that such was his expectation; that he considered the danger as
imminent, the warning as addressed personally to us who heard him speak.

We should leave his presence with that impression, in fear and anxiety.
But if we afterwards discovered that our fear and anxiety were
superfluous; that the events of which he spoke--the most awful and
wonderful of them at least--were not to occur for many centuries to come;
that, even if some calamity were imminent, the immediate future and the
very distant future were so intermingled in his discourse, that it would
require the labours of commentator after commentator, for many hundred
years, to disentangle them, and that their labours would be in vain; that
the coming of the Son of Man, and of the Kingdom of God, of which he had
spoken, were to be referred to a time thousands of years hence; though we
were told in the same breath to look to the fig-tree and all the trees as
a sign that it was coming immediately, and that our own generation would
not pass away before all had taken place:--would not such a discovery
raise in us thoughts and feelings neither wholesome for us nor honourable
to the prophet?

I cannot think otherwise.  We may be aware of the difficulties which
beset this, and any other, interpretation of our Lord's prophecies in
Matthew, Mark, and Luke: we may have the deepest respect for those
learned and pious divines who from time to time have tried to part the
prophecies relating to the fall of Jerusalem from those relating to the
end of the world and the day of Judgment.  Yet, in the face of such a
passage as the text, especially when we cannot agree with those who would
make this "generation" mean this "race" or "nation," we may--we have a
right to--decline to separate the two sets of passages.  We have a right
to say,--He who spake as man never spake, and therefore knew the force of
words; He who knew what was in man--and therefore what effect His words
would produce on His hearers--did deliver a discourse--indeed, many
discourses--which asserted, as far as plain words could be understood by
plain men, that the Kingdom of God was at hand; and that the coming of
the Son of Man would take place before that generation passed away.

And that all His disciples, and St Paul as much as any, put that meaning
upon His words, is a matter of fact and of history, to be seen plainly in
Holy Scripture.

But, while the text compels us to believe that the destruction of
Jerusalem by the Romans was a coming of the Son of Man--a manifestation
of the Kingdom of God--a day of Judgment, in the strictest and most awful
sense; yet we are not compelled to limit the meaning of the text to the
destruction of Jerusalem.

No prophecy of Scripture is of private interpretation.  Prophets,
apostles--how much more our Lord Himself--do not merely indulge in
presages; they lay down laws--laws moral, spiritual, eternal--which have
been fulfilling themselves from the beginning; which are fulfilling
themselves now; which will go on fulfilling themselves to the end of
time.

So said our Lord Jesus of His own prophecies concerning the destruction
of Jerusalem.  It was but one example--a most awful one--of the laws of
His kingdom.  Not in Judaea only, but wherever the carcase was, there
would the eagles be gathered together.  In the moral, as in the physical
word, there were beasts of prey--the scavengers of God--ready to devour
out of His kingdom nations, institutions, opinions, which had become
dead, and decayed, and ready to infect the air.  Many a time since the
Roman eagles flocked to Jerusalem has that prophecy been fulfilled; and
many a time will it be fulfilled once more, and yet once more.

And what else, if we look at them carefully and reverently, is the
meaning of the words in this my text, "Heaven and earth shall pass away,
but My words shall not pass away"?

Shall we translate this,--Heaven and earth shall not come true: but My
words shall come true?  By so doing we may put some little meaning into
the latter half of the verse; but none into the former.  Surely there is
a deeper meaning in the words than that of merely coming true.  Surely
they mean that His words are eternal, perpetual; for ever present,
possible, imminent; for ever coming true.  So, indeed, they would not
pass away.  So they would be like the heavens and the earth, and the laws
thereof; like heat, gravitation, electricity, what not--always here,
always working, always asserting themselves--with this difference, that
when the physical laws of the heavens and the earth, which began in time,
in time have perished, the spiritual laws of God's kingdom, of Christ's
moral government of moral beings, shall endure for ever and for ever,
eternal as that God whose essence they reflect.

Therefore I mean nothing less than that the great and final day of
Judgment is past; or that we are not to look for that second coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ which, as our forefathers taught us to hope, shall
set right all the wrong of this diseased world.

God forbid!  For most miserable were the world, most miserable were
mankind, if all that our Lord prophesied had happened, once and for all,
at the destruction of Jerusalem by the Roman armies.  But most miserable,
also, would this world be, and most miserable would be mankind, if these
words were not to be fulfilled till some future Last Day, and day of
Judgment, for which the Church has now been waiting for more than
eighteen centuries--and, as far as we can judge, may wait for as many
centuries more.  Most miserable, if the Son of Man has never come since
He ascended into heaven from Olivet.  Most miserable, if the kingdom of
God has never been at hand, since He gave that one short gleam of hope to
men in Judaea long ago.  Most miserable, if there be no kingdom of God
among us even now: in one word, if God and Christ be not our King; but
the devil, as some fancy; or Man himself, as others fancy, be the only
king of this world and of its destinies; if there be no order in this mad
world, save what man invents; no justice, save what he executes; no law,
save what he finds convenient to lay upon himself for the protection of
his person and property.  Most miserable, if the human race have no
guide, save its own instincts and tendencies; no history, save that of
its own greed, ignorance and crime, varied only by fruitless struggles
after a happiness to which it never attains.  Most miserable world, and
miserable man, if that be true after all which to the old Hebrew prophet
seemed incredible and horrible--if God does look on while men deal
treacherously, and does hold His peace when the wicked devours the man
who is more righteous than he; and has made men as the fishes of the sea,
as the creeping things that have no ruler over them.

I said--Most miserable, in that case, was the world and man.  I did not
say that they would consider themselves miserable.  I did not say that
they would think it a Gospel, and good news, that Christ was their King,
and that His Kingdom was always at hand.  They never thought that good
news.  When the prophets told them of it, they stoned them.  When the
Lord Himself told them, they crucified Him.  Worldly men dislike the
message now, probably, as much as they ever did.  But they escape from
it, either by treating it as a self-evident commonplace which no
Christian denies, and therefore no Christian need think of; or by smiling
at it as an exploded superstition, at least as a "Semitic" form of
thought, with which we have nothing to do.  They confound it, often I
fear purposely, with those fancied miraculous interpositions, those
paltry special providences, which fanatics in all ages have believed to
be worked for their own special behoof.  Altogether they dislike, and
express very openly their dislike, of the least allusion to a Divine
Providence "interfering," as they strangely term it, with them and their
affairs.

And they are wise, doubtless, in their generation.  The news that Christ
is the King of men and of the world must be unpleasant, even offensive,
to too many, both of those who fancy that they are managing this world,
and of those who fancy that they could manage the world still better, if
they only had their rights.  It must be unpleasant to be told that they
are not managing the world, and cannot manage it: that it is being
managed and ruled by an unseen King, whose ways are far above their ways,
and His thoughts above their thoughts.

For then: Prudence might demand of them, that they should find out what
are that King's ways, thoughts and laws, and obey them--an enquiry so
troublesome, that many very highly educated persons consider it, now-a-
days, quite impossible; and tell us that, for practical purposes, God's
laws can neither be discovered, nor obeyed.

Moreover, their scheme of this world is one which would work--so they
fancy--just as well if there was no God.  Unpleasant therefore it must be
for them to hear, not merely that there is a God, but that He has His own
scheme of the world; and that it is working, whether they like or not;
that God, and not they, is making history; God, and not they, appointing
the bounds and the times of nations; God, and not they, or any man or
men, distributing good and evil among mankind.

They do not object, of course, to the existence of a God.  They only
object to His being what the Hebrew prophets called Him--a living God; a
God who executes justice and judgment by His Son Jesus Christ, to whom He
has committed all power both in heaven and earth.  They are ready
sometimes to allow even that, provided they may relegate it into the
past, or into the future.  They are ready to allow that God and Christ
exerted power over men at the first Advent 1800 years ago, and that they
will exert power over men at the second Advent--none knows how long
hence.  But that God and Christ are exerting power now--in an
ever-present and perpetual Advent--in this nineteenth century just as
much as in any century before or since--that they had rather not believe.
Their creed is, that though heaven and earth have not passed away; though
the laws of nature are working for ever as at the beginning: yet Christ's
words have passed away, and fallen into abeyance for many centuries past,
to remain in abeyance for many centuries to come.

In one word--while they believe more or less in a past God, and a future
God, yet as to the existence of a present God, in any practical and real
sense--they believe--how little, I dare not say.

Whether this generation will awaken out of that sleep of practical
Atheism, which is creeping on them more and more, who can tell?  That
they are uneasy in the sleep, there are many signs.  For in their sleep
dreams come of another world, of which their five senses tell them
nought.  Then do some fly to mediaeval superstitions, which give them at
least elaborate and agreeable substitutes for a living God.  Some fly to
impostors, who pretend by juggling tricks to put them in communication
with that unseen world which they have so long denied.  Some, again, play
with unfulfilled prophecy; and fancy that it is for them, though it was
not for the apostles, to know the times and seasons which the Father has
put in His own power, and the day and hour of which no man knoweth, no
not the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but the Father only.

Better that, than that they should believe that there is nothing, and
never will be anything, in the world, beyond what their five senses can
apprehend.

But whether they awake or not out of their sleep, their blindness does
not alter the eternal fact, whether men believe it or not.  That is true
what the Psalmist said of old: "The Lord is King, be the people never so
impatient.  He sitteth upon His throne, though the earth be never so
unquiet."

The utterances of the old Psalmists and prophets concerning the
ever-present kingdom of God are facts, not dreams.  Whether men believe
it or not, it is true that the power, glory, and righteousness of His
kingdom may be known unto men; that His kingdom is an everlasting
kingdom, and His dominion endureth throughout all ages; that The Lord
upholds all such as fall, and lifts up those that are down; that the eyes
of all wait on Him, that He may give them their meat in due season; that
He opens His hand, and filleth all things living with plenteousness; that
the Lord is righteous in all His ways, and holy in all His works; that He
is nigh to them that call upon Him, yea to all who call upon Him
faithfully.  He that planted the ear, shall He not hear?  He that made
the eye, shall He not see?  He that chastiseth the nations; it is He that
teacheth man knowledge: shall He not punish?

Whether men believe it or not, that is true which the Psalmist
said--Whither shall I flee from His Spirit, or whither shall I go from
His presence?  If I climb up to heaven, He is there; if I go down to
hell, He is there also.  If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in
the uttermost part of the sea, even there shall His hand lead me, His
right hand hold me still.

Whether men believe it or not, that is true which Christ spake on
earth--That the Father hath committed all judgment to Him, because He is
the Son of man; that to Him is given all power in heaven and earth; and
that He is with us, even to the end of the world.

Whether men believe it or not, that is true which S. Paul spake on Mars'
hill, saying that the Lord is not far from any one of us, for in Him we
live and move and have our being; and that He hath appointed a day in
which He will judge the world in righteousness, by that Man whom He hath
ordained, and raised from the dead.

Whether men believe it or not, that is true which Christ spake--Heaven
and earth shall pass away; but My words shall not pass away; at least
till He has put down all rule and all authority and power, and delivered
up the kingdom to God, even the Father, that God may be all in all.

"That one far-off divine event, toward which the whole creation moves,"
will be, not the resumption, but the triumph, of Christ's rule; of a rule
which began before the world, which has endured through all the ages,
which endures now, punishing or rewarding each and every one of us, and
of our children's children, as long as there shall be a man upon the
earth.  For by Christ's will alone the world of man consists; in Christ's
laws alone is true life, health, wealth, possible for any man, family or
nation; out of His kingdom He casts, sooner or later, all things which
offend, and whosoever loveth and maketh a lie.  He said of
Himself--Whosoever falleth on this rock shall be broken; but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it shall grind him to powder.




SERMON X.  THE LAW OF THE LORD.


PSALM I. 1,2.

   Blessed is the man who hath not walked in the counsel of the ungodly,
   nor stood in the path of sinners, nor sat in the seat of the scornful.
   But his delight is in the law of the Lord; and in his law will he
   exercise himself day and night.

The first and second Psalms, taken together, are the key to all the
Psalms; I may almost say to the whole Bible.  I will say a few words on
them this morning, especially to those who are coming to the Holy
Communion, to shew their allegiance to that Lord, in whose law alone is
life, and who sits on the throne of the universe, King of kings, and Lord
of lords: but I say it to the whole congregation likewise; nay, if there
were an infidel or a heathen in the Church, I should say it to them.  For
in this case what is true of one man is true of every man, whether he
knows it or not.

We all should like to be blessed.  We all should like to be, as the Psalm
says, like trees planted by the waterside, whose leaves never wither, and
who bring forth their fruit in due season.  We should all wish to have it
said of us--Whatsoever he doeth it shall prosper.  Then here is the way
to inherit that blessing--"_Blessed is the man whose delight is in the
law of the Lord_, _and who exercises himself in His law day and night_."
The Psalmist is not speaking of Moses' Law, nor of any other law of forms
and ceremonies.  He says expressly "The law of the Lord"--that is, the
law according to which the Lord has made him and all the world; and
according to which the Lord rules him and all the world.  The Psalms--you
must remember--say very little about Moses' law; and when they do, speak
of it almost slightingly, as if to draw men's minds away from it to a
deeper, nobler, more eternal law.  In one Psalm God asks, "Thinkest thou
that I will eat bulls' flesh, and drink the blood of goats?"  And in
another Psalm some one answers, "Sacrifice and burnt-offering thou
wouldest not.  Then said I, Lo I come, to do thy will, O God.  Thy law is
within my heart."  This is that true and eternal law of which Solomon
speaks in his proverbs, as the Wisdom by which God made the heavens, and
laid the foundation of the earth; and tells us that that Wisdom is a tree
of life to all who can lay hold of her; that in her right hand is length
of days, and in her left hand riches and honour; that her ways are ways
of pleasantness; and all her paths are peace.

This is that law, of which the Prophet says--that God will put it into
men's hearts, and write it in their minds; and they shall be His people,
and He will be their God.  This is that law, which the inspired
Philosopher--for a philosopher he was indeed--who wrote the 119th Psalm,
continually prayed and strove to learn, intreating the Lord to teach him
His law, and make him remember His everlasting judgments.  This is that
law, which our Lord Jesus Christ perfectly fulfilled, because the law was
His Father's law, and therefore His own law, and therefore he perfectly
comprehended the law, and perfectly loved the law; and said with His
whole heart--I delight to do Thy will, O God.

The will of God.  For in one word, this Law, which we have to learn, and
by keeping which we shall be blessed, is nothing else than God's Will.
God's Will about us.  What God has willed and chosen we should be.  What
God has willed and chosen we should do.  The greatest philosopher of the
18th century said that every rational being had to answer four
questions--Where am I?  What can I know?  What must I do?  Whither am I
going?  And he knew well that--as the Bible tells us throughout--the only
way to get any answer to those four tremendous questions is--To delight
in the law of the Lord; to struggle, think, pray, till we get some
understanding of God's will; of God's will about ourselves and about the
world; and so be blessed indeed.

But to do that, it is plain that we must heed the warning which the first
verse of the Psalm gives us--"Blessed is the man that hath not walked in
the counsel of the ungodly."  For it is plain that a man will never learn
God's will if he takes counsel from ungodly men who care nothing for
God's will, and do not believe that God's will governs the world.  Neither
must he, as the Psalm says, 'stand in the way of sinners'--of profligate
and dishonest men who break God's law.  For if he follows their ways, and
breaks God's law himself, it is plain that he will learn little or
nothing about God's law, save in the way of bitter punishment.  For let
him but break God's law a little too long, and then--as the 2nd Psalm
says--'God will rule him with a rod of iron, and break him in pieces like
a potter's vessel.'  But there is even more hope for him--for he may
repent and amend--than if he sits in the seat of the scorners.  The
scorners; the sneering, the frivolous, the unearnest, the unbelieving,
the envious, who laugh down what they call enthusiasm and romance; who
delight in finding fault, and in blackening those who seem purer or
nobler than themselves.  These are the men who cannot by any possibility
learn anything of the law of God; for they will not even look for it.
They have cast away the likeness of rational men, and have taken upon
themselves the likeness of the sneering accusing Satan, who asks in the
book of Job--"Doth Job serve God for nought?"  When the greatest poet of
our days tried to picture his idea of a fiend tempting a man to his ruin,
he gave his fiend just such a character as this; a very clever,
courteous, agreeable man of the world, and yet a being who could not love
any one, could not believe in any one; who mocked not only at man but at
God and tempted and ruined man, not out of hatred to him, hardly out of
envy; but in mere sport, as a cruel child may torment an insect;--in one
word, a scorner.  And so true was his conception felt to be, that men of
that character are now often called by the very name which he gave to his
Satan--Mephistopheles.  Beware therefore of the scornful spirit, as well
as of the openly sinful or of the ungodly.  If you wish to learn the law
of the Lord, keep your souls pious, pure, reverent, and earnest; for it
is only the pure in heart who shall see God; and only those who do God's
will as far as they know it, who will know concerning any doctrine
whether it be true or false; in one word, whether it be of God.

And now bear in mind secondly, that this law is the law of the Lord.  You
cannot have a law without a lawgiver who makes the law, and also without
a judge who enforces the law; and the lawgiver and the judge of the law
of the Lord is the Lord Himself, our Lord Jesus Christ.

Remembering Him, and that He is King, we can understand the fervour of
indignation and pity, with which the writer of the 2nd Psalm bursts
out--"Why do the heathen rage, and why do the people imagine a vain
thing?  The kings of the earth stand up, and the rulers take counsel
together, against the Lord, and against His Anointed--

"Let us break their bonds asunder and cast away their cords from us."

