      His praises aloud I'll proclaim,
    And join with the armies above,
      To shout His adorable name.
    To gaze on His glories divine
      Shall be my eternal employ;
    To see them incessantly shine,
      My boundless, ineffable joy.

Tune, "Birmingham"--an English melody. Anonymous.


"BLEST BE THE TIE THAT BINDS."

Perhaps the best hymn-expression of sacred brotherhood, at least it has
had, and still has the indorsement of constant use. The author, John
Fawcett, D.D., is always quoted as the example of his own words, since
he sacrificed ambition and personal interest to Christian affection.

Born near Bradford, Yorkshire, Jan. 6, 1739, and converted under the
preaching of Whitefield, he joined the Methodists, but afterwards
became a member of the new Baptist church in Bradford. Seven years later
he was ordained over the Baptist Society at Wainsgate. In 1772 he
received a call to succeed the celebrated Dr. Gill, in London, and
accepted. But at the last moment, when his goods were packed for
removal, the clinging love of his people, weeping their farewells around
him, melted his heart. Their passionate regrets were more than either he
or his good wife could withstand.

"I will _stay_," he said; "you may unpack my goods, and we will live for
the Lord lovingly together."

It was out of this heart experience that the tender hymn was born.

    Our fears, our hopes, our aims are one,
      Our comforts and our cares.

Dr. Fawcett died July 25, 1817.

Tune, "Boylston," L. Mason; or "Dennis," H.G. Naegeli.


"I LOVE THY KINGDOM, LORD."

"Dr. Dwight's Hymn," as this is known _par eminence_ among many others
from his pen, is one of the imperishable lyrics of the Christian Church.
The real spirit of the hundred and twenty-second Psalm is in it, and it
is worthy of Watts in his best moments.

Timothy Dwight was born at Northampton, Mass, May 14, 1752, and
graduated at Yale College at the age of thirteen. He wrote several
religious poems of considerable length. In 1795 he was elected President
of Yale College, and in 1800 he revised Watts' Psalms, at the request of
the General Association of Connecticut, adding a number of translations
of his own.

    I love Thy kingdom, Lord,
      The house of Thine abode,
    The Church our blest Redeemer saved
      With His own precious blood.

    I love Thy Church, O God;
      Her walls before Thee stand,
    Dear as the apple of Thine eye,
      And graven on Thy hand.

Dr. Dwight died Jan. 11, 1817.

Tune, "St. Thomas," Aaron Williams, (1734-1776.)

Mr. Hubert P. Main, however, believes the author to be Handel. It
appeared as the second movement of a four-movement tune in Williams's
1762 collection, which contained pieces by the great masters, with his
own; but while not credited to Handel, Williams did not claim it
himself.


"MID SCENES OF CONFUSION."

This hymn, common in chapel hymnbooks half a century and more ago, is
said to have been written by the Rev. David Denham, about 1826.


_THE TUNE._

"Home, Sweet Home" was composed, according to the old account, by John
Howard Payne as one of the airs in his opera of "Clari, the Maid of
Milan," which was brought out in London at Drury Lane in 1823. But
Charles Mackay, the English poet, in the London Telegraph, asserts that
Sir Henry Bishop, an eminent musician, in his vain search for a Sicilian
national air, _invented_ one, and that it was the melody of "Home, sweet
Home," which he afterwards set to Howard Payne's words. Mr. Mackay had
this story from Sir Henry himself.

    Mid scenes of confusion and creature complaints
    How sweet to my soul is communion with saints,
    To find at the banquet of mercy there's room
    And feel in the presence of Jesus at home.
      Home, home, sweet, sweet home!
    Prepare me, dear Savior for glory, my home.

John Howard Payne, author at least, of the original _words_ of "Home,
Sweet Home," was born in New York City June 9, 1791. He was a singer,
and became an actor and theatrical writer. He composed the words of his
immortal song in the year 1823, when he was himself homeless and hungry
and sheltered temporarily in an attic in Paris.

His fortunes improved at last, and he was appointed to represent his
native country as consul in Tunis, where he died, Apr. 9, 1852.


"O, COULD I SPEAK THE MATCHLESS WORTH."

The writer of this hymn of worshiping ardor and exalted Christian love
was an English Baptist minister, the Rev. Samuel Medley. He was born at
Cheshunt, Hertfordshire, June 23, 1738, and at eighteen years of age
entered the Royal Navy, where, though he had been piously educated, he
became dissipated and morally reckless. Wounded in a sea fight off Cape
Lagos, and in dread of amputation he prayed penitently through nearly a
whole night, and in the morning the surprised surgeon told him his limb
could be saved.

The voice of his awakened conscience was not wholly disregarded, though
it was not till some time after he left the navy that his vow to begin a
religious life was sincerely kept. After teaching school for four years,
he began to preach in 1766, Wartford in Hertfordshire being the first
scene of his godly labors. He died in Liverpool July 17, 1799, at the
end of a faithful ministry there of twenty-seven years. A small edition
of his hymns was published during his lifetime, in 1789.

    O could I speak the matchless worth,
    O could I sound the glories forth
      Which in my Saviour shine,
    I'd soar and touch the heavenly strings
    And vie with Gabriel while he sings,
      In notes almost divine!


_THE TUNE._

"Colebrook," a plain choral; but with a noble movement, by Henry Smart,
is the English music to this fine lyric, but Dr. Mason's "Ariel" is the
American favorite. It justifies its name, for it has wings--in both full
harmony and duet--and its melody feels the glory of the hymn at every
bar.


"ROCK OF AGES CLEFT FOR ME."

Augustus Montagu Toplady, author of this almost universal hymn, was born
at Farnham, Surrey, Eng., Nov. 4, 1740. Educated at Westminster School,
and Trinity College, Dublin, he took orders in the Established Church.
In his doctrinal debates with the Wesleys he was a harsh
controversialist; but his piety was sincere, and marked late in life by
exalted moods. Physically he was frail, and his fiery zeal wore out his
body. Transferred from his vicarage at Broad Hembury, Devonshire, to
Knightsbridge, London, at twenty-eight years of age, his health began to
fail before he was thirty-five, and in one of his periods of illness he
wrote--

    When languor and disease invade
      This trembling house of clay,
   'Tis sweet to look beyond my pains
      And long to fly away.

And the same homesickness for heaven appears under a different figure in
another hymn--

    At anchor laid remote from home,
    Toiling I cry, "Sweet Spirit, come!
    Celestial breeze, no longer stay,
    But swell my sails, and speed my way!"

Possessed of an ardent religious nature, his spiritual frames
exemplified in a notable degree the emotional side of Calvinistic piety.
Edward Payson himself, was not more enraptured in immediate view of
death than was this young London priest and poet. Unquestioning faith
became perfect certainty. As in the bold metaphor of "Rock of Ages," the
faith finds voice in--

    A debtor to mercy alone,

--and other hymns in his collection of 1776, two years before the end
came. Most of this devout writing was done in his last days, and he
continued it as long as strength was left, until, on the 11th of August,
1778, he joyfully passed away.

Somehow there was always something peculiarly heartsome and "filling" to
pious minds in the lines of Toplady in days when his minor hymns were
more in vogue than now, and they were often quoted, without any idea
whose making they were. "At anchor laid" was crooned by good old ladies
at their spinning-wheels, and godly invalids found "When languor and
disease invade" a comfort next to their Bibles.

"Rock of Ages" is said to have been written after the author, during a
suburban walk, had been forced to shelter himself from a thunder
shower, under a cliff. This is, however, but one of several stories
about the birth-occasion of the hymn.

It has been translated into many languages. One of the foreign
dignitaries visiting Queen Victoria at her "Golden Jubilee" was a native
of Madagascar, who surprised her by asking leave to sing, but delighted
her, when leave was given, by singing "Rock of Ages." It was a favorite
of hers--and of Prince Albert, who whispered it when he was dying.
People who were school-children when Rev. Justus Vinton came home to
Willington, Ct., with two Karen pupils, repeat to-day the "la-pa-ta,
i-oo-i-oo" caught by sound from the brown-faced boys as they sang their
native version of "Rock of Ages."

Gen. J.E.B. Stuart, the famous Confederate Cavalry leader, mortally
wounded at Yellow Tavern, Va., and borne to a Richmond hospital, called
for his minister and requested that "Rock of Ages" be sung to him.

The last sounds heard by the few saved from the wreck of the steamer
"London" in the Bay of Biscay, 1866, were the voices of the helpless
passengers singing "Rock of Ages" as the ship went down.

A company of Armenian Christians sang "Rock of Ages" in their native
tongue while they were being massacred in Constantinople.

No history of this grand hymn of faith forgets the incident of Gladstone
writing a Latin translation of it while sitting in the House of
Commons. That remarkable man was as masterly in his scholarly
recreations as in his statesmanship. The supreme Christian sentiment of
the hymn had permeated his soul till it spoke to him in a dead language
as eloquently as in the living one; and this is what he made of it:


_TOPLADY._

    Rock of ages, cleft for me,
    Let me hide myself in Thee;
    Let the water and the blood,
    From Thy riven side which flowed,
    Be of sin the double cure,
    Cleanse me from its guilt and power.

    Not the labor of my hands
    Can fulfil Thy law's demands;
    Could my zeal no respite know,
    Could my tears for ever flow,
    All for sin could not atone,
    Thou must save, and Thou alone.

    Nothing in my hand I bring,
    Simply to Thy cross I cling;
    Naked, come to Thee for dress,
    Helpless, look to Thee for grace:
    Foul, I to the fountain fly;
    Wash, me, Saviour, or I die.

    Whilst I draw this fleeting breath,
    When my eyestrings break in death;
    When I soar through tracts unknown,
    See Thee on Thy judgment throne,
    Rock of ages, cleft for me,
    Let me hide myself in Thee.


_GLADSTONE._

    Jesus, pro me perforatus,
    Condar intra tuum latus;
    Tu per lympham profluentem,
    Tu per sanguinem tepentem,
    In peccata mi redunda,
    Tolle culpam, sordes munda!

    Coram Te nec justus forem
    Quamvis tota vi laborem,
    Nec si fide nunquam cesso,
    Fletu stillans indefesso;
    Tibi soli tantum munus--
    Salva me, Salvator Unus!

    Nil in manu mecum fero,
    Sed me versus crucem gero:
    Vestimenta nudus oro,
    Opem debilis imploro,
    Fontem Christi quaero immundus,
    Nisi laves, moribundus.

    Dum hos artus vita regit,
    Quando nox sepulcro legit;
    Mortuos quum stare jubes,
    Sedens Judex inter nubes;--
    Jesus, pro me perforatus,
    Condar intra tuum latus!

The wonderful hymn has suffered the mutations common to time and taste.

    When I soar thro' tracts unknown

--becomes--

    When I soar to worlds unknown,

--getting rid of the unpoetic word, and bettering the elocution, but
missing the writer's thought (of the unknown _path_,--instead of going
to many "worlds"). The Unitarians have their version, with substitutes
for the "atonement lines."

But the Christian lyric maintains its life and inspiration through the
vicissitudes of age and use, as all intrinsically superior things can
and will,--and as in the twentieth line,--

    When my eyestrings break in death;

--modernized to--

    When my eyelids close in death,

--the hymn will ever adapt itself to the new exigencies of common
speech, without losing its vitality and power.


_THE TUNE._

A happy inspiration of Dr. Thomas Hastings made the hymn and music
inevitably one. Almost anywhere to call for the tune of "Toplady"
(namesake of the pious poet) is as unintelligible to the multitude as
"Key" would be to designate the "Star-spangled Banner." The common
people--thanks to Dr. Hastings--have learned "Rock of Ages" by _sound_.

Thomas Hastings was born in Washington, Ct., 1784. For eight years he
was editor of the _Western Recorder_, but he gave his life to church
music, and besides being a talented tone-poet he wrote as many as six
hundred hymns. In 1832, by invitation from twelve New York churches, he
went to that city, and did the main work of his life there, dying, in
1872, at the good old age of eighty-nine. His musical collections number
fifty-three. He wrote his famous tune in 1830.

[Illustration: Thomas Hastings]


"MY SOUL BE ON THY GUARD"

Strangely enough, this hymn, a trumpet note of Christian warning and
resolution, was written by one who himself fell into unworthy ways.[12]
But the one strong and spiritual watch-song by which he is remembered
appeals for him, and lets us know possibly, something of his own
conflicts. We can be thankful for the struggle he once made, and for the
hymn it inspired. It is a voice of caution to others.

[Footnote 12: I have been unable to verify this statement found in Mr.
Butterworth's "Story of the Hymns."--T.B.]

George Heath, the author, was an English minister, born in 1781; died
1822. For a time he was pastor of a Presbyterian Church at Honiton,
Devonshire, and was evidently a prolific writer, having composed a
hundred and forty-four hymns, an edition of which was printed.


_THE TUNE._

No other has been so familiarly linked with the words as Lowell Mason's
"Laban" (1830). It has dash and animation enough to reenforce the hymn,
and give it popular life, even if the hymn had less earnestness and
vigor of its own.

    Ne'er think the vict'ry won
      Nor lay thine armor down:
    Thy arduous work will not be done
      Till thou hast gained thy crown.

    Fight on, my soul till death
      Shall bring thee to thy God;
    He'll take thee at thy parting breath
      To His divine abode.


"PEOPLE OF THE LIVING GOD."

Montgomery _felt_ every line of this hymn as he committed it to paper.
He wrote it when, after years in the "swim" of social excitements and
ambitions, where his young independence swept him on, he came back to
the little church of his boyhood. His father and mother had gone to the
West Indies as missionaries, and died there. He was forty-three years
old when, led by divine light, he sought readmission to the Moravian
"meeting" at Fulneck, and anchored happily in a haven of peace.

    People of the living God
      I have sought the world around,
    Paths of sin and sorrow trod,
      Peace and comfort nowhere found:

    Now to you my spirit turns--
      Turns a fugitive unblest;
    Brethren, where your altar burns,
      Oh, receive me into rest.

James Montgomery, son of Rev. John Montgomery, was born at Irvine,
Ayrshire, Scotland, Nov. 4, 1771, and educated at the Moravian Seminary
at Fulneck, Yorkshire, Eng. He became the editor of the _Sheffield
Iris_, and his pen was busy in non-professional as well as professional
work until old age. He died in Sheffield, April 30, 1854.

His literary career was singularly successful; and a glance through any
complete edition of his poems will tell us why. His hymns were all
published during his lifetime, and all, as well as his longer pieces,
have the purity and polished beauty, if not the strength, of Addison's
work. Like Addison, too, he could say that he had written no line which,
dying, he would wish to blot.

The best of Montgomery was in his hymns. These were too many to
enumerate here, and the more enduring ones too familiar to need
enumeration. The church and the world will not soon forget "The Home in
Heaven,"--

    Forever with the Lord,
    Amen, so let it be.
    Life from the dead is in that word;
   'Tis immortality.

Nor--

    O where shall rest be found,

--with its impressive couplet--

   'Tis not the whole of life to live
    Nor all of death to die.

Nor the haunting sweetness of--

    There is a calm for those who weep.

Nor, indeed, the hymn of Christian love just now before us.


_THE TUNE._

The melody exactly suited to the gentle trochaic step of the home-song,
"People of the living God," is "Whitman," composed for it by Lowell
Mason. Few Christians, in America, we venture to say, could hear an
instrument play "Whitman" without mentally repeating Montgomery's words.


"TO LEAVE MY DEAR FRIENDS."

This hymn, called "The Bower of Prayer," was dear to Christian hearts in
many homes and especially in rural chapel worship half a century ago and
earlier, and its sweet legato melody still lingers in the memories of
aged men and women.

Elder John Osborne, a New Hampshire preacher of the "Christian"
(_Christ-ian_) denomination, is said to have composed the tune (and
possibly the words) about 1815--though apparently the music was arranged
from a flute interlude in one of Haydn's themes. The warbling notes of
the air are full of heart-feeling, and usually the best available treble
voice sang it as a solo.

    To leave my dear friends and from neighbors to part,
    And go from my home, it affects not my heart
    Like the thought of absenting myself for a day
    From that blest retreat I have chosen to pray,
              I have chosen to pray.

    The early shrill notes of the loved nightingale
    That dwelt in the bower, I observed as my bell:
    It called me to duty, while birds in the air
    Sang anthems of praises as I went to prayer,
              As I went to prayer.[13]

    How sweet were the zephyrs perfumed by the pine,
    The ivy, the balsam, the wild eglantine,
    But sweeter, O, sweeter superlative were
    The joys that I tasted in answer to prayer,
              In answer to prayer.

[Footnote 13: The _American Vocalist_ omits this stanza as too fanciful
as well as too crude]


"SAVIOUR, THY DYING LOVE."

This hymn of grateful piety was written in 1862, by Rev. S. Dryden
Phelps, D.D., of New Haven, and first published in _Pure Gold_, 1871;
afterwards in the (earlier) _Baptist Hymn and Tune Book_.

    Saviour, Thy dying love
      Thou gavest me,
    Nor should I aught withhold
      Dear Lord, from Thee.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Give me a faithful heart,
      Likeness to Thee,
    That each departing day
      Henceforth may see
    Some work of love begun,
    Some deed of kindness done,
    Some wand'rer sought and won,
      Something for Thee.

The penultimate line, originally "Some sinful wanderer won," was altered
by the author himself. The hymn is found in most Baptist hymnals, and
was inserted by Mr. Sankey in _Gospel Hymns No. 1_. It has since won its
way into several revival collections and undenominational manuals.

Rev. Sylvester Dryden Phelps, D.D., was born in Suffield, Ct., May 15,
1816, and studied at the Connecticut Literary Institution in that town.
An early call to the ministry turned his talents to the service of the
church, and his long settlement--comprising what might be called his
principal life work--was in New Haven, where he was pastor of the First
Baptist church twenty-nine years. He died there Nov. 23, 1895.


_THE TUNE._

The Rev. Robert Lowry admired the hymn, and gave it a tune perfectly
suited to its metre and spirit. It has never been sung in any other. The
usual title of it is "Something for Jesus." The meaning and sentiment of
both words and music are not unlike Miss Havergal's--

    I gave my life for thee.


"IN SOME WAY OR OTHER."

This song of Christian confidence was written by Mrs. Martha A.W. Cook,
wife of the Rev. Parsons Cook, editor of the _Puritan Recorder_, Boston.

It was published in the _American Messenger_ in 1870, and is still in
use here, as a German version of it is in Germany. The first stanza
follows, in the two languages:

    In some way or other the Lord will provide.
        It may not be my way,
        It may not be thy way,
        And yet in His own way
        The Lord will provide.

    Sei's so oder anders, der Herr wird's versehn;
        Mag's nicht sein, wie ich will,
        Mag's nicht sein, wie du willst,
        Doch wird's sein, wie Er will:
        Der Herr wird's versehn.

In the English version the easy flow of the two last lines into one
sentence is an example of rhythmic advantage over the foreign syntax.

Mrs. Cook was married to the well-known clergyman and editor, Parsons
Cook, (1800-1865) in Bridgeport, Ct., and survived him at his death in
Lynn, Mass. She was Miss Martha Ann Woodbridge, afterwards Mrs. Hawley,
and a widow at the time of her re-marriage as Mr. Cook's second wife.


_THE TUNE._

Professor Calvin S. Harrington, of Wesleyan University, Middletown, Ct.,
set music to the words as printed in _Winnowed Hymns_ (1873) and
arranged by Dr. Eben Tourjee, organizer of the great American Peace
Jubilee in Boston. In the _Gospel Hymns_ it is, however, superseded by
the more popular composition of Philip Phillips.

Dr. Eben Tourjee, late Dean of the College of Music in Boston
University, and founder and head of the New England Conservatory, was
born in Warwick, R.I., June 1, 1834. With only an academy education he
rose by native genius, from a hard-working boyhood to be a teacher of
music and a master of its science. From a course of study in Europe he
returned and soon made his reputation as an organizer of musical schools
and sangerfests. The New England Conservatory of Music was first
established by him in Providence, but removed in 1870 to Boston, its
permanent home. His doctorate of music was conferred upon him by
Wesleyan University. Died in Boston, April 12, 1891.

Philip Phillips, known as "the singing Pilgrim," was born in Jamestown,
Chautauqua, Co., N.Y., Aug. 13, 1834. He compiled twenty-nine
collections of sacred music for Sunday schools, gospel meetings, etc.;
also a _Methodist Hymn and Tune Book_, 1866. He composed a great number
of tunes, but wrote no hymns. Some of his books were published in
London, for he was a cosmopolitan singer, and traveled through Europe
and Australia as well as America. Died in Delaware, O., June 25, 1875.


"NEARER, MY GOD, TO THEE."

Mr. William Stead, fond of noting what is often believed to be the
"providential chain of causes" in everything that happens, recalls the
fact that Benjamin Flower, editor of the _Cambridge Intelligencer_,
while in jail (1798) at the instigation of Bp. Watson for an article
defending the French Revolution, and criticising the Bishop's political
course, was visited by several sympathizing ladies, one of whom was Miss
Eliza Gould. The young lady's first acquaintance with him there in his
cell led to an attachment which eventuated in marriage. Of that marriage
Sarah Flower was born. By the theory of providential sequences Mr. Stead
makes it appear that the forgotten vindictiveness of a British prelate
"was the _causa causans_ of one of the most spiritual and aspiring hymns
in the Christian Hymnary."

"Nearer, My God, to Thee" was on the lips of President McKinley as he
lay dying by a murderer's wicked shot. It is dear to President Roosevelt
for its memories of the battle of Las Quasimas, where the Rough Riders
sang it at the burial of their slain comrades. Bishop Marvin was saved
by it from hopeless dejection, while practically an exile during the
Civil War, by hearing it sung in the wilds of Arkansas, by an old woman
in a log hut.

A letter from Pittsburg, Pa., to a leading Boston paper relates the name
and experience of a forger who had left the latter city and wandered
eight years a fugitive from justice. On the 5th of November, (Sunday,)
1905, he found himself in Pittsburg, and ventured into the Dixon
Theatre, where a religious service was being held, to hear the music.
The hymn "Nearer, My God, to Thee" so overcame him that he went out
weeping bitterly. He walked the floor of his room all night, and in the
morning telephoned for the police, confessed his name and crime, and
surrendered himself to be taken back to the Boston authorities.

Mrs. Sarah Flower Adams, author of the noble hymn (supposed to have been
written in 1840), was born at Harlow, Eng., Feb. 22, 1805, and died
there in 1848. At her funeral another of her hymns was sung, ending--

    When falls the shadow, cold in death
    I yet will sing with fearless breath,
    As comes to me in shade or sun,
   "Father, Thy will, not mine, be done."

The attempts to _evangelize_ "Nearer, My God, to Thee" by those who
cannot forget that Mrs. Adams was a Unitarian, are to be deplored. Such
zeal is as needless as trying to sectarianize an Old Testament Psalm.
The poem is a perfect religious piece--to be sung as it stands, with
thanks that it was ever created.


_THE TUNE._

In English churches (since 1861) the hymn was and may still be sung to
"Horbury," composed by Rev. John B. Dykes, and "St. Edmund," by Sir
Arthur Sullivan. Both tunes are simple and appropriate, but such a hymn
earns and inevitably acquires a single tune-voice, so that its music
