exceeds all sweetness; the delight in the law exceeds all delights; the
extinction of thirst overcomes all pain.

355. Pleasures destroy the foolish, if they look not for the other
shore; the foolish by his thirst for pleasures destroys himself, as if
he were his own enemy.

356. The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind is damaged by passion:
therefore a gift bestowed on the passionless brings great reward.

357. The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind is damaged by hatred:
therefore a gift bestowed on those who do not hate brings great reward.

358. The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind is damaged by vanity:
therefore a gift bestowed on those who are free from vanity brings great
reward.

359. The fields are damaged by weeds, mankind is damaged by lust:
therefore a gift bestowed on those who are free from lust brings great
reward.




Chapter XXV. The Bhikshu (Mendicant)

360. Restraint in the eye is good, good is restraint in the ear, in the
nose restraint is good, good is restraint in the tongue.

361. In the body restraint is good, good is restraint in speech, in
thought restraint is good, good is restraint in all things. A Bhikshu,
restrained in all things, is freed from all pain.

362. He who controls his hand, he who controls his feet, he who controls
his speech, he who is well controlled, he who delights inwardly, who is
collected, who is solitary and content, him they call Bhikshu.

363. The Bhikshu who controls his mouth, who speaks wisely and calmly,
who teaches the meaning and the law, his word is sweet.

364. He who dwells in the law, delights in the law, meditates on the
law, follows the law, that Bhikshu will never fall away from the true
law.

365. Let him not despise what he has received, nor ever envy others: a
mendicant who envies others does not obtain peace of mind.

366. A Bhikshu who, though he receives little, does not despise what he
has received, even the gods will praise him, if his life is pure, and if
he is not slothful.

367. He who never identifies himself with name and form, and does not
grieve over what is no more, he indeed is called a Bhikshu.

368. The Bhikshu who acts with kindness, who is calm in the doctrine
of Buddha, will reach the quiet place (Nirvana), cessation of natural
desires, and happiness.

369. O Bhikshu, empty this boat! if emptied, it will go quickly; having
cut off passion and hatred thou wilt go to Nirvana.

370. Cut off the five (senses), leave the five, rise above the five. A
Bhikshu, who has escaped from the five fetters, he is called Oghatinna,
`saved from the flood.'

371. Meditate, O Bhikshu, and be not heedless! Do not direct thy thought
to what gives pleasure that thou mayest not for thy heedlessness have to
swallow the iron ball (in hell), and that thou mayest not cry out when
burning, `This is pain.'

372. Without knowledge there is no meditation, without meditation
there is no knowledge: he who has knowledge and meditation is near unto
Nirvana.

373. A Bhikshu who has entered his empty house, and whose mind is
tranquil, feels a more than human delight when he sees the law clearly.

374. As soon as he has considered the origin and destruction of the
elements (khandha) of the body, he finds happiness and joy which belong
to those who know the immortal (Nirvana).

375. And this is the beginning here for a wise Bhikshu: watchfulness
over the senses, contentedness, restraint under the law; keep noble
friends whose life is pure, and who are not slothful.

376. Let him live in charity, let him be perfect in his duties; then in
the fulness of delight he will make an end of suffering.

377. As the Vassika plant sheds its withered flowers, men should shed
passion and hatred, O ye Bhikshus!

378. The Bhikshu whose body and tongue and mind are quieted, who is
collected, and has rejected the baits of the world, he is called quiet.

379. Rouse thyself by thyself, examine thyself by thyself, thus
self-protected and attentive wilt thou live happily, O Bhikshu!

380. For self is the lord of self, self is the refuge of self; therefore
curb thyself as the merchant curbs a good horse.

381. The Bhikshu, full of delight, who is calm in the doctrine of Buddha
will reach the quiet place (Nirvana), cessation of natural desires, and
happiness.

382. He who, even as a young Bhikshu, applies himself to the doctrine of
Buddha, brightens up this world, like the moon when free from clouds.




Chapter XXVI. The Brahmana (Arhat)

383. Stop the stream valiantly, drive away the desires, O Brahmana!
When you have understood the destruction of all that was made, you will
understand that which was not made.

384. If the Brahmana has reached the other shore in both laws (in
restraint and contemplation), all bonds vanish from him who has obtained
knowledge.

385. He for whom there is neither this nor that shore, nor both, him,
the fearless and unshackled, I call indeed a Brahmana.

386. He who is thoughtful, blameless, settled, dutiful, without
passions, and who has attained the highest end, him I call indeed a
Brahmana.

387. The sun is bright by day, the moon shines by night, the warrior
is bright in his armour, the Brahmana is bright in his meditation; but
Buddha, the Awakened, is bright with splendour day and night.

388. Because a man is rid of evil, therefore he is called Brahmana;
because he walks quietly, therefore he is called Samana; because he
has sent away his own impurities, therefore he is called Pravragita
(Pabbagita, a pilgrim).

389. No one should attack a Brahmana, but no Brahmana (if attacked)
should let himself fly at his aggressor! Woe to him who strikes a
Brahmana, more woe to him who flies at his aggressor!

390. It advantages a Brahmana not a little if he holds his mind back
from the pleasures of life; when all wish to injure has vanished, pain
will cease.

391. Him I call indeed a Brahmana who does not offend by body, word, or
thought, and is controlled on these three points.

392. After a man has once understood the law as taught by the
Well-awakened (Buddha), let him worship it carefully, as the Brahmana
worships the sacrificial fire.

393. A man does not become a Brahmana by his platted hair, by his
family, or by birth; in whom there is truth and righteousness, he is
blessed, he is a Brahmana.

394. What is the use of platted hair, O fool! what of the raiment of
goat-skins? Within thee there is ravening, but the outside thou makest
clean.

395. The man who wears dirty raiments, who is emaciated and covered with
veins, who lives alone in the forest, and meditates, him I call indeed a
Brahmana.

396. I do not call a man a Brahmana because of his origin or of his
mother. He is indeed arrogant, and he is wealthy: but the poor, who is
free from all attachments, him I call indeed a Brahmana.

397. Him I call indeed a Brahmana who has cut all fetters, who never
trembles, is independent and unshackled.

398. Him I call indeed a Brahmana who has cut the strap and the thong,
the chain with all that pertains to it, who has burst the bar, and is
awakened.

399. Him I call indeed a Brahmana who, though he has committed no
offence, endures reproach, bonds, and stripes, who has endurance for his
force, and strength for his army.

400. Him I call indeed a Brahmana who is free from anger, dutiful,
virtuous, without appetite, who is subdued, and has received his last
body.

401. Him I call indeed a Brahmana who does not cling to pleasures, like
water on a lotus leaf, like a mustard seed on the point of a needle.

402. Him I call indeed a Brahmana who, even here, knows the end of his
suffering, has put down his burden, and is unshackled.

403. Him I call indeed a Brahmana whose knowledge is deep, who possesses
wisdom, who knows the right way and the wrong, and has attained the
highest end.

404. Him I call indeed a Brahmana who keeps aloof both from laymen and
from mendicants, who frequents no houses, and has but few desires.

405. Him I call indeed a Brahmana who finds no fault with other beings,
whether feeble or strong, and does not kill nor cause slaughter.

406. Him I call indeed a Brahmana who is tolerant with the intolerant,
mild with fault-finders, and free from passion among the passionate.

407. Him I call indeed a Brahmana from whom anger and hatred, pride and
envy have dropt like a mustard seed from the point of a needle.

408. Him I call indeed a Brahmana who utters true speech, instructive
and free from harshness, so that he offend no one.

409. Him I call indeed a Brahmana who takes nothing in the world that is
