(2). _Hadis-i-Mua'llaq_, or a Tradition in the Isnad of which there is some
break. If it begins with a Tabi' (one in the generation after that of the
Companions), it is called "_Mursal_" the one link in the chain, the
Companion, being wanting. If the first link in the chain of narrators
begins in a generation still later, it has another name, and so on.

(3). Traditions which have various names, according as the narrator
concealed the name of his Imam, or where different narrators disagree, or
where the narrator has mixed some of his own words with the Tradition, or
has been proved to be a liar, an evil liver, or mistaken; but into an
account of these it is not necessary to enter, for no Tradition of this
class would be considered as of itself sufficient ground on which to base
any important doctrine.[66]

It is the universally accepted rule, that no authentic Tradition can be
contrary to the Quran. The importance attached to Tradition has been shown
in the preceding chapter, an importance which has demanded the formation of
an elaborate system of exegesis. To an orthodox Muslim the Book and the
Sunnat, God's word direct and God's word through the mind of the Prophet,
are the foundation and sum of Islam, a fact not always taken into account
by modern panegyrists of the system.

{73}

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER III.

THE SECTS OF ISLAM.

It is a commonly received but nevertheless an erroneous opinion, that the
Muhammadan religion is one remarkable for the absence of dogma and the
unanimity of its professors. In this chapter I propose to show how the
great sects differ in some very important principles of the faith, and
their consequent divergence in practice. There is much that is common
ground to all, and of that some account was given in the first chapter on
the "Foundations of Islam."

It was there shown that all Muslim sects are not agreed as to the essential
foundations of the Faith. The Sunnis recognise four foundations, the
Wahhabis two; whilst the Shia'hs reject altogether the Traditions held
sacred by both Sunni and Wahhabi. The next chapter will contain a full
account of the doctrines held by the Sunnis, and so no account of this, the
orthodox sect, is given in this chapter.

The first breach in Islam arose out of a civil war. The story has been so
often told that it need not be reproduced here at any length. 'Ali, the
son-in-law of Muhammad, was the fourth Khalif of Islam. He is described as
"the last and worthiest of the primitive Musalmans who imbibed his
religious enthusiasm from companionship with the Prophet himself, and who
followed to the last the simplicity of his character." He was a man
calculated by his earnest devotion to the Prophet and his own natural
graces to win, as he has done, the admiration of succeeding generations. A
strong opposition, however, arose, and 'Ali was assassinated in a mosque at
Kufa. It is not easy, amid the conflicting statements of historians of the
rival sects, to arrive at the truth in all the details of the events which
happened then; {74} but the generally received opinion is, that after the
assassination of 'Ali, Hasan, his son, renounced his claim to the Khalifate
in favour of his father's rival, Muavia. Hasan was ultimately poisoned by
his wife, who, it is said, was instigated by Muavia to do the deed, in
order to leave the coast clear for his son Yezid. The most tragic event has
yet to come. Yezid, who succeeded his father, was a very licentious and
irreligious man. The people of Kufa, being disgusted at his conduct, sent
messengers to Husain, the remaining son of 'Ali, with the request that he
would assume the Khalifate. In vain the friends of Husain tried to persuade
him to let the people of Kufa first revolt, and thus show the reality of
their wishes by their deeds. In an evil hour Husain started with a small
band of forty horsemen and one hundred foot-soldiers. On the plain of
Karbala he found his way barred by a force of three thousand men. "We are
few in number," said Husain, "and the enemy is in force. I am resolved to
die. But you--I release you from your oath of allegiance; let all those who
wish to do so leave me." "O Son of the Apostle of God!" was the reply,
"what excuse could we give to thy grandfather on the day of resurrection
did we abandon thee to the hands of thine enemies?" One by one these brave
men fell beneath the swords of the enemy, until Husain and his infant son
alone were left. Weary and thirsty, Husain sat upon the ground. The enemy
drew near, but no one dared to kill the grandson of the Prophet. An arrow
pierced the ear of the little boy and he died. "We came from God, and we
return to him," were the pathetic words of Husain, as with a sorrowful
heart he laid the dead body of his son on the sand. He then stooped down to
drink some water from the river Euphrates. Seeing him thus stooping, the
enemy discharged a flight of arrows, one of which wounded him in the mouth.
He fought bravely for a while, but at last fell covered with many wounds.
The schism between the Sunni and the Shia'h was now complete. {75}

The ceremonies celebrated during the annual fast of Muharram refer to these
historical facts, and help to keep alive a bitter feud; but to suppose that
the only difference between the Shia'h and the Sunni is a mere dispute as
to the proper order of the early Khalifs would be a mistake. Starting off
with a political quarrel, the Shia'hs have travelled into a very distinct
religious position of their own. The fundamental tenet of the Shia'h sect
is the "divine right" of 'Ali the Chosen and his descendants. From this it
follows that the chief duty of religion consists in devotion to the Imam
(or Pontiff); from which position some curious dogmas issue. The whole
question of the Imamat is a very important one. The word Imam comes from an
Arabic word meaning to aim at, to follow after. The term Imam then becomes
equal to the word leader or exemplar. It is applied in this sense to
Muhammad as the leader in all civil and religious questions, and to the
Khalifs, his successors. It is also, in its religious import only, applied
to the founders of the four orthodox schools of jurisprudence, and in a
restricted sense to the leader of a congregation at prayer in a mosque. It
is with the first of these meanings that we have now to deal. It is so used
in the Quran--"When his Lord made trial of Abraham by commands which he
fulfilled, He said: 'I am about to make of thee an Imam to mankind;' he
said: 'Of my offspring also?' 'My covenant,' said God, 'embraceth not the
evil-doers.'" (Sura ii. 118.) From this verse two doctrines are deduced.
First, that the Imam must be appointed by God, for if this is not the case,
why did Abraham say "of my offspring also?" Secondly, the Imam is free from
sin, for God said: "My covenant embraceth not the evil-doer."

The first dispute about the Imamat originated with the twelve thousand who
revolted from 'Ali after the battle of Siffin (657 A.D.), because he
consented to submit to arbitration the dispute between himself and Muavia.
Some years after they were nearly all destroyed by 'Ali. A few {76}
survivors, however, fled to various parts. Two at last settled in Oman, and
there preached their distinctive doctrines. In course of time the people of
Oman adopted the doctrine that the Imamat was not hereditary but elective,
and that in the event of misconduct the Imam might be deposed.
'Abdullah-ibn-Ibadh (744 A.D.) was a vigorous preacher of this doctrine,
and from him the sect known as the 'Ibadhiyah takes its rise. The result of
this teaching was the establishment of the power and jurisdiction of the
Imam of Oman. The 'Ibadhiyah seem to have always kept themselves
independent of the Sunni Khalifs of Baghdad, and, therefore, would consider
themselves free from any obligation to obey the Sultan of Turkey. From the
ordinary Shia'hs they differ as regards the "divine right" of 'Ali and his
children. The curious in such matters will find the whole subject well
treated in Dr. Badger's "Seyyids of Oman."

The term Kharigite (Separatist) has since become the generic name for a
group of sects which agree as to the need of an Imam, though they differ as
to the details of the dogma. In opposition to this heresy of the Kharigite
stands what may be termed the orthodox doctrine of the Shia'h. The Shia'hs
hold that the Imamat must continue in the family of 'Ali, and that religion
consists mainly in devotion to the Imam. The tragic end of 'Ali and his
sons invested them with peculiar interest. When grieving for the sad end of
their leaders, the Shi'ahs found consolation in the doctrine which soon
found development, _viz._, that it was God's will that the Imamat should
continue in the family of 'Ali. Thus a tradition relates that the Prophet
said: "He of whom I am master has 'Ali also for a master." "The best judge
among you is 'Ali." Ibn Abbas, a Companion says: "I heard the Prophet say:
'He who blasphemes my name blasphemes the name of God; he who blasphemes
the name of 'Ali blasphemes my name.'" A popular Persian hymn shows to what
an extent this feeling deepened. {77}

 "Mysterious being! none can tell
  The attributes in thee that dwell;
  None can thine essence comprehend;
  To thee should every mortal bend--
  For 'tis by thee that man is given
  To know the high behests of heaven."

The general idea is, that long before the creation of the world, God took a
ray of light from the splendour of His own glory and united it to the body
of Muhammad, to which He said: "Thou art the elect, the chosen, I will make
the members of thy family the guides to salvation." Muhammad said: "The
first thing which God created was my light, and my spirit."[67] The body of
the Prophet was then in some mysterious way hidden. In due time the world
was created, but not until the birth of Muhammad did this ray of glory
appear. It is well known to all Musalmans as the "Nur-i-Muhammadi"--light
of Muhammad.

This "Nur" is said to be of four kinds. From the first kind God created His
Throne, from the second the Pen of Fate, from the third Paradise, and from
the fourth the state, or place of Spirits and all created beings. According
to a statement made by 'Ali, Muhammad said that he was created from the
light of God, whilst all other created beings were formed from the "light
of Muhammad."[68]

This "light" descended to 'Ali, and from him passed on to the true Imams,
who alone are the lawful successors of the Prophet. Rebellion against them
is sin; devotion to them the very essence of religion.

The doctrine of the Imamat has given rise to endless discussion and
dissension, as the numerous sub-divisions of the Shia'h sect will show.
They are said to be thirty-two in number. The Shia'h proper is the largest
and most influential of them. The following are the Shi'ah tenets regarding
the Imam, based on one of their standard books of {78} divinity.[69] The
Imam is the successor of the Prophet, adorned with all the qualities which
he possessed. He is wiser than the most learned men of the age, holier than
the most pious. He is the noblest of the sons of men and is free from all
sin original or actual: hence the Imam is called ma'sum (innocent.)[70] God
rules the world by wisdom, hence the sending forth of prophets was a
necessity; but it was equally necessary to establish the Imamat. Thus the
Imam is equal to a prophet. 'Ali said: "In me is the glory of every prophet
that has ever been." The authority of the Imam is the authority of God, for
(I quote the Hyat-un-Nafis) "his word is the word of God and of the
Prophet, and obedience to his order is incumbent." The nature of the Imam
is identical with the nature of Muhammad, for did not 'Ali say: "I am
Muhammad, and Muhammad is me." This probably refers to the possession by
the Imam of the "light of Muhammad." The bodies of the Imams are so pure
and delicate that they cast no shadow.[71] They {79} are the beginning and
the end of all things. To know the Imams is the very essence of the
knowledge which men can gain of God. "The Holy God calls the Imams His
word, His hands, His signs, His secret. Their commands and prohibitions,
their actions too, He recognises as His own." As mediums between God and
man they hold a far higher position than the prophets, for "the grace of
God, without their intervention, reaches to no created being." These
extravagant claims for the Imams culminate in the assertion that "for them
a pillar of light has been fixed between the earth and heaven, by which the
actions of the Faithful are made known to them." The Imam is the supreme
Pontiff, the Vicar of God on earth. The possession of an infallible book is
not sufficient. The infallible guide is needed. Such wisdom and discernment
as such a guide would require can only be found amongst the descendants of
the Prophet. It is no longer, then, a matter of wonder, that in some cases,
almost, if not entirely, divine honour is paid to 'Ali and his
descendants.[72]

The Usul, or fundamental tenets of the Shia'h sect are five in number. (1)
To believe in the unity of God, (2) To admit that He is just, (3) To
believe in the divine mission of all the prophets, and that Muhammad is the
chief of all, (4) To consider 'Ali the Khalif next in order after Muhammad,
(5) To believe 'Ali's descendants from Hasan to Mahdi, the twelfth Imam, to
be his true successors, and to consider all of them in character, position
and dignity as raised far above all other Muslims. This is the doctrine of
the Imamat.

{80}

The first principal divisions of the Shia'h sect are the Isma'ilians and
the Imamites. The latter believe in twelve Imams, reckoning 'Ali as the
first.[73] The last of the twelve Abu'l-Qasim, is supposed to be alive
still, though hidden in some secret place. He bears the name of Al-Mahdi,
"the guided." It is expected that he will reappear at the second advent of
Christ. They say that he was born near Baghdad in the year 258 A.H. He
afterwards mysteriously disappeared. When he was born the words, "Say:
'truth is come and falsehood is vanished: Verily falsehood is a thing that
vanisheth,'" (Sura xvii. 83) were found written on his right arm. When he
came into the world, he pointed with his fingers to heaven, sneezed, and
said: 'Praise be to God, the Lord of the world.' A person one day visited
Imam Hasan 'Askari (the eleventh Imam) and said: 'O son of the Prophet who
will be Khalif and Imam after thee?' He brought out a child and said: 'if
thou hadst not found favour in the eyes of God, He would not have shown
thee this child; his name is that of the Prophet, and so is his
patronymic,' (Abu 'l-Qasim). The sect who believe Mahdi to be alive at
present, say that he rules over cities in the far west, and he is even said
to have children. God alone knows the truth.[74]

The other large division, the Isma'ilians, agree with the Imamites in all
particulars save one. They hold that after Sadiq, the sixth Imam, commenced
what is called the succession of the "concealed Imams." They believe that
there never can be a time when there shall be no Imam, but that he is now
in seclusion. This idea has given rise to all sorts of secret societies,
and has paved the way for a mystical religion, which often lands its
votaries in atheism.[75] {81}

The Ghair-i-Mahdi (literally "without Mahdi") are a small sect who believe
that Al-Mahdi will not reappear. They say that one Syed Muhammad of Jeypore
was the real Mahdi, the twelfth Imam, and that he has now gone never more
to return. They venerate him as highly as they do the Prophet, and consider
all other Musalmans to be unbelievers. On the night called Lailat-ul-Qadr,
in the month of Ramazan, they meet and repeat two rak'at prayers. After
that act of devotion is over, they say: "God is Almighty, Muhammad is our
Prophet, the Quran and Mahdi are just and true. Imam Mahdi is come and
gone. Whosoever disbelieves this is an infidel." They are a very fanatical
sect.

There is another small community of Ghair-i-Mahdis called the Da,iri,
settled in the province of Mysore, who hold peculiar views on this point.
About four hundred years ago, a man named Syed Ahmad collected some
followers in the dominions of the Nizam of Hyderabad. He called himself the
Imam Mahdi, and said that he was superior to any prophet. He and his
disciples, being bitterly persecuted by the orthodox Musalmans, fled to a
village in the adjoining district of Mysore where their descendants,
fifteen hundred in number, now reside. It is said that they do not
intermarry with other Musalmans. The usual Friday service in the mosque is
ended by the leader saying: "Imam Mahdi came and went away," to which the
people respond: "He who does not believe this is a Kafir" (infidel).

There are several Traditions which refer to the latter days. "When of time
one day shall be left, God shall raise up a man from among my descendants,
who shall fill the world with justice, just as before him the world was
full of oppression." And again: "The world shall not come to an end till
the king of the earth shall appear, who is a man of my family, and whose
name is the same as mine." When Islam entered upon the tenth century of its
existence, there was throughout Persia and India a millenarian movement.
Men {82} declared that the end was drawing near, and various persons arose
who claimed to be Al-Mahdi. I have already mentioned two. Amongst others
was Shaikh 'Alai of Agra. (956 A.H.) Shaikh Mubarak, the father of
Abu'l-Fazl--the Emperor Akbar's famous vizier, was a disciple of Shaikh
'Alai and from him imbibed Mahdavi ideas. This brought upon him the wrath
of the 'Ulama who, however, were finally overcome by the free-thinking and
heretical Emperor and his vizier. There never was a better ruler in India
than Akbar, and never a more heretical one as far as orthodox Islam is
concerned. The Emperor delighted in the controversies of the age. The Sufis
and Mahdavis were in favour at Court. The orthodox 'Ulama were treated with
contempt. Akbar fully believed that the millennium had come. He started a
new era, and a new religion called the 'Divine Faith.' There was toleration
for all except the bigoted orthodox Muslims. Abu'l-Fazl and others like
him, who professed to reflect Akbar's religious views, held that all
religions contained truth. Thus:--

 "O God, in every temple I see people that seek Thee, and in every language
     I hear spoken, people praise Thee!
      Polytheism and Islam feel after Thee,
      Each religion says, 'Thou art one, without equal.'
  If it be a mosque, people murmur the holy prayer, and if it be a
      Christian Church, people ring the bell from love to Thee,
      Sometimes I frequent the Christian cloister, and sometimes the
          mosque,
      But it is Thou whom I search from temple to temple."

In this reign one Mir Sharif was promoted to the rank of a Commander of a
thousand, and to an appointment in Bengal. His chief merit in Akbar's eyes
was that he taught the doctrine of the transmigration of souls and the
close advent of the millennium. He was a disciple of Mahmud of Busakhwan,
the founder of the Nuqtawiah sect. As this is another offshoot of the
Shia'hs I give a brief account of them here. Mahmud lived in the reign of
Timur and {83} professed to be Al-Mahdi. He also called himself the
Shakhs-i-Wahid--the Individual one. He used to quote the verse, "It may be
that thy Lord will raise thee up to a glorious (mahmud) station." (Sura
xvii. 81). From this he argued that the body of man had been advancing in
purity since the creation, and that on its reaching to a certain degree,
one Mahmud (glorious) would arise, and that then the dispensation of
Muhammad would come to an end. He claimed to be the Mahmud. He also taught
the doctrine of transmigration, and that the beginning of everything was
the Nuqtah-i-khak--earth atom. It is on this account that they are called
the Nuqtawiah sect. They are also known by the names Mahmudiah and
Wahidiah. Shah 'Abbas king of Persia expelled them from his dominions, but
Akbar received the fugitives kindly and promoted some amongst them to high
offices of State.

This Mahdavi movement, arising as it did out of the Shia'h doctrine of the
Imamat, is a very striking fact. That imposters should arise and claim the
name and office of Al-Mahdi is not to be wondered at, but that large bodies
of men should follow them shows the unrest which dwelt in men's hearts, and
how they longed for a personal leader and guide.

The whole of the Shia'h doctrine on this point seems to show that there is
in the human heart a natural desire for some Mediator--some Word of the
Father, who shall reveal Him to His children. At first sight it would seem,
as if the doctrine of the Imamat might to some extent reconcile the
thoughtful Shia'h to the Christian doctrine of the Incarnation and
Mediation of Jesus Christ, to His office as the perfect revealer of God's
will; and as our Guide in life; but alas! it is not so. The mystic lore
connected with Shia'h doctrine has sapped the foundation of moral life and
vigour. A system of religious reservation, too, is a fundamental part of
the system in its mystical developments, whilst all Shia'hs may lawfully
practise "takia," or religious {84} compromise in their daily lives. It
thus becomes impossible to place dependence on what a Shia'h may profess,
