with those of the planet dedicated to the king of the gods.


                     Venus at sunrise and sunset.

A fragment of a tablet published in 1870 gives some interesting
particulars concerning the planet Venus, probably explaining some as
yet unknown mythological story concerning her. According to this, she
was a female at sunset, and a male at sunrise; Istar of Agade (Akad or
Akkad) at sunrise, and Istar of Erech at sunset: Istar of the stars at
sunrise, and the lady of the gods at sunset.


                      And in the various months.

Istar was identified with Nin-si-anna in the first month of the year
(Nisan = March-April), with the star of the bow in Ab (August-September),
etc. In Sebat (January-February) she was the star of the
water-channel, Iku, which was Merodach's star in Sivan (May-June), and
in Marcheswan her star was Rabbu, which also belonged to Merodach in
the same month. It will thus be seen, that Babylonian astronomy is far
from being as clear as would be desired, but doubtless many
difficulties will disappear when further inscriptions are available.


                   Stars identified with Merodach.

The same fragment gives the celestial names of Merodach for every
month of the year, from which it would appear, that the astrologers
called him Umun-sig-ea in Nisan (March-April), Dapinu in Tammuz
(June-July), Nibiru in Tisri (September-October), Sarru (the star
Regulus), in Tebet (December-January), etc. The first three are names
by which the planet Jupiter was known.

As for the planets and stars, so also for the constellations, which
are identified with many gods and divine beings, and probably contain
references, in their names and descriptions, to many legends. In the
sixth tablet of the Creation-series, it is related of Merodach that,
after creating the heavens and the stations for Anu, Bel, and Ae,

  "He built firmly the stations of the great gods--
  Stars their likeness--he set up the /Lumali/,
  He designated the year, he outlined the (heavenly) forms.
  He set for the twelve months three stars each,
  From the day when the year begins, . . . for signs."

As pointed out by Mr. Robert Brown, jr., who has made a study of these
things, the "three stars" for each month occur on one of the remains
of planispheres in the British Museum, and are completed by a tablet
which gives them in list-form, in one case with explanations. Until
these are properly identified, however, it will be impossible to
estimate their real value. The signs of the Zodiac, which are given by
another tablet, are of greater interest, as they are the originals of
those which are in use at the present time:--

  Month                   Sign                                Equivalent

  Nisan (Mar.-Apr.)       The Labourer                        The Ram
  Iyyar (Apr.-May)        /Mulmula/ and the Bull of heaven    The Bull
  Sivan (May-June)        /Sib-zi-anna/ and the great Twins   The Twins
  Tammuz (June-July)      /Allul/ or /Nagar/                  The Crab
  Ab (July.-Aug.)         The Lion (or dog)                   The Lion
  Elul (Aug.-Sep.)        The Ear of corn(?)                  The ear of Corn (Virgo)
  Tisri (Sep.-Oct.)       The Scales                          The Scales
  Marcheswan (Oct.-Nov.)  The Scorpion                        The Scorpion
  Chisleu (Nov.-Dec.)     /Pa-bil-sag/                        The Archer
  Tebet (Dec.-Jan.)       /Sahar-mas/, the Fish-kid           The Goat
  Sebat (Jan.-Feb.)       /Gula/                              The Water-bearer
  Adar (Feb.-Mar.)        The Water Channel and the Tails     The Fishes


                   Parallels in Babylonian legends.

The "bull of heaven" probably refers to some legend such as that of
the story of Gilgames in his conflict with the goddess Istar when the
divine bull was killed; /Sib-zi-anna/, "the faithful shepherd of
heaven," suggests that this constellation may refer to Tammuz, the
divine shepherd; whilst "the scorpion" reminds us of the scorpion-men
who guarded the gate of the sun (Samas), when Gilgames was journeying
to gain information concerning his friend Enki-du, who had departed to
the place of the dead. Sir Henry Rawlinson many years ago pointed out
that the story of the Flood occupied the eleventh tablet of the
Gilgames series, corresponding with the eleventh sign of the Zodiac,
Aquarius, or the Water-bearer.


                          Other star-names.

Other names of stars or constellations include "the weapon of
Merodach's hand," probably that with which he slew the dragon of
Chaos; "the Horse," which is described as "the god Zu," Rimmon's
storm-bird--Pegasus; "the Serpent," explained as Eres-ki-gal, the
queen of Hades, who would therefore seem to have been conceived in
that form; "the Scorpion," which is given as /Ishara tantim/, "Ishara
of the sea," a description difficult to explain, unless it refer to
her as the goddess of the Phoenician coast. Many other identifications,
exceedingly interesting, await solution.


          How the gods were represented. On cylinder-seals.

Many representations of the gods occur, both on bas-reliefs,
boundary-stones, and cylindrical and ordinary seals. Unfortunately, their
identification generally presents more or less difficulty, on account
of the absence of indications of their identity. On a small cylinder-seal
in the possession of the Rev. Dr. W. Hayes Ward, Merodach is
shown striding along the serpentine body of Tiawath, who turns her
head to attack him, whilst the god threatens her with a pointed weapon
which he carries. Another, published by the same scholar, shows a
deity, whom he regards as being Merodach, driven in a chariot drawn by
a winged lion, upon whose shoulders stands a naked goddess, holding
thunderbolts in each hand, whom he describes as Zer-panitum. Another
cylinder-seal shows the corn-deity, probably Nisaba, seated in
flounced robe and horned hat, with corn-stalks springing out from his
shoulders, and holding a twofold ear of corn in his hand, whilst an
attendant introduces, and another with a threefold ear of corn
follows, a man carrying a plough, apparently as an offering. On
another, a beautiful specimen from Assyria, Istar is shown standing on
an Assyrian lion, which turns his head as if to caress her feet. As
goddess of war, she is armed with bow and arrows, and her star is
represented upon the crown of her tiara.


                       On boundary-stones, etc.

On the boundary-stones of Babylonia and the royal monoliths of Assyria
the emblems of the gods are nearly always seen. Most prominent are
three horned tiaras, emblematic, probably, of Merodach, Anu, and Bel
(the older). A column ending in a ram's head is used for Ea or Ae, a
crescent for Sin or Nannar, the moon-god; a disc with rays for Samas,
the sun-god; a thunderbolt for Rimmon or Hadad, the god of thunder,
lightning, wind, and storms; a lamp for Nusku, etc. A bird, perhaps a
hawk, stood for Utu-gisgallu, a deity whose name has been translated
"the southern sun," and is explained in the bilingual inscriptions as
Samas, the sun-god, and Nirig, one of the gods of war. The emblem of
Gal-alim, who is identified with the older Bel, is a snarling dragon's
head forming the termination of a pole, and that of Dun-asaga is a
bird's head similarly posed. On a boundary-stone of the time of
Nebuchadnezzar I., about 1120 B.C., one of the signs of the gods shows
a horse's head in a kind of shrine, probably the emblem of Rimmon's
storm-bird, Zu, the Babylonian Pegasus.


                        Other divine figures.

One of the finest of all the representations of divinities is that of
the "Sun-god-stone," found by Mr. Hormuzd Rassam at Abu-habbah (the
ancient Sippar), which was one of the chief seats of his worship. It
represents him, seated in his shrine, holding in his hand a staff and
a ring, his usual emblems, typifying his position as judge of the
world and his endless course. The position of Merodach as sun-god is
confirmed by the small lapis-lazuli relief found by the German
expedition at the mound known as Amran ibn 'Ali, as he also carries a
staff and a ring, and his robe is covered with ornamental circles,
showing, in all probability, his solar nature. In the same place
another small relief representing Rimmon or Hadad was found. His robe
has discs emblematical of the five planets, and he holds in each hand
a thunderbolt, one of which he is about to launch forth. Merodach is
accompanied by a large two-horned dragon, whilst Hadad has a small
winged dragon, typifying the swiftness of his course, and another
animal, both of which he holds with cords.



                              CHAPTER V

                 THE DEMONS: EXORCISMS AND CEREMONIES

Good and evil spirits, gods and demons, were fully believed in by the
Babylonians and Assyrians, and many texts referring to them exist.
Naturally it is not in some cases easy to distinguish well between the
special functions of these supernatural appearances which they
supposed to exist, but their nature is, in most cases, easily
ascertained from the inscriptions.

To all appearance, the Babylonians imagined that spirits resided
everywhere, and lay in wait to attack mankind, and to each class,
apparently, a special province in bringing misfortune, or tormenting,
or causing pain and sickness, was assigned. All the spirits, however,
were not evil, even those whose names would suggest that their
character was such--there were good "liers in wait," for instance, as
well as evil ones, whose attitude towards mankind was beneficent.

The /utukku/. This was a spirit which was supposed to do the will of
Anu, the god of the heavens. There was the /utukku/ of the plain, the
mountains, the sea, and the grave.

The /alu/. Regarded as the demon of the storm, and possibly, in its
origin, the same as the divine bull sent by Istar to attack Gilgames,
and killed by Enki-du. It spread itself over a man, overpowering him
upon his bed, and attacking his breast.

The /edimmu/. This is generally, but wrongly, read /ekimmu/, and
translated "the seizer," from /ekemu/, "to seize." In reality,
however, it was an ordinary spirit, and the word is used for the
wraiths of the departed. The "evil /edimmu/" was apparently regarded
as attacking the middle part of a man.

The /gallu/. As this word is borrowed from the Sumerian /galla/, which
has a dialectic form, /mulla/, it is not improbable that it may be
connected with the word /mula/, meaning "star," and suggesting
something which is visible by the light it gives--possibly a
will-o'-the-wisp,--though others are inclined to regard the word as being
connected with /gala/, "great." In any case, its meaning seems to have
become very similar to "evil spirit" or "devil" in general, and is an
epithet applied by the Assyrian king Assur-bani-apli to Te-umman, the
Elamite king against whom he fought.

The /ilu limnu/, "evil god," was probably originally one of the
deities of Tiawath's brood, upon whom Merodach's redemption had had no
effect.

The /rabisu/ is regarded as a spirit which lay in wait to pounce upon
his prey.

The /labartu/, in Sumerian /dimme/, was a female demon. There were
seven evil spirits of this kind, who were apparently regarded as being
daughters of Anu, the god of the heavens.

The /labasu/, in Sumerian /dimmea/, was apparently a spirit which
overthrew, that being the meaning of the root from which the word
comes.

The /ahhazu/, in Sumerian /dimme-kur/, was apparently so called as
"the seizer," that being the meaning indicated by the root.

The /lilu/, in Sumerian /lila/, is generally regarded as "the
night-monster," the word being referred to the Semitic root /lil/ or
/layl/, whence the Hebrew /layil/, Arabic /layl/, "night." Its origin,
however, is Sumerian, from /lila/, regarded as meaning "mist." To the
word /lilu/ the ancient Babylonians formed a feminine, /lilithu/,
which entered the Hebrew language under the form of /lilith/, which
was, according to the rabbins, a beautiful woman, who lay in wait for
children by night. The /lilu/ had a companion who is called his
handmaid or servant.

The /namtaru/ was apparently the spirit of fate, and therefore of
greater importance than those already mentioned. This being was
regarded as the beloved son of Bel, and offspring of /Eres-ki-gal/ or
Persephone, and he had a spouse named /Hus-bi-saga/. Apparently he
executed the instructions given him concerning the fate of men, and
could also have power over certain of the gods.

The /sedu/ were apparently deities in the form of bulls. They were
destructive, of enormous power, and unsparing. In a good sense the
/sedu/ was a protecting deity, guarding against hostile attacks. Erech
and the temple E-kura were protected by spirits such as these, and to
one of them Isum, "the glorious sacrificer," was likened.

The /lamassu/, from the Sumerian /lama/, was similar in character to
the /sedu/, but is thought to have been of the nature of a colossus--a
winged man-headed bull or lion. It is these creatures which the kings
placed at the sides of the doors of their palaces, to protect the
king's footsteps. In early Babylonian times a god named Lama was one
of the most popular deities of the Babylonian pantheon.


                       A specimen incantation.

Numerous inscriptions, which may be regarded as dating, in their
origin, from about the middle of the third millennium before Christ,
speak of these supernatural beings, and also of others similar. One of
the most perfect of these inscriptions is a large bilingual tablet of
which a duplicate written during the period of the dynasty of
Hammurabi (before 2000 B.C.) exists, and which was afterwards provided
with a Semitic Babylonian translation. This inscription refers to the
evil god, the evil /utukku/, the /utukku/ of the plain, of the
mountain, of the sea, and of the grave; the evil /sedu/, the glorious
/alu/, or divine bull, and the evil unsparing wind. There was also
that which takes the form of a man, the evil face, the evil eye, the
evil mouth, the evil tongue, the evil lip, the evil breath; also the
afflicting /asakku/ (regarded as the demon of fever), the /asakku/
which does not leave a man: the afflicting /namtaru/ (fate), the
severe /namtaru/, the /namtaru/ which does not quit a man. After this
are mentioned various diseases, bodily pains, annoyances, such as "the
old shoe, the broken shoe-lace, the food which afflicts the body of a
man, the food which turns in eating, the water which chokes in
drinking," etc. Other things to be exorcised included the spirit of
death, people who had died of hunger, thirst, or in other ways; the
handmaid of the /lilu/ who had no husband, the prince of the /lilu/
who had no wife, whether his name had been recorded or unrecorded.

The method of exorcising the demons causing all these things is
curious. White and black yarn was spun, and fastened to the side and
canopy of the afflicted person's bed--the white to the side and the
top or canopy, the black to the left hand--and then, apparently, the
following words were said:--

"Evil /utukku/, evil /alu/, evil /edimmu/, evil /gallu/, evil god,
evil /rabisu/, /labartu/, /labasu/, /ahhazu/, /lilu/, /lilithu/,
handmaid of /lilu/, sorcery, enchantment, magic, disaster, machination
which is not good--may they not set their head to his head, their hand
to his hand, their foot to his foot--may they not draw near. Spirit of
heaven, mayest thou exorcise, spirit of earth, mayest thou exorcise."

But this was only the beginning of the real ceremony. The god
Asari-alim-nunna (Merodach), "eldest son of Eridu," was asked to wash
him in pure and bright water twice seven times, and then would the evil
lier-in-wait depart, and stand aside, and a propitious /sedu/ and a
propitious /labartu/ reside in his body. The gates right and left
having been thus, so to say, shut close, the evil gods, demons, and
spirits would be unable to approach him, wherever he might be. "Spirit
of heaven, exorcise, spirit of earth, exorcise." Then, after an
invocation of Eres-ki-gal and Isum, the final paragraph was
pronounced:--

  "The afflicted man, by an offering of grace
  In health like shining bronze shall be made bright.
  As for that man,
  Samas shall give him life.
  Merodach, first-born son of the Abyss,
  It is thine to purify and glorify.
  Spirit of heaven, mayest thou exorcise, spirit of
    earth, mayest thou exorcise."


                        Rites and ceremonies.

As may be expected, the Babylonians and Assyrians had numerous rites
and ceremonies, the due carrying out of which was necessary for the
attainment of the grace demanded, or for the efficacy of the thanks
tendered for favours received.

Perhaps the oldest ceremony recorded is that which Ut-napistim, the
Chaldaean Noah, made on the /zikkurat/ or peak of the mountain after
the coming forth from the ship which had saved him and his from the
Flood. The Patriarch's description of this ceremony is short:--

  "I sent forth to the four winds, I poured out a libation
  I made an offering on the peak of the mountain:
