No impostor, it may safely be said, could have accomplished so mighty a
work. No one unsupported by a living faith in the reality of his
commission, in the goodness of his cause, could have maintained the same
consistent attitude through long years of adverse fortune, alike in the
day of victory and in the hour of defeat, in the plenitude of his power
and at the moment of death."--Islam and its Founder, by J.W.H. Stobart,
M.A., page 23.

"Of the sincerity of his belief in his own mission there can be no
doubt. The great merit is his that among a people given up to idolatry
he rose to a vivid perception of the Unity of God, and preached this
great doctrine with firmness and constancy, amid ridicule and
persecution. But there it seems to me that the eulogy of the Prophet
ought to cease."--Islam under the Arabs by R.D. Osborn. London 1876, p.
90.]


[Sidenote: Striking effects of Mohammad's reforms.]

35. Although his mission was only to convey the message and preach
publicly what was revealed to him, and he was not responsible for the
conversion of the ungodly polytheists to the purer theology and higher
morality, or in other words, to the faith of Islam, yet whatever success
and beneficial results in the sphere of theology, morality, and reforms
in social matters he achieved was a strong evidence of his Divine
mission. In the name of God and in the character of His Apostle, he
wrought a great reform according to his light in his own country. "Every
good tree bringeth forth good fruit."--(Matt. VII, 17). Facts are
stubborn things, and facts are conclusive in these points.

The effects produced by his preaching, and the changes wrought by them
in the religious, social, and political sphere of the polytheists, the
idolatrous and grossly superstitious Arabs within a comparatively short
period, mostly consisting of persecutions at Mecca, and struggles at
Medina, were very striking. From an indiscriminate mass of polytheism
and gross superstitious belief in gods, genii, the sons and daughters of
God, he gave them a pure monotheistic belief, recognizing no other
superior power but the Almighty. He raised the moral standard of his
countrymen, ameliorated the condition of women, curtailed and mitigated
polygamy and slavery, and virtually abolished them as well as
infanticide. He most sternly denounced and absolutely forbade many
heinous evils of the Arab society. He united a number of wild and
independent tribes into a nation and abolished their internecine wars.

Sir W. Muir says:--

     "Few and simple as the positive precepts of Mahomet up to this time
     appear, they had wrought a marvellous and a mighty work. Never,
     since the days when primitive Christianity startled the world from
     its sleep, and waged a mortal combat with Heathenism, had men seen
     the like arousing of spiritual life, the like faith that suffered
     sacrifice and took joyfully the spoiling of goods for conscience
     sake.

     "From time beyond memory, Mecca and the whole Peninsula had been
     steeped into spiritual torpor. The slight and transient influence
     of Judaism, Christianity, or Philosophy upon the Arab mind, had
     been but as the ruffling here and there the surface of a quiet
     lake;--all remained still and motionless below. The people were
     sunk in superstition, cruelty, and vice. It was a common practice
     for the eldest son to marry his father's widows inherited as
     property with the rest of the estate. Pride and poverty had
     introduced among them, as it has among the Hindus, the crime of
     female infanticide. Their religion consisted in gross idolatry, and
     their faith was rather the dark superstitious dread of unseen
     beings, whose goodwill they sought to propitiate, and to avert
     their displeasure, than the belief in an over-ruling Providence.
     The Life to come and Retribution of good and evil were, as motives
     of action, practically unknown.

     "Thirteen years before the Hegira, Mecca lay lifeless in this
     debased state. What a change those thirteen years had now produced!
     A band of several hundred persons had rejected idolatry, adopted
     the worship of one great God, and surrendered themselves implicitly
     to the guidance of what they believed a revelation from
     Him;--praying to the Almighty with frequency and fervour, looking
     for pardon through His mercy, and striving to follow after good
     works, almsgiving, chastity and justice. They now lived under a
     constant sense of the Omnipotent power of God, and of His
     providential care over the minutest of their concerns. In all the
     gifts of nature, in every relation of life, at each turn of their
     affairs, individual or public, they saw His hand. And, above all,
     the new spiritual existence in which they joyed and gloried, was
     regarded as the mark of His especial grace, while the unbelief of
     their blinded fellow-citizens was the hardening stamp of His
     predestined reprobation. Mahomet was the minister of life to
     them,--the source under God of their new-born hopes; and to him
     they yielded a fitting and implicit submission.

     "In so short a period, Mecca had, from this wonderful movement,
     been rent into two factions, which, unmindful of the old land-marks
     of tribe and family, were arrayed in deadly opposition one against
     the other. The believers bore persecution with a patient and
     tolerant spirit. And though it was their wisdom so to do, the
     credit of a magnanimous forbearance may be freely accorded to
     them. One hundred men and women, rather than abjure the precious
     faith, had abandoned their homes, and sought refuge, till the storm
     should be overpast, in Abyssinian exile. And now even a larger
     number, with the Prophet himself, emigrated from their fondly-loved
     city, with its sacred temple,--to them the holiest spot on
     earth,--and fled to Medina. There the same wonder-working charm had
     within two or three years prepared for them a brotherhood ready to
     defend the Prophet and his followers with their blood. Jewish truth
     had long sounded in the ears of the men of Medina, but it was not
     till they heard the spirit-stirring strains of the Arabian prophet,
     that they too awoke from their slumber, and sprang suddenly into a
     new and earnest life."[133]

Further on Sir W. Muir says:--

     "And what have been the effects of the system which, established by
     such instrumentality, Mahomet has left behind him. We may freely
     concede that it banished for ever many of the darker elements of
     superstition which had for ages shrouded the Peninsula. Idolatry
     vanished before the battle-cry of Islam; the doctrine of the unity
     and infinite perfections of God, and of a special all-pervading
     Providence, became a living principle in the hearts and lives of
     the followers of Mahomet, even as it had in his own. An absolute
     surrender and submission to the divine will (the very name of
     _Islam_) was demanded as the first requirement of the religion. Nor
     are social virtues wanting. Brotherly love is inculcated within the
     circle of the faith; orphans are to be protected, and slaves
     treated with consideration; intoxicating drinks are prohibited,
     and Mahometanism may boast of a degree of temperance unknown to any
     other creed."[134]

Dr. Marcus Dods writes:--

     "But is Mahommed in no sense a Prophet? Certainly he had two of the
     most important characteristics of the prophetic order. He saw truth
     about God which his fellowmen did not see, and he had an
     irresistible inward impulse to publish this truth. In respect of
     this latter qualification Mahommed may stand comparison with the
     most courageous of the heroic prophets of Israel. For the truth's
     sake he risked his life, he suffered daily persecutions for years,
     and eventually banishment, the loss of property, of the goodwill of
     his fellow-citizens, and the confidence of his friends--he suffered
     in short as much as any man can suffer short of death, which he
     only escaped by flight, and yet he unflinchingly proclaimed his
     message. No bribe, threat or inducement could silence him. 'Though
     they array against me the sun on the right hand, and the moon on
     the left, I cannot renounce my purpose.' And it was this
     persistency, this belief in his call, to proclaim the Unity of God
     which was the making of Islam. Other men have been monotheists in
     the midst of idolaters, but no other man has founded a strong and
     enduring monotheistic religion. The distinction in his case was his
     resolution that other men should believe.... His giving himself out
     as a prophet of God was, in the first instance, not only sincere,
     but probably correct in the sense in which he himself understood
     it. He felt that he had thoughts of God which it deeply concerned
     all around him to receive, and he knew that these thoughts were
     given him by God, although not, as we shall see, a revelation
     strictly so called. His mistake lay by no means in his supposing
     himself to be called upon by God to speak for him and introduce a
     better religion, but it lay in his gradually coming to insist quite
     as much on men's accepting him as a prophet as on their accepting
     the great truth he preached. He was a prophet to his countrymen in
     so far as he proclaimed the Unity of God, but this was no
     sufficient ground for his claiming to be their guide in all matters
     of religion, still less for his assuming the lordship over them in
     all matters civil as well...."

The learned doctor further on in his book, "Mohammed, Buddha, and
Christ," remarks:--

     "But as we endeavour to estimate the good and evil of Islam, it
     gradually appears that the chief point we must attend to is to
     distinguish between its value to Arabia in the seventh century and
     its value to the world at large. No one, I presume, would deny that
     to Mohammed's contemporaries his religion was an immense advance on
     anything they had previously believed in. It welded together the
     disunited tribes, and lifted the nation to the forefront of the
     important powers in the world. It effected what Christianity and
     Judaism had alike failed to effect--it swept away, once and for
     ever, idolatry, and established the idea of one true God. Its
     influence on Arabia was justly and pathetically put by the Moslem
     refugees in Abyssinia, who when required to say why they should not
     be sent back to Mecca, gave the following account of their religion
     and what it had done for them: 'O king, we were plunged in
     ignorance and barbarism; we worshipped idols; we ate dead bodies;
     we committed lewdness; disregarded family ties and the duties of
     neighbourhood and hospitality; we knew no law but that of the
     strong, when God sent among us a messenger of whose truthfulness,
     integrity, and innocence we were aware; and he called us to the
     unity of God, and taught us not to associate any god with him; he
     forbade us the worship of idols, and enjoined upon us to speak the
     truth, to be faithful to our trusts, to be merciful, and to regard
     the rights of others; to love our relatives and to protect the
     weak; to flee vice and avoid all evil. He taught us to offer
     prayers, to give alms, and to fast. And because we believed in him
     and obeyed him, therefore are we persecuted and driven from our
     country to seek thy protection.'"[135]

But after all we have here seen of the opinions of Dr. Marcus Dods and
Sir W. Muir, let us turn to what the Rev. Stephens thinks of Mohammad:--

     "The aim of Mahomet was to revive among his countrymen the Arabs,
     as Moses revived among his countrymen the Jews, the pure faith of
     their common forefather Abraham. In this he succeeded to a very
     great extent. For a confused heap of idolatrous superstitions he
     substituted a pure monotheistic faith; he abolished some of the
     most vicious practices of his countrymen, modified others; he
     generally raised the moral standard, improved the social condition
     of the people, and introduced a sober and rational ceremonial in
     worship. Finally he welded by this means a number of wild
     independent tribes, mere floating atoms, into a compact body
     politic, as well prepared and as eager to subdue the kingdoms of
     the world to their rule and to their faith, as ever the Israelites
     had been to conquer the land of Canaan.

            *     *     *     *     *

     "The Koran also enjoins repeatedly and in very emphatic language
     the duty of showing kindness to the stranger and the orphan, and of
     treating slaves, if converted to the faith, with the consideration
     and respect due to believers. The duty even of mercy to the lower
     animals is not forgotten, and it is to be thankfully acknowledged
     that Mohammedanism as well as Buddhism shares with Christianity the
     honour of having given birth to hospitals and asylums for the
     insane and sick.

            *     *     *     *     *

     "The vices most prevalent in Arabia in the time of Mahomet which
     are most sternly denounced and absolutely forbidden in the Koran
     were drunkenness, unlimited concubinage and polygamy, the
     destruction of female infants, reckless gambling, extortionate
     usury, superstitious arts of divination and magic. The abolition of
     some of these evil customs, and the mitigation of others, was a
     great advance in the morality of the Arabs, and is a wonderful and
     honourable testimony to the zeal and influence of the reformer. The
     total suppression of female infanticide and of drunkenness is the
     most signal triumph of his work."[136]

The reverend gentleman quoted above continues:

     "First of all, it must be freely granted that to his own people
     Mahomet was a great benefactor. He was born in a country where
     political organization, and rational faith, and pure morals were
     unknown. He introduced all three. By a single stroke of masterly
     genius he simultaneously reformed the political condition, the
     religious creed, and the moral practice of his countrymen. In the
     place of many independent tribes he left a nation; for a
     superstitious belief in gods many and lords many he established a
     reasonable belief in one Almighty yet beneficent Being; taught men
     to live under an abiding sense of this Being's superintending care,
     to look to Him as the rewarder, and to fear Him as the punisher of
     evil-doers. He vigorously attacked, and modified and suppressed
     many gross and revolting customs which had prevailed in Arabia down
     to his time. For an abandoned profligacy was substituted a
     carefully regulated polygamy, and the practice of destroying female
     infants was effectually abolished.

     "As Islam gradually extended its conquest beyond the boundaries of
     Arabia, many barbarous races whom it absorbed became in like manner
     participators in its benefits. The Turk, the Indian, the Negro, and
     the Moor were compelled to cast away their idols, to abandon their
     licentious rites and customs, to turn to the worship of one God, to
     a decent ceremonial and an orderly way of life. The faith even of
     the more enlightened Persian was purified: he learned that good and
     evil are not co-ordinate powers, but that just and unjust are alike
     under the sway of one All-wise and Holy Ruler, who ordereth all
     things in heaven and earth.

     "For barbarous nations, then, especially--nations which were more
     or less in the condition of Arabia itself at the time of
     Mahomet--nations in the condition of Africa at the present day,
     with little or no civilisation, and without a reasonable
     religion--Islam certainly comes as a blessing, as a turning from
     darkness to light and from the power of satan unto God."[137]

[Footnote 133: The Life of Mahomet by Sir W. Muir, LL.D., Vol. II, pp.
269-71.]

[Footnote 134: The Life of Mahomet by Sir W. Muir, Vol. IV, pp. 320-21.]

[Footnote 135: Mohammed, Buddha and Christ, by Marcus Dods, D.D., pp.
17-19 & 119.]

[Footnote 136: Christianity and Islam: The Bible and the Koran, by Rev.
W.R.W. Stephens, pp. 94, 104, 112, London, 1877.]

[Footnote 137: Christianity and Islam: The Bible and the Koran, by the
Rev. W.R.W. Stephens, pp. 129-30, London, 1877.]


[Sidenote: Indictment against Mohammad.]

36. What the opponents of Mohammad can possibly say against his mission
is his alleged moral declension at Medina.[138] They accuse him of
cruelty[139] and sensuality[140] during his sojourn in that city after
he had passed without any blame more than fifty-five years of his age,
and had led a pious missionary life for upwards of fifteen years. These
moral stains cannot be inconsistent with his office of being a prophet
or reformer. It is no matter if a prophet morally degrades his character
under certain circumstances, or morally degrades his character at the
end of his age--after leading for upwards of fifty-five years a life of
the highest moral principles, and as a paragon of temperance and
high-toned living--while he has faithfully conveyed the message, and has
sincerely and honestly preached religious reforms, and the sublimity of
his preachings have in themselves the marks of divine truth.

If the said prophet defends his stains or immoral deeds by professed
revelations, and justifies himself in his flagrant breaches of morality
by producing messages from heaven, just and equally as he does when he
teaches the purer theology and higher morality for which he is
commissioned, then and from that time only we will consider him as an
impostor, guilty of high blasphemy in forging the name of God for his
licentious self indulgences.

But in the case of Mohammad, in the first place, the charges of cruelty
and sensuality during a period of six or seven years towards the end of
his life, excepting three years, are utterly false; and secondly, if
proved to have taken place, it is not proved that Mohammad justified
himself by alleging to have received a divine sanction or command to the
alleged cruelties and flagrant breaches of morality. The charges of
assassinations and cruelties to the prisoners of war and others, and of
the alleged perfidy and craftiness enumerated by Sir W. Muir, have been
examined and refuted by me in this book. _Vide_ pp. 60-73 and pp. 76-97.
The cases of Maria, a slave-girl, and Zeinab not coming directly under
the object of this book have been treated separately in Appendix B, pp.
211-220 of this work.

Mohammad, in his alleged cruelties towards his enemies, is not
represented by Sir W. Muir to have justified himself by special
revelation or sanction from on high, yet the Rev. Mr. Hughes, whose work
has been pronounced as having "_the rare merit of being accurate_,"
makes him (Mohammad) to have done them under the sanction of God in the
Koran.

     "The best defenders of the Arabian Prophet[141] are obliged to
     admit that the matter of Zeinab, the wife of Zeid, and again of
     Mary, the Coptic slave, are 'an indelible stain' upon his memory;
     that he is untrue once or twice to the kind and forgiving
     disposition of his best nature; that he is once or twice
     unrelenting in the punishment of his personal enemies, and that he
     is guilty even more than once of conniving at the assassination of
     inveterate opponents; but they do not give any satisfactory
     explanation or apology for all this being done _under the supposed
     sanction_ of God in the Quran."[142]

Such is the rare accuracy of Mr. Hughes' work. It is needless for me to
repeat here that none of these allegations are either true or facts, or
alleged to have been committed under the sanction of God in the Koran.

The Rev. Marcus Dods writes regarding the character of Mohammad:--

     "The knot of the matter lies not in his polygamy, nor even in his
     occasional licentiousness, but in the fact that he defended his
     conduct, when he created scandal, by professed revelations which
     are now embodied as parts of the Koran. When his wives murmured,
     and with justice, at his irregularities, he silenced them by a
     revelation giving him conjugal allowances which he had himself
     proscribed as unlawful. When he designed to contract an alliance
     with a woman forbidden to him by his own law, an inspired
     permission was forthcoming, encouraging him to the
     transgression."[143]

Both of these alleged instances given above are mere fabrications. There
was no revelation giving Mohammad conjugal allowances which he had
himself proscribed as unlawful, nor any permission was brought forward
to sanction an alliance forbidden to him by his own law. This subject
has been fully discussed by me in my work "Mohammad, the True Prophet,"
and the reader is referred to that work.[144] A few verses on the
marital subject of Mohammad are greatly misunderstood by European
writers on the subject, and Dr. Dods shares the generally wrong idea
when he says:--

     "He rather used his office as a title to license from which
     ordinary men were restrained. Restricting his disciples to four
     wives, he retained to himself the liberty of taking as many as he
     pleased." (Page 23.)

This is altogether a gross misrepresentation of the real state of
things. Mohammad never retained to himself the liberty of taking as many
wives as he pleased. On the contrary, Sura XXXIII, 52, expressly forbade
him all women except those he had already with him, giving him no option
to marry in the case of the demise of some or all of them. This will
show that he rather used his office as a restraint against himself of
what was lawful for the people in general to enjoy. The only so-called
privilege above the rest of the believers (Sura XXXIII, 49) was not "to
retain to himself the liberty of taking as many wives as he pleased,"
but to retain the wives whom he had already married and whose number
exceeded the limit of four under Sura IV, 3. Other believers having more
wives than four as in the case of Kays, Ghailan, and Naofal, were
requested to separate themselves from the number exceeding the limit
prescribed for the first time. This was before polygamy was declared to
have been virtually abolished, _i.e._, between the publication of _vv._
3 and 128 of Sura IV. There was neither any breach of morality, nor
anything licentious in his retaining the marriages lawfully contracted
by him before the promulgation of Sara IV, 3. Even this privilege (Sura
XXXIII, 49) was counterbalanced by _Ibid_, 52, which runs thus:--

     "Women are not allowed thee hereafter, nor to change them for other
     women, though their beauty charm thee, except those already
     possessed by thee."

Mr. Stanley Lane Poole suffers under the same misrepresentation as other
European writers[145] do when he says that:--

     "The Prophet allowed his followers only four wives, he took more
     than a dozen himself."

He writes:--

     "When, however, all has been said, when it has been shown that
     Mohammad was not the rapacious voluptuary some have taken him for,
     and that his violation of his own marriage-law may be due to
     motives reasonable and just from his point of view rather than to
     common sensuality."

     "Did Mohammad believe he was speaking the words of God equally when
     he declared that permission was given him to take unto him more
     wives, as when he proclaimed, 'There is no god but God?'"[146]

Mohammad did not violate his own marriage-law, and never pretended that
permission was given to him to take more wives than what was allowed for
other people. All his marriages (which are wrongly considered to have
been about a dozen) were contracted by him before he published the law
unjustly said to have been violated by him. He retained these wives
after the law was promulgated, and their number exceeded four, but he
was interdicted to marry any other women in the place of these in case
of their demise or divorce. Other believers were advised after the
promulgation of the law to reduce the number of their wives exceeding
four, but were at liberty to replace their wives within the limit
assigned in the case of their demise or divorce. Mohammad's case had no
breach of morality or sensual license in it. It was very wise of
Mohammad to retain all the wives he had married before Sura IV, 3, came
into force, for the reason that the wives thus repudiated by him might
have married some of the unbelievers, even some of his enemies, which
would have been derogatory to the Prophet in the eyes of his
contemporaries and a laughing-stock for his enemies.

[Footnote 138: "We may readily admit that at the first Mahomet did
believe, or persuaded himself to believe, that his revelations were
dictated by a divine agency. In the Meccan period of his life there
certainly can be traced no personal ends or unworthy motives to belie
this conclusion. The Prophet was there, what he professed to be, 'a
simple Preacher and a Warner;' he was the despised and rejected teacher
of a gainsaying people; and he had apparently no ulterior object but
their reformation. Mahomet may have mistaken the right means to effect
this end, but there is no sufficient reason for doubting that he used
those means in good faith and with an honest purpose.

"But the scene altogether changes at Medina. There the acquisition of
temporal power, aggrandisement, and self-glorification mingled with the
grand object of the Prophet's previous life, and they were sought after
and attained by precisely the same instrumentality. Messages from Heaven
were freely brought forward to justify his political conduct, equally
with his religious precepts. Battles were fought, wholesale executions
inflicted, and territories annexed, under pretext of the Almighty's
sanction. Nay, even baser actions were not only excused, but encouraged
