Christianity that was the debtor to India in this respect. Both
theories are in the main impossible. This cult of the child Krishna
arose in India, and, with the possible exception of a few obscure
tales, it never spread outside the circle of Indian religion. But how
and where did it arise? That is a question hard to answer; there is no
direct evidence, and we can only balance probabilities. Now what are
the probabilities?

The worship of Krishna as a babe, a boy, and a young man among the
herdsfolk of Vraja seems to have no relation with the older form of
the religion as set forth in the epic textbooks. It is a new element,
imported from without. The most natural conclusion then is that it
came from the people who are described in it, some tribe that pastured
their herds in the woodlands near Mathura. Perhaps these herdsfolk
were Abhiras, ancestors of the modern Ahir tribes. If so, it would be
natural that their cult should attract attention; for sometimes
Abhiras counted for something in society, and we even find a
short-lived dynasty of Abhira kings reigning in Nasik in the third
century A.D.[29] Be this as it may, it seems very likely that some
pastoral tribe had a cult of a divine child blue or black of hue, and
perhaps actually called by them Krishna or Kanha, "Black-man" (observe
that henceforth Krishna is regularly represented with a blue skin), a
cult in which gross rustic fantasy had free play; that it came in some
circles to be linked on to the epic cycle of Krishna Vasudeva; and
that some Bhagavatas, seeing in it latent possibilities, gave it
polished literary expression and thereby established it as a part of
the Vasudeva legend. It quickly seized upon the popular imagination
and spread like wild-fire over India. For it satisfied many needs. The
tenderness of the father and still more of the mother for the little
babe, their delight in the sports of childhood, the amorist's pleasure
in erotic adventure, and, not by any means least, the joy in the
romantic scenery of the haunted woodlands--all these instincts found
full play in it, and were sanctified by religion.

[Footnote 29: Rapson, _Catal. of the Coins of the Andhra Dynasty,
etc._, pp. xliv, lxii, lxix, cxxxiii-cxxxvi, clxii; _Indian Antiq._,
xlvii, p. 85, etc.]


II. RAMA

Rama is the hero of the Ramayana, the great epic ascribed to Valmiki,
a poet who in course of time has passed from the realm of history into
that of myth, like many other Hindus. The poem, as it has come down to
us, contains seven books, which relate the following tale. Dasa-ratha,
King of Ayodhya (now Ajodhya, near Faizabad), of the dynasty which
claimed descent from the Sun-god, had no son, and therefore held the
great _Asva-medha_, or horse-sacrifice, as a result of which he
obtained four sons, Rama by his queen Kausalya, Bharata by Kaikeyi,
and Lakshmana and Satrughna by Sumitra. Rama, the eldest, was also
pre-eminent for strength, bravery, and noble qualities of soul.
Visiting in his early youth the court of Janaka, king of Videha, Rama
was able to shoot an arrow from Janaka's bow, which no other man could
bend, and as a reward he received as wife the princess Sita, whom
Janaka had found in a furrow of his fields and brought up as his own
daughter. So far the first book, or Bala-kanda. The second book, or
Ayodhya-kanda, relates how Queen Kaikeyi induced Dasa-ratha, sorely
against his will, to banish Rama to the forests in order that her son
Bharata might succeed to the throne; and the Aranya-kanda then
describes how Rama, accompanied by his wife Sita and his faithful
brother Lakshmana, dwelt in the forest for a time, until the demon
King Ravana of Lanka, by means of a trick, carried off Sita to his
city. The Kishkindha-kanda tells of Rama's pursuit of Ravana and his
coming to Kishkindha, the city of Sugriva, the king of the apes, who
joined him as an ally in his expedition; and the Sundara-kanda
describes the march of their armies to Lanka, which is identified with
Ceylon, and their crossing over the straits. Then comes the
Yuddha-kanda, which narrates the war with Ravana, his death in battle,
the restoration of Sita, the return of Rama and Sita to Ayodhya, and
the crowning of Rama in place of Dasa-ratha, who had died of grief
during his exile. Finally comes the Uttara-kanda, which relates that
Rama, hearing some of the people of Ayodhya spitefully casting
aspersions on the virtue of Sita during her imprisonment in the palace
of Ravana, gave way to foolish jealousy and banished her to the
hermitage of Valmiki, where she gave birth to twin sons, Kusa and
Lava; when these boys had grown up, Valmiki taught them the Ramayana
and sent them to sing it at the court of Rama, who on hearing it sent
for Sita, who came to him accompanied by Valmiki, who assured him of
her purity; and then Sita swore to it on oath, calling upon her mother
the Earth-goddess to bear witness; and the Earth-goddess received her
back into her bosom, leaving Rama bereaved, until after many days he
was translated to heaven.

Such is the tale of Rama as told in the Valmiki-ramayana--a clean,
wholesome story of chivalry, love, and adventure. But clearly the
Valmiki-ramayana is not the work of a single hand. We can trace in it
at least two strata. Books II.-VI. contain the older stratum; the rest
is the addition of a later poet or series of poets, who have also
inserted some padding into the earlier books. This older stratum, the
nucleus of the epic, gives us a picture of heroic society in India at
a very early date, probably not very long after the age of the
Upanishads; perhaps we shall not be far wrong if we say it was
composed some time before the fourth century B.C. In it Rama is simply
a hero, miraculous in strength and goodness, but nevertheless wholly
human; but in the later stratum--Books I. and VII. and the occasional
insertions in the other books--conditions are changed, and Rama
appears as a god on earth, a partial incarnation of Vishnu, exactly as
in the Bhagavad-gita and other later parts of the Mahabharata the hero
Krishna has become an incarnation of Vishnu also. The parallel may
even be traced further. Krishna stands to Arjuna in very much the same
relation as Rama to his brother Lakshmana--a greater and a lesser
hero, growing into an incarnate god and his chief follower. This is
thoroughly in harmony with Hindu ideas, which regularly conceive the
teacher as accompanied by his disciple and abhor the notion of a voice
crying in the wilderness; indeed we may almost venture to suspect that
this symmetry in the epics is not altogether uninfluenced by this
ideal. This, however, is a detail: the main point to observe is that
Rama was originally a local hero of the Solar dynasty, a legendary
king of Ayodhya, and as the Puranas give him a full pedigree, there is
no good reason to doubt that he really existed "once upon a time." But
the story with which he is associated in the Ramayana is puzzling. Is
it a pure romance? Or is it a glorified version of some real
adventures? Or can it be an old tale, perhaps dating from the early
dawn of human history, readapted and fitted on to the person of an
historical Rama? The first of these hypotheses seems unlikely, though
by no means impossible. The second suggestion has found much favour.
Many have believed that the story of the expedition of Rama and his
army of apes to Lanka represents a movement of the Aryan invaders from
the North towards the South; and this is supported to some extent by
Indian tradition, which has located most of the places mentioned in
the Ramayana, and in particular has identified Lanka with Ceylon. In
support of this one may point to the Iliad of Homer, which has a
somewhat similar theme, the rape and recovery of Helen by the armies
of the Achaeans, the basis of which is the historical fact of an
expedition against Troy and the destruction of that city. But there
are serious difficulties in the way of accepting this analogy, the
most serious of all being the indubitable fact that there is not a
tittle of evidence to show that such an expedition was ever made by
the Aryans. True, there were waves of emigration from Aryan centres
southward in early times; but those that travelled as far as Ceylon
went by sea, either from the coasts of Bengal or Orissa or Bombay.
Besides, the expedition of Rama is obviously fabulous, for his army
was composed not of Aryans but of apes. All things considered, there
seems to be most plausibility in the third hypothesis[30]. Certainly
Rama was a local hero of Ayodhya, and probably he was once a real
king; so it is likely enough that an old saga (or sagas) attached
itself early to his memory. And as his fame spread abroad, principally
on the wings of Valmiki's poem, the honours of semi-divinity began to
be paid to him in many places beyond his native land, and about the
beginning of our era he was recognised as an incarnation of Vishnu
sent to establish a reign of righteousness in the world. In Southern
India this cult of Rama, like that of Krishna, has for the most part
remained subordinate to the worship of Vishnu, though the Vaishnava
church there has from early times recognised the divinity of both of
them as embodiments of the Almighty. But its great home is the North,
where millions worship Rama with passionate and all-absorbing love.

[Footnote 30: I regret that I cannot accept the ingenious hypothesis
lately put forward by Rai Saheb Dineshchandra Sen in his _Bengali
Ramayanas_. The story of the Dasaratha-jataka seems to me to be a
garbled and bowdlerised snippet cut off from a possibly pre-Valmikian
version of the old Rama-saga; the rest of the theory appears to be
quite mistaken.]


III. SOME LATER PREACHERS

With all its attractions and success, the new Krishnaism did not
everywhere overgrow the older stock upon which it had been engrafted.
There were many places in which the early worship of Vishnu and
Vasudeva remained almost unchanged. The new legends of Krishna's
childhood might indeed be accepted in these centres of conservatism,
but they made little difference in the spirit and form of the worship,
which continued to follow the ancient order. In some of them the
Bhagavad-gita, Narayaniya, and other epic doctrinals still remained
the standard texts, which theologians connected with the ancient
Upanishads and the Brahma-sutra summarising the latter; in other
centres there arose, beginning perhaps about the seventh century A.D.,
a series of Samhitas, or manuals of doctrine and practice for the
Pancharatra[31] sect, which, though in essentials agreeing with the
Narayaniya, taught a different theory of cosmogony and introduced the
worship of the goddess Sri or Lakshmi, the consort of Vishnu, as the
agency or energy through which the Supreme Being becomes active in
finite existence; and in yet other places other texts were followed,
such as those of the Vaikhanasa school. This worship of
Vishnu-Vasudeva on the ancient lines was peculiarly vigorous among the
representatives of Aryan culture in the South, who had introduced the
cults of Vishnu and Siva with the rest of the Aryan pantheon into the
midst of Dravidian animism. Hinduism, transplanted into the Dravidian
area, has there remained more conservative than anywhere else, and has
clung firmly to its ancient traditions. There is nothing of Dravidian
origin in the South Indian worship of Vishnu and Siva; they are
entirely Aryan importations. But they have become thoroughly
assimilated in their southern home, and each of them has produced a
huge mass of fine devotional literature in the vernaculars. In the
Tamil country the church of Vishnu boasts of the Nal-ayira-prabandham,
a collection of Tamil psalms numbering about 4,000 stanzas composed by
twelve poets called Alvars, which were collected about 1000 A.D.;
and the worship of 'Siva is equally well expressed in the Tiru-murai,
compiled about the twelfth century, of which one section, the Devaram,
was put together about the same time as the Nal-ayira-prabandham. Both
the Tiru-murai and the Nal-ayira-prabandham breathe the same spirit of
ecstatic devotion as the Bhagavata-purana; they are the utterances of
wandering votaries who travelled from temple to temple and poured
forth the passionate raptures of their souls in lyrical praise of
their deities. Through these three main channels the stream of
devotion spread far and wide through the land. Like most currents of
what we call "revivalism," it usually had an erotic side; and the
larger temples frequently have attached to them female staffs of
attendant votaries and _corps de ballet_ of very easy virtue. But this
aspect was far more marked in neo-Krishnaism, which often tends to
intense pruriency, than in the other two cults. The Alvars pay
little regard to the legends of Krishna, and concentrate their
energies upon the worship of Vishnu as he is represented in the great
temples of Srirangam, Conjevaram, Tirupati, and similar sanctuaries.

[Footnote 31: On this name see above, p. 86.]

About the beginning of the ninth century the peaceful course of
Vaishnava religion was rudely disturbed by the preaching of Samkara
Acharya. Samkara, one of the greatest intellects that India has ever
produced, was a Brahman of Malabar, and was born about the year 788.
Taking his stand upon the Upanishads, Brahma-sutra, and Bhagavad-gita,
upon which he wrote commentaries, he interpreted them as teaching the
doctrine of Advaita, thorough monistic idealism, teaching that the
universal Soul, Brahma, is absolutely identical with the individual
Soul, the _atma_ or Self, that all being is only one, that salvation
consists in the identification of these two, and is attained by
knowledge, the intuition of their identity, and that the phenomenal
universe or manifold of experience is simply an illusion (_maya_)
conjured up in Brahma by his congenital nature, but really alien to
him--in fact, a kind of disease in Brahma. This was not new: it had
been taught by some ancient schools of Aupanishadas, and was very like
the doctrine of some of the Buddhist idealists; but the vigour and
skill with which Samkara propagated his doctrines threatened ruin to
orthodox Vaishnava theologians, and roused them to counter-campaigns.
Among the Vaishnava Brahmans of the South who won laurels in this
field was Yamunacharya, who lived about 1050, and was the grandson of
Natha Muni, who collected the hymns of the Alvars in the
Nal-ayira-prabandham and founded the great school of Vaishnava
theology at Srirangam. In opposition to Samkara's monism, Yamunacharya
propounded the doctrine of his school, the so-called Visishtadvaita,
which was preached with still greater skill and success by his famous
successor Ramanuja, who died in 1137. Ramanuja's greatest works are
his commentaries on the Brahma-sutra and Bhagavad-gita. In them he
expounds with great ability the principles of his school, namely, that
God, sentient beings or souls, and insentient matter form three
essentially distinct classes of being; that God, who is the same as
Brahma, Vishnu, Narayana, or Krishna, is omnipotent, omnipresent, and
possessed of all good qualities; that matter forms the body of souls,
and souls form the body of God; that the soul attains salvation as a
result of devout and loving meditation upon God, worship of him, and
study of the scriptures; and that salvation consists in eternal union
of the soul with God, but not in identity with him, as Samkara taught.
The scriptures on which Ramanuja took his stand were mainly the
Upanishads, Brahma-sutra, and Bhagavad-gita; but he also acknowledged
as authoritative the Pancharatra Samhitas, in spite of their
divergences in details of doctrine, and it is from them that his
church has derived the worship of Sri or Lakshmi as consort of Vishnu,
which is a very marked feature of their community and has gained for
them the title of Sri-vaishnavas. But Ramanuja was much more than a
scholar and a writer of books; he was also a man of action, a
"practical mystic." Like Samkara, he organised a body of _sannyasis_
or ascetic votaries, into which, however, he admitted only Brahmans,
whereas Samkara opened some of the sections of his devotees to
non-Brahmans; but on the other hand he was far more liberal than
Samkara in the choice of his congregations, for he endeavoured to
bring men of the lowest castes, Sudras and even Pariahs, within the
influence of his church, though he kept up the social barrier between
them and the higher castes, and he firmly upheld the principle of the
Bhagavad-gita that it is by the performance of religious and social
duties of caste, and not by knowledge alone, that salvation is most
surely to be won. He established schools and monasteries, reorganised
the worship of the temples, usually in accordance with the Pancharatra
rules, and thus placed his church in a position of such strength in
Southern India that its only serious rival is the church of Siva.

Nimbarka, who probably flourished about the first half of the twelfth
century, preached for the cult of Krishna a doctrine combining monism
with dualism, which is followed by a small sect in Northern India.
Ananda-tirtha or Madhva, in the first three quarters of the thirteenth
century, propounded for the same church a theory of thorough dualism,
which has found many admirers, chiefly in the Dekkan. Vallabhacharya,
born in 1479, founded a school of Krishna-worshippers which claims a
"pure monism" without the aid of the theory of _maya_, or illusion,
which is a characteristic of Samkara's monism. This community has
become very influential, chiefly in Bombay Presidency; but in recent
times it has been under a cloud owing to the scandals arising from a
tendency to practise immoral orgies and from the claims of its
priesthood, as representing the god, to enjoy the persons and property
of their congregations.

Besides these and other schools which were founded on a basis of
Sanskrit scholastic philosophy, there have been many popular religious
movements, which from the first appealed directly to the heart of the
people in their own tongues.

The first place in which we see this current in movement is the
Maratha country. Here, about 1290, Jnanesvara or Jnanadeva, popularly
known as Jnanoba, composed his Jnanesvari, a paraphrase of the
Bhagavad-gita in about 10,000 Marathi verses, as well as a number of
hymns to Krishna and a poem on the worship of Siva. To the same period
belonged Namadeva, who was born at Pandharpur, according to some in
1270 and according to others about a century later. Then came
Ekanatha, who is said to have died in 1608, and composed some hymns
and Marathi verse-translations from the Bhagavata. The greatest of all
was Tukaram, who was born about 1608.[32] In the verses of these
poets the worship of Krishna is raised to a level of high
spirituality. Ramananda, who apparently lived between 1400 and 1470
and was somehow connected with the school of Ramanuja, preached
salvation through Rama to all castes and classes of Northern India,
with immense and enduring success. To his spiritual lineage belongs
Tulsi Das (1532-1623), whose Rama-charita-manasa, a poem in Eastern
Hindi on the story of Valmiki's Ramayana, has become the Bible of the
North. The same influences are visible in the poems of Kabir, a Moslem
