
[62] Daniel x. 20.

[63] Hebrews x. 13.




IV.--A MESSAGE FROM THE CROWNED CHRIST

(Revelation, Chapters ii and iii)


 "The glory of love is brightest when the glory of self is dim,
 And they have the most compelled me who most have pointed to Him.
 They have held me, stirred me, swayed me,--I have hung on their
   every word,
 Till I fain would arise and follow, not them, not them,--but their
   Lord!"[64]


Patmos Spells Patience.

Patience is strength at its strongest, using all its strength in holding
back from doing something. Patience is love at flood pleading with
strength to hold steady in holding back.

The love in the strength insists on waiting a bit longer for the sake of
the one being waited for. The strength in the love obeys the love
passion and takes fresh hold in holding back.

Patmos spells out the patience of our Lord Jesus. It tells the strength
and tenderness of His love. Olivet spelled out His _plan_, His great
sweeping plan, _through His followers_, for a race. Calvary spelled out
His _passion_, passion of love, passion of suffering, in dying for a
race.

Calvary, Olivet, and Patmos are inseparably linked, the gentle slope of
the Jerusalem hillside, the little mount to its east, and the little
rocky isle in the far AEgean. Calvary was the passion of love pouring out
a life for a race. Olivet was the plan of love for telling a race, till
every one would know the love by the feel. Patmos is the patience of
love pleading with the should-be tellers of the story to carry out the
plan, and waiting, and then waiting just a little longer.

Olivet had heard the last word. There the Master had told the disciples
the plan. All the race was to be told and taught, bit by bit, earnestly,
repeatedly, patiently, tirelessly, by word and act and life. He Himself
unseen by outer eyes would always be with them, His supernatural power
making real and living what they told and taught. This was the plan.
Olivet was to be the executive of Calvary, bringing home to men and
making vital to them what had been done there.

Then Jesus went up on the Cloud. And they went out everywhere. And His
power convincingly went with them just as He had said. Within a
generation the news and the power had gone together to the outermost rim
of the world they knew.

They were expecting Him to return as a result of this witnessing of
theirs. The next time they see His face and hear His voice will be as He
comes on the Cloud out of the blue. So they understand and believe. This
is their constant expectancy.

Now that generation has moved off the scene of action. Another
generation has come in its place, and has almost run its course and
moved off the scene. And still they are looking forward to and talking
about His return.

But now to this new generation of His followers something quite
different comes. Instead of Himself coming in glory there comes another
last message to them. It fits perfectly into the Olivet message, but
goes further and says something more.

The Olivet message is about taking the light of the Gospel message out
everywhere. The Patmos message in its pictured setting of candlesticks
and Man of Fire and blazing light recognized this as the one thing to be
done, but says there's something the matter with the candlesticks.

The Olivet word is about taking the message. This Patmos word is about
the messengers. That one is about the _service_ of His followers; this
other about their _life_. The life underlies the service. Nothing can so
hinder and hurt the service as a life not true in itself. Here something
in the life of the Church is hindering its service. The Master's plan at
this stage is in danger.

His broader plan extends beyond this Church movement. This is one great
step to be followed by another. That broader plan had been outlined at
the first Church Conference, held in Jerusalem. James, the presiding
officer, said that the carrying of the Gospel to all men was to be
followed by a national regeneration of the Jews; and then through a
regenerated Jewish nation there would be a new era of world-wide
evangelization,[65] and with this the Conference was in agreement.

The leaders among these early disciples are eagerly anticipating Jesus'
return to carry on the next stage. They understand that what they are
doing is preparing the way for this next step.

But now instead of returning to carry forward the broader plan here
comes another message. Apparently things are not going satisfactorily.
The plan at this stage is in danger, while the Calvary passion back of
it still burns. Failure is impending. The Master _might_ sweep aside the
men that are failing, and press on Himself into the next step of His
plan. For the case is urgent. A race is waiting. The darkness thickens.

But instead He waits. With patience and strength and love beyond our
power to grasp He waits. This is the setting of the Patmos message, to
which we now turn.


The Unity of the Message.

We must keep our eyes on the Man who is talking. His overawing presence
gives tremendous meaning to His words. That gentle touch of the right
hand has no doubt strengthened John even as Daniel was strengthened. And
he is standing and looking as he listens. But the sight of that wondrous
Man walking among the candlesticks floods his face and his whole being
indescribably as he listens to the message spoken.

The overpowering sense of awe, of reality and power, and of the
tremendous meaning of what is being said never leaves. So he listens.
So we must listen. So only can we get into the meaning of these words.
The words will mean only as much as the Man means in the intensity of
His presence. You must keep your eye on this crowned Christ as you
listen.

The seven-fold description given us of Christ is the key to these seven
messages. The partial description beginning each message is seen to fit
into the particular condition of the Church spoken to. Yet all these
bits of description must be put together to get the full description. It
is a seven-fold description of one person.

And so all the messages must be taken together to see the Church as He
sees it, and to get His message to it. It is one message. A look at the
seven promises made to the overcomers makes it clear that all seven are
one promise. It is not that one overcomer receives one thing, and
another another, but each one gets all of what is mentioned in the
seven. A rather careful, swift look at these promises makes this clear
enough.

It is spoken to one Church in seven groups in seven different cities.
There is one call to repentance, one warning of what will happen to the
unpenitent at five successive stages, one plea to hear seven times
repeated, and one blessed result to the overcomer, in a seven-fold
statement.

And there is just one evil to be recognized and fought. That evil is
seen to grow from one degree to another, from bad to worse and worst.
Its emphasis changes from one phase to another. It has shown itself
differently in different parts of the world, and in different ages
since, but it is the one evil power, always the same behind the
different manifestations.

There is rare combination and adaptation in this message. It was meant
for the Church of that day, and of every day since, and for some future
day. For it stands as the one message from Christ to His Church between
Olivet and His return. It is meant distinctively for the Church as a
whole, and yet it makes an intense personal appeal to each one in the
Church.

It is spoken to the little groups of Churches in Asia Minor grouping
about the city of Ephesus, which had been founded by Paul and ministered
to by John. And without doubt it fitted into the conditions and
tendencies of those particular seven Churches.

But these are representative of all. Probably any group of seven would
be representative of all in varying degree. The mother Church at
Jerusalem is not named, nor the great Gentile missionary Church at
Antioch. But these messages with their approval and criticism, their
warning and promise, were meant for all the Church in Asia and Europe
and Africa at that time.

They are found to fit into the need of the Church scattered throughout
the world in every generation since then. Always there have been little
groups that were faithful and true, always some suffering because of
their faithfulness and remaining faithful in spite of suffering. And
always those who have been formal, who have companioned with evil, who
have been swamped by the evil with which they companioned, and those
practically asleep or dead.

This Patmos message will be found to fit the Church of to-day with
remarkable accuracy and faithfulness. And the whole probability is in
favor of finding that it will fit peculiarly the future Church, the
Church at the end of this present period.

This whole book of the Revelation is peculiarly a Church book. While it
is full of instruction and plea for our individual lives, yet it is
distinctively _the_ Church book. It stands out among the books of the
New Testament as the one book addressed to the Church and to the whole
Church.

It gives the great bulk of its space to an awful time of persecution
that is coming to the Church at some future time. This is spoken of
elsewhere, notably by Jesus in His talk with the disciples on Mount
Olivet, but it is the chief subject treated here. And it is treated with
great detail. The name commonly applied to this coming persecution is
the great tribulation.

It is significant that the book that clearly is distinctively a Church
book is taken up chiefly with a description of that future persecution.
It leads to the deep conviction that this book of the Revelation so
fitted to the need of the Church when spoken, and in every generation
since, will be found to be peculiarly fitted to that generation of the
Church that is to pass through this great coming persecution; that is,
to the Tribulation Church.

It will probably be the mainstay and comfort of those who will insist on
being true during those awful days, regardless of the suffering
involved. No book has been more slighted and ignored. It has been called
by some within the Church of our own generation "the joke of the Bible."
It will likely come to be the book most studied and loved for its light
and help in the terribly troublous times ahead. There will be an eager,
hungry searching for every scrap of information, and for any fresh ray
of light on its meaning.


The Seven-fold Message.

Now this seven-fold message lets us see things through Christ's eyes. He
is letting them and us see what He sees. The Scottish poet's thoughtful
lines might well be changed to get the yet better look: "Oh! wad some
power the giftie gie us, to see oursel's as" _God_ sees us. It would do
more than free us from blunders and notions. And we are needing more.

Each one of these seven messages begins by our Lord drawing their eyes
to Himself. This is the thing needed most. And this will give meaning
and force to the message. They are to be looking at Him as they listen.
Then He speaks of all the good things He sees. Then of the faulty, weak,
bad things, in a few simple but unmistakably plain words. No one could
doubt what He meant.

Then is the pleading call to repent, with the faithful warning of what
will surely happen if they don't. Then the earnest plea that His words
be listened to and taken to heart, and the wondrously gracious promise
held out to those who steadily set themselves against the evil, and who
get the victory.

Let us look for a moment at each of these Churches as seen by those
searching eyes of flame.

_Ephesus_ is the centre of the group, the natural leader, the largest
and most influential, perhaps the mother Church of the group, where Paul
and John had put in so much time and strength, and whence they reached
out to these others.

Christ reminds them of His presence in their midst and His control of
the angel messengers that minister to them. Then he speaks of their good
deeds, their tireless activity, steadfast endurance, intense zeal for
the true faith, with special emphasis upon their unwearying
steadfastness even under sore difficulties, and their hatred of those
who made compromise with evil so hateful to Himself.

But there is something lacking, the tender personal love for Himself.
There's intense loyalty to Church and to the faith, but a lack of
personal love for Himself. And the startling thing is that this is said
to quite outweight all these good things. They may have these things
without the love, but they cannot have the love without having these
things, and at a finer temperature.

And this defect is crucial. If persisted in it is fatal. It will
actually mean their _rejection as His messenger_. This is the critical
thing which we seem to have such a hard time getting hold of. The
essential qualification for true service is the personal attachment to
our Lord Jesus Himself, that warm heart love which the human heart longs
for and gives to some one. He longs for this. This is _the_ essential;
not Church organization nor creed, not zeal for orthodoxy, but warm love
for a person. Service, witnessing, all the rest, are valuable to Him in
reaching His world only as they grow out of a tender love for Himself.

And the startling thing is that this privilege and opportunity of
service is to be taken away _not_ because displeasing to Him, but
because it fails of the end in view. The candlestick is only removed
because it is no longer serviceable; it is not giving out the light.
This earnest, aggressive, orthodox, patiently-enduring Church is to be
rejected as a light-holder, because it is not holding out the light.
This is tremendous!

The group in _Smyrna_ is tenderly reminded of the suffering of their
Lord, for they are filling up what is left behind of His suffering. This
tells at once the depth of their personal love for Him, nothing could
tell it more.

They are poor in money and so despised, but rich in faith and so
precious to Him. They are suffering at the hands of the Jews, who were
the outspoken, intense, fanatical enemy of the Christians. There is no
reproach, only earnest encouragement to keep steady even through
fiercer fires yet to come.

The description of Himself to the _Pergamum_ group is startling. He is
the one with a sharp two-edged sword. There is something here He must
fight against. They are frankly told that they have had a hard place to
witness in, and earnestly commended for being true even in the midst of
persecution.

But there's something wrong, and it is very serious. It is as wrong and
bad as it can be. There is actually compromise with evil, partnership
with the world in its wickedness. The thing is put in the intensest way
possible by characterizing it as adultery. No stronger language could be
used to tell how He sees the evil they are guilty of. And they are
plainly told that He will fight against them. They have made themselves
His enemy by joining His enemies.

The _Thyatira_ group is reminded of the purity of their Lord, who cannot
stand impurity but searches it relentlessly out, and pursues it to the
death. There's a faithful minority here. Their activity and love and
faith and patience and increasing activity in service are all counted
carefully over and warmly commended.

But the evil here is much worse. It is put into the gravest language.
"Thou sufferest the woman _Jezebel_." This is most significant. There is
no worse character named in the whole Old Testament. She not only
represented the worst adulterous uncleanness in herself, but she was
the national leader energetically fostering unclean idolatrous practices
among the people. Jezebel pulled God's light-holder nation down to the
lowest moral level it ever reached. She brazenly dominated king and
people, and remained stubbornly obstinate to the terrible end.

Christ brings _her_ name in here. Again this is tremendous. No more
terrific parallel could have been made. Here evil characterized as
adulterous has actually come to a place of leadership in the Church.
With great longsuffering time has been given that all this might be
changed, but with Jezebel-like obstinacy it was determined that there
would be no change. And the inevitable result that will surely follow
continued obstinacy will be a great tribulation or deadly persecution.

The _Sardis_ group is told that Christ is the centre of all life and
help, in the control of the Holy Spirit and of the angel messengers.
There is nothing to commend here. There are some who insist on living
true lives, but they are a scanty scattered few, not enough to count.

There are some ragged remnants of good, but even these are sickly and
nearly dead. The Church is well organized, energetic, standing high
among men, but with an utter absence of spiritual life. The personal
lives of most are like dirty garments. And the warning is this: He will
come as a thief, that is unexpectedly, disagreeably, to take away what
they prize most and leave them stripped and naked.

The longest message is to the group in _Philadelphia_. Christ reminds
them that He is holy in character, faithful to His promises, having full
control, and giving opportunity of service as the highest reward of
faithfulness. This candlestick is giving out light, for it is given yet
further opportunity of shining.

The chief characteristic of this group is its steady plodding
faithfulness. They are not spoken of as brilliant or talented, but
faithful in the midst of opposition. He loves them with the sort of deep
love drawn out by love freely given. And a special promise is given, a
significant promise. A great persecution is coming, an awful testing
time to all the earth. But He will keep them _through_ this unhurt
because they have been keeping His word so faithfully.

The common reading here is, "I will keep thee _from_ the hour of trial."
It is quite as accurate to read "through" in place of "from." And there
