
Meanwhile, how fared it with the Emperor and the Pope? Shortly after
the Diet of Nurnberg (1522) Charles V. left Germany for the
Netherlands. Owing to the troubles in Spain and the long drawn out war
with France he was unable to give any attention to the progress of
affairs in Germany. The administration of the Empire was committed to
three representatives, the ablest of whom was the Elector Frederick of
Saxony, the friend and patron of Luther. The result was that Luther
had a free hand to spread his views notwithstanding the decree of
Worms.

Leo X. died in 1521 and was succeeded by Adrian VI. (1522-3), a former
tutor of the Emperor. As a Hollander it might be anticipated that his
representations to the German princes would prove more effective than
those of his Italian predecessor, particularly as not even his worst
enemies could discover anything worthy of reproach either in his
principles or personal conduct. Convinced that Luther's only chance of
winning support lay in his exaggerated denunciations of real or
imaginary abuses, he determined to bring about a complete reform,
first in Rome itself and then throughout the entire Christian world.
Owing to his ill-disguised contempt for all that was dear to the heart
of the Humanist Leo X., and to the severe measures taken by him to
reduce expenses at the Roman Court, he encountered great opposition in
Rome, and incurred the dislike both of officials and people.

When he learned that a Diet was to be held at Nurnberg (1522) to
consider plans for the defence of the Empire against the Turks who had
conquered Belgrade, he despatched Chieregati as his nuncio to invite
the princes to enforce the decree of Worms, and to restore peace to
the Church by putting down the Lutheran movement. In his letters to
individual members of the Diet and in his instructions to the nuncio,
which were read publicly to the assembled representatives, Adrian VI.
admitted the existence of grave abuses both in Rome itself and in
nearly every part of the church.[26] He promised, however, to do
everything that in him lay to bring about a complete and thorough
reform.

These admissions served only to strengthen the hands of Luther and his
supporters, who pointed to them as a justification for the whole
movement, and to provide the princes with a plausible explanation of
their inactivity in giving effect to the decree of Worms. The princes
refused to carry out the decree of Worms, alleging as an excuse the
danger of popular commotion. They brought forward once more the
grievances of the German nation against Rome (/Centum Gravamina/),
insisted on a General Council being called to restore peace to the
Church, and held out a vague hope that an effort would be made to
prevent the spread of the new doctrine till the Council should be
convoked.

The papal nuncio, dissatisfied with the attitude of the
representatives, withdrew from the Diet before the formal reply was
delivered to him. Adrian VI., cognisant of the failure of his efforts
and wearied by the opposition of the Romans to whom his reforms were
displeasing, made a last fruitless effort to win over Frederick of
Saxony to his side. The news that the island of Rhodes, for the
defence of which he had laboured and prayed so strenuously, had fallen
into the hands of the Turks, served to complete his affliction and to
bring him to a premature grave. He died in September 1523 to the great
delight of the Romans, who could barely conceal their rejoicing even
when he lay on his bed of death. He was an excellent Pope, though
perhaps not sufficiently circumspect for the critical times in which
he lived. Had he been elected a century earlier, and had he been given
an opportunity of carrying out reforms, as had been given to some of
his predecessors, the Lutheran movement would have been an
impossibility.

He was succeeded by Clement VII. (1523-34). The new Pope was a
relative of Leo X., and, like him, a patron of literature and art. He
was a man of blameless life and liberal views, and endowed with great
prudence and tact, but his excessive caution and want of firmness led
to the ruin of his best-conceived plans and to the failure of his
general policy. He despatched Cardinal Campeggio as his legate to the
Diet of Nurnberg (1524). Once again the princes of Germany closed
their ears to the appeal of the Pope, refused to take energetic
measures to enforce the decree of Worms, and talked of establishing a
commission to consider the grievances of their nation against Rome,
and to inquire into the religious issues that had been raised.
Campeggio, feeling that it was hopeless to expect assistance from the
Diet, turned to the individual princes. He succeeded in bringing about
an alliance at Ratisbon (1524) between the rulers of Austria, Bavaria,
and several of the ecclesiastical princes of Southern Germany for the
purpose of opposing the new teaching and safeguarding the interests of
the Catholic Church. A similar alliance of the Catholic princes of
Northern Germany was concluded at Dessau in 1526. At the same time the
princes who were favourable to Lutheran views, notably Philip of
Hesse, John, Elector of Saxony, the rulers of Brandenburg, Prussia,
Mecklenburg and Mansfeld, together with the representatives of the
cities of Brunswick and Mecklenburg, met and pledged themselves to
make common cause, were any attempt made by the Emperor or the
Catholic princes to suppress Luther's doctrine by force. In this way
Germany was being divided gradually into two hostile camps.

Unfortunately Charles V., whose presence in Germany might have
exercised a restraining influence, was so engrossed in the life and
death struggle with France that he had no time to follow the progress
of the religious revolt. To complicate the issue still more, Clement
VII., who had been friendly to the Emperor for some time after his
election, alarmed lest the freedom of the Papal States and of the Holy
See might be endangered were the French driven completely from the
peninsula, took sides openly against Charles V. and formed an alliance
with his opponent. The good fortune that had smiled on the French arms
suddenly deserted them. In 1525 Francis I. was defeated at Pavia and
taken as prisoner to Spain, where he was forced to accept the terms
dictated to him by his victorious rival. On his release in 1526 he
refused to abide by the terms of the Treaty, and a new alliance,
consisting of the Pope, France, England, Venice, Florence, Milan, and
Switzerland was formed against Charles V. Disturbances, fomented by
the Italian supporters of the Emperor, broke out in the Papal States,
and a German army led by the Prince of Bourbon marched on Rome without
the knowledge of Charles, captured the city, plundered its treasures,
and for several days wreaked a terrible vengeance on the citizens.
Charles, who was in Spain at the time, was deeply grieved when the
news was brought to him of the havoc that had been wrought by his
subordinates. A temporary peace was concluded immediately between the
Emperor and the Pope, and the peace of Barcelona in 1529 put an end to
this unholy strife. About the same time the hostilities between
Charles and Francis I. were brought to a conclusion by the Peace of
Cambrai, and the Emperor, having been crowned by the Pope at Bologna
(1530), was free at last to turn his attention to the religious
revolution in Germany.[27]

During the struggle between Charles V. and the Pope the Lutheran
princes had a free hand to do as they pleased, and, indeed, at one
time they were not without hope that Charles might be induced to place
himself at their head. Besides, owing to the fact that the Turks were
advancing on Hungary and were likely to overrun the hereditary
dominions of the House of Habsburg, they felt confident that no
attempt could be made to suppress Lutheranism by force. At the Diet of
Speier, in 1526, John Duke of Saxony, and Philip of Hesse adopted so
violent and unconciliatory an attitude that Germany was on the brink
of civil war, had not the Archduke Ferdinand, alarmed by the success
of the Turks, used all his powers to prevent a division. It was agreed
that both sides should unite against the Turks, that a Council should
be called within a year to discuss the religious difficulties, and
that in the meantime individual rulers were free to enforce or
disregard the decree of Worms as they wished.

These concessions, wrung from the Catholic princes owing to the fear
of Turkish invasion, did not satisfy either party. False rumours were
spread among the Protestant princes that Duke George of Saxony and
other Catholic rulers intended to have recourse to arms, and though
the Duke was able to clear himself of the charge, the relations
between the two parties became gradually more strained. In 1526 the
Turks overcame the Hungarians and Bohemians at Mohacz, and advancing
into Austria were encamped under the very walls of Vienna. It became
necessary to summon another Diet at Speier (1529). The Catholic
princes were in the majority, and the knowledge, that the Emperor had
concluded peace with France and the Pope and was now ready to support
them, rendered them less willing to accept dictation. It was carried
by a majority that the Emperor should endeavour to have a Council
convoked within a year, that in the meantime the rulers in whose
territories the decree of Worms had been in force should continue to
enforce it, and that in the states where the new teaching had taken
root the rulers were at liberty to allow it to continue, but, in the
interval before the Council they should permit no further changes to
be introduced. Nobody should be allowed to preach against the
Sacrament of the Altar; the Mass should be celebrated if it had not
been abolished, and if abolished no one should be punished for
celebrating or attending it, and the Scripture should be expounded
according to the traditional interpretation of the Church.

The Lutheran party objected strongly to this decree, and as their
objections were over-ruled they submitted a formal protest, on account
of which they received the distinctive title of Protestants.[28] The
protest, signed by the Elector of Saxony, the Margrave of Brandenburg,
the Dukes of Brunswick-Luneburg, Philip of Hesse, and the
representatives of fourteen cities, having failed to produce any
effect on the Diet, a deputation was appointed to interview the
Emperor and to place their grievances before him. But Charles V.,
mindful of his imperial oath, refused to allow himself to be
intimidated. He warned the deputation that he and the Catholic princes
had also their duties to fulfil towards God and the Church, and that
until a Council should assemble they must obey the decrees of the
Diet. In January 1530 he convened a new Diet to meet at Augsburg at
which he himself promised to be present.

The Diet was convened to meet at Augsburg in April 1530, but it was
the middle of June before the Emperor, accompanied by the papal
legate, made his formal entrance into the city. On the following day
the feast of Corpus Christi was celebrated with the customary
solemnities, and the Emperor was pained deeply when he learned that
the Protestant princes refused to be present or to take any part in
the function. At the opening of the Diet it was agreed that the
religious question should take precedence, and the Protestant princes
were invited to make a clear statement of their doctrines and demands.
Luther himself could not be present on account of the decree of Worms,
and hence the duty of preparing a complete exposition of the
Protestant doctrine devolved upon the ablest of his lieutenants,
Philip Melanchthon. He drew up and presented to the Diet the document
known as the /Augsburg Confession/ (/Confessio Augustana/), accepted
by Luther himself as a masterly though perhaps too moderate statement
of the new teaching. The Confession was divided into two parts, the
former of which consisted of twenty-one articles or dogmas of faith
received by himself and his friends; the latter dwelt with what he
termed abuses which they rejected, notable amongst these being
celibacy of the clergy, monastic vows, auricular confession, private
masses, communion under one kind, abstinence, and episcopal
government. The Confession was drawn up very skilfully, great
prominence being given to the doctrines on which all Christians were
agreed, while the distinctive tenets of the Protestant reformers were
put forward in their mildest and least offensive form. The document
was read to the Diet in German by Bayer, Chancellor of the Elector of
Saxony, and undoubtedly it produced a marked impression on the
assembly. The Emperor held a conference with the Catholic princes,
some of whom advocated prompt recourse to the sternest measures.
Others, however, amongst them being several of the ecclesiastical
princes, misled by the temperate and, in a certain sense, misleading
character of Melanchthon's statement, and believing that a peaceful
solution to the religious difficulty was still possible, urged Charles
V. to abstain from decisive action. It was agreed that the work of
examining and refuting the Augsburg Confession should be entrusted to
a certain number of Catholic theologians, the most prominent of whom
were Eck, Cochlaeus, and Conrad Wimpina.[29] Unfortunately these men
allowed their natural feelings of irritation to overcome their
judgment, and not content with a calm and judicial refutation of the
document submitted to them, they attacked warmly the exaggerations,
contradictions, and misrepresentations of Catholic doctrine of which
Luther had been guilty, and succeeded in imparting to their reply a
bitter and ironical tone more likely to widen than to heal the
division. At the request of the Emperor they modified it very
considerably, confining themselves entirely to a brief and
dispassionate examination of the individual points raised by
Melanchthon, and in its modified form their refutation (/Confutatio
Confessionis Augustanae/) was presented to the Diet (3rd Aug.).

When the reply of the Catholic theologians had been read the Emperor
called upon the Protestant princes to return to the unity of the
Church; but his appeal fell upon deaf ears, and it seemed as if the
issue were to be decided immediately by civil war. By way of
compromise it was suggested that representatives of both parties
should meet in conference, Eck, Cochlaeus, and Wimpina being selected
as the Catholic theologians, Melanchthon, Brenz, and Schnep as the
champions of Lutheranism. From the very outset it should have been
evident to all that, where disagreement was so fundamental, one party
maintaining the theory of an infallible Church as the only safe guide
in religious matters, the other rejecting entirely the authority of
the Church and the Pope in favour of individual judgment, the
discussion of particular dogmas could never lead to unity. As a matter
of fact Melanchthon was willing to make most important concessions,
and on the question of original sin, free-will, justification, faith,
penance, and the intercession of the saints, formulas were put forward
not displeasing to either party. Even in regard to the Eucharist, the
jurisdiction of the bishops, and the supremacy of Rome, Melanchthon
was inclined to go far to meet his opponents, much to the disgust of
the extremists of his own party and to the no small alarm of
Luther.[30] But in reality the apparent harmony existed only on paper,
and the concessions made by Melanchthon depended entirely on the
meaning that should be placed on the ambiguous phraseology and
qualifications with which they were clothed. On the question of the
Mass, the celibacy of the clergy, and the meritorious character of
good works, no agreement was arrived at, as Melanchthon, alarmed by
the opposition of his own supporters and the reproofs of Luther, was
unwilling to modify his position. What the conference of theologians
had failed to do was undertaken by a mixed commission consisting of
princes, theologians, and lawyers, but without any result. In
September the Emperor announced that he was endeavouring to procure
the convocation of a General Council and that in the meantime the
Protestants should return to the old faith, a certain time being
allowed them for consideration, that they should attempt no further
innovations or interference with the followers of the old faith, that
they should restore the ecclesiastical goods which had been seized,
and that they should unite with the Catholics in opposing the
Anabaptists and the Sacramentarians.

The Protestant princes refused to submit on the ground that their
doctrines were in harmony with the Word of God, and to justify this
contention Melanchthon published the /Apologia Confessionis
Augustanae/, which was in many points more full and explicit than the
Confession itself. Some of the German cities that had embraced the
Zwinglian doctrine, notably, Strassburg and Constance, repudiated the
Augsburg Confession, and presented a document embodying their beliefs,
known as the /Confessio Tetrapolitana/ which found no favour with
Charles V. or with the Diet. Finally, on the 18th November, the
Emperor announced to the Diet that until a General Council should
meet, everything must be restored to the /status quo/, that he felt it
incumbent upon him as protector of the Church to defend the Catholic
faith with all his might, and that in this work he could count on the
full support of the Catholic princes. Unfortunately, it was by no
means correct to state that the Catholic rulers of Germany stood
behind their Emperor. Nearly all of them were anxious to avoid civil
war at any cost, and not a few of them hesitated to support the
Emperor lest the suppression of the Protestant princes might lead to
the establishment of a strong central power. Nor were the Protestants
alarmed by the threat of force. With the Turks hovering on the flanks
of the empire, they were confident that they might expect concessions
rather than violence.

The Protestant princes met in December (1530) at Schmalkald to
consider their position, and early in the following year (1531) they
formed the Schmalkaldic League for the defence of their religious and
temporal interests. Negotiations were opened up with France, Denmark,
and England, and notification was made to the Emperor that they must
withhold their assistance against the Turks until their religious
beliefs were secured. They refused, furthermore, to recognise
Ferdinand, brother of Charles V., whom Charles had proclaimed King of
the Romans. The Emperor, alarmed by the news that Soliman was
preparing an immense army for a general attack on Italy and Austria,
and well aware that he could not count either on the assistance of the
Catholic princes or the neutrality of France, was forced to give way.
In July 1532 peace was concluded at Nurnberg. According to the terms
of the Peace of Nurnberg it was agreed that until a General Council
should assemble no action should be taken against the Protestant
princes, and that in the interval everything was to remain unchanged.
This agreement, it was stipulated, should apply only to those who
accepted the Confession of Augsburg, a stipulation that was meant to
exclude the followers of Zwingli.

Charles V. was really anxious that a Council should be called, nor was
Clement VII. unwilling to meet his wishes, if only he could have been
certain that a Council constituted as such assemblies had been
constituted traditionally, could serve any useful purpose. Time and
again Luther had expressed his supreme contempt for the authority of
General Councils, though he professed to be not unwilling to submit
the matters in dispute to a body of men selected by the civil rulers.
In 1532-3 Pope and Emperor met at Bologna to discuss the situation,
and messengers were despatched to see on what terms the Protestants
would consent to attend the Council. The members of the Schmalkaldic
League refused (1533) to accept the conditions proposed by the Pope,
namely, that the Council should be constituted according to the plan
hitherto followed in regard to such assemblies, and that all should
pledge themselves beforehand to accept its decrees.[31]

Clement VII. died in September (1534) and was succeeded by Paul III.
(1534-49). He convoked a General Council to meet at Mantua in 1537,
but the League refused once more to attend (1535). Even had there been
no other difficulties in the way, the war that broke out with renewed
bitterness between Charles V. and Francis I. would have made it
impossible for such a body to meet with any hope of success. The
helpless condition of the Emperor, confronted, as he was, on the one
side by the French and on the other by the Turks, raised the hopes of
the Protestant party, and made them more determined than ever to
attend no Council in which the authority of the bishops or the
jurisdiction of the Pope should be recognised. Moreover, each year
brought new accessions to their ranks. The appearance of organised
Christian bodies, completely national in character, accepting the
civil rulers as their head, and conceding to them full power to deal
as they liked with ecclesiastical property, created a deep impression
on several princes and free cities, and made them not averse to giving
the new religion a fair trial. In 1530, the Elector of Saxony, Philip
of Hesse and the rulers of Ansbach, Anhalt, Brunswick-Luneburg,
Bayreuth, East Friesland, and a few of the larger cities had gone over
to Luther. Before ten years had elapsed the greater part of Northern
Germany had fallen from the Catholic Church, and even in Southern
Germany Protestantism had made serious inroads. Several of the more
important cities such as Wittenberg, Strassburg, Nurnberg, Magdeburg,
Frankfurt-on-Main, Hamburg, and Erfurt became leading centres for the
spread of the new teaching, while many of the German universities, for
example, Erfurt, Basle, Frankfurt, Rostock, and Marburg supported
strongly the efforts of Luther.

The Catholic princes, alarmed by the rapid spread of the new doctrines
and by the extravagant demands of the Protestants, met together to
form the Holy League (1538) as a defence against the Schmalkaldic
confederation. Feeling was running so high at the time that the long
expected war might have broken out immediately, had not the dread of a
Turkish invasion exercised a restraining influence on both parties. In
1539 negotiations were opened up for a temporary armistice, and
another fruitless attempt was made to arrive at peace by means of a
religious conference. Before any result had been attained the Emperor
summoned a Diet to meet at Ratisbon (April 1541). Three theologians
were appointed from both sides to discuss the questions at issue.
Though some of the Catholic representatives showed clearly enough that
their desire for union was much greater than their knowledge of
Catholic principles, an understanding was arrived at only in regard to
a few points of difference. By the Recess of the Diet (known as the
/Ratisbon Interim/) it was ordered that both parties should observe
the articles of faith on which they had agreed until a General Council
should meet, that in the interval the terms of the Peace of Nurnberg
should be carried out strictly, that the religious houses that had
escaped destruction hitherto should remain undisturbed, and that the
disciplinary decrees promulgated by the cardinal legate (Contarini)
should be obeyed by the Catholics.

The Protestant princes were still dissatisfied. In order to procure
their assistance Charles was obliged to yield to further demands,
notably, to permit them to suppress the monasteries in their
dominions. But, fortunately for the Catholic Church, the agreement
embodied in the /Ratisbon Interim/ was rejected by the more extreme
Protestant Party led by Luther himself, and the danger of grave
misunderstanding was removed.

During the following years the Lutheran movement continued to advance
by leaps and bounds. Duke George of Saxony, one of its strongest
opponents, died in 1539, and his successor invited the Lutheran
preachers to assist him in the work of reform. Henry, Duke of
Brunswick, was driven from his kingdom by the League of Schmalkald and
forced to seek refuge in Bavaria. The Bishoprics of Hildesheim and
Naumburg were captured by force, and it required all the efforts of
the Pope and of the Emperor to prevent Cologne from being handed over
to Luther's followers by its prince-bishop (Hermann von Wied).
Lutheranism provided almost irresistible attractions for the lay
rulers, who desired to acquire wealth and power at the expense of the
Church, as well as for the unworthy ecclesiastical princes who were
anxious to convert the states of which they were merely administrators
into hereditary dominions.

But though outwardly the movement prospered beyond expectation all was
far from well within. The fundamental principle enunciated by Luther,
namely, the rejection of all religious authority, opened the way for
new theories and new sects. Quite apart from the controversies between
the followers of Luther and Zwingli, which shall be dealt with later,
the Anabaptists and others continued to destroy the harmony of the
self-styled reformers. The Anabaptists seized the city of Munster,
proclaimed a democratic theocracy with John of Leyden, a tailor, at
its head, and pronounced their intention of taking the field for the
overthrow of tyrants and impostors. But their success was short-lived.
Conrad, bishop and prince of Munster, raised an army, laid siege to
the city which he captured after a desperate struggle, and put to
death the fanatical leaders who had deceived the people (1535-6).
Other writers and preachers questioned the doctrines of the Trinity
and Incarnation, and advocated many heresies condemned by the early
Church, some of them going so far as to insist on the revival of
circumcision and the Jewish ceremonial law.[32]

Nor did the new teaching exercise an elevating influence on the morals
or conduct of its adherents. Luther himself was forced to admit that
the condition of affairs had grown worse even than it had been before
he undertook his campaign. "Since we have commenced to preach our
doctrine," he said in one of his sermons, "the world has grown daily
worse, more impious, and more shameless. Men are now beset by legions
of devils, and while enjoying the full light of the Gospel are more
avaricious, more impure, and repulsive than of old under the Papacy.
Peasants, burghers, nobles, men of all degrees, the higher as well as
the lowest are all alike slaves to avarice, drunkenness, gluttony, and
impurity, and given over to horrible excesses of abominable
passions."[33]

The princes, free from all religious and ecclesiastical restraints,
set an example of licentiousness which their subjects were not slow to
imitate. Philip of Hesse was the life and soul of the Lutheran
movement. He was married already to Christina, daughter of Duke George
of Saxony, by whom eight children had been born to him, but finding it
impossible to observe his marriage obligations, and wishing to impart
to his own sinful conduct an air of decency, he demanded permission
from Luther to marry one of the maids of honour in attendance on his
sister. This request placed Luther and Melanchthon in a very delicate
position. On the one hand, if they acceded to it they would be
regarded as patrons and defenders of adultery and would expose
themselves to the ridicule of their opponents; on the other, were they
to refuse compliance with his wishes, Philip, forgetful of his former
zeal for the pure word of God, might carry out his threats to return
to the Catholic Church. After long and anxious deliberation they
determined to exercise a dispensing power such as had never been
exercised before by any Pope. "In order to provide for the welfare of
his soul and body and to bring greater glory to God," they allowed him
to take to himself a second wife, insisting, however, that the whole
affair should be kept a close secret. But hardly had the marriage
ceremony been gone through (1540) than the story of the dispensation
became public. Luther was at first inclined to deny it entirely as an
invention of his enemies, but he changed his mind when he found that
the proofs were irrefragable and determined to brazen out the
affair.[34]

Luther's last years were full of anxiety and sorrow. As he looked
round his own city of Wittenberg and the cities of Germany where his
doctrines had taken root he found little ground for self-
congratulation. Religious dissensions, bitterness, war-like
preparations, decline of learning, decay of the universities, and
immorality, had marked the progress of his gospel. In many districts
the power of the Pope had indeed been broken, but only to make way for
the authority of the civil rulers upon whom neither religious nor
disciplinary canons could exercise any restraint; the monasteries and
religious institutions had been suppressed, but their wealth had
passed into the treasuries of the princes, whilst the poor for whose
benefit it had been held in trust were neglected, and the ministers of
religion were obliged to have recourse to different occupations to
secure a livelihood. To his followers and his most intimate associates
he denied the liberty of thought and speech that he claimed for
himself, by insisting on the unconditional acceptance of his doctrines
as if in him alone were vested supreme authority and infallibility.
For exercising their right to private judgment, Carlstadt was pursued
from pulpit to pulpit till at last he was forced to seek safety in
flight; Zwingli was denounced as a heretic for whose salvation it was
useless to pray; the Anabaptists were declared to be unworthy of any
better fate than the sword or the halter; Agricola, his most zealous
