order in matters of religion, there shall not lack blanchers that will
say, "As for images, whereas they have used to be censed, and to have
candles offered unto to them, none be so foolish to do it to the stock or
stone, or to the image itself; but it is done to God and his honour
before the image."  And though they should abuse it, these blanchers will
be ready to whisper the king in the ear, and to tell him, that this abuse
is but a small matter; and that the same, with all other like abuses in
the church, may be reformed easily.  "It is but a little abuse," say
they, "and it may be easily amended.  But it should not be taken in hand
at the first, for fear of trouble or further inconveniences.  The people
will not bear sudden alterations; an insurrection may be made after
sudden mutation, which may be to the great harm and loss of the realm.
Therefore all things shall be well, but not out of hand, for fear of
further business."  These be the blanchers, that hitherto have stopped
the word of God, and hindered the true setting forth of the same.  There
be so many put-offs, so many put-byes, so many respects and
considerations of worldly wisdom: and I doubt not but there were
blanchers in the old time to whisper in the ear of good king Hezekiah,
for the maintenance of idolatry done to the brasen serpent, as well as
there hath been now of late, and be now, that can blanch the abuse of
images, and other like things.  But good king Hezekiah would not be so
blinded; he was like to Apollos, "fervent in spirit."  He would give no
ear to the blanchers; he was not moved with the worldly respects, with
these prudent considerations, with these policies: he feared not
insurrections of the people: he feared not lest his people would bear not
the glory of God; but he, without any of these respects, or policies, or
considerations, like a good king, for God's sake and for conscience sake,
by and by plucked down the brasen serpent, and destroyed it utterly, and
beat it to powder.  He out of hand did cast out all images, he destroyed
all idolatry, and clearly did extirpate all superstition.  He would not
hear these blanchers and worldly-wise men, but without delay followeth
God's cause, and destroyeth all idolatry out of hand.  Thus did good king
Hezekiah; for he was like Apollos, fervent in spirit, and diligent, to
promote God's glory.

And good hope there is, that it shall be likewise here in England; for
the king's majesty is so brought up in knowledge, virtue, and godliness,
that it is not to be mistrusted but that we shall have all things well,
and that the glory of God shall be spread abroad throughout all parts of
the realm, if the prelates will diligently apply their plough, and be
preachers rather than lords.  But our blanchers, which will be lords, and
no labourers, when they are commanded to go and be resident upon their
cures, and preach in their benefices, they would say, "What?  I have set
a deputy there; I have a deputy that looketh well to my flock, and the
which shall discharge my duty."  "A deputy," quoth he!  I looked for that
word all this while.  And what a deputy must he be, trow ye?  Even one
like himself: he must be a canonist; that is to say, one that is brought
up in the study of the pope's laws and decrees; one that will set forth
papistry as well as himself will do; and one that will maintain all
superstition and idolatry; and one that will nothing at all, or else very
weakly, resist the devil's plough: yea, happy it is if he take no part
with the devil; and where he should be an enemy to him, it is well if he
take not the devil's part against Christ.

But in the meantime the prelates take their pleasures.  They are lords,
and no labourers: but the devil is diligent at his plough.  He is no
unpreaching prelate: he is no lordly loiterer from his cure, but a busy
ploughman; so that among all the prelates, and among all the pack of them
that have cure, the devil shall go for my money, for he still applieth
his business.  Therefore, ye unpreaching prelates, learn of the devil: to
be diligent in doing of your office, learn of the devil: and if you will
not learn of God, nor good men, for shame learn of the devil; _ad
erubescentiam vestrum dico_, "I speak it for your shame:" if you will not
learn of God, nor good men, to be diligent in your office, learn of the
devil.  Howbeit there is now very good hope that the king's majesty,
being of the help of good governance of his most honourable counsellors
trained and brought up in learning, and knowledge of God's word, will
shortly provide a remedy, and set an order herein; which thing that it
may so be, let us pray for him.  Pray for him, good people; pray for him.
Ye have great cause and need to pray for him.




A SERMON ON THE PARABLE OF A KING THAT MARRIED HIS SON, MADE BY MASTER
LATIMER.


   MATTHEW XXII. [2,3.]

   _Simile factum est regnum coelorum homini regi qui fecit nuptias filio
   suo_.

   The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which married his
   son, and sent forth his servants to call them that, &c.

This is a gospel that containeth very much matter; and there is another
like unto this in the fourteenth of Luke: but they be both one in effect,
for they teach both one thing; and therefore I will take them both in
hand together, because they tend to one purpose.  Matthew saith, "The
kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king, which married his son;"
Luke saith, "A certain man ordained a great supper:" but there is no
difference in the very substance of the matter, for they pertain to one
purpose.  Here is made mention of a feast-maker: therefore we must
consider who was the feast-maker: secondarily, who was his son: thirdly,
we must consider to whom he was married: fourthly, who were they that
called the guests: fifthly, who were the guests.  And then we must know
how the guest-callers behaved themselves: and then, how the guests
behaved themselves towards them that called them.  When all these
circumstances be considered, we shall find much good matters covered and
hid in this gospel.

Now that I may so handle these matters, that it may turn to the
edification of your souls, and to the discharge of my office, I will most
instantly desire you to lift up your hearts unto God, and desire his
divine Majesty, in the name of his only-begotten Son, our Saviour Jesus
Christ, that he will give unto us his Holy Ghost:--unto me, that I may
speak the word of God, and teach you to understand the same; unto you,
that you may hear it fruitfully, to the edification of your souls; so
that you may be edified through it, and your lives reformed and amended;
and that his honour and glory may increase daily amongst us.  Wherefore I
shall desire you to say with me, "Our Father," &c.

Dearly beloved in the Lord, the gospel that is read this day is a
parable, a similitude or comparison.  For our Saviour compared the
kingdom of God unto a man that made a marriage for his son.  And here was
a marriage.  At a marriage, you know, there is commonly great feastings.
Now you must know who was this feast-maker, and who was his son, and to
whom he was married; and who were those that should be called, and who
were the callers; how they behaved themselves, and how the guests behaved
themselves towards them that called them.

Now this marriage-maker, or feast-maker, is Almighty God.  Luke the
Evangelist calleth him a man, saying, "A certain man ordained a great
supper."  He calleth him a man, not that he was incarnate, or hath taken
our flesh upon him: no, not so; for you must understand that there be
three Persons in the Deity, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost.  And these three Persons decked the Son with manhood; so that
neither the Father, neither the Holy Ghost, took flesh upon them, but
only the Son; he took our flesh upon him, taking it of the Virgin Mary.
But Luke called God the Father a man, not because he took flesh upon him,
but only compared him unto a man; not that he will affirm him to be a
man.  Who was he now that was married?  Who was the bridegroom?  Marry,
that was our Saviour Jesus Christ, the second person in the Deity; the
eternal Son of God.  Who should be his spouse?  To whom was he married?
To his church and congregation: for he would have all the world to come
unto him, and to be married unto him: but we see by daily experience that
the most part refuse his offer.  But here is shewed the state of the
church of God: for this marriage, this feast, was begun at the beginning
of the world, and shall endure to the end of the same: yet for all that,
the most part refused it: for at the very beginning of the world, ever
the most part refused to come.  And so it appeareth at this time, how
little a number cometh to this wedding and feast: though we have callers,
yet there be but few of those that come.  So ye hear that God is the
feast-maker; the bridegroom is Christ, his Son, our Saviour; the bride is
the congregation.

Now what manner of meat was prepared at this great feast?  For ye know it
is commonly seen, that at a marriage the finest meat is prepared that can
be gotten.  What was the chiefest dish at this great banquet?  What was
the feast-dish?  Marry, it was the bridegroom himself: for the Father,
the feast-maker, prepared none other manner of meat for the guests, but
the body and blood of his own natural Son.  And this is the chiefest dish
at this banquet; which truly is a marvellous thing, that the Father
offereth his Son to be eaten.  Verily, I think that no man hath heard the
like.  And truly there was never such kind of feasting as this is, where
the Father will have his Son to be eaten, and his blood to be drunk.

We read in a story, that a certain man had eaten his son; but it was done
unawares: he knew not that it was his son, else no doubt he would not
have eaten him.  The story is this: There was a king named Astyages,
which had heard by a prophecy, that one Cyrus should have the rule and
dominion over his realm after his departure; which thing troubled the
said king very sore, and therefore [he] sought all the ways and means how
to get the said Cyrus out of the way; how to kill him, so that he should
not be king after him.  Now he had a nobleman in his house, named
Harpagus, whom he appointed to destroy the said Cyrus: but howsoever the
matter went, Cyrus was preserved and kept alive, contrary to the king's
mind.  Which thing when Astyages heard, what doth he?  This he did:
Harpagus, that nobleman which was put in trust to kill Cyrus, had a son
in the court, whom the king commanded to be taken; his head, hands, and
feet to be cut off; and his body to be prepared, roasted, or sodden, of
the best manner as could be devised.  After that, he biddeth Harpagus to
come and eat with him, where there was jolly cheer; one dish coming after
another.  At length the king asked him, "Sir, how liketh you your fare?"
Harpagus thanketh the king, with much praising the king's banquet.  Now
the king perceiving him to be merrily disposed, commanded one of his
servants to bring in the head, hands, and feet of Harpagus's son.  When
it was done, the king showed him what manner of meat he had eaten, asking
him how it liketh him.  Harpagus made answer, though with an heavy heart,
_Quod regi placet, id mihi quoque placet_; "Whatsoever pleaseth the king,
that also pleaseth me."  And here we have an ensample of a flatterer, or
dissembler: for this Harpagus spake against his own heart and conscience.
Surely, I fear me, there be a great many of flatterers in our time also,
which will not be ashamed to speak against their own heart and
consciences, like as this Harpagus did; which had, no doubt, a heavy
heart, and in his conscience the act of the king misliked him, yet for
all that, with his tongue he praised the same.  So I say, we read not in
any story, that at any time any father had eaten his son willingly and
wittingly; and this Harpagus, of whom I rehearsed the story, did it
unawares.  But the Almighty God, which prepared this feast for all the
world, for all those that will come unto it, he offereth his only Son to
be eaten, and his blood to be drunken.  Belike he loved his guests well,
because he did feed them with so costly a dish.

Again, our Saviour, the bridegroom, offereth himself at his last supper,
which he had with his disciples, his body to be eaten, and his blood to
be drunk.  And to the intent that it should be done to our great comfort;
and then again to take away all cruelty, irksomeness, and horribleness,
he sheweth unto us how we shall eat him, in what manner and form; namely,
spiritually, to our great comfort: so that whosoever eateth the mystical
bread, and drinketh the mystical wine worthily, according to the
ordinance of Christ, he receiveth surely the very body and blood of
Christ spiritually, as it shall be most comfortable unto his soul.  He
eateth with the mouth of his soul, and digesteth with the stomach of his
soul, the body of Christ.  And to be short: whosoever believeth in
Christ, putteth his hope, trust, and confidence in him, he eateth and
drinketh him: for the spiritual eating is the right eating to everlasting
life; not the corporal eating, as the Capernaites understood it.  For
that same corporal eating, on which they set their minds, hath no
commodities at all; it is a spiritual meat that feedeth our souls.

But I pray you, how much is this supper of Christ regarded amongst us,
where he himself exhibiteth unto us his body and blood?  How much, I say,
is it regarded?  How many receive it with the curate or minister?  O
Lord, how blind and dull are we to such things, which pertain to our
salvation!  But I pray you, wherefore was it ordained principally?
Answer: it was ordained for our help, to help our memory withal; to put
us in mind of the great goodness of God, in redeeming us from everlasting
death by the blood of our Saviour Christ; yea, and to signify unto us,
that his body and blood is our meat and drink for our souls, to feed them
to everlasting life.  If we were now so perfect as we ought to be, we
should not have need of it: but to help our imperfectness it was ordained
of Christ; for we be so forgetful, when we be not pricked forward, we
have soon forgotten all his benefits.  Therefore to the intent that we
might better keep it in memory, and to remedy this our slothfulness, our
Saviour hath ordained this his supper for us, whereby we should remember
his great goodness, his bitter passion and death, and so strengthen our
faith: so that he instituted this supper for our sake, to make us to keep
in fresh memory his inestimable benefits.  But, as I said before, it is
in a manner nothing regarded amongst us: we care not for it; we will not
come unto it.  How many be there, think ye, which regard this supper of
the Lord as much as a testoon?  But very few, no doubt of it: and I will
prove that they regard it not so much.  If there were a proclamation made
in this town, that whosoever would come unto the church at such an hour,
and there go to the communion with the curate, should have a testoon;
when such a proclamation were made, I think, truly, all the town would
come and celebrate the communion to get a testoon: but they will not come
to receive the body and blood of Christ, the food and nourishment of
their souls, to the augmentation and strength of their faith!  Do they
not more regard now a testoon than Christ?  But the cause which letteth
us from celebrating of the Lord's Supper, is this: we have no mind nor
purpose to leave sin and wickedness, which maketh us not to come to this
supper, because we be not ready nor meet to receive it.  But I require
you in God's behalf; leave your wickedness, that ye may receive it
worthily, according to his institution.  For this supper is ordained, as
I told you before, for our sake, to our profits and commodities: for if
we were perfect, we should not need this outward sacrament; but our
Saviour, knowing our weakness and forgetfulness, ordained this supper to
the augmentation of our faith, and to put us in remembrance of his
benefits.  But we will not come: there come no more at once, but such as
give the holy loaves from house to house; which follow rather the custom
than any thing else.  Our Saviour Christ saith in the gospel of St. John,
_Ego sum panis virus, qui de coelo descendi_; "I am the living bread
which came down from heaven."  Therefore whosoever feedeth of our Saviour
Christ, he shall not perish; death shall not prevail against him: his
soul shall depart out of his body, yet death shall not get the victory
over him; he shall not be damned.  He that cometh to that marriage, to
that banquet, death shall be unto him but an entrance or a door to
everlasting life.  _Panis quem ego dabo caro mea est_; "The bread that I
will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world."  As
many as will feed upon him, shall attain to everlasting life: they shall
never die; they shall prevail against death; death shall not hurt them,
because he hath lost his strength.  If we would consider this, no doubt
we would be more desirous to come to the communion than we be; we would
not be so cold; we would be content to leave our naughty living, and come
to the Lord's table.

Now ye have heard what shall be the chiefest dish at this marriage,
namely, the body and blood of Christ.  But now there be other dishes,
which be sequels or hangings-on, wherewith the chief dish is powdered:
that is, remission of sins; also the Holy Ghost, which ruleth and
governeth our hearts; also the merits of Christ, which are made ours.  For
when we feed upon this dish worthily, then we shall have remission of our
sins; we shall receive the Holy Ghost.  Moreover, all the merits of
Christ are ours; his fulfilling of the law is ours; and so we be
justified before God, and finally attain to everlasting life.  As many,
therefore, as feed worthily of this dish, shall have all these things
with it, and in the end everlasting life.  St. Paul saith, _Qui proprio
Filio suo non pepercit, sed pro nobis omnibus tradidit illum, quomodo non
etiam cum illo omnia nobis donabit_?  "He which spared not his own Son,
but gave him for us all, how shall he not with him give us all things
also?"  Therefore they that be in Christ are partakers of all his merits
and benefits; of everlasting life, and of all felicity.  He that hath
Christ hath all things that are Christ's.  He is our preservation from
damnation; he is our comfort; he is our help, our remedy.  When we feed
upon him, then we shall have remission of our sins: the same remission of
sins is the greatest and most comfortable thing that can be in the world.
O what a comfortable thing is this, when Christ saith, _Remittuntur tibi
peccata_, "Thy sins are forgiven unto thee!"  And this is a standing
sentence; it was not spoken only to the same one man, but it is a general
proclamation unto all us: all and every one that believeth in him shall
have forgiveness of their sins.  And this proclamation is cried out daily
by his ministers and preachers; which proclamation is the word of grace,
the word of comfort and consolation.  For like as sin is the most fearful
and the most horriblest thing in heaven and in earth, so the most
comfortablest thing is the remedy against sin; which remedy is declared
and offered unto us in this word of grace and the power to distribute
this remedy against sins he hath given unto his ministers, which be God's
treasurers, distributers of the word of God.  For now he speaketh by me,
he calleth you to this wedding by me, being but a poor man; yet he hath
sent me to call you.  And though he be the author of the word, yet he
will have men to be called through his ministers to that word.  Therefore
let us give credit unto the minister, when he speaketh God's word: yea,
rather let us credit God when he speaketh by his ministers, and offereth
us remission of our sins by his word.  For there is no sin so great in
this world, but it is pardonable as long as we be in this world, and call
for mercy: for here is the time of mercy; here we may come to forgiveness
of our sins.  But if we once die in our sins and wickedness, so that we
be damned, let us not look for remission afterwards: for the state after
this life is unchangeable.  But as long as we be here, we may cry for
mercy.  Therefore let us not despair: let us amend our lives, and cry
unto God for forgiveness of our sins; and then no doubt we shall obtain
remission, if we call with a faithful heart upon him, for so he hath
promised unto us in his most holy word.

The holy scripture maketh mention of a sin against the Holy Ghost, which
sin cannot be forgiven, neither in this world, nor in the world to come.
And this maketh many men unquiet in their hearts and consciences: for
some there be which ever be afraid, lest they have committed that same
sin against the Holy Ghost, which is irremissible.  Therefore some say,
"I cannot tell whether I have sinned against the Holy Ghost or not: if I
have committed that sin, I know I shall be damned."  But I tell you what
ye shall do: despair not of the mercy of God, for it is immeasurable.  I
cannot deny but that there is a sin against the Holy Ghost, which is
irremissible: but we cannot judge of it aforehand, we cannot tell which
man hath committed that sin or not, as long as he is alive; but when he
is once gone, then I can judge whether he sinned against the Holy Ghost
or not.  As now I can judge that Nero, Saul, and Judas, and such like,
that died in sins and wickedness, did commit this sin against the Holy
Ghost: for they were wicked, and continued in their wickedness still to
the very end; they made an end in their wickedness.  But we cannot judge
whether one of us sin this sin against the Holy Ghost, or not; for though
a man be wicked at this time, yet he may repent, and leave his wickedness
tomorrow, and so not commit that sin against the Holy Ghost.  Our Saviour
Christ pronounced against the scribes and Pharisees, that they had
committed that sin against the Holy Ghost; because he knew their hearts,
he knew they would still abide in their wickedness to the very end of
their lives.  But we cannot pronounce this sentence against any man, for
we know not the hearts of men: he that sinneth now, peradventure shall be
turned tomorrow, and leave his sins, and so be saved.  Further, the
promises of our Saviour Christ are general; they pertain to all mankind:
he made a general proclamation, saying, _Qui credit in me, habet vitam
aeternam_; "Whosoever believeth in me hath everlasting life."  Likewise
St. Paul saith, _Gratia exsuperat supra peccatum_; "The grace and mercies
of God exceedeth far our sins."  Therefore let us ever think and believe
that the grace of God, his mercy and goodness, exceedeth our sins.  Also
consider what Christ saith with his own mouth: _Venite ad me, omnes qui
laboratis, &c_.  "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are laden, and I
