
    27 And after these things he went forth, and beheld a publican,
    named Levi, sitting at the place of toll, and said unto him,
    Follow me. 28 And he forsook all, and rose up and followed him.


    29 And Levi made him a great feast in his house: and there was a
    great multitude of publicans and of others that were sitting at
    meat with them. 30 And the Pharisees and their scribes murmured
    against his disciples, saying, Why do ye eat and drink with the
    publicans and sinners? 31 And Jesus answering said unto them, They
    that are in health have no need of a physician; but they that are
    sick. 32 I am not come to call the righteous but sinners to
    repentance.


Nothing could further emphasize the sympathy of Jesus than his calling a
publican to be his close companion and friend. These taxgatherers were
everywhere despised for their dishonesty, extortion, and greed; but Jesus
chose one of them named Levi, or Matthew, and transformed him into an
apostle, an evangelist, and a saint.

There must have been something admirable in the character of the man; at
least there was something inspiring in his example, for as soon as he
heard the clear call of the Master, "He forsook all, and rose up and
followed him."

Probably he had more to leave than any of the twelve men who became
apostles of Christ. He must have been possessed of wealth. At least, as
soon as he was converted, he made "a great feast in his house" and invited
"a great multitude of publicans and of others" to be his guests. He had
the courage of his convictions; he was not ashamed of his new Master. He
was eager to have his old friends introduced to Christ.

It was on the occasion of this feast that Jesus was criticized by the
Pharisees for eating and drinking with publicans and sinners. He made this
most significant reply: "They that are in health have no need of a
physician; but they that are sick. I am not come to call the righteous but
sinners to repentance." By this statement Jesus emphasized and vindicated
his conduct and defined his mission. A physician enters a sick room, not
because he delights in disease or rejoices in suffering, but because he
desires to cure and to relieve; so Jesus companied with sinners not
because he countenanced sin or enjoyed the society of the depraved, but
because, as a healer of souls, he was willing to go where he was most
needed and to work where the ravages of sin were most severe. He came into
the world to save sinners. Their conduct distressed him, their sins pained
him; but to accomplish his task he sought them out and showed his sympathy
by his presence and by his healing power.

Are there any who do not need the spiritual cure he can effect? Are any
"sound;" are some not "sinners"? These questions each must answer for
himself. Probably those who like the Pharisees are least conscious of
their sickness are in most desperate danger. Then again, are those who
know his power willing like the Master to go with his gospel to the places
of greatest need?



5. The Question of Fasting. Ch. 5:33-39


    33 And they said unto him, The disciples of John fast often, and
    make supplications; likewise also the _disciples_ of the
    Pharisees; but thine eat and drink. 34 And Jesus said unto them,
    Can ye make the sons of the bride-chamber fast, while the
    bridegroom is with them? 35 But the days will come; and when the
    bridegroom shall be taken away from them, then will they fast in
    those days. 36 And he spake also a parable unto them: No man
    rendeth a piece from a new garment and putteth it upon an old
    garment; else he will rend the new, and also the piece from the
    new will not agree with the old. 37 And no man putteth new wine
    into old wine-skins; else the new wine will burst the skins, and
    itself will be spilled, and the skins will perish. 38 But new wine
    must be put into fresh wine-skins. 39 And no man having drunk old
    _wine_ desireth new; for he saith, The old is good.


The Pharisees were disturbed by the attitude of Jesus toward sinners. Much
more were they distressed by his attitude toward the forms and ceremonies
which to their mind constituted the very essence of religion. This
attitude had been expressed by the failure of Jesus to require his
disciples to observe the fasts which had become so prominent in the system
of legalism taught by the religious leaders of the Jews. The Law of Moses
prescribed no fasts. The rabbis had so multiplied them that a Pharisee
could boast of fasting "twice in the week." The disciples of John the
Baptist were taught to fast frequently, not as an empty form, but to
express the solemn character of the ministry of John who had come
preaching "repentance unto remission of sins." It was not strange,
therefore, that the enemies of Jesus came to him with a complaint and with
the question, "The disciples of John fast often, and make supplications;
likewise also the disciples of the Pharisees; but thine eat and drink." In
his reply Jesus stated distinctly the view his followers should take, not
only of fasting but of all religious forms: "Can ye make the sons of the
bride-chamber fast, while the bridegroom is with them? But the days will
come; and when the bridegroom shall be taken away from them, then will
they fast in those days." Fasting is an expression of sorrow. How absurd
then would it be for Jesus' followers to fast while the heavenly
Bridegroom was with them! They might express their distress thus when he
should be taken away. Thus Jesus declared that fasting, like all religious
rites, may be quite fitting if it is a true expression of religious
feeling, but if it is a matter of form, of rule, or requirement, if it is
regarded as a ground of merit, it is an absurdity and an impertinence.

Jesus added a parable which further indicates his attitude toward all the
rites and ceremonies in which the Pharisees took such delight. He declared
that he had not come to regulate the fasts and feasts or to amend the
Jewish ritual. That would be like sewing a new patch on an old garment.
This religion of ceremonies had served its purpose. Jesus had come with
something, new and better. The life of freedom and of joy which he was
imparting could not be bound up in the narrow forms and rites of Judaism.
New wine could not be kept in old wine skins.

Christianity cannot be comprehended by any system of rites and ceremonies.
It must not be interpreted as a set of rules and requirements; it must not
be confused with any ritual. It controls men, not by rules, but by
motives. Its symbol is not a fast but a feast, for its pervasive spirit is
joy.

As reported by Luke, Jesus added a characteristic phrase indicating his
tender sympathy, "And no man having drunk old wine desireth new; for he
saith, The old is good." Those who long have been accustomed to a religion
of forms find it difficult to be satisfied with the religion of faith. We
must be patient with them. It is not easy for them to give up the
practices of childhood and it takes time for them to learn the gladness
and the freedom of spiritual maturity offered to the followers of Christ.



6. The Sabbath Controversy. Ch. 6:1-11


    1 Now it came to pass on a sabbath, that he was going through the
    grainfields; and his disciples plucked the ears, and did eat,
    rubbing them in their hands. 2 But certain of the Pharisees said,
    Why do ye that which it is not lawful to do on the sabbath day? 3
    And Jesus answering them said, Have ye not read even this, what
    David did, when he was hungry, he, and they that were with him; 4
    how he entered into the house of God, and took and ate the
    showbread, and gave also to them that were with him; which it is
    not lawful to eat save for the priests alone? 5 And he said unto
    them, The Son of man is lord of the sabbath.


    6 And it came to pass on another sabbath, that he entered into the
    synagogue and taught: and there was a man there, and his right
    hand was withered. 7 And the scribes and the Pharisees watched
    him, whether he would heal on the sabbath; that they might find
    how to accuse him. 8 But he knew their thoughts; and he said to
    the man that had his hand withered, Rise up, and stand forth in
    the midst. And he arose and stood forth. 9 And Jesus said unto
    them, I ask you, Is it lawful on the sabbath to do good, or to do
    harm? to save a life, or to destroy it? 10 And he looked round
    about on them all, and said unto him, Stretch forth thy hand. And
    he did so: and his hand was restored. 11 But they were filled with
    madness; and communed one with another what they might do to
    Jesus.


Jesus had aroused the anger of the Pharisees by his claim to forgive sins.
He had further enraged them by his treatment of sinners. But he brought
their hatred to a climax of fury by his attitude toward Sabbath
observance. Henceforth they sought to destroy him.

The question of the Sabbath has never lost its interest. The followers of
Christ need to stand firmly by the principles set forth by their Lord.
These principles are few but fundamental: The Sabbath is a day designed
for worship and for rest and is to be broken only by works of necessity
and of mercy.

The first of these exceptions to the required rest of the Sabbath Day was
illustrated by the case of the disciples who were accused by the Pharisees
of breaking the Sabbath because as they walked through the fields they
picked the ripened ears and thus, according to the interpretation of their
enemies, were guilty of working on the Sabbath Day. Our Lord did not deny
that the Sabbath law had been broken. He merely referred his enemies to
the case of David and his followers who, forced by hunger, broke the
Mosaic Law in entering the tabernacle and eating the "showbread." Jesus
argued that, when necessary to relieve their hunger, his followers were
also justified in disregarding the law of rest.

An illustration of the second exception to the law of absolute cessation
from labor was given "on another sabbath" when in the synagogue Jesus
healed a man whose right hand was "withered." The Pharisees regarded this
action of Jesus as another breach of the law of rest. Jesus defended his
action on the ground that it was dictated by mercy and that work which
secured relief from suffering was allowable on the Sabbath Day. He replied
to his enemies by a searching question, assuming the principle that
refraining from help is the same as inflicting harm. He, asked them
whether they regarded the Sabbath Day as of such character as to make it
right on that day to do that which on other days was wrong: "I ask you, Is
it lawful on the sabbath to do good, or to do harm? to save a life, or to
destroy it?"

While Jesus taught that the law of rest might thus be broken to meet the
necessities of man and to show mercy to those in need or in distress, he
by no means abrogated the Sabbath. He declared, however, that "the Son of
man is lord of the sabbath," by which he meant that as the representative
of men he had a right to interpret the Law for the highest good of man. He
was justified in relieving the Sabbath from the narrow and burdensome
observances which had been bound upon it by the Pharisees and to restore
it to mankind as a glad day of rest and of refreshment and of fellowship
with God.




C. The Third Period. Chs. 6:12 to 8:56



1. The Choice of the Twelve. Ch. 6:12-19


    12 And it came to pass in these days, that he went out into the
    mountain to pray; and he continued all night in prayer to God. 13
    And when it was day, he called his disciples; and he chose from
    them twelve, whom also he named apostles: 14 Simon, whom he also
    named Peter, and Andrew his brother, and James and John, and
    Philip and Bartholomew, 15 and Matthew and Thomas, and James _the
    son_ of Alphaeus, and Simon who was called the Zealot, 16 and Judas
    _the son_ of James, and Judas Iscariot, who became a traitor; 17
    and he came down with them, and stood on a level place, and a
    great multitude of his disciples, and a great number of the people
    from all Judaea and Jerusalem, and the sea coast of Tyre and Sidon,
    who came to hear him, and to be healed of their diseases; 18 and
    they that were troubled with unclean spirits were healed. 19 And
    all the multitude sought to touch him; for power came forth from
    him, and healed _them_ all.


The choice of the twelve apostles marks a new and important period in the
public ministry of our Lord. The deep significance of the act is indicated
by Luke in his statement that Jesus passed the entire preceding night in
prayer to God. One reason for his decision may have been the mad hatred of
the Pharisees whose anger had now reached a murderous height. To give more
assured permanence to his work Jesus saw the necessity of organizing his
followers. He had been surrounded by a multitude of disciples, some of
whom were his constant companions, but he now determined to appoint
officers who would act as trained leaders, who would be his official
messengers accredited by miraculous powers.

In all four places in the New Testament where the names of these twelve
apostles are found, they are arranged in three invariable groups, possibly
in accordance with their intimacy with Jesus and their real service to
him. In all ages there have been among his followers such concentric
circles, such inner groups, who have been blessed by peculiar intimacy
with their Lord, not due to his arbitrary choice, but to their peculiar
capacities for love and obedience and faith.

The first six mentioned by Luke were men who under the influence of John
the Baptist had become the first followers of Christ. Other things being
equal, those who have known Jesus longest are able to serve him best.

The chief place in the first group is always assigned to Simon Peter,
bold, impulsive, fickle, but possessing the peculiar powers of leadership
which qualified him for the place of primacy among the apostles of our
Lord.

With him Luke names his brother Andrew, probably a man of less ability and
strength, but one who will ever be remembered as having brought Peter into
fellowship with Jesus. None can ever tell what share in the reward of a
more famous worker will be enjoyed by one more obscure to whom the greater
leader owes his Christian career.

The next to be mentioned are James and John, the "sons of thunder," the
courageous, loving, faithful companions who with Peter form the inmost
circle of the followers of Christ. James was the first to suffer martyrdom
for the sake of his Master, while John lingered longest of all the
apostolic band, testifying to the cause of him who had chosen John as his
closest friend, and for whose return John continued to watch and to wait.

Of the second four, the first to be mentioned are Philip and Bartholomew;
the latter is supposed to be the same as Nathanael, the Israelite without
guile whom Philip won as a disciple for Christ.

The next were Matthew and Thomas. The former had been a despised publican,
but his training had prepared him to become a careful recorder of facts,
so that after his intimate fellowship with Christ he became one of his
biographers and wrote that which is numbered as the first of the Gospels.
Thomas has won the reputation of being a doubting disciple. He was
certainly naturally despondent and incredulous. The fact, however, that
such a man became convinced of the resurrection of Christ so soon after
the event is one of the most important testimonies to the reality of the
fundamental fact of our Christian faith.

As to the last group, we know nothing of James, the son of Alphaeus,
commonly called "James the less" in contrast with James the brother of
John; but it is surely a mistake to identify him with James the brother of
our Lord who became the head of the church in Jerusalem and wrote the
Epistle which bears his name. "Simon who was called the Zealot" was by
this latter title distinguished from Simon Peter. If this title is
correctly interpreted, he had formerly belonged to that fanatical party of
Jews who were promoters and supporters of the revolt against Rome, which
finally resulted in the destruction of Jerusalem.

Judas, the son of James, is carefully distinguished in the narrative from
the traitor whose infamous name always comes last on the list of apostles
and is never mentioned in Scripture without some designation of disgrace
and shame. Why he should have been chosen as a follower of Christ no one
can sufficiently explain, yet there must have been in him original
elements of good. There was surely the possibility of development into
usefulness and sainthood, but he tried to cherish the passion of greed
while companying with Jesus, and the inevitable reaction was so great and
rapid that he soon degenerated into a thief and a traitor. His fate serves
as a warning to all the followers of Christ and his testimony to the
character of Jesus has been repeated through all the years, "I have ...
betrayed innocent blood."

