task for you.  Here, take this box, and go your way to the
infernal shades, and give this box to Proserpine, and say, 'My
mistress Venus desires you to send her a little of your beauty,
for in tending her sick son she has lost come of her own.'  Be
not too long on your errand, for I must paint myself with it to
appear at the circle of the gods and goddesses this evening."

Psyche was now satisfied that her destruction was at hand, being
obliged to go with her own feet directly down to Erebus.
Wherefore, to make no delay of what was not to be avoided, she
goes to the top of a high tower to precipitate herself headlong,
thus to descend the shortest way to the shades below.  But a
voice from the tower said to her, "Why, poor unlucky girl, dost
thou design to put an end to thy days in so dreadful a manner?
And what cowardice makes thee sink under this last danger, who
hast been so miraculously supported in all thy former?"  Then the
voice told her how by a certain cave she might reach the realms
of Pluto, and how to avoid all the dangers of the road, to pass
by Cerberus, the three-headed dog, and prevail on Charon, the
ferryman, to take her across the black river and bring her back
again.  But the voice added, "When Proserpine has given you the
box, filled with her beauty, of all things this is chiefly to be
observed by you, that you never once open or look into the box
nor allow your curiosity to pry into the treasure of the beauty
of the goddesses.

Psyche encouraged by this advice obeyed it in all things, and
taking heed to her ways travelled safely to the kingdom of Pluto.
She was admitted to the palace of Proserpine, and without
accepting the delicate seat or delicious banquet that was offered
her, but contented with coarse bread for her food, she delivered
her message from Venus.  Presently the box was returned to her,
shut and filled with the precious commodity.  Then she returned
the way she came, and glad was she to come out once more into the
light of day.

But having got so far successfully through her dangerous task a
longing desire seized her to examine the contents of the box.
"What," said she, "shall I, the carrier of this divine beauty,
not take the least bit to put on my cheeks to appear to more
advantage in the eyes of my beloved husband!:" So she carefully
opened the box, but found nothing there of any beauty at all, but
an infernal and truly Stygian sleep, which being thus set free
from its prison, took possession of her, and she fell down in the
midst of the road, a sleepy corpse without sense or motion.

But Cupid being now recovered from his wound, and not able longer
to bear the absence of his beloved Psyche, slipping through the
smallest crack of the window of his chamber which happened to be
left open, flew to the spot where Psyche lay, and gathering up
the sleep from her body closed it again in the box, and waked
Psyche with a light touch of one of his arrows.  "Again," said
he, "hast thou almost perished by the same curiosity.  But now
perform exactly the task imposed on you by my mother, and I will
take care of the rest."

Then Cupid, as swift as lightning penetrating the heights of
heaven, presented himself before Jupiter with his supplication.
Jupiter lent a favoring ear, and pleaded the cause of the lovers
so earnestly with Venus that he won her consent.  On this he sent
Mercury to bring Psyche up to the heavenly assembly, and when she
arrived, handing her a cup of ambrosia, he said, "Drink this,
Psyche, and be immortal; nor shall Cupid ever break away from the
knot in which he is tied, but these nuptials shall be perpetual."

Thus Psyche became at last united to Cupid, and in due time they
had a daughter born to them whose name was Pleasure.

The fable of Cupid and Psyche is usually considered allegorical.
The Greek name for a butterfly is Psyche, and the same word means
the soul.  There is no illustration of the immortality of the
soul so striking and beautiful as the butterfly, bursting on
brilliant wings from the tomb in which it has lain, after a dull,
grovelling caterpillar existence, to flutter in the blaze of day
and feed on the most fragrant and delicate productions of the
spring.  Psyche, then, is the human soul, which is purified by
sufferings and misfortunes, and is thus prepared for the
enjoyment of true and pure happiness.

In works of art Psyche is represented as a maiden with the wings
of a butterfly, alone or with Cupid, in the different situations
described in the allegory.

Milton alludes to the story of Cupid and Psyche in the conclusion
of his Comus:--

  "Celestial Cupid, her famed son, advanced,
  Holds his dear Psyche sweet entranced,
  After her wandering labors long,
  Till free consent the gods among
  Make her his eternal bride;
 And from her fair unspotted side
  T wo blissful twins are to be born,
  Youth and Joy; so Jove hath sworn."

The allegory of the story of Cupid and Psyche is well presented
in the beautiful lines of T. K. Hervey:--

  "They wove bright fables in the days of old
  When reason borrowed fancy's painted wings;
  When truth's clear river flowed o'er sands of gold,
  And told in song its high and mystic things!
  And such the sweet and solemn tale of her
  The pilgrim-heart, to whom a dream was given.
  That led her through the world,   Love's worshipper,
  To seek on earth for him whose home was heaven!

  "In the full city, by the haunted fount,
  Through the dim grotto's tracery of spars,
  'Mid the pine temples, on the moonlit mount,
  Where silence sits to listen to the stars;
  In the deep glade where dwells the brooding dove,
  The painted valley, and the scented air,
  She heard far echoes of the voice of Love,
  And found his footsteps' traces everywhere.

  "But never more they met!  Since doubts and fears,
  Those phantom-shapes that haunt and blight the earth,
  Had come 'twixt her, a child of sin and tears,
  And that bright spirit of immortal birth;
  Until her pining soul and weeping eyes
  Had learned to seek him only in the skies;
  Till wings unto the weary heart were given,
  And she became Love's angel bride in heaven!"

The story of Cupid and Psyche first appears in the works of
Apuleius, a writer of the second century of our era.  It is
therefore of much more recent date than most of the legends of
the Age of Fable.  It is this that Keats alludes to in his Ode to
Psyche.

  "O latest born and loveliest vision far
  Of all Olympus' faded hierarchy!
  Fairer than Phoebe's sapphire-regioned star
  Or Vesper, amorous glow-worm of the sky;
  Fairer than these, though temple thou hast none,
  Nor altar heaped with flowers;
  Nor virgin-choir to make delicious moan
  Upon the midnight hours;
  No voice, no lute, no pipe, no incense sweet,
  From chain-swung censer teeming;
  No shrine, no grove, no oracle, no heat
  Of Pale-mouthed prophet dreaming."

In Moore's Summer Fete, a fancy ball is described, in which one
of the characters personated is Psyche.

    "not in dark disguise to-night
  Hath our young heroine veiled her light;
  For see, she walks the earth, Love's own.
  His wedded bride, by holiest vow
  Pledged in Olympus, and made known
  To mortals by the type which now
  Hangs glittering on her snowy brow,
  That butterfly, mysterious trinket,
  Which means the soul (though few would think it),
  And sparkling thus on brow so white,
  Tells us we've Psyche here to-night."




Chapter VII

Cadmus.  The Myrmidons.

Jupiter, under the disguise of a bull, had carried away to the
island of Crete, Europa, the daughter of Agenor king of
Phoenicia.  Agenor commanded his son Cadmus to go in search of
his sister, and not to return without her.  Cadmus went and
sought long and far for his sister, but could not find her, and
not daring to return unsuccessful, consulted the oracle of Apollo
to know what country he should settle in.  The oracle informed
him that he should find a cow in the field, and should follow her
wherever she might wander, and where she stopped, should build a
city and call it Thebes.  Cadmus had hardly left the Castalian
cave, from which the oracle was delivered, when he saw a young
cow slowly walking before him.  He followed her close, offering
at the same time his prayers to Phoebus.  The cow went on till
she passed the shallow channel of Cephisus and came out into the
plain of Panope.  There she stood still, and raising her broad
forehead to the sky, filled the air with her lowings.  Cadmus
gave thanks, and stooping down kissed the foreign soil, then
lifting his eyes, greeted the surrounding mountains. Wishing to
offer a sacrifice to Jupiter, he sent his servants to seek pure
water for a libation.  Nearby there stood an ancient grove which
had never been profaned by the axe, in the midst of which was a
cave, thick covered with the growth of bushes, its roof forming a
low arch, from beneath which burst forth a fountain of purest
water.  In the cave lurked a horrid serpent with a crested head
and scales glittering like gold.  His eyes shone like fire, his
body was swollen with venom, he vibrated a triple tongue, and
showed a triple row of teeth.  No sooner had the Tyrians (Cadmus
and his companions came from Tyre, the chief city of Phoenicia)
dipped their pitchers in the fountain, and the ingushing waters
made a sound, than the glittering serpent raised his head out of
the cave and uttered a fearful hiss.  The vessels fell from their
hands, the blood left their cheeks, they trembled in every limb.
The serpent, twisting his scaly body in a huge coil, raised his
head so as to overtop the tallest trees, and while the Tyrians
from terror could neither fight nor fly, slew some with his
fangs, others in his folds, and others with his poisonous breath.

Cadmus having waited for the return of his men till midday, went
in search of them.  His covering was a lion's hide, and besides
his javelin he carried in his hand a lance, and in his breast a
bold heart, a surer reliance than either.  When he entered the
wood and saw the lifeless bodies of his men, and the monster with
his bloody jaws, he exclaimed, "O faithful friends, I will avenge
you, or share your death."  So saying he lifted a huge stone and
threw it with all his force at the serpent.  Such a block would
have shaken the wall of a fortress, but it made no impression on
the monster.  Cadmus next threw his javelin, which met with
better success, for it penetrated the serpent's scales, and
pierced through to his entrails.  Fierce with pain the monster
turned back his head to view the wound, and attempted to draw out
the weapon with his mouth, but broke it off, leaving the iron
point rankling in his flesh.  His neck swelled with rage, bloody
foam covered his jaws, and the breath of his nostrils poisoned
the air around.  Now he twisted himself into a circle, then
stretched himself out on the ground like the trunk of a fallen
tree.  As he moved onward, Cadmus retreated before him, holding
his spear opposite to the monster's opened jaws.  The serpent
snapped at the weapon and attempted to bite its iron point.  At
last Cadmus, watching his chance, thrust the spear at a moment
when the animal's thrown back came against the trunk of a tree,
and so succeeded in pinning him to its side.  His weight bent the
tree as he struggled in the agonies of death.

While Cadmus stood over his conquered foe, contemplating its vast
size, a voice was heard (from whence he knew not, but he heard it
distinctly), commanding him to take the dragon's teeth and sow
them in the earth.  He obeyed.  He made a furrow in the ground,
and planted the teeth, destined to produce a crop of men.  Scarce
had he done so when the clods began to move, and the points of
spears to appear above the surface.  Next helmets, with their
nodding plumes, came up, and next, the shoulders and breasts and
limbs of men with weapons, and in time a harvest of armed
warriors.  Cadmus, alarmed, prepared to encounter a new enemy,
but one of them said to him, "Meddle not with our civil war."
With that he who had spoken smote one of his earth-born brothers
with a sword, and he himself fell pierced with an arrow from
another.  The latter fell victim to a fourth, and in like manner
the whole crowd dealt with each other till all fell slain with
mutual wounds except five survivors.  One of these cast away his
weapons and said, "Brothers, let us live in peace!"  These five
joined with Cadmus in building his city, to which they gave the
name of Thebes.

Cadmus obtained in marriage Harmonia, the daughter of Venus.  The
gods left Olympus to honor the occasion with their presence, and
Vulcan presented the bride with a necklace of surpassing
brilliancy, his own workmanship.  But a fatality hung over the
family of Cadmus in consequence of his killing the serpent sacred
to Mars.  Semele and Ino, his daughters, and Actaeon and
Pentheius, his grandchildren, all perished unhappily; and Cadmus
and Harmonia quitted Thebes, now grown odious to them, and
emigrated to the country of the Enchelians, who received them
with honor and made Cadmus their king.  But the misfortunes of
their children still weighed upon their minds; and one day Cadmus
exclaimed, "If a serpent's life is so dear to the gods, I would I
were myself a serpent."  No sooner had he uttered the words than
he began to change his form.  Harmonia beheld it, and prayed to
the gods to let her share his fate.  Both became serpents.  They
lie in the woods, but mindful of their origin they neither avoid
the presence of man nor do they ever injure any one.

There is a tradition that Cadmus introduced into Greece the
letters of the alphabet which were invented by the Phoenicians.
This is alluded to by Byron, where, addressing the modern Greeks,
he says:

  "You have the letters Cadmus gave,
  Think you he meant them for a slave?"

Milton, describing the serpent which tempted Eve, is reminded of
the serpents of the classical stories, and says,

  "----pleasing was his shape,
  And lovely; never since of serpent kind
  Lovelier; not those that in Illyria changed
  Hermione and Cadmus, nor the god
  in Epidaurus."

The "god in Epidaurus" was AEsculapius.  Serpents were held
sacred to him.


THE MYRMIDONS

The Myrmidons were the soldiers of Achilles in the Trojan war.
From them all zealous and unscrupulous followers of a political
chief are called by that name down to this day.  But the origin
of the Myrmidons would not give one the idea of a fierce and
bloody race, but rather of a laborious and peaceful one.

Cephalus, king of Athens, arrived in the island of AEgina to seek
assistance of his old friend and ally AEacus, the king, in his
wars with Minos, king of Crete.  Cephalus was kindly received,
and the desired assistance readily promised.  "I have people
enough," said AEacus, "to protect myself and spare you such a
force as you need."  "I rejoice to see it," replied Cephalus,
"and my wonder has been raised, I confess, to find such a host of
youths as I see around me, all apparently of about the same age.
Yet there are many individuals whom I previously knew that I look
for now in vain.  What has become of them?"  AEacus groaned, and
replied with a voice of sadness, "I have been intending to tell
you, and will now do so without more delay, that you may see how
from the saddest beginning a happy result sometimes flows.  Those
whom you formerly knew are now dust and ashes!  A plague sent by
angry Juno devastated the land.  She hated it because it bore the
name of one of her husband's female favorites.  While the disease
appeared to spring from natural causes we resisted it as we best
might by natural remedies; but it soon appeared that the
pestilence was too powerful for our efforts, and we yielded.  At
the beginning the sky seemed to settle down upon the earth, and
thick clouds shut in the heated air.  For four months together a
deadly south wind prevailed.  The disorder affected the wells and
springs; thousands of snakes crept over the land and shed their
poison in the fountains.  The force of the disease was first
spent on the lower animals; dogs, cattle, sheep, and birds.  The
luckless ploughman wondered to see his oxen fall in the midst of
their work, and lie helpless in the unfinished furrow.  The wool
fell from the bleating sheep, and their bodies pined away.  The
horse, once foremost in the race, contested the palm no more, but
groaned at his stall, and died an inglorious death.  The wild
boar forgot his rage, the stag his swiftness, the bears no longer
attacked the herds.  Everything languished; dead bodies lay in
the roads, the fields, and the woods; the air was poisoned by
them.  I tell you what is hardly credible, but neither dogs nor
birds would touch them, nor starving wolves.  Their decay spread
the infection.  Next the disease attacked the country people, and
then the dwellers in the city.  At first the cheek was flushed,
and the breath drawn with difficulty.  The tongue grew rough and
swelled, and the dry mouth stood open with its veins enlarged and
gasped for the air.  Men could not bear the heat of their clothes
or their beds, but preferred to lie on the bare ground; and the
ground did not cool them, but on the contrary, they heated the
spot where they lay.  Nor could the physicians help, for the
disease attacked them also, and the contact of the sick gave them
infection, so that the most faithful were the first victims.  At
last all hope of relief vanished and men learned to look upon
death as the only deliverer from disease.  Then they gave way to
every inclination, and cared not to ask what was expedient, for
nothing was expedient.  All restraint laid aside, they crowded
around the wells and fountains, and drank till they died, without
quenching thirst.  Many had not strength to get away from the
water, but died in the midst of the stream, and others would
drink of it notwithstanding.  Such was their weariness of their
sick-beds that some would creep forth, and if not strong enough
to stand, would die on the ground.  They seemed to hate their
friends, and got away from their homes, as if, not knowing the
cause of their sickness, they charged it on the place of their
abode.  Some were seen tottering along the road, as long as they
could stand, while others sank on the earth, and turned their
dying eyes around to take a last look, then closed them in death.

"What heart had I left me, during all this, or what ought I to
have had, except to hate life and wish to be with my dead
subjects?  On all sides lay my people strewn like over-ripened
apples beneath the tree, or acorns under the storm-shaken oak.
You see yonder s temple on the height.  It is sacred to Jupiter.
Oh, how many offered prayers there; husbands for wives, fathers
for sons, and died in the very act of supplication!  How often,
while the priest made ready for sacrifice, the victim fell,
struck down by disease without waiting for the blow.  At length
all reverence for sacred things was lost.  Bodies were thrown out
unburied, wood was wanting for funeral piles, men fought with one
another for the possession of them.  Finally there were none left
to mourn; sons and husbands, old men and youths, perished alike
unlamented.

"Standing before the altar I raised my eyes to heaven.  'Oh,
Jupiter,' I said, 'if thou art indeed my father, and art not
ashamed of thy offspring, give me back my people, or take me also
away!'  At these words a clap of thunder was heard.  'I accept
the omen,' I cried; 'oh, may it be a sign of a favorable
disposition towards me!'  By chance there grew by the place where
I stood an oak with wide-spreading branches, sacred to Jupiter.
I observed a troop of ants busy with their labor, carrying minute
grains in their mouths and following one another in a line up the
trunk of the tree.  Observing their numbers with admiration, I
said, 'Give me, oh father, citizens as numerous as these, and
replenish my empty city.'  The tree shook and gave a rustling
sound with its branches though no wind agitated them.  I trembled
in every limb, yet I kissed the earth and the tree.  I would not
confess to myself that I hoped, yet I did hope.  Night came on
and sleep took possession of my frame oppressed with cares.  The
tree stood before me in my dreams, with its numerous branches all
covered with living, moving creatures.  It seemed to shake its
limbs and throw down over the ground a multitude of those
industrious grain-gathering animals, which appeared to gain in
size, and grow larger, and by-and-by to stand erect, lay aside
their superfluous legs and their black color, and finally to
assume the human form.  Then I awoke, and my first impulse was to
chide the gods who had robbed me of a sweet vision and given me
no reality in its place.  Being still in the temple my attention
was caught by the sound of many voices without; a sound of late
unusual to my ears.  While I began to think I was yet dreaming,
Telamon, my son, throwing open the temple-gates, exclaimed,
'Father, approach, and behold things surpassing even your hopes!'
I went forth; I saw a multitude of men, such as I had seen in my
dream, and they were passing in procession in the same manner.
While I gazed with wonder and delight they approached, and
kneeling, hailed me as their king.  I paid my vows to Jove, and
proceeded to allot the vacant city to the new-born race, and to
parcel out the fields among them.  I called them Myrmidons from
the ant (myrmex), from which they sprang.  You have seen these
persons; their dispositions resemble those which they had in
their former shape.  They are a diligent and industrious race,
eager to gain, and tenacious of their gains.  Among them you may
recruit your forces.  They will follow you to the war, young in
years and bold in heart."

This description of the plague is copied by Ovid from the account
which Thucydides, the Greek historian, gives of the plague of
Athens.  The historian drew from life, and all the poets and
writers of fiction since his day, when they have had occasion to
describe a similar scene, have borrowed their details from him.



Chapter VIII

Nisus and Scylla.  Echo and Narcissus.  Clytie.  Hero and Leander

Minos, king of Crete, made war upon Megara.  Nisus was king of
Megara, and Scylla was his daughter.  The siege had now lasted
six months, and the city still held out, for it was decreed by
fate that it should not be taken so long as a certain purple
lock, which glittered among the hair of King Nisus, remained on
his head.  There was a tower on the city walls, which overlooked
the plain where Minos and his army were encamped.  To this tower
Scylla used to repair, and look abroad over the tents of the
hostile army.  The siege had lasted so long that she had learned
to distinguish the persons of the leaders.  Minos, in particular,
excited her admiration.  She admired his graceful deportment; if
he threw his javelin, skill seemed combined with force in the
discharge; if he drew his bow, Apollo himself could not have done
it more gracefully.  But when he laid aside his helmet, and in
his purple robes bestrode his white horse with its gay
caparisons, and reined in its foaming mouth, the daughter of
Nisus was hardly mistress of herself; she was almost frantic with
admiration.  She envied the weapon that he grasped, the reins
that he held.  She felt as if she could, if it were possible, go
to him through the hostile ranks; she felt an impulse to cast
herself down from the tower into the midst of his camp, or to
open the gates to him, or do anything else, so only it might
gratify Minos.  As she sat in the tower, she talked thus with
herself: "I know not whether to rejoice or grieve at this sad
war.  I grieve that Minos is our enemy; but I rejoice at any
cause that brings him to my sight.  Perhaps he would be willing
to grant us peace, and receive me as a hostage.  I would fly
down, if I could, and alight in his camp, and tell him that we
yield ourselves to his mercy.  But, then, to betray my father!
No!  Rather would I never see Minos again.  And yet no doubt it
is sometimes the best thing for a city to be conquered when the
conqueror is clement and generous.  Minos certainly has right on
his side.  I think we shall be conquered; and if that must be the
end of it, why should not love unbar the gates to him, instead of
leaving it to be done by war?  Better spare delay and slaughter
if we can.  And, oh, if any one should wound or kill Minos!  No
one surely would have the heart to do it; yet ignorantly, not
knowing him, one might.  I will, I will surrender myself to him,
with my country as a dowry, and so put an end to the war.  But
how?  The gates are guarded, and my father keeps the keys; he
only stands in my way.  Oh, that it might please the gods to take
him away! But why ask the gods to do it?  Another woman, loving
as I do, would remove with her own hands whatever stood in the
way of her love.  And can any other woman dare more than I?  I
would encounter fire and sword to gain my object; but here there
is no need of fire and sword.  I only need my father's purple
lock.  More precious than gold to me, that will give me all I
wish."

While she thus reasoned night came on, and soon the whole palace
was buried in sleep.  She entered her father's bedchamber and cut
off the fatal lock; then passed out of the city and entered the
enemy's camp.  She demanded to be led to the king, and thus
addressed him: "I am Scylla, the daughter of Nisus.  I surrender
to you my country and my father's house.  I ask no reward but
yourself; for love of you I have done it.  See here the purple
lock!  With this I give you my father and his kingdom."  She held
out her hand with the fatal spoil.  Minos shrunk back and refused
to touch it.  "The gods destroy thee, infamous woman," he
exclaimed; "disgrace of our time!  May neither earth nor sea
yield thee a resting place!  Surely, my Crete, where Jove himself
was cradled, shall not be polluted with such a monster!"  Thus he
said, and gave orders that equitable terms should be allowed to
the conquered city, and that the fleet should immediately sail
from the island.

Scylla was frantic.  "Ungrateful man," she exclaimed, "is it thus
you leave me?   Me who have given you victory,   who have
sacrificed for you parent and country!  I am guilty, I confess,
and deserve to die, by not by your hand."  As the ships left the
shore, she leaped into the water, and seizing the rudder of the
one which carried Minos, she was borne along an unwelcome
companion of their course.  A sea-eagle soaring aloft,   it was
her father who had been changed into that form,   seeing her,
pounced down upon her, and struck her with his beak and claws.
In terror she let go the ship, and would have fallen into the
water, but some pitying deity changed her into a bird.  The sea-
eagle still cherishes the old animosity; and whenever he espies
her in his lofty flight, you may see him dart down upon her, with
beak and claws, to take vengeance for the ancient crime.


ECHO AND NARCISSUS

Echo was a beautiful nymph, fond of the woods and hills, where
she devoted herself to woodland sports.  She was a favorite of
Diana, and attended her in the chase.  But Echo had one failing;
she was fond of talking, and whether in chat or argument would
have the last word.  One day Juno was seeking her husband, who,
she had reason to fear, was amusing himself among the nymphs.
Echo by her talk contrived to detain the goddess till the nymphs
made their escape.  When Juno discovered it, she passed sentence
upon Echo in these words: "You shall forfeit the use of that
tongue with which you have cheated me, except for that one
purpose you are so fond of   REPLY.  You shall still have the
last word, but no power to speak first."

This nymph saw Narcissus, a beautiful youth, as he pursued the
chase upon the mountains.  She loved him, and followed his
footsteps.  Oh, how she longed to address him in the softest
accents, and win him to converse, but it was not in her power.
She waited with impatience for him to speak first, and had her
answer ready.  One day the youth, being separated from his
companions, shouted aloud, "Who's here?"  Echo replied, "Here."
Narcissus looked around, but seeing no one, called out, "Come."
Echo answered, "Come."  As no one came, Narcissus called again,
"Why do you shun me?"  Echo asked the same question.  "Let us
join one another," said the youth.  The maid answered with all
her heart in the same words, and hastened to the spot, ready to
throw her arms about his neck.  He started back, exclaiming,
"Hands off!  I would rather die than you should have me."  "Have
me," said she; but it was all in vain.  He left her, and she went
to hide her blushes in the recesses of the woods.  From that time
forth she lived in caves and among mountain cliffs.  Her form
faded with grief, till at last all her flesh shrank away.  Her
bones were changed into rocks, and there was nothing left of her
but her voice.  With that she is still ready to reply to any one
who calls her, and keeps up her old habit of having the last
word.

Narcissus was cruel not in this case alone.  He shunned all the
rest of the nymphs as he had done poor Echo.  One day a maiden,
who had in vain endeavored to attract him, uttered a prayer that
he might some time or other feel what it was to love and meet no
return of affection.  The avenging goddess heard and granted the
prayer.

There was a clear fountain, with water like silver, to which the
shepherds never drove their flocks.  Nor did the mountain goats
resort to it, nor any of the beasts of the forest; neither was it
defaced with fallen leaves or branches; but the grass grew fresh
around it, and the rocks sheltered it from the sun.  Hither came
one day the youth fatigued with hunting, heated and thirsty.  He
stooped down to drink, and saw his own image in the water; he
