        ing will ameliorate sin, sickness, and death. Let our
        pulpits do justice to Christian Science. Let
141:30  it have fair representation by the press. Give
        to it the place in our institutions of learning now occu-
        pied by scholastic theology and physiology, and it will
142:1   eradicate sickness and sin in less time than the old systems,
        devised for subduing them, have required for self-estab-
142:3   lishment and propagation.

                           Two claims omitted

        Anciently the followers of Christ, or Truth, measured
        Christianity by its power over sickness, sin, and death;
142:6   but modern religions generally omit all but one
        of these powers, - the power over sin. We
        must seek the undivided garment, the whole Christ, as our
142:9   first proof of Christianity, for Christ, Truth, alone can
        furnish us with absolute evidence.

                          Selfishness and loss

        If the soft palm, upturned to a lordly salary, and archi-
142:12  tectural skill, making dome and spire tremulous with
        beauty, turn the poor and the stranger from the
        gate, they at the same time shut the door on
142:15  progress. In vain do the manger and the cross tell their
        story to pride and fustian. Sensuality palsies the right
        hand, and causes the left to let go its grasp on the divine.

                             Temple cleansed

142:18  As in Jesus' time, so to-day, tyranny and pride need to
        be whipped out of the temple, and humility and divine Sci-
        ence to be welcomed in. The strong cords of
142:21  scientific demonstration, as twisted and wielded
        by Jesus, are still needed to purge the temples of their
        vain traffic in worldly worship and to make them meet
142:24  dwelling-places for the Most High.

                                MEDICINE

                         Question of precedence

        Which was first, Mind or medicine? If Mind was
142:27  first and self-existent, then Mind, not matter, must have
        been the first medicine. God being All-in-
        all, He made medicine; but that medicine was
142:30  Mind. It could not have been matter, which departs
        from the nature and character of Mind, God. Truth
143:1   is God's remedy for error of every kind, and Truth de-
        stroys only what is untrue. Hence the fact that, to-day,
143:3   as yesterday, Christ casts out evils and heals the
        sick.

                            Methods rejected

        It is plain that God does not employ drugs or hygiene,
143:6   nor provide them for human use; else Jesus would have
        recommended and employed them in his heal-
        ing. The sick are more deplorably lost than
143:9   the sinning, if the sick cannot rely on God for help and
        the sinning can. The divine Mind never called matter
        /medicine/, and matter required a material and human be-
143:12  lief before it could be considered as medicine.

                           Error not curative

        Sometimes the human mind uses one error to medi-
        cine another. Driven to choose between two difficulties,
143:15  the human mind takes the lesser to relieve the
        greater. On this basis it saves from starva-
        tion by theft, and quiets pain with anodynes. You
143:18  admit that mind influences the body somewhat, but
        you conclude that the stomach, blood, nerves, bones,
        etc., hold the preponderance of power. Controlled by
143:21  this belief, you continue in the old routine. You lean on
        the inert and unintelligent, never discerning how this de-
        prives you of the available superiority of divine Mind.
143:24  The body is not controlled scientifically by a negative
        mind.

                         Impossible coalescence

        Mind is the grand creator, and there can be no power
143:27  except that which is derived from Mind. If Mind was
        first chronologically, is first potentially, and
        must be first eternally, then give to Mind the
143:30  glory, honor, dominion, and power everlastingly due its
        holy name. Inferior and unspiritual methods of healing
        may try to make Mind and drugs coalesce, but the two will
144:1   not mingle scientifically. Why should we wish to make
        them do so, since no good can come of it?
144:3   If Mind is foremost and superior, let us rely upon Mind,
        which needs no cooperation from lower powers, even if
        these so-called powers are real.

144:6        Naught is the squire, when the king is nigh;
             Withdraws the star, when dawns the sun's brave light.

                             Soul and sense

        The various mortal beliefs formulated in human philoso-
144:9   phy, physiology, hygiene, are mainly predicated of matter,
        and afford faint gleams of God, or Truth.
        The more material a belief, the more obstinately
144:12  tenacious its error; the stronger are the manifestations of
        the corporeal senses, the weaker the indications of Soul.

                         Will-power detrimental

        Human will-power is not Science. Human will belongs
144:15  to the so-called material senses, and its use is to be con-
        demned. Willing the sick to recover is not the
        metaphysical practice of Christian Science, but
144:18  is sheer animal magnetism. Human will-power may in-
        fringe the rights of man. It produces evil continually,
        and is not a factor in the realism of being. Truth, and
144:21  not corporeal will, is the divine power which says to
        disease, "Peace, be still."

                         Conservative antagonism

        Because divine Science wars with so-called physical
144:24  science, even as Truth wars with error, the old schools
        still oppose it. Ignorance, pride, or prejudice
        closes the door to whatever is not stereotyped.
144:27  When the Science of being is universally understood,
        every man will be his own physician, and Truth will be
        the universal panacea.

                             Ancient healers

144:30  It is a question to-day, whether the ancient inspired
        healers understood the Science of Christian healing, or
145:1   whether they caught its sweet tones, as the natural
        musician catches the tones of harmony, without being
145:3   able to explain them. So divinely imbued
        were they with the spirit of Science, that the
        lack of the letter could not hinder their work; and that
145:6   letter, without the spirit, would have made void their
        practice.

                        The struggle and victory

        The struggle for the recovery of invalids goes on, not
145:9   between material methods, but between mortal minds
        and immortal Mind. The victory will be on
        the patient's side only as immortal Mind
145:12  through Christ, Truth, subdues the human belief in
        disease. It matters not what material method one may
        adopt, whether faith in drugs, trust in hygiene, or reliance
145:15  on some other minor curative.

                          Mystery of godliness

        Scientific healing has this advantage over other meth-
        ods, - that in it Truth controls error. From this fact
145:18  arise its ethical as well as its physical ef-
        fects. Indeed, its ethical and physical effects
        are indissolubly connected. If there is any mystery
145:21  in Christian healing, it is the mystery which godliness
        always presents to the ungodly, - the mystery always
        arising from ignorance of the laws of eternal and unerr-
145:24  ing Mind.

                         Matter /versus/ matter

        Other methods undertake to oppose error with error,
        and thus they increase the antagonism of one form of
145:27  matter towards other forms of matter or error,
        and the warfare between Spirit and the flesh
        goes on. By this antagonism mortal mind must con-
145:30  tinually weaken its own assumed power.

                          How healing was lost

        The theology of Christian Science includes healing
        the sick. Our Master's first article of faith propounded
146:1   to his students was healing, and he proved his faith by
        his works. The ancient Christians were healers. Why
146:3   has this element of Christianity been lost?
        Because our systems of religion are governed
        more or less by our systems of medicine. The first idol-
146:6   atry was faith in matter. The schools have rendered
        faith in drugs the fashion, rather than faith in Deity. By
        trusting matter to destroy its own discord, health and
146:9   harmony have been sacrificed. Such systems are barren
        of the vitality of spiritual power, by which material sense
        is made the servant of Science and religion becomes
146:12  Christlike.

                           Drugs and divinity

        Material medicine substitutes drugs for the power of
        God - even the might of Mind - to heal the body.
146:15  Scholasticism clings for salvation to the per-
        son, instead of to the divine Principle, of the
        man Jesus; and his Science, the curative agent of God,
146:18  is silenced. Why? Because truth divests material drugs
        of their imaginary power, and clothes Spirit with suprem-
        acy. Science is the "stranger that is within thy gates,"
146:21  remembered not, even when its elevating effects prac-
        tically prove its divine origin and efficacy.

                     Christian Science as old as God

        Divine Science derives its sanction from the Bible,
146:24  and the divine origin of Science is demonstrated through
        the holy influence of Truth in healing sick-
        ness and sin. This healing power of Truth
146:27  must have been far anterior to the period in
        which Jesus lived. It is as ancient as "the Ancient of
        days." It lives through all Life, and extends throughout
146:30  all space.

                           Reduction to system

        Divine metaphysics is now reduced to a system, to a
        form comprehensible by and adapted to the thought of
147:1   the age in which we live. This system enables the
        learner to demonstrate the divine Principle,
147:3   upon which Jesus' healing was based, and
        the sacred rules for its present application to the cure of
        disease.

147:6   Late in the nineteenth century I demonstrated the divine
        rules of Christian Science. They were submitted to the
        broadest practical test, and everywhere, when honestly ap-
147:9   plied under circumstances where demonstration was hu-
        manly possible, this Science showed that Truth had lost
        none of its divine and healing efficacy, even though cen-
147:12  turies had passed away since Jesus practised these rules
        on the hills of Judaea and in the valleys of Galilee.

                          Perusal and practice

        Although this volume contains the complete Science of
147:15  Mind-healing, never believe that you can absorb the whole
        meaning of the Science by a simple /perusal/
        of this book. The book needs to be /studied/,
147:18  and the demonstration of the rules of scientific healing
        will plant you firmly on the spiritual groundwork of
        Christian Science. This proof lifts you high above the
147:21  perishing fossils of theories already antiquated, and en-
        ables you to grasp the spiritual facts of being hitherto
        unattained and seemingly dim.

                       A definite rule discovered

147:24  Our Master healed the sick, practised Christian heal-
        ing, and taught the generalities of its divine Principle to
        his students; but he left no definite rule for
147:27  demonstrating this Principle of healing and
        preventing disease. This rule remained to be discovered
        in Christian Science. A pure affection takes form in good-
147:30  ness, but Science alone reveals the divine Principle of
        goodness and demonstrates its rules.

                           Jesus' own practice

        Jesus never spoke of disease as dangerous or as difficult
148:1   to heal. When his students brought to him a case they
        had failed to heal, he said to them, "O faithless gen-
148:3   eration," implying that the requisite power
        to heal was in Mind. He prescribed no drugs,
        urged no obedience to material laws, but acted in direct
148:6   disobedience to them.

                   The man of anatomy and of theology

        Neither anatomy nor theology has ever described man
        as created by Spirit, - as God's man. The former ex-
148:9   plains the men of /men/, or the "children of
        men," as created corporeally instead of spir-
        itually and as emerging from the lowest, in-
148:12  stead of from the highest, conception of being. Both
        anatomy and theology define man as both physical and
        mental, and place mind at the mercy of matter for every
148:15  function, formation, and manifestation. Anatomy takes
        up man at all points materially. It loses Spirit, drops the
        true tone, and accepts the discord. Anatomy and the-
148:18  ology reject the divine Principle which produces harmo-
        nious man, and deal - the one wholly, the other primarily
        - with matter, calling that /man/ which is not the counter-
148:21  part, but the counterfeit, of God's man. Then theology
        tries to explain how to make this man a Christian, - how
        from this basis of division and discord to produce the con-
148:24  cord and unity of Spirit and His likeness.

                          Physiology deficient

        Physiology exalts matter, dethrones Mind, and claims
        to rule man by material law, instead of spiritual. When
148:27  physiology fails to give health or life by this
        process, it ignores the divine Spirit as unable
        or unwilling to render help in time of physical need.
148:30  When mortals sin, this ruling of the schools leaves them
        to the guidance of a theology which admits God to be
        the healer of sin but not of sickness, although our great
149:1   Master demonstrated that Truth could save from sickness
        as well as from sin.

                         Blunders and blunderers

149:3   Mind as far outweighs drugs in the cure of disease as
        in the cure of sin. The more excellent way is divine
        Science in every case. Is /materia medica/ a
149:6   science or a bundle of speculative human
        theories? The prescription which succeeds in one in-
        stance fails in another, and this is owing to the different
149:9   mental states of the patient. These states are not com-
        prehended and they are left without explanation except
        in Christian Science. The rule and its perfection of opera-
149:12  tion never vary in Science. If you fail to succeed in any
        case, it is because you have not demonstrated the life of
        Christ, Truth, more in your own life, - because you have
149:15  not obeyed the rule and proved the Principle of divine
        Science.

                          Old-school physician

        A physician of the old school remarked with great
149:18  gravity: "We know that mind affects the body some-
        what, and advise our patients to be hopeful
        and cheerful and to take as little medicine as
149:21  possible; but mind can never cure organic difficulties."
        The logic is lame, and facts contradict it. The author
        has cured what is termed organic disease as readily as she
149:24  has cured purely functional disease, and with no power
        but the divine Mind.

                            Tests in our day

        Since God, divine Mind, governs all, not partially but
149:27  supremely, predicting disease does not dignify therapeutics.
        Whatever guides thought spiritually benefits
        mind and body. We need to understand the
149:30  affirmations of divine Science, dismiss superstition, and
        demonstrate truth according to Christ. To-day there
        is hardly a city, village, or hamlet, in which are not to
150:1   be found living witnesses and monuments to the virtue
        and power of Truth, as applied through this Christian
150:3   system of healing disease.

                            The main purpose

        To-day the healing power of Truth is widely demon-
        strated as an immanent, eternal Science, instead of a
150:6   phenomenal exhibition. Its appearing is the
        coming anew of the gospel of "on earth peace,
        good-will toward men." This coming, as was promised
150:9   by the Master, is for its establishment as a permanent
        dispensation among men; but the mission of Christian
        Science now, as in the time of its earlier demonstration,
150:12  is not primarily one of physical healing. Now, as then,
        signs and wonders are wrought in the metaphysical heal-
        ing of physical disease; but these signs are only to demon-
150:15  strate its divine origin, - to attest the reality of the higher
        mission of the Christ-power to take away the sins of the
        world.

                            Exploded doctrine

150:18  The science (so-called) of physics would have one be-
        lieve that both matter and mind are subject to disease,
        and that, too, in spite of the individual's pro-
150:21  test and contrary to the law of divine Mind.
        This human view infringes man's free moral agency; and
        it is as evidently erroneous to the author, and will be to
150:24  all others at some future day, as the practically rejected
        doctrine of the predestination of souls to damnation or
        salvation. The doctrine that man's harmony is gov-
150:27  erned by physical conditions all his earthly days, and that
        he is then thrust out of his own body by the operation of
        matter, - even the doctrine of the superiority of matter
150:30  over Mind, - is fading out.

                             Disease mental

        The hosts of AEsculapius are flooding the world with
        diseases, because they are ignorant that the human mind
151:1   and body are myths. To be sure, they sometimes treat
        the sick as if there was but one factor in the case; but
151:3   this one factor they represent to be body, not
        mind. Infinite Mind could not possibly create
        a remedy outside of itself, but erring, finite, human mind
151:6   has an absolute need of something beyond itself for its
        redemption and healing.

                          Intentions respected

        Great respect is due the motives and philanthropy of
151:9   the higher class of physicians. We know that if they un-
        derstood the Science of Mind-healing, and were
        in possession of the enlarged power it confers
151:12  to benefit the race physically and spiritually, they would
        rejoice with us. Even this one reform in medicine would
        ultimately deliver mankind from the awful and oppres-
151:15  sive bondage now enforced by false theories, from which
        multitudes would gladly escape.

                          Man governed by Mind

        Mortal belief says that death has been occasioned by
151:18  fright. Fear never stopped being and its action. The
        blood, heart, lungs, brain, etc., have nothing
        to do with Life, God. Every function of the
151:21  real man is governed by the divine Mind. The human
        mind has no power to kill or to cure, and it has no com-
        trol over God's man. The divine Mind that made man
151:24  maintain His own image and likeness. The human
        mind is opposed to God and must be put off, as St. Paul
        declares. All that really exists is the divine Mind and
151:27  its idea, and in this Mind the entire being is found har-
        monious and eternal. The straight and narrow way is to
        see and acknowledge this fact, yield to this power, and
151:30  follow the leadings of truth.

                          Mortal mind dethroned

        That mortal mind claims to govern every organ of the
        mortal body, we have overwhelming proof. But this so-
152:1   called mind is a myth, and must by its own consent yield
        to Truth. It would wield the sceptre of a monarch, but
152:3   it is powerless. The immortal divine Mind
        takes away all its supposed sovereignty, and
        saves mortal mind from itself. The author has endeavored
152:6   to make this book the AEsculapius of mind as well as of
        body, that it may give hope to the sick and heal them,
        although they know not how the work is done. Truth
152:9   has a healing effect, even when not fully understood.

                        All activity from thought

        Anatomy describes muscular action as produced by
        mind in one instance and not in another. Such errors
152:12  beset every material theory, in which one
        statement contradicts another over and over
        again. It is related that Sir Humphry Davy once ap-
152:15  parently cured a case of paralysis simply by introducing
        a thermometer into the patient's mouth. This he did
        merely to ascertain the temperature of the patient's body;
152:18  but the sick man supposed this ceremony was intended
        to heal him, and he recovered accordingly. Such a fact
        illustrates our theories.

                  The author's experiments in medicine

152:21  The author's medical researches and experiments had
        prepared her thought for the metaphysics of Christian
        Science. Every material dependence had
152:24  failed her in her search for truth; and she can
        now understand why, and can see the means
        by which mortals are divinely driven to a spiritual source
152:27  for health and happiness.

                        Homoeopathic attenuations

        Her experiments in homoeopathy had made her skep-
        tical as to material curative methods. Jahr, from
152:30  /Aconitum/ to /Zincum oxydatum/, enumerates
        the general symptoms, the characteristic
        signs, which demand different remedies; but the drug
153:1   is frequently attenuated to such a degree that not a ves-
        tige of it remains. Thus we learn that it is not the drug
153:3   which expels the disease or changes one of the symptoms
        of disease.

                           Only salt and water

        The author has attenuated /Natrum muriaticum/ (com-
153:6   mon table-salt) until there was not a single saline property
        left. The salt had "lost his savour;" and yet,
        with one drop of that attenuation in a goblet of
153:9   water, and a teaspoonful of the water administered at in-
        tervals of three hours, she has cured a patient sinking in
        the last stage of typhoid fever. The highest attenuation
153:12  of homoeopathy and the most potent rises above matter into
        mind. This discovery leads to more light. From it may
        be learned that either human faith or the divine Mind is
153:15  the healer and that there is no efficacy in a drug.

                             Origin of pain

        You say a boil is painful; but that is impossible, for
        matter without mind is not painful. The boil simply
153:18  manifests, through inflammation and swell-
        ing, a belief in pain, and this belief is called a
        boil. Now administer mentally to your patient a high
153:21  attenuation of truth, and it will soon cure the boil. The
        fact that pain cannot exist where there is no mortal mind
        to feel it is a proof that this so-called mind makes its
153:24  own pain - that is, its own /belief/ in pain.

                           Source of contagion

        We weep because others weep, we yawn because they
        yawn, and we have smallpox because others have it; but
153:27  mortal mind, not matter, contains and carries
        the infection. When this mental contagion is
        understood, we shall be more careful of our mental con-
153:30  ditions and we shall avoid loquacious tattling about
        disease, as we would avoid advocating crime. Neither
        sympathy nor society should ever tempt us to cherish
154:1   error in any form, and certainly we should not be error's
        advocate.
154:3   Disease arises, like other mental conditions, from as-
        sociation. Since it is a law of mortal mind that certain
        diseases should be regarded as contagious, this law ob-
154:6   tains credit through association, - calling up the fear that
        creates the image of disease and its consequent manifes-
        tation in the body.

                            Imaginary cholera

154:9   This fact in metaphysics is illustrated by the following
        incident: A man was made to believe that he occupied a
        bed where a cholera patient had died. Imme-
154:12  diately the symptoms of this disease appeared,
        and the man died. The fact was, that he had not caught
        the cholera by material contact, because no cholera patient
154:15  had been in that bed.

                           Children's ailments

        If a child is exposed to contagion or infection, the
        mother is frightened and says, "My child will be sick."
154:18  The law of mortal mind and her own fears gov-
        ern her child more than the child's mind gov-
        erns itself, and they produce the very results which might
154:21  have been prevented through the opposite understanding.
        Then it is believed that exposure to the contagion wrought
        the mischief.

154:24  That mother is not a Christian Scientist, and her affec-
        tions need better guidance, who says to her child: "You
        look sick," "You look tired," "You need rest," or "You
154:27  need medicine."

        Such a mother runs to her little one, who thinks she has
        hurt her face by falling on the carpet, and says, moaning
154:30  more childishly than her child, "Mamma knows you are
        hurt." The better and more successful method for any
        mother to adopt is to say: "Oh, never mind! You're not
155:1   hurt, so don't think you are." Presently the child forgets
        all about the accident, and is at play.

                            Drug-power mental

155:3   When the sick recover by the use of drugs, it is the law
        of a general belief, culminating in individual faith, which
        heals; and according to this faith will the effect
155:6   be. Even when you take away the individual
        confidence in the drug, you have not yet divorced the drug
        from the general faith. The chemist, the botanist, the
155:9   druggist, the doctor, and the nurse equip the medicine
        with their faith, and the beliefs which are in the majority
        rule. When the general belief endorses the inanimate
155:12  drug as doing this or that, individual dissent or faith, un-
        less it rests on Science, is but a belief held by a minority,
        and such a belief is governed by the majority.

                            Belief in physics

155:15  The universal belief in physics weighs against the high
        and mighty truths of Christian metaphysics. This errone-
        ous general belief, which sustains medicine and
155:18  produces all medical results, works against
        Christian Science; and the percentage of power on the
        side of this Science must mightily outweigh the power of
155:21  popular belief in order to heal a single case of disease. The
        human mind acts more powerfully to offset the discords
        of matter and the ills of flesh, in proportion as it puts less
155:24  weight into the material or fleshly scale and more weight
        into the spiritual scale. Homoeopathy diminishes the
        drug, but the potency of the medicine increases as the
155:27  drug disappears.

                             Nature of drugs

        Vegetarianism, homoeopathy, and hydropathy have
        diminished drugging; but if drugs are an antidote to
155:30  disease, why lessen the antidote? If drugs
        are good things, is it safe to say that the
        less in quantity you have of them the better? If drugs
156:1   possess intrinsic virtues or intelligent curative qualities,
        these qualities must be mental. Who named drugs, and
156:3   what made them good or bad for mortals, beneficial or
        injurious?

                       Dropsy cured without drugs

        A case of dropsy, given up by the faculty, fell into
156:6   my hands. It was a terrible case. Tapping had been
        employed, and yet, as she lay in her bed, the
        patient looked like a barrel. I prescribed
156:9   the fourth attenuation of /Argentum nitratum/ with occa-
        sional doses of a high attenuation of /Sulphuris/. She im-
        proved perceptibly. Believing then somewhat in the
156:12  ordinary theories of medical practice, and learning that
        her former physician had prescribed these remedies, I
        began to fear an aggravation of symptoms from their
156:15  prolonged use, and told the patient so; but she was
        unwilling to give up the medicine while she was re-
        covering. It then occurred to me to give her un-
156:18  medicated pellets and watch the result. I did so, and
        she continued to gain. Finally she said that she would
        give up her medicine for one day, and risk the
156:21  effects. After trying this, she informed me that she
        could get along two days without globules; but on
        the third day she again suffered, and was relieved by
156:24  taking them. She went on in this way, taking the
        unmedicated pellets, - and receiving occasional visits
        from me, - but employing no other means, and she was
156:27  cured.

                            A stately advance

        Metaphysics, as taught in Christian Science, is the
        next stately step beyond homoeopathy. In metaphysics,
156:30  matter disappears from the remedy entirely,
        and Mind takes its rightful and supreme
        place. Homoeopathy takes mental symptoms largely
157:1   into consideration in its diagnosis of disease. Christian
        Science deals wholly with the mental cause in judging and
157:3   destroying disease. It succeeds where homoeopathy fails,
        solely because its one recognized Principle of healing is
        Mind, and the whole force of the mental element is em-
157:6   ployed through the Science of Mind, which never shares
        its rights with inanimate matter.

                        The modus of homoeopathy

        Christian Science exterminates the drug, and rests on
157:9   Mind alone as the curative Principle, acknowledging that
        the divine Mind has all power. Homoeopathy
        mentalizes a drug with such repetition of
157:12  thought-attenuations, that the drug becomes
        more like the human mind than the substratum of this so-
        called mind, which we call matter; and the drug's power
157:15  of action is proportionately increased.

                          Drugging unchristian

        If drugs are part of God's creation, which (according
        to the narrative in Genesis) He pronounced/ good/, then
157:18  drugs cannot be poisonous. If He could cre-
        ate drugs intrinsically bad, then they should
        never be used. If He creates drugs at all and designs
157:21  them for medical use, why did Jesus not employ them
        and recommend them for the treatment of disease?
        Matter is not self-creative, for it is unintelligent. Erring
157:24  mortal mind confers the power which the drug seems to
        possess.

        Narcotics quiet mortal mind, and so relieve the body;
157:27  but they leave both mind and body worse for this sub-
        mission. Christian Science impresses the entire corpore-
        ality, - namely, mind and body, - and brings out the
157:30  proof that Life is continuous and harmonious. Science
        both neutralizes error and destroys it. Mankind is the
        better for this spiritual and profound pathology.

                      Mythology and materia medica

158:1   It is recorded that the profession of medicine originated
        in idolatry with pagan priests, who besought the gods to
158:3   heal the sick and designated Apollo as "the god
        of medicine." He was supposed to have dic-
        tated the first prescription, according to the
158:6   "History of Four Thousand Years of Medicine." It is
        here noticeable that Apollo was also regarded as the sender
        of disease, "the god of pestilence." Hippocrates turned
158:9   from image-gods to vegetable and mineral drugs for heal-
        ing. This was deemed progress in medicine; but
        what we need is the truth which heals both mind and
158:12  body. The future history of material medicine may
        correspond with that of its material god, Apollo, who was
        banished from heaven and endured great sufferings
158:15  upon earth.

                        Footsteps to intemperance

        Drugs, cataplasms, and whiskey are stupid substitutes
        for the dignity and potency of divine Mind and its effi-
158:18  cacy to heal. It is pitiful to lead men into
        temptation through the byways of this wil-
        derness world, - to victimize the race with intoxicating
158:21  prescriptions for the sick, until mortal mind acquires an
        educated appetite for strong drink, and men and women
        become loathsome sots.

                            Advancing degrees

158:24  Evidences of progress and of spiritualization greet us
        on every hand. Drug-systems are quitting their hold on
        matter and so letting in matter's higher stra-
158:27  tum, mortal mind. Homoeopathy, a step in
        advance of allopathy, is doing this. Matter is going out
        of medicine; and mortal mind, of a higher attenuation
158:30  than the drug, is governing the pellet.

                             Effects of fear

        A woman in the city of Lynn, Massachusetts, was
        etherized and died in consequence, although her physi-
159:1   cians insisted that it would be unsafe to perform a needed
        surgical operation without the ether. After the autopsy,
159:3   her sister testified that the deceased protested
        against inhaling the ether and said it would kill
        her, but that she was compelled by her physicians to take
159:6   it. Her hands were held, and she was forced into sub-
        mission. The case was brought to trial. The evidence
        was found to be conclusive, and a verdict was returned that
159:9   death was occasioned, not by the ether, but by fear of
        inhaling it.

                     Mental conditions to be heeded

        Is it skilful or scientific surgery to take no heed of men-
159:12  tal conditions and to treat the patient as if she were so
        much mindless matter, and as if matter were
        the only factor to be consulted? Had these
159:15  unscientific surgeons understood metaphysics,
        they would have considered the woman's state of mind,
        and not have risked such treatment. They would either
159:18  have allayed her fear or would have performed the opera-
        tion without ether.

        The sequel proved that this Lynn woman died from
159:21  effects produced by mortal mind, and not from the disease
        or the operation.

                        False source of knowledge

        The medical schools would learn the state of man
159:24  from matter instead of from Mind. They examine the
        lungs, tongue, and pulse to ascertain how
        much harmony, or health, matter is permit-
159:27  ting to matter, - how much pain or pleasure, action or
        stagnation, one form of matter is allowing another form
        of matter.

159:30  Ignorant of the fact that a man's belief produces dis-
        ease and all its symptoms, the ordinary physician is
        liable to increase disease with his own mind, when he
160:1   should address himself to the work of destroying it through
        the power of the divine Mind.

160:3   The systems of physics act against metaphysics, and
        /vice versa/. When mortals forsake the material for the
        spiritual basis of action, drugs lose their healing force,
160:6   for they have no innate power. Unsupported by the
        faith reposed in it, the inanimate drug becomes
        powerless.

                            Obedient muscles

160:9   The motion of the arm is no more dependent upon the
        direction of mortal mind, than are the organic action and
        secretion of the viscera. When this so-called
160:12  mind quits the body, the heart becomes as tor-
        pid as the hand.

                            Anatomy and mind

        Anatomy finds a necessity for nerves to convey the man-
160:15  date of mind to muscle and so cause action; but what does
        anatomy say when the cords contract and be-
        come immovable? Has mortal mind ceased
160:18  speaking to them, or has it bidden them to be impotent?
        Can muscles, bones, blood, and nerves rebel against mind
        in one instance and not in another, and become cramped
160:21  despite the mental protest?

        Unless muscles are self-acting at all times, they are
        never so, - never capable of acting contrary to mental
160:24  direction. If muscles can cease to act and become rigid
        of their own preference, - be deformed or symmetrical,
        as they please or as disease directs, - they must be self-
160:27  directing. Why then consult anatomy to learn how mor-
        tal mind governs muscle, if we are only to learn from
        anatomy that muscle is not so governed?

                            Mind over matter

160:30  Is man a material fungus without Mind
        to help him? Is a stiff joint or a contracted
        muscle as much a result of law as the supple and
161:1   elastic condition of the healthy limb, and is God the
        lawgiver?

161:3   You say, "/I/ have burned my finger." This is an
        exact statement, more exact than you suppose; for mor-
        tal mind, and not matter, burns it. Holy inspiration
161:6   has created states of mind which have been able to nullify
        the action of the flames, as in the Bible case of the three
        young Hebrew captives, cast into the Babylonian furnace;
161:9   while an opposite mental state might produce spontaneous
        combustion.

                         Restrictive regulations

        In 1880, Massachusetts put her foot on a proposed
161:12  tyrannical law, restricting the practice of medicine. If
        her sister States follow this example in har-
        mony with our Constitution and Bill of Rights,
161:15  they will do less violence to that immortal sentiment of the
        Declaration, "Man is endowed by his Maker with certain
        inalienable rights, among which are life, liberty, and the
161:18  pursuit of happiness."

        The oppressive state statutes touching medicine re-
        mind one of the words of the famous Madame Roland,
161:21  as she knelt before a statue of Liberty, erected near the
        guillotine: "Liberty, what crimes are committed in thy
        name!"

                     Metaphysics challenges physics

161:24  The ordinary practitioner, examining bodily symptoms,
        telling the patient that he is sick, and treating the case ac-
        cording to his physical diagnosis, would natu-
161:27  rally induce the very disease he is trying to cure,
        even if it were not already determined by mor-
        tal mind. Such unconscious mistakes would not occur, if
161:30  this old class of philanthropists looked as deeply for cause
        and effect into mind as into matter. The physician agrees
        with his "adversary quickly," but upon different terms
162:1   than does the metaphysician; for the matter-physician
        agrees with the disease, while the metaphysician agrees
162:3   only with health and challenges disease.

                           Truth an alterative

        Christian Science brings to the body the sunlight of
        Truth, which invigorates and purifies. Christian Science
162:6   acts as an alterative, neutralizing error with
        Truth. It changes the secretions, expels hu-
        mors, dissolves tumors, relaxes rigid muscles, restores
162:9   carious bones to soundness. The effect of this Science is
        to stir the human mind to a change of base, on which it
        may yield to the harmony of the divine Mind.

                            Practical success

162:12  Experiments have favored the fact that Mind governs
        the body, not in one instance, but in every instance. The
        indestructible faculties of Spirit exist without
162:15  the conditions of matter and also without the
        false beliefs of a so-called material existence. Working
        out the rules of Science in practice, the author has re-
162:18  stored health in cases of both acute and chronic disease in
        their severest forms. Secretions have been changed, the
        structure has been renewed, shortened limbs have been
162:21  elongated, ankylosed joints have been made supple, and
        carious bones have been restored to healthy conditions. I
        have restored what is called the lost substance of lungs, and
162:24  healthy organizations have been established where disease
        was organic. Christian Science heals organic disease as
        surely as it heals what is called functional, for it requires
162:27  only a fuller understanding of the divine Principle of
        Christian Science to demonstrate the higher rule.

                      Testimony of medical teachers

        With due respect for the faculty, I kindly
162:30  quote from Dr. Benjamin Rush, the famous
        Philadelphia teacher of medical practice. He
        declared that "it is impossible to calculate the mischief
163:1   which Hippocrates has done, by first marking Nature
        with his name, and afterward letting her loose upon sick
163:3   people."

        Dr. Benjamin Waterhouse, Professor in Harvard Uni-
        versity, declared himself "sick of learned quackery."

163:6   Dr. James Johnson, Surgeon to William IV, King Of
        England, said:

        "I declare my conscientious opinion, founded on long
163:9   observation and reflection, that if there were not a single
        physician, surgeon, apothecary, man-midwife, chemist,
        druggist, or drug on the face of the earth, there would be
163:12  less sickness and less mortality."

        Dr. Mason Good, a learned Professor in London,
        said:

163:15  "The effects of medicine on the human system are in
        the highest degree uncertain; except, indeed, that it has
        already destroyed more lives than war, pestilence, and
163:18  famine, all combined."

        Dr. Chapman, Professor of the Institutes and Practice
        of Physic in the University of Pennsylvania, in a published
163:21  essay said:

        "Consulting the records of our science, we cannot
        help being disgusted with the multitude of hypotheses
163:24  obtruded upon us at different times. Nowhere is the
        imagination displayed to a greater extent; and perhaps
        so ample an exhibition of human invention might gratify
163:27  our vanity, if it were not more than compensated by the
        humiliating view of so much absurdity, contradiction,
        and falsehood. To harmonize the contrarieties of med-
163:30  ical doctrines is indeed a task as impractible as to
        arrange the fleeting vapors around us, or to reconcile the
        fixed and repulsive antipathies of nature. Dark and
164:1   perplexed, our devious career resembles the groping of
