is evidently intended. No such phraseology would be suited to indicate
the omnipresence, or merely the spiritual presence of Jehovah. See Deut.
xxxi. 15.

"And the cloud of Jehovah was upon them by day when they went out of the
camp. And it came to pass when the ark set forward that Moses said,
_Rise up_, Jehovah, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them
that hate thee flee before thee. And when it rested, he said, _Return_,
O Jehovah, unto the many thousands of Israel." Numb. x. 35, 36.

On these occasions the cloud visibly rose above the tabernacle, and
advanced before the children of Israel; and again descended and rested
on the tabernacle. The address of Moses seems unintelligible, unless
Jehovah was personally present.

"And Jehovah _came down_ in the pillar of the cloud and stood in the
door of the tabernacle.... And he said, With Moses will _I speak mouth
to mouth, even apparently_; ... and _the similitude of Jehovah shall he
behold_." Numb. xii. Surely a local personal presence is here intended.

"At the door of the tabernacle _before_ Jehovah, I will meet you, to
speak there unto thee; and there I will meet with the children of
Israel; and the tabernacle shall be sanctified by my glory; and I will
_dwell among_ the children of Israel, and will be their Elohim. And they
shall know that I am Jehovah their Elohe, that brought them forth out of
the land of Egypt that I may _dwell among them_." Exod. xxix. 42-46.
"Defile not the land which ye shall inhabit, wherein I dwell: for I
Jehovah dwell among the children of Israel." Numb. xxxv. 34. "I have not
dwelt in any house since the time that I brought up the children of
Israel out of Egypt, even to this day, but have walked in a tent and in
a tabernacle. In all the places wherein I have walked with the children
of Israel," &c. 2 Sam. vii., and 1 Chron. xvii.

So of the phrases, "dwelleth between the cherubim," "sitteth between the
cherubim," and the like, which imply the local personal presence of
Jehovah.

The local presence and agency of the Messenger Jehovah, as Captain of
his hosts, and dictator to Joshua of all the steps taken by him in the
conquest and destruction of the Canaanites, is clearly indicated
throughout the book of Joshua.

Joshua had, for forty years in the wilderness, as minister to Moses,
been familiar with the personal presence, the agency, the miraculous
power, and the voice of the Messenger, in the tabernacle, in the pillar
of cloud by day and of fire by night, on mount Sinai, and on many
peculiar and special occasions.

His name properly signifies _Saviour_. The Hebrew word Jehoshua is
equivalent to the Greek name Jesus, or Saviour.

On the occurrence of the war with Amalek, shortly after the passage of
the Red Sea, Joshua was appointed by Moses to command the army of the
Israelites. He led out the chosen men of war, while Moses, Aaron, and
Hur took their station on a neighboring hill, where Moses held up the
rod of God, as a token that all the success under Joshua, in the
destruction of the Amalekites, was owing to the superior power of
Jehovah exerted specially on the occasion. When Moses held up his hand,
Israel prevailed; and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed.

The battle being ended by the discomfiture of Amalek and his people,
Jehovah said unto Moses, "Write this for a memorial, and rehearse it in
the ears of Joshua, That I will utterly put out the remembrance of
Amalek from under heaven. And Moses built an altar, and called the name
of it Jehovah Nissi," _i. e._, the Lord my banner. Exod. xvii.

Thus the supremacy and leadership of Jehovah was fully acknowledged. It
was his war, executed under the lieutenancy of Joshua, in accordance
with the specific directions given to Moses, and in the exercise of
faith in the will of Jehovah, as indicated by tokens of his appointment.

On the occasion of the giving of the tables of stone, Joshua accompanied
Moses, as his minister, into the mount of God. There they tarried forty
days, while "the sight of the glory of Jehovah was like devouring fire
on the top of the mount, in the eyes of the children of Israel." The
directions concerning the construction of the tabernacle were given on
that occasion. Exod. xxiv. When they descended from the mount, Joshua
seems first to have heard the shouting of the people before the molten
image they had made. Exod. xxxii.

In the progress of the events which succeeded this defection, the cloudy
pillar--the Shekina--descended from Sinai, and stood at the door of the
tabernacle, and Jehovah talked with Moses. "And Jehovah spake unto Moses
face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend. And Moses turned again
into the camp, but his minister Joshua departed not out of the
tabernacle." He, therefore, doubtless heard and saw the same as Moses.
Ibid. xxxiii.

He was one of those sent to examine and report concerning the land of
Canaan, Numb. xiii.; on which occasion, Moses changed his name from
Oshea to Jehoshua. Ten of those sent were unfaithful. The joint report
of Joshua and Caleb was true and faithful. The ten were destroyed by a
plague; the two were protected and preserved. Ibid. xiv.

Joshua was specially set apart as the successor of Moses, and
consecrated by the laying on of Moses' hands, in the presence of the
high priest and the congregation. Numb. xxvii. He, with the high priest,
was appointed to divide the land. Ibid. xxxiv. When Moses was forbidden
to enter the good land, he was notified that his minister Joshua would
lead the children of Israel thither, and commanded to encourage him.
Deut. i. 38. This he did, Deut. iii., and more emphatically, chap.
xxxi., when in the presence of all Israel he encouraged him, and cited
the predictions concerning his causing the people to inherit the land;
adding, "And Jehovah, he it is that doth go _before thee_; he will be
_with thee_; he will not fail thee, nor forsake thee; fear not, neither
be dismayed."

On the death of Moses, we read that "Joshua, the son of Nun, was full of
the spirit of wisdom, for Moses had laid his hands upon him; and the
children of Israel hearkened unto him, and did as Jehovah commanded
Moses." Deut. xxxiv.

Notwithstanding all this training, discipline, and intimate fellowship
with Moses for forty years, and the premonitions, designations and
predictions of him, as leader of Israel in place of Moses; yet such was
the sacredness and specialty of the relation in which he was to
officiate, that Jehovah spake unto Joshua, charged him with the duties
he was to perform, and promised him victory and complete success, in
case of his fidelity. "As I was with Moses, so _I will be with thee_. I
will not fail nor forsake thee. Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and
of a good courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed: for the Lord
thy God _is with thee_ whithersoever thou goest." Josh. i.

Joshua was to act only upon the authority expressly delegated to him,
and in the strictest subordination to the directions previously given to
Moses, and those which Jehovah now and from time to time announced to
him. The circumstances, like those which attended Moses at the
commencement and throughout his official life, required an assured and
unwavering faith in the declared purposes, the promises, the presence
and power of Jehovah the Elohe of Israel, the king, preserver, teacher,
and guide of his people.

There was, no doubt, a degree of mysteriousness connected with the
personal and local manifestations of Jehovah, which rendered an
unwavering faith constantly requisite. The minds of men, no less at that
than at other periods, were most readily and strongly affected by
visible and familiar objects. The chief incitements to idolatry were
visible, and such as were supposed to be easily comprehended. The fears
of men, founded in their consciousness of guilt and ignorance, had
reference naturally to things invisible and mysterious. The conscious
depravity, corruption, blindness and ill-desert of men, in contrast with
the perfect holiness, righteousness, impartiality, and other perfections
of Jehovah, could not but excite their natural inclination to exclude
him from their thoughts, instead of loving and confiding in him, and
realizing his presence by faith.

Whether for these or other reasons, a strong, constant, unwavering faith
in the person and the perfections, prerogatives and works of Jehovah,
was not uniformly exhibited even by the patriarchs and prophets of the
ancient dispensation. That dispensation was specially characterized as
one of outward and visible manifestations, miraculous interpositions,
and audible revelations; yet in the most signal instances of strong
faith as occasioning it, some special and overpowering manifestation of
Jehovah was vouchsafed. Thus Abraham, on the occasion of entering into
and ratifying the covenant concerning the everlasting inheritance of the
promised land by his posterity, through Christ as his Seed; the Shekina
visibly appeared, passed between the pieces of the sacrifice, and
probably consumed them. And again, prior to the destruction of Sodom,
when that event was revealed, and the earlier promises were renewed to
him, Jehovah appeared in the form of man, and conversed and walked with
him.




CHAPTER IX.

    Narrative concerning Job.


In the narrative concerning Job, who is supposed to have lived in the
age preceding that of Abraham, we read, chapter i., that he from time to
time offered burnt offerings continually; and that "there was a day when
the sons of (the) Elohim came to present themselves before Jehovah, and
Satan came also among them. And Jehovah said unto Satan, Whence comest
thou?--And Satan went forth from the presence of Jehovah." A statement
in the same words is made in relation to another day, chapter ii.; from
which passages it appears that Job, as priest of his family, offered
typical sacrifices according to the custom of that age; and that there
was a place to which the true worshippers came to present themselves
before Jehovah--a place doubtless of customary resort for worship, and,
from the analogy of the patriarchal history, of visible manifestation.
They came there to present themselves before Jehovah, implying that he
was personally and locally present; which is also strongly implied in
the statement, on both occasions, that Satan went forth from _the
presence_ of Jehovah. That adversary and accuser of the sons of Elohim
was literally present, and it is not perceived how he could be said to
go forth from the spiritual presence of Jehovah. It is probable that he
was not visible to the worshippers, and that neither the words addressed
to him, nor his replies, were audible to them. But those words proceeded
from Him from whose presence he went forth.

However this may be, it is evident from subsequent passages that Job had
clear apprehensions of the person and office of the Redeemer, and
recognized him as Jehovah in the administration of providence. To that
official person he doubtless refers under the designation _Shadai_,
translated Almighty, which he employs more than thirty times; which
appears from Exod. vi. to have been familiar to the patriarchs, and
which, from a comparison of passages from the Old and New Testaments,
signified the same divine Person as Melach Jehovah. In one instance only
he employs the term Adonai as a Divine designation--namely, in the
passage concerning Wisdom, chap. xxviii.: "Elohim understandeth the way
thereof. When he made a decree for the rain, then did he see it. And
unto man he said, Behold the fear of Adonai, that is wisdom." In chapter
xix. he refers to the same Person under an official designation of
frequent occurrence. "I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that he shall
stand at the latter day upon the earth; and ... in my flesh shall I see
Eloah." The word _Goel_, translated _Redeemer_, is employed with the
same reference in the following among other passages. "Melach the
Messenger, which _redeemed_ me from all evil." Gen. xlviii. "Let the
words of my mouth, and the meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy
sight, O Jehovah, my strength and my _Redeemer_." Ps. xix. "And they
remembered that Elohim was their rock, and El, their _Redeemer_." Ps.
lxxviii. "Thus saith Jehovah your _Redeemer_, and the Holy One of
Israel." Isa. xliii. 14. "Thus saith Jehovah, the King of Israel, and
his _Redeemer_, Jehovah Zebaoth." Ibid. xliv. 6. "Thus saith Jehovah thy
_Redeemer_, and he that formed thee, I am Jehovah that maketh all
things, that stretcheth forth the heavens alone," &c. Isa. xliv. 24.
"All flesh shall know that I Jehovah am thy Saviour, and thy
_Redeemer_, the Mighty One of Jacob." Isa. xlix. 26.

The original word, as a verb, signifies to redeem, to ransom; and as a
noun, a kinsman, blood relation, one having a right, or to whom it
pertained, to redeem; redeemer, kinsman-redeemer. Hence, when employed
as in the passages above cited, it includes a reference to the complex
person of Christ, and to Eloah in human nature, as spoken of
prospectively by Job.

At the close of his appointed trial, when the integrity of Job had been
vindicated, and the imputations and predictions of the adversary confuted,
a different and more glorious manifestation of Jehovah was made to him, a
manifestation adapted and designed--like that to Ezekiel, chap. i., in the
likeness of _a man_ on a throne in the midst of fire and cloud, moving as
in a whirlwind, and like that to Isaiah, chap. vi., and that to the
disciples on the holy mount--to impart to him new and more exalted
apprehensions of the perfections, prerogatives, and works of Jehovah; to
fit the humbled and penitent beholder for the gifts and honors he was to
receive, the duties he was to perform, and the conspicuous station he was
to occupy as one whose righteousness had been publicly tried and divinely
attested. "Jehovah answered Job out of _the whirlwind_, and said, Where
wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth?" &c.; adding a
prolonged detail of his works of creation and providence, and contrasting
the ignorance and nothingness of man with the operations of his wisdom and
power. Job answered: "Behold, I am vile, what shall I answer thee? I will
lay my hand upon my mouth." He confesses his sinfulness, the ignorance and
errors which had marked his replies to his friends, and adds: "I have
heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye seeth thee.
Wherefore I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes." He saw him in
that ineffable and, to mortals, all but insupportable splendor of glory,
which caused such an impression of his deity and his holiness, as in
contrast to make him conscious of his own vileness as a sinner, and induce
in him the utmost self-abasement; as in the parallel instance of Ezekiel,
it is said that "he fell upon his face;" and in that of Isaiah, that he
exclaimed, on seeing Adonai Jehovah Zebaoth, "Woe is me! for I am undone,
because I am a man of unclean lips;" and of Daniel, in an analogous
instance of his vision of the same glorified Person in the likeness of
man, chap. x., that he fell with his face to the ground, that there
remained no strength in him, that his comeliness was turned into
corruption. So at the Transfiguration on the mount, the disciples fell on
their faces and were sore afraid. Paul, on witnessing a like personal
manifestation, fell to the earth; and John, in Patmos, seeing that
glorified Person, fell at his feet as dead.

There was prevalent, at a very early period, a sentiment that to see God
would occasion or be followed by the death of the beholder; which
probably arose, not from simple appearances in the likeness of man, on
occasions which called for no exhibitions of Divine majesty and glory,
but from manifestations of overpowering, insupportable radiance,
comparable only to that of lightning, or that of the unclouded sun. Such
a manifestation we may well suppose to have been made on the expulsion
of Adam from Eden, in conjunction with the cherubic forms, as in
repeated instances afterwards. It was demanded by the occasion and the
end to be accomplished. There were sword-like flames, or lightnings, as
when Moses brought forth the people out of the camp to meet with (the)
Elohim, when he descended on mount Sinai; and they, terrified by the
lightnings, said, "Let not Elohim speak with us, lest we die;" and as in
the vision of Ezekiel, "out of the fire went forth lightning." So when
the seventy elders ascended mount Sinai with Moses, "and saw the Elohe
of Israel, the sight of the glory of Jehovah was like devouring fire."

The sentiment or apprehension above referred to is indicated by Jacob,
after wrestling with the Messenger Jehovah: "I have seen Elohim face to
face, and _my life is preserved_." Also in the words addressed to Gideon
after he had exclaimed, "Alas, O Adonai Jehovah! for because I have seen
the Messenger Jehovah face to face. And Jehovah said unto him, Fear not,
thou shalt not die." And, "Manoah said unto his wife, We shall surely
die, because we have seen Elohim." Such an inference is very likely to
have been drawn from the declaration of Jehovah to Moses, Exod. xxxiii.
20: "Thou canst not see my face: for there shall no man _see me_ and
live;" that is, _see me_ unveiled by the human form, or by a dark or
luminous cloud-like envelope, as in the burning bush, on mount Sinai,
and in the tabernacle; for in these modes of appearance Moses had
repeatedly seen him, and in the chapter above referred to, vs. 9, we
read that, "As Moses entered into the tabernacle, the cloudy pillar
descended and stood at the door of the tabernacle; and Jehovah spake
unto Moses face to face, as a man speaketh unto his friend." But, owing
to the defection of Aaron and the people in making and worshipping a
molten image, he had, to the consternation of Moses, intimated a purpose
to withdraw from among them; and after he had, upon the earnest entreaty
of Moses, signified that his presence should continue with them, Moses,
in his anxiety and perturbation, and perhaps fearing that he would not
visibly manifest himself, (see vs. 16,) besought that he would show him
his glory, the unclouded glory of his person. This was denied, as
certain to be fatal. But as far as he could endure the sight and live,
the request was granted. "And Jehovah descended in the cloud and stood
with him there, and proclaimed the name of Jehovah. And Moses made haste
and bowed his head toward the earth, and worshipped."




CHAPTER X.

    Further notice of Divine Manifestations to Abraham and
    Jacob--Mysteriousness attending the Divine Appearances--The
    visible Form always like that of Man.


In resuming the notice of expressions and statements in the history of
the patriarchs, which imply the local and visible presence of Jehovah,
