out again, without question was anciently the more usual
method."--(Archbishop Seeker.)

"_Immersion_ was the usual method in which baptism was administered in
the early Church. * * * Immersion was undoubtedly a common mode of
administering baptism, and was not discontinued when infant baptism
prevailed. * * * Sprinkling gradually took the place of immersion
without any formal renunciation of the latter."--(Canon Farrar.)

4. _Historical Notes on Infant Baptism_. "The baptism of infants, in
the first two centuries after Christ, was altogether unknown. * * *
The custom of baptizing infants did not begin before the third age
after Christ was born. In the former ages no trace of it appears; and
it was introduced without the command of Christ."--(Curcullaeus.)

"It is certain that Christ did not ordain infant baptism. * * * We
cannot prove that the apostles ordained infant baptism. From those
places where baptism of a whole family is mentioned (as in Acts 16:33;
I Cor. 1:16) we can draw no such conclusion, because the inquiry is
still to be made, whether there were any children in the families of
such an age that they were not capable of any intelligent reception of
Christianity; for this is the only point on which the case turns. * *
* As baptism was closely united with a conscious entrance on Christian
communion, faith and baptism were always connected with one another;
and thus it is in the highest degree probable that baptism was
performed only in instances where both could meet together, and that
the practice of infant baptism was unknown at this (the apostolic)
period. * * * That not till so late a period as (at least certainly
not earlier than) Irenaeus, a trace of infant baptism appears; and
that it first became recognized as an apostolic tradition in the
course of the third century, is evidence rather against than for the
admission of its apostolic origin."--(Johann Neander, a German
theologian who flourished in the first half of the nineteenth
century.)

"Let them therefore come when they are grown up--when they can
understand--when they are taught whither they are to come. Let them
become Christians when they can know Christ."--(Tertullian, one of the
Latin "Christian Fathers;" he lived from 150 to 220 A. D.)
Tertullian's almost violent opposition to the practice of pedo-baptism
is cited by Neander as "a proof that it was then not usually
considered an apostolic ordinance; for in that case he would hardly
have ventured to speak so strongly against it."

Martin Luther, writing in the early part of the sixteenth century,
declared: "It cannot be proven by the sacred scriptures that infant
baptism was instituted by Christ, or begun by the first Christians
after the apostles."

"By _tekna_ the Apostle understands, not infants, but posterity; in
which significance the word occurs in many places of the New Testament
(see among others John 8:39); whence it appears that the argument
which is very commonly taken from this passage for the baptism of
infants, is of no force, and good for nothing."--(Limborch, a native
of Holland, and a theologian of repute; he lived 1633-1712.)

5. _Summary of Changes in the Sacrament as an Ordinance_. "Errors
concerning the sacrament, and its signification, and the manner of
administering it, grew rapidly in the professed Christian churches
during the early centuries of the Christian era. As soon as the power
of the priesthood had departed, much disputation arose in matters of
ordinance, and the observance of the sacrament became distorted.
Theological teachers strove to foster the idea that there was much
mystery attending this naturally simple and most impressive ordinance;
that all who were not in full communion with the Church should be
excluded, not only from participation in the ordinance, which was
justifiable, but from the privilege of witnessing the service, lest
they profane the mystic rite by their unhallowed presence. Then arose
the heresy of transubstantiation,--which held that the sacramental
emblems by the ceremony of consecration lost their natural character
of simple bread and wine, and became in reality flesh and
blood,--actually parts of the crucified body of Christ. Arguments
against such dogmas is useless. Then followed the veneration of the
emblems by the people, the bread and wine--regarded as part of
Christ's tabernacle, being elevated in the mass for the adoration of
the people; and later, the custom of suppressing half of the sacrament
was introduced. By the innovation last mentioned, only the bread was
administered, the dogmatic assertion being that both the body and the
blood were represented in some mystical way in one of the 'elements.'
Certain it is, that Christ required His disciples to both eat and
drink in remembrance of Him."--(The Author, "Articles of Faith,"
Lecture 9, Note 4.)

6. _As to the Antiquity of the Doctrine of Transubstantiation_. As
stated in the text, the date of origin of the Catholic doctrine of
transubstantiation has been debated. The following summary is
instructive. "Protestants combatting the Catholic idea of the real
presence of the flesh and blood in the eucharist--transubstantiation--
have endeavored to prove that this doctrine was not of earlier origin
than the eighth century. In this, however, the evidence is against
them. Ignatius, bishop of Antioch, writing early in the second
century, says of certain supposed heretics: 'They do not admit of
eucharists and oblations, because they do not believe the eucharist to
be the flesh of our Savior Jesus Christ, who suffered for our sins.'
(Epistle of Ignatius to the Smyrneans.) So Justin Martyr, also writing
in the first half of the second century: 'We do not receive them [the
bread and the wine] as ordinary food or ordinary drink, but as by the
word of God, Jesus Christ, our Savior, was made flesh and took upon
him both flesh and blood for our salvation, so also the food which was
blessed by the prayer of the word which proceeded from Him, and from
which our flesh and blood, by transmutation, receive nourishment, is,
we are taught, both the flesh and blood of that Jesus who was made
flesh.' (Justin's Apology to Emperor Antoninus.) After Justin's time
the testimony of the fathers is abundant. There can be no doubt as to
the antiquity of the idea of the real presence of the body and blood
of Jesus in the eucharist; but that proves--as we said of infant
baptism--not that the doctrine is true, but that soon after the
apostles had passed away, the simplicity of the gospel was corrupted
or else entirely departed from."--(B. H. Roberts, "Outlines of
Ecclesiastical History," p. 133.)




CHAPTER IX.

**Internal Causes.--Continued**.


1. Among the controlling causes leading to the general apostasy of the
Church, we have specified as third in the series: _Unauthorized
changes in Church organization and government_.

2. A comparison between the plan of organization on which the
Primitive Church was founded and the ecclesiastical system which took
its place will afford valuable evidence as to the true or apostate
condition of the modern Church. The Primitive Church was officered by
apostles, pastors, high priests, seventies, elders, bishops, priests,
teachers, and deacons.--(See Luke 6:13 and Mark 3:14; Eph. 4:11; Heb.
5:1-5; Luke 10:1-11; Acts 14:23; 15:6; I Peter 5:1; I Tim. 3:1; Titus
1:17; Rev. 1:6; Acts 13:1; I Tim. 3:8-12.) We have no evidence that
the presiding council of the Church, comprising the twelve apostles,
was continued beyond the earthly ministry of those who had been
ordained to that holy calling during the life of Christ or soon after
His ascension. Nor is there record of any ordination of individuals to
the apostleship, irrespective of membership in the council of twelve,
beyond those whose calling and ministry are chronicled in the New
Testament, which, as a historical record, ends with the first century.

3. Ecclesiastical history other than the holy scriptures informs us,
however, that wherever a branch, or church, was organized, a bishop or
an elder (presbyter) was placed in charge. There is no doubt that
while the apostles lived, they were recognized and respected as the
presiding authorities of the Church. As they established branches or
churches, they selected the bishops, and submitted their nominations
to the vote of the members. As already stated, the principle of
self-government, or common consent, was respected in apostolic days
with a care amounting to sacred duty. We read that the bishops were
assisted in their local administration by presbyters and deacons.

4. After the apostles had gone, bishops and other officers were
nominated by, or at the instance of, the existing authorities. The
affairs of each church or branch were conducted and regulated by the
local officers, so that a marked equality existed among the several
churches, none exercising or claiming supremacy except as to the
deference voluntarily paid to those churches that had been organized
by the personal ministry of the apostles. Throughout the first and the
greater part of the second century, "the Christian churches were
independent of each other; nor were they joined together by
association, confederacy, or other bonds but those of charity. Each
Christian assembly was a little state, governed by its own laws, which
were either enacted, or, at least, approved by the society."--
(Mosheim, "Eccl. Hist.," Cent. II, Part II, ch. 2:2.)

5. As with the churches, so with their bishops,--there was a
recognized equality among them. Late in the second, and throughout the
third century, however, marked distinctions and recognitions of rank
arose among the bishops, those of large and wealthy cities assuming
authority and dignity above that accorded by them to the bishops of
the country provinces. The bishops of the largest cities or provinces,
took to themselves the distinguishing title of Metropolitans,--(See
Mosheim, "Eccl. Hist.," Cent. II, Part II, ch. 2:3; also Cent. IV,
Part II, ch. 2:3, and compare Cent. I, Part II, ch. 2:14.) and assumed
a power of presidency over the bishops of more limited jurisdiction.

6. The second century was marked by the custom of holding synods or
church councils; the practice originated among the churches in Greece,
and thence became general. These councils grew rapidly in power, so
that in the third century we find them legislating for the churches,
and directing by edict and command in matters which formerly had been
left to the vote of the people. Needless to say that with such
assumptions of authority came arrogance and tyranny in the government
of the Church. As the form of church government changed more and more,
many minor orders of clergy or church officers arose; thus in the
third century we read of sub-deacons, acolytes, ostiars, readers,
exorcists, and copiates. As an instance of the pride of office, it is
worthy of note that a sub-deacon was forbidden to sit in the presence
of a deacon without the latter's express consent.

7. Rome, so long the "mistress of the world" in secular affairs,
arrogated to herself a pre-eminence in church matters, and the bishop
of Rome claimed supremacy. It is doubtless true that the church at
Rome was organized by Peter and Paul. Tradition, founded on error,
said that the apostle Peter was the first bishop of Rome; and those
who successively were acknowledged as bishops of the metropolis
claimed to be, in fact, lineal successors of the presiding apostle.
The high but none the less false claim is made by the Catholic Church
in this day, that the present pope is the last lineal successor--not
alone to the bishopric but to the apostleship.

8. The rightful supremacy of the bishops of Rome, or Roman pontiffs as
they came to be known, was early questioned; and when Constantine made
Byzantium, or Constantinople, the capital of the empire, the bishop of
Constantinople claimed equality. The dispute divided the Church, and
for five hundred years the dissension increased, until in the ninth
century (855 A. D.) it developed into a great disruption, in
consequence of which the bishop of Constantinople, known distinctively
as the patriarch, disavowed all further allegiance to the bishop of
Rome, otherwise known as the Roman pontiff. This disruption is marked
today by the distinction between Roman Catholics.

9. The election of pontiff, or bishop of Rome, was long left to the
vote of the people and clergy; later the electoral function was vested
in the clergy alone; and in the eleventh century the power was lodged
in the college of cardinals, where it remains vested today. The Roman
pontiffs strove with unremitting zeal to acquire temporal as well as
spiritual authority; and their influence had become so great that in
the eleventh century we find them claiming the right to direct
princes, kings, and emperors in the affairs of the several nations. It
was at this, the early period of their greatest temporal power, that
the pontiffs took the title of _pope_, the word meaning literally papa
or father, and applied in the sense of universal parent. The power of
the popes was increased during the twelfth century, and may be said to
have reached its height in the thirteenth century.

10. Not content with assumed supremacy in all church affairs, the
popes "carried their insolent pretensions so far as to give themselves
out for lords of the universe, arbiters of the fate of kingdoms and
empires, and supreme rulers over the kings and princes of the
earth."--(Mosheim, "Eccl. Hist.," Cent. XI, Part II, ch. 2:2.) They
claimed the right to authorize and direct in the internal affairs of
nations, and to make lawful the rebellion of subjects against their
rulers if the latter failed to keep favor with the papal power.

11. Compare this arrogant and tyrannical church of the world with the
Church of Christ. Unto Pilate our Lord declared, "My kingdom is not of
this world."--(John 18:36.) and on an earlier occasion, when the
people would have proclaimed Him king with earthly dominion,--(John
6:15.) He departed from them. Yet the Church that boasts of its divine
origin as founded by the Christ, who would not be a king, lifts itself
above all kings and rulers, and proclaims itself the supreme power in
the affairs of nations.

12. In the fourth century the Church had promulgated what has been
since designated as an infamy, viz.: that "errors in religion, when
maintained and adhered to after proper admonition, were punishable
with civil penalties, and corporal tortures."--(Mosheim, "Eccl.
Hist.," Cent. IV, Part II, ch. 3:16.) The effect of this unjust rule
appeared as more and more atrocious with the passage of the years, so
that in the eleventh century, and later, we find the Church imposing
punishment of fine, imprisonment, bodily torture, and even death, as
penalties for infraction of church regulations, and, more infamous
still, providing for mitigation or annulment of such sentences on
payment of money. This led to the shocking practice of selling
_indulgences_ or pardons, which custom was afterwards carried to the
awful extreme of issuing such before the commission of the specific
offense, thus literally offering for sale licenses to sin, with
assurance of temporal and promise of spiritual immunity.

13. The granting of indulgences as exemptions from temporal penalties
was at first confined to the bishops and their agents, and the
practice dates as an organized traffic from about the middle of the
twelfth century. It remained for the popes, however, to go to the
blasphemous extreme of assuming to remit the penalties of the
hereafter on payment of the sums prescribed. Their pretended
justification of the impious assumption was as horrible as the act
itself, and constitutes the dreadful _doctrine of supererogation_.

14. As formulated in the thirteenth century, this doctrine was thus
set forth: "That there actually existed an immense treasure of
_merit_, composed of the pious deeds and virtuous actions which the
saints had performed _beyond what was necessary for their own
salvation_, and which were therefore applicable to the benefit of
others; that the guardian and dispenser of this precious treasure was
the Roman pontiff, and that of consequence he was empowered to assign
to such as he thought proper a portion of this inexhaustible source of
merit, suitable to their respective guilt, and sufficient to deliver
them from the punishment due to their crimes."--(As cited by Mosheim;
see "Eccl. Hist.," Cent. XII, Part II, ch. 3:4.)

15. The doctrine of supererogation is as unreasonable as it is
unscriptural and untrue. Man's individual responsibility for his acts
is as surely a fact as is his agency to act for himself. He will be
saved through the merits and by the atoning sacrifice of our Redeemer
and Lord; and his claim upon the salvation provided is strictly
dependent on his compliance with the principles and ordinances of the
gospel as established by Jesus Christ. Remission of sins and the
eventual salvation of the human soul are provided for; but these gifts
of God are not to be purchased with money. Compare the awful fallacies
of supererogation and the blasphemous practice of assuming to remit
sins of one man in consideration of the merits of another, with the
declaration of the one and only Savior of mankind: "But I say unto
you, that every idle word that men shall speak, they shall give
account thereof in the day of judgment."--(Matt. 12:36.) His inspired
apostles, seeing in prophetic vision the day of awful certainty,
solemnly testifies, "And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before
God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is
the book of life: and the dead were judged out of those things which
were written in the books, _according to their works_. And the sea
gave up the dead which were in it; and death and hell delivered up the
dead which were in them: _and they were judged every man according to
their works_."--(Rev. 20:12, 13. Italics intro.)

16. The scriptures proclaim the eternal fact of individual
accountability;--(For a concise treatment of the doctrine of man's
responsibility see the author's "Articles of Faith," Lecture 3.) the
Church in the days of its degeneracy declares that the merit of one
may be bought by another and paid for in worldly coin. Can such a
Church be in any measure the Church of Christ?

17. In illustration of the indulgences as sold in Germany in the
sixteenth century, we have the record of the doings of John Tetzel,
agent of the pope, who traveled about selling forgiveness of sins.
Says Milner: "Myconius assures us that he himself heard Tetzel declaim
with incredible effrontery concerning the unlimited power of the pope
and the efficacy of indulgences. The people believed that the moment
any person had paid the money for the indulgence he became certain of
his salvation; and that the souls for whom the indulgences were bought
were instantly released out of purgatory. * * * John Tetzel boasted
that he had saved more souls from hell by his indulgences than St.
Peter had converted to Christianity by his preaching. He assured the
purchasers of them, their crimes, however enormous, would be forgiven;
whence it became almost needless for him to bid them dismiss all fears
concerning their salvation. For, remission of sins being fully
obtained, what doubt could there be of salvation?"--(Milner, "History
of the Church," Cent. XVI, ch. 2.)

18. A copy of an indulgence written by the hand of Tetzel, the vendor
of popish pardons, has been preserved to us as follows: "May our Lord,
Jesus Christ, have mercy upon thee and absolve thee by the merits of
His most holy passion. And I, by His authority, that of His Apostles
Peter and Paul, and of the most holy pope granted and committed to me
in these parts, do absolve thee, first from all ecclesiastical
censures, in whatever manner they have been incurred; and then from
all the sins, transgressions, and excesses, how enormous soever they
may be, even for such as are reserved for the cognizance of the holy
see; and as far as the keys of the holy church extend, I remit to thee
all the punishment which thou deservest in purgatory on their account;
and I restore thee to the holy sacraments of the church, to the unity
of the faithful, and to that innocence and purity which thou
possessedst at baptism; so that when thou diest, the gates of
punishment shall be shut, and the gates of the paradise of delight
shall be opened; and if thou shalt not die at present, this grace
shall remain in full force when thou art at the point of death. In the
name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost."--(Milner,
"Church History," Cent. XVI, ch. 2.)

19. By way of excuse or defense, it has been claimed for the Roman
Catholic Church that a profession of contrition or repentance was
required of every applicant for indulgence, and that the pardon was
issued on the basis of such penitence, and not primarily for money or
its equivalent; but that recipients of indulgences, at first
voluntarily, and later in compliance with established custom, made a
material offering or donation to the Church. It is reported, moreover,
that some of the abuses with which the selling of indulgences had been
associated were disapproved by the Council of Trent, about the middle
of the sixteenth century. Nevertheless, the dread fact remains that
for four hundred years the Church had claimed for its pope the power
to remit all sins, and that the promise of remission had been sold and
bought.--(See Note 1, end of chapter.)

20. The awful sin of blasphemy consists in taking to one's self the
divine prerogatives and powers. Here we find the pope of Rome, the
head of the only church recognized at the time, assuming to remit the
punishment due in the hereafter for sins committed in mortality. A
pope assuming to sit in judgment as God Himself! Is this not a
fulfilment of the dread conditions of apostasy foreseen and foretold
as antecedent to the second advent of Christ? Read for yourselves:
"Let no man deceive you by any means: for that day shall not come,
except there come a falling away first, and that man of sin be
revealed, the son of perdition; _who opposeth and exalteth himself
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that he as God
sitteth in the temple of God, shewing himself that he is
God_."--(Thess. 2:3, 4. Italics introduced. See Note 4, end of
chapter.)

21. Another abuse perpetrated by the councils through which assemblies
the supreme pontiffs exercised their autocratic powers, is seen in the
restrictions placed on the reading and interpretation of scripture.
The same Council of Trent, which had disclaimed authority or blame for
the acts of church officials regarding the scandalous traffic in
indulgences, prescribed most rigid regulations forbidding the reading
of the scriptures by the people. Thus: "A severe and intolerable law
was enacted, with respect to all interpreters and expositors of the
scriptures, by which they were forbidden to explain the sense of these
divine books, in matters of faith and practice, in such a manner as to
make them speak a different language from that of the church and the
ancient doctors. The same law further declared that the church alone
(i. e., its ruler, the Roman pontiff) had the right of determining the
true meaning and signification of scripture. To fill up the measure of
these tyrannical and iniquitous proceedings, the church of Rome
persisted obstinately in affirming, though not always with the same
imprudence and plainness of speech, that _the holy scriptures were not
composed for the use of the multitude, but only for that of their
spiritual teachers_; and, of consequence, ordered these divine records
to be taken from the people in all places where it was allowed to
execute its imperious demands."--(Mosheim, "Eccl. Hist.," Cent. XVI,
Part I, ch. 1:25. The italics are introduced by the present writer.)

22. Is it possible that a church teaching such heresies can be the
Church established by Jesus Christ? The Lord Jesus commanded all:
"_Search the scriptures_; for in them ye think ye have eternal life:
and they are they which testify of me."--(John 5:39; compare verse 46;
also Isaiah 8:20; Luke 16:29; and Acts 17:11.)

23. Surely a pall of darkness had fallen upon the earth. The Church of
Christ had long since ceased to exist. In place of a priesthood
conferred by divine authority, a man-created papacy ruled with the
iron hand of tyranny and without regard to moral restraint. In a
scholarly work Dr. J. W. Draper gives a list of pontiffs who had stood
at the head of the Church from the middle of the eighth to the middle
of the eleventh centuries, with biographical notes of each.--(See Note
3, end of chapter.) And what a picture is there outlined! To win the
papal crown no crime was too great, and for a period of centuries the
immoralities of many of the popes and their subordinates are too
shocking for detailed description. It may be claimed that the author
last cited, and whose words are given below, was an avowed opponent of
the Roman Catholic Church, and that, therefore, his judgment is
prejudiced; in reply let it be said that the attested facts of history
support the dread arraignment. In commenting on the facts set forth,
Dr. Draper says:

24. "More than a thousand years had elapsed since the birth of our
Savior, and such was the condition of Rome. Well may the historian
shut the annals of those times in disgust. Well may the heart of the
Christian sink within him at such a catalogue of hideous crimes. Well
may we ask, Were these the vicegerents of God upon earth--these, who
had truly reached the goal beyond which the last effort of human
wickedness cannot pass? Not until several centuries after these events
did public opinion come to the true and philosophical conclusion--the
total rejection of the divine claims of the papacy. For a time the
evils were attributed to the manner of the pontifical election, as if
they could by any possibility influence the descent of a power which
claimed to be supernatural and under the immediate care of God. * * *
No one can study the development of the Italian ecclesiastical power
without discovering how completely it depended on human agency, too
often on human passion and intrigue; how completely wanting it was of
any mark of the divine construction and care--the offspring of man,
not of God, and therefore bearing upon it the lineaments of human
passions, human virtues, and human sins."--(Draper, "Intellectual
Development of Europe;" Vol. 1, p. 382.)

25. By increasing changes and unauthorized alterations in organization
and government, the earthly establishment known as "the Church," with
popes, cardinals, abbots, friars, monks, exorcists, acolytes, etc.,
lost all semblance to the Church as established by Christ and
maintained by His apostles. The Catholic argument that there has been
an uninterrupted succession of authority in the priesthood from the
Apostle Peter to the present occupant of the papal throne, is
untenable in the light of history, and unreasonable in the light of
fact. Authority to speak and act in the name of God, power to
officiate in the saving ordinances of the gospel of Christ, the high
privilege of serving as a duly commissioned ambassador of the court of
Heaven,--these are not to be had as the gifts of princes, nor are they
to be bought for money, nor can they be won as trophies of the bloody
sword. The history of the papacy is the condemnation of the Church of
Rome.--(See Notes 2 and 3, end of chapter.)


NOTES.

1. _The Roman Church Responsible for the Traffic in "Indulgences_." In
view of the claim asserted by some defenders of the Roman Church, to
the effect that the shameful traffic in indulgences was not sanctioned
by the church, and that the church cannot be held accountable for the
excesses to which its subordinates may go in their alleged official
acts, the following remarks by Milner, the judicious authority on
Church History (Cent. XVI, chap. 2.), may be of interest: "It does not
appear that the rulers of the hierarchy ever found the least fault
with Tetzel as exceeding his commission, till an opposition was openly
made to the practice of indulgences. Whence it is evident, that the
protestants have not unjustly censured the corruption of the court of
Rome in this respect. * * * The indulgences were farmed to the highest
bidders, and the undertakers employed such deputies to carry on the
traffic as they thought most likely to promote their lucrative views.
The inferior officers concerned in this commerce were daily seen in
public houses enjoying themselves in riot and voluptuousness
(Maimbourg, p. 11). In fine, whatever the greatest enemy of popery
could have wished, was at that time exhibited with the most
undisguised impudence and temerity, as if on purpose to render that
wicked ecclesiastical system infamous before all mankind."

The author proceeds to comment on the graded prices by which these
indulgences were placed within the pecuniary reach of all classes, and
finds in the wholesale traffic proof of profound ignorance and dire
superstition, and then points out the need of a new gospel
dispensation as follows: "This, however, was the very situation of
things _which opened the way for the reception of the gospel_. But who
was to proclaim the gospel in its native beauty and simplicity? The
princes, the bishops, and the learned men of the times saw all this
scandalous traffic respecting the pardon of sins; but none was found
who possessed the knowledge, the courage, and the honesty, necessary
to detect the fraud, and to lay open to mankind the true doctrine of
salvation by the remission of sins through Jesus Christ." Milner finds
the inauguration of a new era in the "Reformation" during the
sixteenth century. It is sufficient for our present purpose to know
that he recognized the need of preparation whereby the way would be
opened "for the reception of the gospel."--(Milner, "Ch. Hist.,"
Cent. XVI, ch. 2; italics introduced.)

2. _Three Popes at One Time_. "One of the severest blows given both
the temporal and the spiritual authority of the popes, was the
removal, in 1309, through the influence of the French king, Philip the
Fair, of the papal chair from Rome to Avignon, in Provence, near the
frontier of France. Here it remained for a space of about seventy
years, an era known in church history as the Babylonian Captivity.
While it was established here, all the popes were French, and of
course all their policies were shaped and controlled by the French
kings. * * * The discontent awakened among the Italians by the
situation of the papal court at length led to an open rupture between
them and the French party. In 1378 the opposing factions each elected
a pope, and thus there were two heads of the church, one at Avignon
and the other at Rome. The spectacle of _two rival popes_, each
claiming to be the rightful successor of St. Peter, and the sole
infallible head of the church, very naturally led men to question the
claims and infallibility of both. It gave the reverence which the
world had so generally held for the Roman See a rude shock, and one
from which it never recovered. Finally, in 1409, a general council of
the church assembled at Pisa, for the purpose of composing the
shameful quarrel. The council deposed both popes, and elected
Alexander V as the supreme head of the church. But matters, instead of
being mended hereby, were only made worse; for neither of the deposed
pontiffs would lay down his authority in obedience to the demands of
the council, and consequently _there were now three popes instead of
two_. In 1414 another council was called, at Constance, for the
settlement of the growing dispute. Two of the claimants were deposed
and one resigned. A new pope was then elected--Pope Martin V. In his
person the Catholic world was again united under a single spiritual
head. The schism was outwardly healed, but the wound had been too deep
not to leave permanent marks upon the church."--(P. V. N. Meyers,
"Gen. Hist.," pp. 457, 458. Italics introduced.)

The rupture between the French and Italian factions, referred to by
Meyers in the quotation given above, is known in history as the Great
Schism. It may be regarded as the decisive beginning of decline in the
temporal power of the popes.

3. _The Papacy Condemns Itself._ The line of succession in the papacy
for a limited period as referred to in the text, is given by Draper as
follows:

"To some it might seem, considering the interests of religion alone,
desirable to omit all biographical reference to the popes; but this
cannot be done with justice to the subject. The essential principle of
the papacy, that the Roman pontiff is the vicar of Christ upon earth,
necessarily obtrudes his personal relations upon us. How shall we
understand his faith unless we see it illustrated in his life? Indeed,
the unhappy character of those relations was the inciting cause of the
movements in Germany, France, and England, ending in the extinction of
the papacy as an actual political power, movements to be understood
only through a sufficient knowledge of the private lives and opinions
of the popes. It is well, as far as possible, to abstain from
burdening systems with the imperfections of individuals. In this case
they are inseparably interwoven. The signal peculiarity of the papacy
is that, though its history may be imposing, its biography is
infamous. I shall, however, forbear to speak of it in this latter
respect more than the occasion seems necessarily to require; shall
pass in silence some of those cases which would profoundly shock my
religious reader, and therefore restrict myself to the ages between
the middle of the eighth and the middle of the eleventh centuries,
excusing myself to the impartial critic by the apology that these were
the ages with which I have been chiefly concerned in this chapter.

"On the death of Pope Paul I, who had attained the pontificate A. D.
757, the Duke of Nepi compelled some bishops to consecrate
Constantine, one of his brothers, as pope; but more legitimate
electors subsequently, A. D. 768, choosing Stephen IV, the usurper and
his adherents were severely punished; the eyes of Constantine were put
out; the tongue of the Bishop Theodoras was amputated, and he was left
in a dungeon to expire in the agonies of thirst. The nephews of Pope
Adrian seized his successor, Pope Leo III, A. D. 79, in the street,
and, forcing him into a neighboring church, attempted to put out his
eyes and cut out his tongue; at a later period, this pontiff, trying
to suppress a conspiracy to depose him, Rome became the scene of
rebellion, murder and conflagration. His successor, Stephen V, A. D.
816, was ignominiously driven from the city: his successor, Paschal I,
