of strangers shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister
unto thee: for in my wrath I smote thee, but in my favor have I had
mercy on thee. Therefore thy gates shall be open continually; they
shall not be shut day nor night; that men may bring unto thee the
forces of the Gentiles, and that their kings may be brought. For the
nation and kingdom that will not serve thee shall perish: yea, those
nations shall be utterly wasted. The glory of Lebanon shall come unto
thee, the fir-tree, the pine-tree, and the box together, to beautify
the place of my sanctuary; and I will make the place of my feet
glorious. The sons also of them that afflicted thee shall come bending
unto thee; and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down
at the soles of thy feet; and they shall call thee, The city of the
Lord, the Zion of the Holy One of Israel.

"Whereas thou hast been forsaken and hated, so that no man went
through thee, I will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many
generations. Thou shalt also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shalt
suck the breast of kings: and thou shalt know that I the Lord am thy
Savior and thy Redeemer, the Mighty One of Jacob. For brass I will
bring gold, and for iron I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and
for stones iron: I will also make thy officers peace, and thine
exactors righteousness. Violence shall no more be heard in thy land,
wasting nor destruction within thy borders; but thou shalt call thy
walls Salvation, and thy gates Praise. The sun shall be no more thy
light by day; neither for brightness shall the moon give light unto
thee: but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and thy
God thy glory. Thy sun shall no more go down; neither shall thy moon
withdraw itself: for the Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and
the days of thy mourning shall be ended. Thy people also shall be all
righteous: they shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my
planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified. A little one
shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation: I the Lord
will hasten it in his time."

In this chapter we learn--First, that there is a city to be built in
the last days, unto which, not only Israel, but all the nations of the
Gentiles, are to flow; and the nation and kingdom that will not serve
the city shall perish and be utterly wasted. Second, we learn that the
name of that city is Zion, the city of the Lord. Third, we learn that
it is called the place of His sanctuary, and the place of His feet.
Fourth, that the best of timber, consisting of fir, pine, and boxwood,
is to be brought in great plenty, to beautify the place of His
sanctuary, and make the place of His feet glorious. Fifth, the
precious metals are to abound in such plenty, that gold is to be in
the room of brass, silver in the room of iron, brass in the room of
wood, and iron in the room of stones. Their officers are to be peace
officers, and their exactors righteous exactors; violence is no more
to be heard in the land; wasting nor destruction within their borders.
Their walls are to be Salvation, and their gates Praise: while the
glory of God, in the midst of the city, outshines the sun. The days of
their mourning are ended; their people are ail righteous, and are to
inherit the _land_ forever, being the branch of the Lord's planting,
that He may be glorified. A little one shall become a strong nation,
and the Lord will hasten it in His time.

The Psalmist David has told us, concerning the time of the building of
this city, in his one hundred and second Psalm, from the thirteenth to
the twenty-second verse: "Thou shalt arise and have mercy upon Zion;
for the time to favor her, yea, the set time, is come. For Thy
servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust thereof. So
the heathen shall fear the name of the Lord, and all the kings of the
earth Thy glory. When the Lord shall build up Zion, He shall appear in
His glory. He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise
their prayer. This shall be written for the generation to come: and
the people which shall be created shall praise the Lord. For He hath
looked down from the height of His sanctuary; from Heaven did the Lord
behold the earth; to hear the groaning of the prisoner; to loose those
that are appointed to death; to declare the name of the Lord in Zion,
and His praise in Jerusalem; when the people are gathered together,
and the kingdoms, to serve the Lord."

From this scripture we learn--First, that there is a set time to build
up Zion, or the city of which Isaiah speaks, namely, just before the
second coming of Christ; and that when this city is built, the Lord
will appear in His glory, and not before. So from this we affirm, that
if such a city is never built, then the Lord will never come. Second,
we learn that the people and kingdoms are to be gathered together, to
serve the Lord, both in Zion and Jerusalem; and third, that this Psalm
was written expressly for the generation to come, and the people which
shall be created shall praise the Lord, when they read it and see it
fulfilled.

I will now call the attention of the reader to the first paragraph of
the sixth chapter of the Record of Ether, contained in the Book of
Mormon: "For he truly told them of all things from the beginning of
man; and how that after the waters had receded from off the face of
this land (America), it became a choice land above all other lands, a
chosen land of the Lord, wherefore, the Lord would have that all men
should serve Him who dwell upon the face thereof; and that it was the
place of the New Jerusalem, which should come down out of heaven, and
the holy sanctuary of the Lord. Behold, Ether saw the days of Christ,
and he spake concerning a New Jerusalem upon this land: and he spake
also concerning the house of Israel, and the Jerusalem from whence
Lehi should come; after it should be destroyed, it should be built up
again a holy city unto the Lord; wherefore, it could not be a New
Jerusalem, for it had been in a time of old; but it should be built up
again, and become a holy city of the Lord, and it should be built up
unto the house of Israel; and that a New Jerusalem should be built up
upon this land, unto the remnant of the seed of Joseph, for which
things there has been a type; for as Joseph brought his father down
into the land of Egypt, even so he died there; wherefore, the Lord
brought a remnant of the seed of Joseph out of the land of Jerusalem,
that He might be merciful unto the seed of Joseph, that they should
perish not, even as He was merciful unto the father of Joseph, that he
should perish not; wherefore, the remnant of the house of Joseph shall
be built up on this land, and it shall be a land of their inheritance;
and they shall build up a holy city unto the Lord, like unto the
Jerusalem of old, and they shall no more be confounded, until the end
come, when the earth shall pass away. And there shall be a new heaven
and a new earth, and they shall be like unto the old, save the old
have passed away, and all things have become new. And then cometh the
New Jerusalem: and blessed are they who dwell therein, for it is they
whose garments are white through the blood of the Lamb; and they are
they who are numbered among the remnant of the seed of Joseph who were
of the house of Israel. And then also cometh the Jerusalem of old, and
the inhabitants thereof; blessed are they for they have been washed in
the blood of the Lamb; and they are they who were scattered and
gathered in from the four quarters of the earth, and from the north
countries, and are partakers of the fulfilling of the covenant which
God made with their father Abraham. And when these things come,
bringeth to pass the Scripture which saith, "There are they who were
first, who shall be last: and there are they who were last, who shall
be first."

From this prophecy we learn--First, that America is a chosen land of
the Lord, above every other land. Second, that it is the place of the
New Jerusalem, which shall come down from God, out of heaven, upon the
earth, when it is renewed. Third, that a New Jerusalem is to be built
in America, to the remnant of Joseph, after a similar pattern, or like
unto the old Jerusalem in the land of Canaan; and that the old
Jerusalem shall be rebuilt at the same time, and, this being done,
both cities will continue in prosperity on the earth, until the great
and last change, when the heavens and the earth are to be renewed.
Fourth, we learn that when this change takes place, the two cities,
together with the inhabitants thereof, are to be caught up into
heaven, and being changed and made new, the one comes down upon the
American land, and the other to its own place as formerly: and, fifth,
we learn that the inhabitants of these two cities are the same that
gathered together and first builded them. The remnant of Joseph, and
those gathered with them, inherit the New Jerusalem. And the tribes of
Israel, gathered from the north countries, and from the four quarters
of the earth, inhabit the other; and thus all things being made new,
we find those who were once strangers and pilgrims on THE EARTH, in
possession of that better country, and that city, for which they
sought.

We will now turn to John's Revelation, and examine the city after it
is made new, and see if it is anything like the pattern which it
exhibited previous to its final change, Rev. xxi: "And I saw a new
heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were
passed away; and there was no more sea. And I, John, saw the holy
city, New Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a
bride adorned for her husband. And I heard a great voice out of
heaven, saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and He will
dwell with them, and they shall be His people, and God himself shall
be with them, and be their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor
crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things
are passed away. And He that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make
all things new. And He said unto me, Write, for these words are true
and faithful. And He said unto me, It is done. I am Alpha and Omega,
the beginning and the end. I will give unto him that is athirst, of
the fountain of the water of life freely. He that overcometh shall
inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall be my son. But
the fearful, and unbelieving, and the abominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and all liars, shall have
their part in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone: which is
the second death.

"And there came unto me one of the seven angels which had the seven
vials full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me, saying, Come
hither, I will show thee the bride, the Lamb's wife. And he carried me
away in the spirit to a great and high mountain, and showed me that
great city, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God,
having the glory of God: and her light was like unto a stone most
precious, even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal; and had a wall
great and high, and had twelve gates, and at the gates, twelve angels,
and names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve tribes of
the children of Israel. On the east, three gates; on the north, three
gates; on the south, three gates; on the west, three gates. And the
wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them the names of the
twelve Apostles of the Lamb. And he that talked with me had a golden
reed to measure the city, and the gates thereof, and the wall thereof.
And the city lieth four square, and the length is as large as the
breadth. And he measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand
furlongs: the length and the breadth and the height of it are equal.
And he measured the wall thereof, an hundred and forty and four
cubits, according to the measure of a man, that is, of the angel. And
the building of the wall of it was of jasper: and the city was of pure
gold, like unto clear glass. And the foundations of the wall of the
city were garnished with all manner of precious stones. The first
foundation was jasper; the second, sapphire; the third, a chalcedony;
the fourth, an emerald; the fifth, sardonyx; the sixth, sardius; the
seventh, chrysolyte; the eighth, beryl; the ninth, a topaz; the tenth,
a chrysoprasus; the eleventh, a jacinth; the twelfth, an amethyst. And
the twelve gates were twelve pearls; every several gate was of one
pearl: and the street of the city was pure gold, as it were
transparent glass. And I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God
Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it. And the city had no need
of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it; for the glory of God
did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. And the nations of
them which are saved shall walk in the light of it; and the kings of
the earth do bring their glory and honor into it. And the gates of it
shall not be shut at all by day; for there shall be no night there.
And they shall bring the glory and honor of the nations into it. And
there shall in no wise enter into it anything that defileth, neither
whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie; but they which are
written in the Lamb's book of life." Also, twenty-second chapter, he
says: "And He showed me a pure river of water of life, clear as
crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb. In the
midst of the street of it, and on either side of the river, was there
the tree of life, which bare twelve manner of fruits, and yielded her
fruit every month: and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of
the nations. And there shall be no more curse: but the throne of God
and of the Lamb shall be in it; and His servants shall serve Him. And
they shall see His face; and His name shall be in their foreheads. And
there shall be no night there; and they need no candle, neither light
of the sun; for the Lord God giveth them light: and they shall reign
forever and ever. And He said unto me, These sayings are faithful and
true: and the Lord God of the holy prophets sent His angel to show
unto His servants the things which must shortly be done. Behold, I
come quickly: blessed is he that keepeth the sayings of the prophecy
of this book."

From this beautiful description, we learn--First, that the new earth
is not to be separated by any sea, consequently, what is now called
the Eastern and Western Continents will then be one land. Secondly,
we learn that the Lord will make not only the heavens and earth, but
_all things_ new (including of course, the cities of Jerusalem and
Zion, where His tabernacle will have been for more than a thousand
years). Thirdly, we learn that the city will lie four square, and have
twelve gates, with the names of the twelve tribes of Israel, inserted,
one on each gate; three gates on the north, three on the south, three
on the east, and three on the west; precisely after the same manner in
which it will exist temporally during the thousand years, as described
by Ezekiel. Fourthly, we learn that it will be composed of precious
stones, and gold, as the temporal city also will be, as described by
Isaiah. Fifthly, a pure river of the water of life, clear as crystal,
will flow through this renewed city, proceeding from the throne of
God, just as living waters will flow from the sanctuary in the
temporal city, as described by Ezekiel. Sixthly, the tree of life will
stand on either side of the river, even the tree which will have once
borne twelve manner of fruits, and have yielded its fruit every month,
its leaves having been for the healing of the nations. But now, when
John sees it, the nations have no need of healing, for there is no
more death, neither pain, nor sorrow, for the former things have
passed away, and all things are become new, consequently, he speaks in
the past tense, and says they _were_ for the healing of the nations;
of course, referring to the times when they existed temporally,
according to Ezekiel, before their final change.

Now, of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: Ezekiel and
the other Prophets have presented us with the view of the cities of
Zion and Jerusalem, as they will exist during the one thousand years
of rest called the Millennium; and John has given us a view of the
same cities, after their final change, when they come down from God
out of heaven, and rest upon the new earth. But Ether has given us a
sketch of them as they are to exist, both in their temporal and in
their eternal state: and he has told us plainly concerning their
location, first and last, namely, the New Jerusalem, in America,
inhabited by the remnant of Joseph, and those gathered with them, who
have washed their robes, and made them white, in the blood of the
Lamb: and the other Jerusalem, in its former place, inhabited by the
house of Israel gathered from the north countries, and from all
countries where they were scattered, having washed their robes, and
made them white, in the blood of the Lamb. And here is the end of the
matter.

I would only add, that the government of the United States has been
engaged, for upwards of nine years, in gathering the remnant of Joseph
to the very place where they will finally build a New Jerusalem, a
city of Zion, with the assistance of the Gentiles, who will gather
them from all the face of the land: and this gathering is clearly
predicted in the Book of Mormon, and other revelations, and the place
before appointed, and the time set for its fulfilment. And except the
Gentiles repent of all their abominations, and embrace the same
covenant, they will soon be utterly destroyed from off the face of
this land; as it is written by Isaiah: "The nation and kingdom that
will not serve thee shall perish. Yea, those nations shall be utterly
wasted." And as it is written by the Prophet Nephi in the Book of
Mormon (n. e.), 3 Nephi, xxi:

"And, verily, I say unto you, I give unto you a sign, that ye may know
the time when these things shall be about to take place, that I shall
gather in from their long dispersion, my people, O house of Israel,
and shall establish again among them my Zion.

"And behold, this is the thing which I will give unto you for a sign,
for verily I say unto you, that when these things which I declare unto
you, and which I shall declare unto you hereafter of myself, and by
the power of the Holy Ghost, which shall be given unto you of the
Father, shall be made known unto the Gentiles, that they may know
concerning this people who are a remnant of the house of Jacob, and
concerning this my people who shall be scattered by them.

"Verily, verily, I say unto you, when these things shall be made known
unto them of the Father, and shall come forth of the Father, from them
unto you;

"For it is wisdom in the Father that they should be established in
this land, and be set up as a free people by the power of the Father,
that these things might come forth from them unto a remnant of your
seed, that the covenant of the Father may be fulfilled which He hath
covenanted with His people, O house of Israel;

"Therefore, when these works, and the works which shall be wrought
among you hereafter, shall come forth from the Gentiles, unto your
seed, which shall dwindle in unbelief because of iniquity;

"For thus it behoveth the Father that it should come forth from the
Gentiles, that He may shew forth His power unto the Gentiles, for this
cause, that the Gentiles, if they will not harden their hearts, that
they may repent and come unto me, and be baptized in my name, and know
of the true points of my doctrine, that they may be numbered among my
people, O house of Israel;

"And when these things come to pass, that thy seed shall begin to know
these things, it shall be a sign unto them, that they may know that
the work of the Father hath already commenced unto the fulfilling of
the covenant which He hath made unto the people who are of the house
of Israel.

"And when that day shall come, it shall come to pass that kings shall
shut their mouths; for that which had not been told them shall they
see; and that which they had not heard shall they consider.

"For in that day, for my sake shall the Father work a work, which
shall be a great and marvellous work among them; and there shall be
among them who will not believe it, although a man shall declare it
unto them.

"But behold, the life of my servant shall be in my hand; therefore
they shall not hurt him, although he shall be marred because of them.
Yet I will heal him, for I will shew unto them that my wisdom is
greater than the cunning of the devil.

"Therefore it shall come to pass, that whosoever will not believe in
my words, who am Jesus Christ, whom the Father shall cause him to
bring forth unto the Gentiles, and shall give unto him power that he
shall bring them forth unto the Gentiles (it shall be done even as
Moses said), they shall be cut off from among my people who are of the
covenant.

"And my people who are a remnant of Jacob, shall be among the
Gentiles, yea, in the midst of them as a lion among the beasts of the
forest, as a young lion among the flocks of sheep, who, if he go
through both treadeth down and teareth in pieces, and none can
deliver.

"Their hand shall be lifted up upon their adversaries, and all their
enemies shall be cut off.

"Yea, wo be unto the Gentiles, except they repent, for it shall come
to pass in that day, saith the Father, that I will cut off thy horses
out of the midst of thee, and I will destroy thy chariots,

"And I will cut off the cities of thy land, and throw down all thy
strongholds;

"And I will cut off witchcrafts out of thy hand, and thou shalt have
no more soothsayers;

"Thy graven images I will also cut off, and thy standing images out of
the midst of thee, and thou shalt no more worship the works of thy
hands;

"And I will pluck up thy groves out of the midst of thee; so will I
destroy thy cities.

"And it shall come to pass that all lyings, and deceivings, and
envyings, and strifes, and priestcrafts, and whoredoms, shall be done
away.

"For it shall come to pass, saith the Father, that at that day
whosoever will not repent and come unto my beloved Son, them will I
cut off from among my people, O house of Israel;

"And I will execute vengeance and fury upon them, even as upon the
heathen, such as they have not heard.

"But if they will repent, and hearken unto my words, and harden not
their hearts, I will establish my Church among them, and they shall
come in unto the covenant, and be numbered among this the remnant of
Jacob, unto whom I have given this land for their inheritance,

"And they shall assist my people, the remnant of Jacob, and also, as
many of the house of Israel as shall come, that they may build a city,
which shall be called the New Jerusalem;

"And then shall they assist my people that they may be gathered in,
who are scattered upon all the face of the land, in unto the New
Jerusalem,

"And then shall the power of heaven come down among them; and I also
will be in the midst;

"And then shall the work of the Father commence at that day, even when
this Gospel shall be preached among the remnant of this people. Verily
I say unto you, at that day shall the work of the Father commence
among all the dispersed of my people; yea, even the tribes which have
been lost, which the Father hath led away out of Jerusalem.

"Yea, the work shall commence among all the dispersed of my people,
with the Father, to prepare the way whereby they may come unto me,
that they may call on the Father in my name;

"Yea, and then shall the work commence, with the Father, among all
nations, in preparing the way whereby His people may be gathered home
to the land of their inheritance

"And they shall go out from all nations; and they shall not go out in
haste, nor go by flight, for I will go before them, saith the Father,
and I will be their rearward."

O ye remnant of Joseph, your secret is _revealed_, ye who are
despised, smitten, scattered, and driven by the Gentiles from place to
place, until you are left few in number! "O thou afflicted, tossed
with tempest and not comforted," lift up your heads and rejoice, for
your redemption draweth nigh: yea, we have found your record, the
oracles of God once committed to your forefathers, which have been
hidden from you for a long time, because of unbelief. Behold! they are
about to be restored to you again; then shall you rejoice; for you
shall know that it is a blessing from the hand of God; and the scales
of darkness shall begin to fall from your eyes; and the Gentiles shall
not again have power over you; but you shall be gathered by them, and
be built up, and again become a delightsome people; and the time has
come; yea, the work has already commenced; for we have seen you
gathered together, from all parts of the land, unto the place which
God has appointed for the Gentiles to gather you; therefore lay down
your weapons of war, cease to oppose the Gentiles in the gathering of
your various tribes, for the hand of your great God is in all this,
and it was all foretold by your forefathers, ten thousand moons ago.
Therefore suffer them peaceably to fulfil this last act of kindness,
as a kind reward for the injuries you have received from them.

It is with mingled feelings of joy and sorrow that I reflect upon
these things. Sorrow, when I think how you have been smitten; joy,
when I reflect upon the happy change that now awaits you; and sorrow
again, when I turn my thoughts to the awful destruction that awaits
the Gentiles, except they repent. But the eternal purposes of Jehovah
must roll on, until all His promises are fulfilled, and none can
hinder; therefore, O God, Thy will be done! But while I still linger
upon this subject, with feelings that are easier felt than described,
methinks I can almost hear the Indian's mournful chant resounding
through his native woods. It whispers thus:

    Great Spirit of our fathers, lend an ear;
    Pity the red man, to his cries give ear;
    Long hast Thou scourged him with Thy chastening sore;
    When will Thy vengeance cease, Thy wrath be o'er?

    When will the white man's dire ambition cease,
    And let our scattered remnants dwell in peace?
    Or shall we, driven to the western shore,
    Become extinct, and fall to rise no more?

    Forbid, great Spirit! make Thy mercy known;
    Reveal Thy truth; Thy wandering captives own;
    Make bare Thine arm of power, for our release,
    And o'er the earth extend the reign of peace.




CHAPTER VI.

THE DEALINGS OF GOD WITH ALL NATIONS, IN REGARD TO REVELATION.


    "And hath made of one blood all nations of men for to dwell on
    all the face of the earth, and hath determined the times before
    appointed, and the bounds of their habitation; that they should
    seek the Lord, if haply they might feel after Him, and find Him,
    though He he not far from every one of us; for in Him we live,
    and move, and have our being."--Acts, xvii, 26-28.

In this text we learn--First, that all nations are made of one blood.
Secondly, they are designed to dwell on all the face of the earth
(America not excepted). Thirdly, that the Lord has determined the
bounds of their habitation, that is, He has divided the earth among
His children, giving each nation that portion which seemed Him
good--for instance the land of Canaan, to Israel; Mount Seir, to Esau;
Arabia, to Ishmael; America, to the remnant of Joseph, etc., as a
father parcels off a large tract of land to his several children. And
fourthly, He has granted unto all the nations of the earth the
privilege of feeling after Him and finding Him; since He is not so
very far from every one of them, whether they be in Asia, Africa,
Europe, America, or even upon the islands of the sea. Now, if any
nation, in any age of the world, or in any part of the earth, should
happen to live up to their privilege, what would they obtain? I
answer, revelation, for the best of reasons, because no people ever
found God in any other way, nor ever will. Therefore, if they found
God, they found Him by revelation, direct from Himself, He revealing
His will to them; and if they did not find Him in this way, they never
knew Him. And if they did obtain revelation, it was their privilege to
write it, and make a record of the same, and teach it to their
children; and this record would be sacred, because it would contain
the word of God; and thus it would be a HOLY BIBLE, no matter whether
it was written by the Jews, the Ten Tribes, the Nephites, or the
Gentiles. I would just as soon have the Gospel written by Nephi,
Mormon, Moroni or Alma, as the Gospel written by Matthew, Mark, Luke,
or John. Again, I would just as soon believe a revelation given in
America, as believe a revelation given in Asia; for if ever a nation
failed to get a revelation, it was because they did not attain unto
that which was their privilege But why, then, was any nation over left
in darkness, from age to age, without the light of revelation to guide
them? I answer, because their forefathers, in some age of the world,
rejected revelation, cast out and killed the Prophets, and turned a
deaf ear to the things of God, until God took away that which they
enjoyed, and committed it to some other people, and left them from
generation to generation to grow up in ignorance, until He should see
fit again to send His light and truth to that nation; but those who
reject no light are under no condemnation, and the mercy of God hath
claim upon them, through the blood of Christ which atoneth for the
sins of the world. The heathen who never had the light of revelation
will be saved by the blood of Christ; while their forefathers who
rejected the light are condemned, for this is their condemnation, that
when light came they rejected it.

Now on this subject, let us examine the history of various ages. In
the morn of creation, men had light by direct revelation, for Adam,
Cain and Abel talked with the Lord. In the next age, men had light by
revelation, for Enoch walked with the Lord, and not only saw the first
coming of Christ, but His second coming also, and he exclaimed:
"Behold, the Lord cometh with ten thousand of His saints, to take
vengeance on the ungodly," etc., as it is written in Jude. From which
it appears that Enoch knew and prophesied concerning the Messiah, with
all the plainness of an Apostle. Again, in Noah's day there was
positive revelation. And all these were Gentiles, or, rather, the word
Israel had not yet been named upon Jacob by the angel. Now, if it was
the privilege of so many Gentiles to get the word of the Lord, and to
have the knowledge of the true God by revelation, it was the privilege
of all the rest; and if any ran into darkness and worshiped idols,
until God gave them over to work all uncleanness with greediness, and
finally took the oracles of God from them, and confined them more
particularly to Abraham, it was because they had for a long time
rejected them, and rendered themselves unworthy of them; so that from
the days of Israel the oracles of God seemed to pertain more
particularly to the chosen seed, chosen for that very purpose, namely,
that to them might be committed the oracles of God, the Priesthood,
the service of God, and the promises which had been in existence from
the beginning, among the Gentiles, who had long rendered themselves
unworthy of such blessings.

But in process of time Israel rendered themselves unworthy of a
continuance of such blessings, by stoning and killing the Prophets,
and rejecting the Messiah, and all those that God sent unto them,
until at length the Lord took the kingdom from them as a nation, and
gave it again to the Gentiles; in the meantime winking at all the
ignorance through which the Gentiles had passed, from the time the
kingdom had been taken from them until restored again. But as soon as
the kingdom of God was restored again to the Gentiles, He commanded
them all everywhere to repent, and then if they did not do it they
were under condemnation, but not before. But no sooner was the kingdom
taken from the Jews, than the fruits of it disappeared from among
them, and they were dispersed into all the nations of the earth where
they have never again heard the voice of inspiration commanding them
to repent. And if any Gentile has commanded them to repent and be
baptized (in the name of the Lord), without being inspired and
commanded to do it, it was an imposition practised upon them. Not that
repentance was any harm, but the imposition consisted in professing to
be sent with a message when they were not, for when God commands men
to repent, He sends somebody with the command, in order that they may
teach it to those for whom He designs it; and when He does not command
them to do a thing, He does not require it at their hand. Any man who
says that the Jews, as a nation, have been commanded to repent and be
baptized, for the last seventeen hundred years, says that which he
cannot prove, unless he can prove that there has been a new revelation
within that time, commissioning some man to go to them with such an
errand; neither will any generation of Jews, which have existed since
inspiration ceased, be condemned for rejecting any message from God,
for He has sent no message to them, consequently they have rejected
none; but their forefathers, who did reject the things of God, are
under condemnation.

Again, when men were sent with the Gospel to the Gentiles, they were
commanded to repent; and this command was in force, whenever men came
preaching, who were sent by proper authority, and inspired by the Holy
Ghost; but when they had killed the Apostles and inspired men, and
abused their privileges, until God took them away, and left them
without inspiration, then the sin was answered upon that generation;
and those who have since come upon the stage of action have never been
commanded to repent and be baptized (except by some new revelation),
and any man who says that God has commanded a Gentile to repent and
obey the Gospel since the days that inspiration ceased, or since the
days that Apostles and Prophets ceased from among men, says that which
he will not be able to prove, unless he proves that some revelation
has been given since that time, again commissioning men to go to the
