practice of Christianity (viz., a duty that Christians are now bound
to observe), or else it is not calculated for our meridian, where
the spirits of men are of too high an elevation for it; for if pride
and uncharitableness, if divisions and strifes, if wrath and envy,
if animosities and contentions, were but the marks of true
Christians, Diogenes need never light his lamp at noon to find out
such among us; but if a spirit of meekness, gentleness, and
condescension, if a stooping to the weaknesses and infirmities of
one another, if pursuit after peace, when it flies from us, be the
indispensable duties, and characteristical notes of Christians, it
may possibly prove a difficult inquest to find out such among the
crowds of those that shelter themselves under that glorious name."

It is the unity and peace of churches that brings others to them,
and makes Christianity amiable.  What is prophesied of the church of
the Jews may in this case be applied to the Gentile church, Isa.
lxvi. 12, that when once God extends peace to her like a river, the
Gentiles shall come in like a flowing stream; then (and not till
then) the glory of the Lord shall arise upon his churches, and his
glory shall be seen among them; then shall their hearts fear and be
enlarged, because the abundance of the nations shall be converted to
them.

6.  As want of unity and peace keeps those out of the church that
would come in, so it hinders the growth of those that are in.  Jars
and divisions, wranglings and prejudices, eat out the growth, if not
the life of religion.  These are those waters of Marah, that
embitter our spirits, and quench the Spirit of God.  Unity and peace
is said to be like the dew of Hermon, and as a dew that descended
upon Sion, where the Lord commanded his blessing; Psalm cxxxiii. 3.

Divisions run religion into briars and thorns, contentions and
parties.  Divisions are to churches like wars in countries:  where
wars are, the ground lieth waste and untilled, none takes care of
it.  It is love that edifieth, but division pulleth down.  Divisions
are as the north-east wind to the fruits, which causeth them to
dwindle away to nothing; but when the storms are over, every thing
begins to grow.  When men are divided, they seldom speak the truth
in love; and then no marvel they grow not up to him in all things,
who is the head.

It is a sad presage of an approaching famine (as one well observes),
not of bread nor water, but of hearing the word of God, when the
thin ears of corn devour the plump full ones; when the lean kine
devour the fat ones; when our controversies about doubtful things,
and things of less moment, eat up our zeal for the more indisputable
and practical things in religion which may give us cause to fear,
that this will be the character by which our age will be known to
posterity--that it was the age that talked of religion most, and
loved it least.

Look upon those churches where peace is, and there you shall find
prosperity.  When the churches had rest, they were not only
multiplied, but, walking in the fear of the Lord and the comforts of
the Holy Ghost, they were edified; it is when the whole body is knit
together, as with joints and hands, that they increase with the
increase of God.

We are at a stand sometimes, why there is so little growth among
churches, why men have been so long in learning; and are yet so far
from attaining the knowledge of the truth; some have given one
reason, and some another; some say pride is the cause, and others
say covetousness is the cause.  I wish I could say these were no
causes; but I observe, that when God entered his controversy with
his people of old, he mainly insisted upon some one sin, as
idolatry, and shedding innocent blood, &c., as comprehensive of the
rest; not but that they were guilty of other sins, but those that
were the most capital are particularly insisted on:  in like manner,
whoever would but take a review of churches that live in contentions
and divisions, may easily find that breach of unity and charity is
their capital sin, and the occasion of all other sins.  No marvel
then, that the Scripture saith, the whole law is fulfilled in love:
and if so, then where love is wanting, it needs must follow the
whole law is broken.  It is where love grows cold that sin abounds;
and therefore the want of unity and peace is the cause of that
leanness and barrenness that is among us; it is true in spirituals
as well as temporals, that peace brings plenty.

7.  Where unity and peace is wanting, our prayers are hindered; the
promise is, that what we shall agree to ask shall be given us of our
heavenly Father:  no marvel we pray and pray, and yet are not
answered; it is because we are not agreed what to have.

It is reported that the people in Lacedemonia, coming to make
supplication to their idol god, some of them asked for rain, and
others of them asked for fair weather:  the oracle returns them this
answer, That they should go first and agree among themselves.  Would
a heathen god refuse to answer such prayers in which the supplicants
were not agreed, and shall we think the true God will answer them?

We see then that divisions hinder our prayers, and lay a prohibition
on our sacrifice:  "If thou bring thy gift to the altar," saith
Christ, "and there remember that thy brother hath aught against
thee, leave thy gift, and go, and first be reconciled to thy
brother, and then come and offer it."  So that want of unity and
charity hinders even our particular prayers and devotions.

This hindered the prayers and fastings of the people of old from
finding acceptance; Isa. lviii. 3.  The people ask the reason
wherefore they fasted, and God did not see nor take notice of them.
He gives this reason, Because they fasted for strife and debate, and
hid their face from their own flesh.  Again, Isa. lix., the Lord
saith, his hand was not shortened, that he could not save; nor his
ear heavy, that he could not hear:  but their sins had separated
between their God and them.  And among those many sins they stood
chargeable with, this was none of the least, viz., that the way of
peace they had not known.  You see where peace was wanting, prayers
were hindered, both under the Old and New Testaments.

The sacrifice of the people, in the 65th of Isaiah, that said,
"Stand by thyself, I am holier than thou," was a smoke in the
nostrils of the Lord.  On the other hand, we read how acceptable
those prayers were that were made with one accord, Acts iv. 24,
compared with verse 31.  They prayed with one accord, and they were
all of one heart, and of one soul:  And see the benefit of it, "They
were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and spoke the word with all
boldness;" which was the very thing they prayed for, as appears
verse 29.  And the apostle exhorts the husband to dwell with his
wife, that their prayers might not be hindered; 1 Pet. iii. 7.  We
see then want of unity and peace, either in families or churches, is
a hinderance of prayers.

8.  It is a dishonour and disparagement to Christ that his family
should be divided.  When an army falls into mutiny and division, it
reflects disparagement on him that hath the conduct of it.  In like
manner, the divisions of families are a dishonour to the heads, and
those that govern them.  And if so, then how greatly do we dishonour
our Lord and governor, who gave his body to be broken to keep his
church from breaking, who prayed for their peace and unity, and left
peace at his departing from them for a legacy, even a peace which
the world could not bestow upon them.

9.  Where there is peace and unity, there is a sympathy with each
other; that which is the want of one will be the want of all.  "Who
is afflicted," saith the apostle, "and I burn not?"  We should then
"remember them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them which
suffer adversity, as being ourselves also of the body;" Heb. xiii.
3.  But where the body is broken, or men are not reckoned or
esteemed of the body, no marvel we are so little affected with such
as are afflicted.  Where divisions are, that which is the joy of the
one is the grief of another; but where unity and peace and charity
abound, there we shall find Christians in mourning with them that
mourn, and rejoicing with them that rejoice; then they will not envy
the prosperity of others, nor secretly rejoice at the miseries or
miscarriages of any.

IV.  Last of all, I now come to give you twelve directions and
motives for the obtaining peace and unity.

1.  If ever we would live in peace and unity, we must pray for it.
