Kin-Kaku-ji, or Golden Hall Temple, by the same Shogun, in 1397;
Gin-kaku-ji, or Silver Hall Temple, by Yoshi-masa, the eighth Shogun,
in 1480.



11. Zen in the Dark Age.

The latter half of the Ashikaga period was the age of arms and
bloodshed.  Every day the sun shone on the glittering armour of
marching soldiers.  Every wind sighed over the lifeless remains of
the brave.  Everywhere the din of battle resounded.  Out of these
fighting feudal lords stood two champions.  Each of them
distinguished himself as a veteran soldier and tactician.  Each of
them was known as an experienced practiser of Zen.  One was
Haru-nobu[FN#95] (Take-da, died in 1573), better known by his
Buddhist name, Shin-gen.  The other was Teru-tora[FN#96] (Uye-sugi,
died in 1578), better known by his Buddhist name, Ken-shin.  The
character of Shin-gen can be imagined from the fact that he never
built any castle or citadel or fortress to guard himself against his
enemy, but relied on his faithful vassals and people; while that of
Ken-shin, from the fact that he provided his enemy, Shin-gen, with
salt when the latter suffered from want of it, owing to the cowardly
stratagem of a rival lord.  The heroic battles waged by these two
great generals against each other are the flowers of the Japanese
war-history.  Tradition has it that when Shin-gen's army was put to
rout by the furious attacks of Ken-shin's troops, and a single
warrior mounted on a huge charger rode swiftly as a sweeping wind
into Shin-gen's head-quarters, down came a blow of the heavy sword
aimed at Shin-gen's forehead, with a question expressed in the
technical terms of Zen: "What shalt thou do in such a state at such a
moment?"  Having no time to draw his sword, Shin-gen parried it with
his war-fan, answering simultaneously in Zen words: "A flake of snow
on the red-hot furnace!"  Had not his attendants come to the rescue
Shin-gen's life might have gone as 'a flake of snow on the red-hot
furnace.'  Afterwards the horseman was known to have been Ken-shin
himself.  This tradition shows us how Zen was practically lived by
the Samurais of the Dark Age.


[FN#95]  Shin-gen practised Zen under the instruction of Kwai-sen,
who was burned to death by Nobu-naga (O-da) in 1582.  See
Hon-cho-ko-so-den.

[FN#96]  Ken-shin learned Zen under Shu-ken, a So Ta master. See
To-jo-ren-to-roku.


Although the priests of other Buddhist sects had their share in these
bloody affairs, as was natural at such a time, yet Zen monks stood
aloof and simply cultivated their literature.  Consequently, when all
the people grew entirely ignorant at the end of the Dark Age, the Zen
monks were the only men of letters.  None can deny this merit of
their having preserved learning and prepared for its revival in the
following period.[FN#97]


[FN#97]  After the introduction of Zen into Japan many important
books were written, and the following are chief doctrinal works:
Ko-zen-go-koku-ron, by Ei-sai; Sho bo-gen-zo; Gaku-do-yo-zin-shu;
Fu-kwan-za-zen-gi; Ei-hei-ko-roku, by Do-gen; Za-zen-yo-zin-ki; and
Den-ko-roku, by Kei-zan.



12. Zen under the Toku-gana Shogunate.

Peace was at last restored by Iye-yasu, the founder of the Toku-gana
Shogunate (1603-1867).  During this period the Shogunate gave
countenance to Buddhism on one hand, acknowledging it as the state
religion, bestowing rich property to large monasteries, making
priests take rank over common people, ordering every householder to
build a Buddhist altar in his house; while, on the other hand, it did
everything to extirpate Christianity, introduced in the previous
period (1544).  All this paralyzed the missionary spirit of the
Buddhists, and put all the sects in dormant state. As for Zen[FN#98]
it was still favoured by feudal lords and their vassals, and almost
all provincial lords embraced the faith.


[FN#98]  The So To Sect was not wanting in competent teachers, for it
might take pride in its Ten-kei (1648-1699), whose religious insight
was unsurpassed by any other master of the age; in its Shi getsu, who
was a commentator of various Zen books, and died 1764; in its Men-zan
(1683-1769), whose indefatigable works on the exposition of So To Zen
are invaluable indeed; and its Getsu-shu (1618-1696) and Man-zan
(1635-1714), to whose labours the reformation of the faith is
ascribed.  Similarly, the Rin Zai Sect, in its Gu-do (1579-1661); in
its Isshi (1608-1646); in its Taku-an (1573-1645), the favourite
tutor of the third Shogun, Iye-mitsu; in its Haku-in (1667-1751), the
greatest of the Rin Zai masters of the day, to whose extraordinary
personality and labour the revival of the sect is due; and its To-rei
(1721-1792), a learned disciple of Haku-in.  Of the important Zen
books written by these masters, Ro-ji-tan-kin, by Ten-kei;
Men-zan-ko-roku, by Men-zan; Ya-sen-kwan-wa, Soku-ko-roku,
Kwai-an-koku-go, Kei-so-doku-zui, by Haku-in; Shu-mon-mu-jin-to-ron,
by To-rei, are well known.


It was about the middle of this period that the forty-seven vassals
of Ako displayed the spirit of the Samurai by their perseverance,
self-sacrifice, and loyalty, taking vengeance on the enemy of their
deceased lord.  The leader of these men, the tragic tales of whom can
never be told or heard without tears, was Yoshi-o (O-ishi died 1702),
a believer of Zen,[FN#99] and his tomb in the cemetery of the temple
of Sen-gaku-ji, Tokyo, is daily visited by hundreds of his admirers.
Most of the professional swordsmen forming a class in these days
practised Zen. Mune-nori[FN#100](Ya-gyu), for instance, established
his reputation by the combination of Zen and the fencing art.


[FN#99]  See "Zen Shu," No. 151.

[FN#100]  He is known as Ta-jima, who practised Zen under Taku-an.


The following story about Boku-den (Tsuka-hara), a great swordsman,
fully illustrates this tendency:

"On a certain occasion Boku-den took a ferry to cross over the Yabase
in the province of Omi.  There was among the passengers a Samurai,
tall and square-shouldered, apparently an experienced fencer.  He
behaved rudely toward the fellow-passengers, and talked so much of
his own dexterity in the art that Boku-den, provoked by his brag,
broke silence.  'You seem, my friend, to practise the art in order to
conquer the enemy, but I do it in order not to be conquered,' said
Boku-den.  'O monk,' demanded the man, as Boku-den was clad like a
Zen monk, 'what school of swordsmanship do you belong to?'  Well,
mine is the Conquering-enemy-without-fighting-school.'  'Don't tell a
fib, old monk.  If you could conquer the enemy without fighting, what
then is your sword for?'  'My sword is not to kill, but to save,'
said Boku-den, making use of Zen phrases; 'my art is transmitted from
mind to mind.'  'Now then, come, monk,' challenged the man, 'let us
see, right at this moment, who is the victor, you or I.'  The
gauntlet was picked up without hesitation.  'But we must not fight,'
said Boku-den, 'in the ferry, lest the passengers should be hurt.
Yonder a small island you see.  There we shall decide the contest.'
To this proposal the man agreed, and the boat was pulled to that
island.  No sooner had the boat reached the shore than the man jumped
over to the land, and cried: 'Come on, monk, quick, quick!'
Boku-den, however, slowly rising, said: 'Do not hasten to lose your
head.  It is a rule of my school to prepare slowly for fighting,
keeping the soul in the abdomen.'  So saying he snatched the oar from
the boatman and rowed the boat back to some distance, leaving the man
alone, who, stamping the ground madly, cried out: 'O, you fly, monk,
you coward.  Come, old monk!'  'Now listen,' said Boku-den, 'this is
the secret art of the Conquering-enemy-without-fighting-school.
Beware that you do not forget it, nor tell it to anybody else.'
Thus, getting rid of the brawling fellow, Boku-den and his
fellow-passengers safely landed on the opposite shore."[FN#101]  The
O Baku School of Zen was introduced by Yin Yuen (In-gen) who crossed
the sea in 1654, accompanied by many able disciples.[FN#102]  The
Shogunate gave him a tract of land at Uji, near Kyo-to, and in 1659
he built there a monastery noted for its Chinese style of
architecture, now known as O-baku-san.  The teachers of the same
school[FN#103] came one after another from China, and Zen[FN#104]
peculiar to them, flourished a short while.


[FN#101]  Shi-seki-shu-ran.

[FN#102]  In-gen (1654-1673) came over with Ta-Mei (Dai-bi, died
1673), Hwui Lin (E-rin died 1681), Tuh Chan (Doku-tan, died 1706),
and others.  For the life of In-gen: see Zoku-ko-shu-den and
Kaku-shu-ko-yo.

[FN#103]  Tsih Fei (Soku-hi died 1671), Muh Ngan (Moku-an died 1684),
Kao Tsuen (Ko-sen died 1695), the author of Fu-so-zen-rin-so-bo-den,
To-koku-ko-so-den, and Sen-un-shu, are best known.

[FN#104]  This is a sub-sect of the Rin Zai School, as shown in the
following table:

TABLE OF THE TRANSMISSION OF ZEN FROM CHINA TO JAPAN.

1. Bodhidharma.
2. Hwui Ko (E-ka).
3. San Tsang (So-san).
4. Tao Sin (Do-shin).
5. Hung Jan (Ko nin).
---THE NORTHERN SECT
   6. Shang Siu (Jin-shu).
---THE SOUTHERN SECT
   6. Hwui Nang (E-no).
   ---THE RIN ZAI SCHOOL.
      7. Nan Yoh (Nan-gaku).
      ---10. Gi-ku.
      ---11. Lin Tsi (Rin-zai).
         ---21. Yuen Wu (En-go).
            ---22. Fuh Hai (Bukkai).
               ---28. Kaku-a.
            ---THE O BAKU SCHOOL.
               42. In-gen.
         ---25. Hti Ngan (Kyo-an).
            ---26. Ei-sai.
   ---THE SO TO SCHOOL.
      7. Tsing Yuen (Sei-gen).
      ---8. Shih Teu (Seki-to).
         ---11. Tung Shan (To-zan).
            ---23. Ju Tsing (Nyo-jo).
               ---24. Do-gen.

The O Baku School is the amalgamation of Zen and the worship of
Amitabha, and different from the other two schools.  The statistics
for 1911 give the following figures:

The Number of Temples:

The So To School   14,255
The Rin Zai School   6,128
The O Baku School   546

The Number of Teachers:

The So To School   9,576
The Rin Zai School   4,523
The O Baku School   349


It was also in this period that Zen gained a great influence on the
popular literature characterized by the shortest form of poetical
composition.  This was done through the genius of Ba-sho,[FN#105] a
great literary man, recluse and traveller, who, as his writings show
us, made no small progress in the study of Zen.  Again, it was made
use of by the teachers of popular[FN#106] ethics, who did a great
deal in the education of the lower classes.  In this way Zen and its
peculiar taste gradually found its way into the arts of peace, such
as literature, fine art, tea-ceremony, cookery, gardening,
architecture, and at last it has permeated through every fibre of
Japanese life.

[FN#105]  He (died 1694) learned Zen under a contemporary Zen master
(Buccho), and is said to have been enlightened before his reformation
of the popular literature.

[FN#106]  The teaching was called Shin-gaku, or the 'learning of
mind.'  It was first taught by Bai-gan (Ishi-da), and is the
reconciliation of Shintoism and Buddhism with Confucianism.  Bai-gan
and his successors practised Meditation, and were enlightened in
their own way.  Do-ni (Naka-zawa, died 1803) made use of Zen more
than any other teacher.



13. Zen after the Restoration.

After the Restoration of the Mei-ji (1867) the popularity of Zen
began to wane, and for some thirty years remained in inactivity; but
since the Russo-Japanese War its revival has taken place.  And now it
is looked upon as an ideal faith, both for a nation full of hope and
energy, and for a person who has to fight his own way in the strife
of life.  Bushido, or the code of chivalry, should be observed not
only by the soldier in the battle-field, but by every citizen in the
struggle for existence.  If a person be a person and not a beast,
then he must be a Samurai-brave, generous, upright, faithful, and
manly, full of self-respect and self-confidence, at the same time
full of the spirit of self-sacrifice.  We can find an incarnation of
Bushido in the late General Nogi, the hero of Port Arthur, who, after
the sacrifice of his two sons for the country in the Russo-Japanese
War, gave up his own and his wife's life for the sake of the deceased
Emperor.  He died not in vain, as some might think, because his
simplicity, uprightness, loyalty, bravery, self-control, and
self-sacrifice, all combined in his last act, surely inspire the
rising generation with the spirit of the Samurai to give birth to
hundreds of Nogis.  Now let us see in the following chapters what Zen
so closely connected with Bushido teaches us.





CHAPTER III



THE UNIVERSE IS THE SCRIPTURE[FN#107] OF ZEN


1. Scripture is no More than Waste Paper.

[FN#107]  Zen is not based on any particular sutra, either of
Mahayana or of Hinayana.  There are twofold Tripitakas (or the three
collections of the Buddhist scriptures)-namely, the
Mahayana-tripitaka and the Hinayana-tripitaka.  The former are the
basis of the Mahayana, or the higher and reformed Buddhism, full of
profound metaphysical reasonings; while the latter form that of the
Hinayana, or the lower and early Buddhism, which is simple and
ethical teaching.  These twofold Tripitakas are as follows:

THE MAHAYANA-TRIPITAKA.

The Sutra Pitaka.-The Saddharma-pundarika-sutra,
Samdhi-nirmocana-sutra, Avatamsaka-sutra, Prajnyaparamita-sutra,
Amitayus-sutra, Mahaparinirvana-sutra, etc.

The Vinaya Pitaka.--Brahmajala-sutra, Bodhisattva-caryanirdeca, etc.

The Abhidharma Pitaka.--Mahaprajnyaparamita-sutra,
Mahayana-craddhotpada-castra, Madhyamaka-castra, Yogacarya
bhumi-castra, etc.

THE HINAYANA-TRIPITAKA.
The Sutra Pitaka.--Dirghagama, Ekottaragama, Madhyamagama,
Samyuktagama, etc.

The Vinaya Pitaka.--Dharmagupta-vinaya, Mahasamghika-vinaya,
Sarvastivada-vinaya, etc.

The Abhidharma Pitaka.--Dharma-skandha-pada, Samgiti-paryaya-pada,
Jnyanaprasthana-castra, Abhidharma-kosa-castra, etc.

The term 'Tripitaka,' however, was not known at the time of Shakya
Muni, and almost all of the northern Buddhist records agree in
stating that the Tripitaka was rehearsed and settled in the same year
in which the Muni died.  Mahavansa also says: "The book called
Abhidharma-pitaka was compiled, which was preached to god, and was
arranged in due order by 500 Budhu priests."  But we believe that
Shakya Muni's teaching was known to the early Buddhists, not as
Tripitaka, but as Vinaya and Dharma, and even at the time of King
Acoka (who ascended the throne about 269 B.C.) it was not called
Tripitaka, but Dharma, as we have it in his Edicts.  Mahayanists
unanimously assert the compilation of the Tripitaka in the first
council of Rajagrha, but they differ in opinion as to the question
who rehearsed the Abhidharma; notwithstanding, they agree as for the
other respects, as you see in the following:

The Sutra Pitaka, compiled by Ananda; the Vinaya Pitaka, compiled by
Upali; the Abhidharma Pitaka, compiled by Ananda--according to
Nagarjuna (Mahaprajnyaparamita-castra).

The Sutra Pitaka, compiled by Ananda; the Vinaya Pitaka, compiled by
Upali; the Abhidharma Pitaka, compiled by Kacyapa according to Huen
Tsang (Ta-tan-si-yu-ki).

The Sutra Pitaka, compiled by Ananda; the Vinaya Pitaka, compiled by
Upali; the Abhidharma Pitaka, compiled by Purna--according to
Paramartha ('A Commentary on the History of the Hinayana Schools').

The above-mentioned discrepancy clearly betrays the uncertainty of
their assertions, and gives us reason to discredit the compilation of
Abhidharma Pitaka at the first council.  Besides, judging from the
Dharma-gupta-vinaya and other records, which states that Purna took
no part in the first council, and that he had different opinions as
to the application of the rules of discipline from that of Kacyapa,
there should be some errors in Paramartha's assertion.
Of these three collections of the Sacred Writings, the first two, or
Sutra and Vinaya, of Mahayana, as well as of Himayana, are believed
