You saw him, then, as the apostles did, _after_ he had risen?

Yes.

But you did not see anybody rise out of the grave.

I did not.

Are there any witnesses who saw the resurrection?

There are many who saw him after the resurrection.

But if neither they nor you saw him dead, and buried, and did not see
him rise, either, how can you tell that a most astounding and
supposedly impossible miracle had taken place between the time you saw
him last and when you saw him again two or three days after? Is it not
more natural to suppose that, being in a hurry on account of the
approaching Sabbath, Jesus, if ever crucified, was taken down from the
cross before he had really died, and that he was not buried, as rumor
states, but remained in hiding; and his showing himself to you under
cover of darkness and in secluded spots and in the dead of night only,
would seem to confirm this explanation.

You admit also that the risen Jesus did not present himself at the
synagogues of the people, in the public streets, or at the palace of
the High Priest to convince them of his Messiahship. Do you not think
that if he had done this, it would then have been impossible to deny
his resurrection? Why, then, did Jesus hide himself after he came out
of the grave? Why did he not show himself also to his enemies? Was he
still afraid of them, or did he not care whether they believed or not?
If so, why are _you_ trying to convert them? The question waits for a
reasonable answer; Why did not Jesus challenge the whole world with
the evidence of his resurrection? You say you saw him occasionally, a
few moments at a time, now here, and now there, and finally on the top
of a mountain whence he was caught up in a cloud and disappeared
altogether. But that "cloud" has melted away, the sky is clear, and
there is no Jesus visible there. The cloud, then, had nothing to hide.
It was unnecessary to call in a cloud to close the career of your
Christ. The grave is empty, the cloud has vanished. Where is Christ?
In heaven! Ah, you have at last removed him to a world unknown, to the
undiscovered country. Leave him there! Criticism, doubt,
investigation, the light of day, cannot cross its shores. Leave him
there!

[Illustration: St. Margaret of the Catholic Church, Westminster,
England.]

[Illustration: The Goddess Astarte Carrying a Cross, British Museum.]




THE JESUS OF PAUL



The central figure of the New Testament is Jesus, and the question we
are trying to answer is, whether we have sufficient evidence to prove
to the unbiased mind that he is historical. An idea of the
intellectual caliber of the average churchman may be had by the nature
of the evidence he offers to justify his faith in the historical
Jesus. "The whole world celebrates annually the nativity of Jesus; how
could there be a Christmas celebration if there never was a Christ?"
asks a Chicago clergyman. The simplicity of this plea would be
touching were it not that it calls attention to the painful
inefficiency of the pulpit as an educator. The church goer is trained
to believe, not to think. The truth is withheld from him under the
pious pretense that faith, and not knowledge, is the essential thing.
A habit of untruthfulness is cultivated by systematically sacrificing
everything to orthodoxy. This habit in the end destroys one's
conscience for any truths which are prejudicial to one's interest. But
is it true that the Christmas celebration proves a historical Jesus?

We can only offer a few additional remarks to what we have already
said elsewhere in these pages on the Pagan origin of Christmas. It
will make us grateful to remember that just as we have to go to the
Pagans for the origins of our civilized institutions--our courts of
justice, our art and literature, and our political and religious
liberties--we must thank them also for our merry festivals, such as
Christmas and Easter. The ignorant, of course, do not know anything
about the value and wealth of the legacy bequeathed to us by our
glorious ancestors of Greek and Roman times, but the educated can have
no excuse for any failure to own their everlasting indebtedness to the
Pagans. It will be impossible today to write the history of
civilization without giving to the classical world the leading role.
But while accepting the gifts of the Pagan peoples we have abused the
givers. A beneficiary who will defame a bounteous benefactor is
unworthy of his good fortune. I regret to say that the Christian
church, notwithstanding that it owes many of its most precious
privileges to the Pagans, has returned for service rendered insolence
and vituperation. No generous or just institution would treat a rival
as Christianity has treated Paganism.

Both Christmas and Easter are Pagan festivals. We do not know, no one
knows, when Jesus was born; but we know the time of the winter
solstice when the sun begins to retrace his steps, turning his radiant
face toward our earth once more. It was this event, a natural,
demonstrable, universal, event, that our European ancestors celebrated
with song and dance--with green branches, through which twinkled a
thousand lighted candles, and with the exchange of good wishes and
gifts. Has the church had the courage to tell its people that
Christmas is a Pagan festival which was adopted and adapted by the
Christian world, reluctantly at first, and in the end as a measure of
compromise only? The Protestants, especially, conveniently forget the
severe Puritanic legislation against the observance of this Pagan
festival, both in England and America. It is the return to Paganism
which has given to Christmas and Easter their great popularity, as it
is the revival of Paganism which is everywhere replacing the Bible
ideas of monarchic government with republicanism. And yet, repeatedly,
and without any scruples of conscience, preacher and people claim
these festivals as the gifts of their creed to humanity, and quote
them further to prove the historical existence of their god-man,
Jesus. It was this open and persistent perversion of history by the
church, the manufacture of evidence on the one hand, the suppression
of witnesses prejudiced to her interests on the other, and the
deliberate forging of documents, which provoked Carlyle into referring
to one of its branches as _the great lying Church_.

We have said enough to show that, in all probability--for let us not
be dogmatic--the story of Jesus,--his birth and betrayal by one of his
own disciples, his trial in a Roman court, his crucifixion,
resurrection and ascension,--belongs to the order of imaginative
literature. Conceived at first as a religious drama, it received many
new accretions as it traveled from country to country and from age to
age. The "piece" shows signs of having been touched and retouched to
make it acceptable to the different countries in which it was played.
The hand of the adapter, the interpolator and the reviser is
unmistakably present. As an allegory, or as a dramatic composition,
meant for the religious stage, it proved one of the strongest
productions of Pagan or Christian times. But as real history, it lacks
the fundamental requisite--probability. As a play, it is stirring and
strong; as history, it lacks naturalness and consistency. The
miraculous is ever outside the province of history. Jesus was a
miracle, and as such, at least, we are safe in declaring him un-
historical.

We pass on now to the presentation of evidence which we venture to
think demonstrates with an almost mathematic precision, that the Jesus
of the four gospels is a legendary hero, as unhistorical as William
Tell of Switzerland. This evidence is furnished by the epistles
bearing the signature of Paul. He has been accepted as not only the
greatest apostle of Christianity, but in a sense also the author of
its theology. It is generally admitted that the epistles bearing the
name of Paul are among the oldest apostolical writings. They are older
than the gospels. This is very important information. When Paul was
preaching, the four gospels had not yet been written. From the
epistles of Paul, of which there are about thirteen in the Bible--making
the New Testament largely the work of this one apostle--we learn that
there were in different parts of Asia, a number of Christian churches
already established. Not only Paul, then, but also the Christian
church was in existence before the gospels were composed. It would be
natural to infer that it was not the gospels which created the church,
but the church which produced the gospels. Do not lose sight of the
fact that when Paul was preaching to the Christians there was no
written biography of Jesus in existence. There was a church without
a book.

In comparing the Jesus of Paul with the Jesus whose portrait is drawn
for us in the gospels, we find that they are not the same persons at
all. This is decisive. Paul knows nothing about a miraculously born
savior. He does not mention a single time, in all his thirteen
epistles, that Jesus was born of a virgin, or that his birth was
accompanied with heavenly signs and wonders. He knew nothing of a
Jesus born after the manner of the gospel writers. It is not
imaginable that he knew the facts, but suppressed them, or that he
considered them unimportant, or that he forgot to refer to them in any
of his public utterances. Today, a preacher is expelled from his
denomination if he suppresses or ignores the miraculous conception of
the Son of God; but Paul was guilty of that very heresy. How explain
it? It is quite simple: The virgin-born Jesus was not yet
_invented_ when Paul was preaching Christianity. Neither he, nor
the churches he had organized, had ever heard of such a person. The
virgin-born Jesus was of later origin than the Apostle Paul.

Let the meaning of this discrepancy between the Jesus of Paul, that is
to say, the earliest portrait of Jesus, and the Jesus of the four
evangelists, be fully grasped by the student, and it should prove
beyond a doubt that in Paul's time the story of Jesus' birth from the
virgin-mother and the Holy Ghost, which has since become a cardinal
dogma of the Christian church, was not yet in circulation. Jesus had
not yet been Hellenized; he was still a Jewish Messiah whose coming
was foretold in the Old Testament, and who was to be a prophet like
unto Moses, without the remotest suggestion of a supernatural origin.

No proposition in Euclid is safer from contradiction than that, if
Paul knew what the gospels tell about Jesus, he would have, at least
once or twice during his long ministry, given evidence of his
knowledge of it. The conclusion is inevitable that the gospel Jesus is
later than Paul and his churches. Paul stood nearest to the time of
Jesus. Of those whose writings are supposed to have come down to us,
he is the most representative, and his epistles are the _first_
literature of the new religion. And yet there is absolutely not a
single hint or suggestion in them of such a Jesus as is depicted in
the gospels. The gospel Jesus was not yet put together or compiled,
when Paul was preaching.

Once more; if we peruse carefully and critically the writings of Paul,
the earliest and greatest Christian apostle and missionary, we find
that he is not only ignorant of the gospel stories about the birth and
miracles of Jesus, but he is equally and just as innocently ignorant
of the _teachings_ of Jesus. In the gospels Jesus is the author of the
Sermon on the Mount, the Lord's Prayer, the Parable of the Prodigal
Son, the Story of Dives, the Good Samaritan, etc. Is it conceivable
that a preacher of Jesus could go throughout the world to convert
people to the teachings of Jesus, as Paul did, without ever quoting a
single one of his sayings? Had Paul known that Jesus had preached a
sermon, or formulated a prayer, or said many inspired things about the
here and the hereafter, he could not have helped quoting, now and
then, from the words of his master. If Christianity could have been
established without a knowledge of the teachings of Jesus, why, then,
did Jesus come to teach, and why were his teachings preserved by
divine inspiration? But if a knowledge of these teachings of Jesus is
indispensable to making converts, Paul gives not the least evidence
that he possessed such knowledge.

But the Apostle Paul, judging from his many epistles to the earliest
converts to Christianity, which are really his testimony, supposed to
have been sealed by his blood, appears to be quite as ignorant of a
Jesus who went about working miracles,--opening the eyes of the blind,
giving health to the sick, hearing to the deaf, and life to the dead,--as
he is of a Jesus born of a virgin woman and the Holy Ghost. Is not
this remarkable? Does it not lend strong confirmation to the idea that
the miracle-working Jesus of the gospels was not known in Paul's time,
that is to say, the earliest Jesus known to the churches was a person
altogether different from his namesake in the four evangelists. If
Paul knew of a miracle-working Jesus, one who could feed the multitude
with a few loaves and fishes--who could command the grave to open, who
could cast out devils, and cleanse the land of the foulest disease of
leprosy, who could, and did, perform many other wonderful works to
convince the unbelieving generation of his divinity,--is it
conceivable that either intentionally or inadvertently he would have
never once referred to them in all his preaching? Is it not almost
certain that, if the earliest Christians knew of the miracles of
Jesus, they would have been greatly surprised at the failure of Paul
to refer to them a single time? And would not Paul have told them of
the promise of Jesus to give them power to work even greater miracles
than his own, had he known of such a promise. Could Paul really have
left out of his ministry so essential a chapter from the life of
Jesus, had he been acquainted with it? The miraculous fills up the
greater portion of the four gospels, and if these documents were
dictated by the Holy Ghost, it means that they were too important to
be left out. Why, then, does not Paul speak of them at all? There is
only one reasonable answer: A miracle-working Jesus was unknown to
Paul.

What would we say of a disciple of Tolstoi, for example, who came to
America to make converts to Count Tolstoi and never once quoted
anything that Tolstoi had said? Or what would we think of the
Christian missionaries who go to India, China, Japan and Africa to
preach the gospel, if they never mentioned to the people of these
countries the Sermon on the Mount, the Parable of the Prodigal Son,
the Lord's Prayer--nor quoted a single text from the gospels? Yet
Paul, the first missionary, did the very thing which would be
inexplicable in a modern missionary. There is only one rational
explanation for this: The Jesus of Paul was not born of a virgin; he
did not work miracles; and he was not a teacher. It was after his day
that such a Jesus was--I have to use again a strong word--_invented_.

It has been hinted by certain professional defenders of Christianity
that Paul's specific mission was to introduce Christianity among the
Gentiles, and not to call attention to the miraculous element in the
life of his Master. But this is a very lame defense. What is
Christianity, but the life and teachings of Jesus? And how can it be
introduced among the Gentiles without a knowledge of the doctrines and
works of its founder? Paul gives no evidence of possessing any
knowledge of the teachings of Jesus, how could he, then, be a
missionary of Christianity to the heathen? There is no other answer
which can be given than that the Christianity of Paul was something
radically different from the Christianity of the later gospel writers,
who in all probability were Greeks and not Jews. Moreover, it is known
that Paul was reprimanded by his fellow-apostles for carrying
Christianity to the Gentiles. What better defense could Paul have
given for his conduct than to have quoted the commandment of Jesus--

"Go ye into all the world and preach the gospel to every creature."
And he would have quoted the "divine" text had he been familiar with
it. Nay, the other apostles would not have taken him to task for
obeying the commandment of Jesus had they been familiar with such a
commandment. It all goes to support the proposition that the gospel
Jesus was of a date later than the apostolic times.

That the authorities of the church realize how damaging to the reality
of the gospel Jesus is the inexplicable silence of Paul concerning
him, may be seen in their vain effort to find in a passage put in
Paul's mouth by the unknown author of the book of _Acts_, evidence
that Paul does quote the sayings of Jesus. The passage referred to is
the following: "It is more blessed to give than to receive." Paul is
made to state that this was a saying of Jesus. In the first place,
this quotation is not in the epistles of Paul, but in the _Acts_, of
which Paul was not the author; in the second place, there is no such
quotation in the gospels. The position, then, that there is not a
single saying of Jesus in the gospels which is quoted by Paul in his
many epistles is unassailable, and certainly fatal to the historicity
of the gospel Jesus.

Again, from Paul himself we learn that he was a zealous Hebrew, a
Pharisee of Pharisees, studying with Gamaliel in Jerusalem, presumably
to become a rabbi. Is it possible that such a man could remain totally
ignorant of a miracle worker and teacher like Jesus, living in the
same city with him? If Jesus really raised Lazarus from the grave, and
entered Jerusalem at the head of a procession, waving branches and
shouting, "hosanna"--if he was really crucified in Jerusalem, and
ascended from one of its environs--is it possible that Paul neither
saw Jesus nor heard anything about these miracles? But if he knew all
these things about Jesus, is it possible that he could go through the
world preaching Christ without ever once referring to them? It is more
likely that when Paul was studying in Jerusalem there was no
miraculous Jesus living or teaching in any part of Judea.

If men make their gods they also make their Christs. [Footnote:
Christianity and Mythology. J. M. Robertson, to whom the author
acknowledges his indebtedness, for the difference between Paul's Jesus
and that of the Gospels.] It is frequently urged that it was
impossible for a band of illiterate fishermen to have created out of
