joining with those on shipboard in the lines:

"O hear us when we cry to Thee For those in peril on the sea";

and so he ventured personally to thank him who had so kindly
spoken the words of welcome and through him the diocese.

But he did not forget that this was not a welcome to which he
should reply as an individual, but one extended to an embassy
returning from a sacred mission. An embassy responding to its
welcome would naturally refer to two things: the one, the
immediate facts and occurrences of its visit; and the other, the
bearings of the visit upon the relations between the two countries
concerned, Others would do this fully on more general lines; it
had been assigned him to speak more especially of one of the days
of the celebration at Aberdeen, and that was Tuesday, October 7th.
Taking up the first of the two things which an embassy would
naturally report upon, he spoke of the events of the day--the Holy
Communion in the six churches of Aberdeen and in private chapels
at 8 o'clock; the principal service at St. Andrew's Church at 10
1/2 o'clock, with the sermon by our own Bishop from Isaiah lx. 5;
the two hundred clergy (including eighteen bishops from Scotland,
America, England, Ireland, and the colonies), the large
congregation, the use of the Scotch Office for the Holy Communion,
both at the early and the later services; and also, briefly, of
St. Andrew's Church and its decorations. In speaking of the
photograph of the clergy who were present, which was taken at the
close of the service, he pointed out two curious facts about the
groups: without any prearrangement, part of an American flag had
been taken on the plate; and then the only clerical descendant of
Bishop Skinner present--the Rev. J. Skinner Wilson--stood by the
side of the only clerical descendant present of Bishop Seabury--
the Rev. Dr. W. J. Seabury of New York city.

He gave some description of the banquet held at Music Hall in the
afternoon, and of the speeches of those who proposed and those who
responded to the toasts, especially the toast to "The Church in
America," proposed by Dr. Wordsworth, Bishop of St. Andrews, and
responded to by our own Bishop. He referred to some letters which
those who had read the Aberdeen papers sent home had seen, in
which there was discussion of the phrasing of the toast "The
Church _in_ Scotland." He said it did not become him to
comment on the discussion at such a time, only if they should
think of making any change in the phrasing at the next centenary
it occurred to him that "Scotland in the Church" might be tried.

After speaking of another morning commemorative service, at which
Canon Body of Durham preached an able and appropriate sermon, and
giving passing reference to an enthusiastic meeting of the Scotch
"Free and Open Church Association" held in the evening as an
accompaniment to, rather than as a part of, the day's commemoration,
he passed on to speak of the second thing upon which an embassy
would naturally report, and that was the bearings of the day's
events upon the relations between the two Churches. In this
connection he spoke of the sermon and the use of the Scotch
Communion-office of the morning and the hospitality of the
afternoon, which, like the hospitality of the whole stay in
Aberdeen, showed that while the latitude of the place was that of
the far north--it was opposite the northern part of Labrador--the
latitude of the atmosphere and hearts within was most truly that
of the warm and sunny south. In conclusion, he spoke of the
unifying impetus given, both social and spiritual, and expressed
his belief that while the embassy thanked the diocese for the
welcome, all could before God's altar and in that highest
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving with which they were keeping
the anniversary of the consecration of the first bishop of our
diocese and the American Church, thank Him Who has purchased to
Himself an universal Church by the precious Blood of His dear Son,
that as He was with the ministers of apostolical succession in
their highest office to make the great venture of faith one
hundred years ago, so He has ever been with their successors. Let
all realize how much of that purchase of the Son of God has
already been rendered up to Him since 1784, and how in 1884 we are
empowered by the Holy Spirit to extend the Church of Christ more
and more, not in Scotland only, not in America only, but in the
whole world!




REV. MR. HART'S ADDRESS.


The Rev. Professor Hart of Trinity College then gave an account of
the second day of the commemoration at Aberdeen:

I am to try to give in a few words an account of the many events
of the second day of the commemoration at Aberdeen; they shall be
as far as possible the very words which were used in the addresses
which were read and delivered there. The Holy Communion was
celebrated at an early hour in all the churches of the city; and
the special service of the day was held in St. Andrew's Church.
Before the service began, the Rector of Christ Church, Hartford,
on behalf of a considerable number of the clergy and laity of
Connecticut, presented to the Bishop of Aberdeen, as representing
the Scotch Church, a handsome silver paten and chalice, to be used
by himself and his successors. The written address which he read,
prefacing it with a few words, recognized the two-fold gift of a
century ago--an Episcopate which, in words so often used at the
time, was "free, valid, and purely ecclesiastical," and a
Eucharistic Office embodying catholic and primitive principles.
The Bishop of Aberdeen accepted the gift as a witness of faith in
God's promises, of the love of the brethren, and of unity of
worship, as well in the past and the future as in the present. He
then proceeded to celebrate the Holy Communion according to the
English rite, which the Scotch canons now require to be used at
all synods and ordinations, two other Scotch bishops assisting
him, and the vessels just presented being employed both in the
consecration and in the administration.

At the close of the service the six Scotch bishops present--the
venerable Primus being still confined to his house by illness--met
in Synod, when, after prayer and proclamation, the record of the
acts of the Synod of a hundred years ago and the copy of the
Concordate which was left in Scotland were laid upon the table.
Our bishop then, in accordance with an appointment given him by
the House of Bishops of our Church, presented and read an address
prepared, on behalf of that house, by the Presiding Bishop and the
Bishops of New York, Rhode Island, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and
Minnesota. In it, after expressing their affectionate regards
towards the Scotch bishops for the heroic act of their predecessors,
they called attention to the fact that the name of Bishop
Seabury now stands at the head of a list of over a hundred
and thirty bishops; and that, though our Church is grateful for
the direct connection of her Episcopate with that of the Church of
England, she is glad to remember that, through Bishop Seabury, the
Scotch succession has been transmitted to every bishop consecrated
in this land and will be so transmitted to the end of time. They
also expressed our Church's gratitude for the shaping of her
office of the Holy Communion in such a way as to make it in
harmony with the primitive liturgies. And so, offering warm thanks
for offices rendered, for sympathy expressed, and for examples
set, they gratefully acknowledged the close spiritual and
ecclesiastical relationship which binds the two Churches together.
The Bishop of St. Andrews--Dr. Charles Wordsworth--read the
reply, which was understood to have been framed by the venerable
Primus. It alluded to the former sufferings of the Scotch Church,
and to the fact that those who consecrated Bishop Seabury rendered
themselves liable by that act to felon banishment, but that they
did not count their liberty dear to themselves so that they might
do something for the sake of Christ. It bore witness to the
catholic spirit shown by Dr. Seabury and those whom he represented,
when they confessed that by no temporal misfortunes could
the grace of Orders be affected, thus showing that the low
estate of the Scotch bishops was to them no offense, their poverty
no stumbling-block. Then, recalling God's favor as shown to both
Churches, the reply used those words which God's people have never
forgotten to use in their joy and their prosperity--and in reading
them the voice of the venerable Bishop quivered with emotion--
"_Non nobis, Domine, non nobis, sed Nomini Tuo da gloriam_."

The Rector of St. Thomas's Church, New Haven, attended by the
other clergy of the delegation, then read an address prepared on
behalf of the Bishop, Clergy, and Laity of the Diocese of
Connecticut in Convention assembled, by a committee of which the
Rector of Trinity Church, New Haven, was chairman. It bore witness
to the fidelity and bravery of the Scotch bishops of a century ago
in equipping the Church in our diocese for the work it has since
done and the witness it has borne; and, repeating the words of the
reply which the Connecticut clergy returned to the letter which
Bishop Seabury brought from his consecrators, acknowledged our
indebtedness to them and our gratitude to God, and promised that
we would act with our bishop in maintaining unity of faith,
doctrine, discipline, and worship with the Church from which we
received our Episcopate. Referring to the depressed state of both
Churches a hundred years ago and to their better condition now, we
assured them that we still cling to the ancient faith and order,
and that we shall never forget our debt of gratitude or fail to
recognize and cherish the bond of Christian fellowship sealed in
the Concordate even as our fathers have done. The Bishop of St.
Andrews read a reply from the Scotch bishops to this address. It
spoke of their special pleasure in having Bishop Seabury's
successor present at that time, attended by some of the faithful
of his diocese. It adopted the words of the saintly Bishop Jolly
in saying that Connecticut is to them all a word of peculiar
endearment, as the name of its first bishop ever excites their
warmest veneration. And, in the language of one of the psalms for
this fourteenth day of the month, it thanked God for bringing the
Scotch Church to comparative honor and comforting it on every
side.

The Bishop of Aberdeen then, in behalf of a large number of
contributors, presented to our Bishop the pastoral staff which was
borne before him in the procession this morning, calling his
attention to the figures upon it, of St. Andrew, the patron-saint
of Scotland, St. Ninian, one of the early Celtic evangelists, St.
Augustine of Canterbury, as representing the English succession,
St. John, to whom the Scotch Communion office (and with it our
own) is traced, Bishop Kilgour, the senior consecrator of Bishop
Seabury, and Bishop Seabury himself. Our own Bishop replied in
words which I will not undertake to report in his presence.

In the afternoon two papers were read: one by the Rev. Dr.
Beardsley on "Seabury as a Bishop," giving a sketch of his life
and work, testifying to his fidelity to convictions and his
successful efforts to promote peace, by which he brought about the
unity of the Church in this land; and one by Professor Grub of the
University of Aberdeen, tracing the historic connection between
the Scotch and the American Churches. The discussion which
followed was remarkable for the representative character of those
who took part in it--our own Bishop, the Bishop of Gibraltar,
Canon Trevor of York, Canon White of New South Wales, and Dr.
Aberigh-Mackay of Paris (once of Connecticut).

I can do no more than allude to the crowded meeting at the Music
Hall in the evening, which was addressed in noble speeches by the
Bishop of Minnesota, the Bishop of Winchester, the Rev. Mr. Danson
of Aberdeen, Mr. Speir--a prominent Scotch layman,--and the Bishop
of Albany. There was a wonderful unity of sentiment in what was
said, and nothing was more noticeable than the way in which the
speakers all referred to the impulse given to Church work by the
event which we were commemorating. There was a marvellous
inspiration in the volume of voice in which the great assembly
recited the Nicene Creed; and the dignified and scholarly language
of one of the foremost of English prelates, the earnest and
practical words of the Scotch clergyman and layman, the touching
eloquence of our great missionary bishop, and the impassioned and
bold utterances of the other bishop, who is honored abroad for his
father's sake as well as for his own, all sustained and heightened
the enthusiasm which had been kindled by the services of these
days and the memories and hopes which they had awakened.




BISHOP WILLIAMS'S ADDRESS.


At the close of these addresses Bishop Williams said:

You have now heard, my dear brethren, the report of the pilgrims
whom you sent on a pilgrimage of love to that old city where our
succession begins. Visible memorials of all that came together in
Aberdeen in the first week of last month are before you or in your
thoughts. There is the Mitre which tells you of the transmitted
Episcopate; there hangs the Concordate which speaks to you of our
Communion-office. Across the water they have received the holy
Sacrament of the Body and the Blood from the Chalice and Paten
which you sent, and standing here you see this Pastoral Staff--
gifts the interchange of which attests that the pledges and the
gifts of that elder day are not forgotten, but live and will live
while time shall last. The dear old Church of Scotland! How it has
lived through trials deep and wearing and in the face of "dungeon,
fire, and sword!"

They have kept this day which we are keeping now and here, in
Aberdeen; they have kept it in London, in St. Paul's Cathedral,
where the Primate of all England was the preacher. So has the
triple, bond been--I will not say knit again, but--recognized
anew. So be it forever! I will only add what I said in Aberdeen to
the blessed Church of Scotland, having now in mind all the
national Churches of the English succession, as they are all one
in Christ: "Peace be within thy walls, and plenteousness within
thy palaces. For my brethren and companions' sakes, I will wish
thee prosperity. Yea, because of the house of the Lord our God, I
will seek to do thee good."

The Bishop then proceeded with the Communion-service, announcing
that the offerings would be for the benefit of St. Thomas's
Church, Hartford, a memorial to Bishop Brownell, of whom he said
that the longer he lived the more he was impressed with the value
to the diocese of the long and faithful episcopate of his revered
predecessor. Bishop Williams was assisted in the service by the
Bishop of Massachusetts. In consecrating the elements a paten and
chalice were used which once belonged to Bishop Seabury and are
now the property of the Berkeley Divinity School; and for the
administration of the elements two patens were used which were
left by Bishop Seabury to St. James's Church, New London. The Rev.
Dr. Giesy of Norwich, and the Rev. Messrs. McCook, Buckingham, and
Nichols assisted in the administration, a large number of clergy
and laity receiving the Holy Sacrament. Bishop Williams gave the
benediction, holding his pastoral staff. At the close of the
service the clergy left the church, singing the old version of the
first part of the ninetieth psalm, beginning "O God, our help in
ages past."

After the service the clergy were entertained by the Churchwomen
of Hartford in the parish-rooms of Christ Church.

The following is a nearly complete list of the clergymen who were
present:

From Connecticut: The Rt. Rev. the Bishop; The Rev. Messrs. C. G.
Adams, Southport; H. A. Adams, Wethersfield; W. G. Andrews,
Guilford; E. W. Babcock, New Haven; J. H. Barbour, Hartford; E. E.
Beardsley, D.D., LL.D., New Haven; A. E. Beeman, Unionville; J. H.
Betts, South Glastonbury; Prof. John Binney, Middletown; L. P.
Bissell, Litchfield; C. W. Boylston, Greeneville; J. W. Bradin,
Hartford; F. W. Brathwaite, Stamford; George Buck, North Haven; W.
B. Buckingham, New London; W. H. Bulkley, Tashua; C. C. Camp, New
Haven; H. S. Clapp, Norwalk; C. W. Colton, Pine Meadow; Prof. H.
Ferguson, Hartford; J. H. Fitzgerald, Milford; T. B. Fogg,
Brooklyn; Louis French, Darien; E. C. Gardiner, Naugatuck; Prof.
F. Gardiner, D.D., Middletown; J. F. George, Thompsonville; J. H.
George, Salisbury; Samuel Giesy, D.D., Norwich; Alfred Goldsborough,
Yantic; J. B. Goodrich, Windsor; Francis Goodwin, Hartford;
Prof. Samuel Hart, Hartford; J. E. Heald, Tariffville; S. J.
Horton, D.D., Cheshire; J. T. Huntington, Hartford; J. W.
Hyde, West Hartford; Prof. W. A. Johnson, Middletown; W. E.
Johnson, Bristol; J. R. Lambert, Glastonbury; W. H. Larom,
Stafford Springs; E. S. Lines, New Haven; T. D. Martin, Meriden;
J. J. McCook, Hartford; W. H. Moreland, Hartford; W. F. Nichols,
Hartford; J. L. Parks, Middletown; W. L. Peck, Windsor Locks; C.
I. Potter, Stratford; A. T. Randall, Meriden; J. B. Robinson,
Hazardville; J. H. Rogers, New Britain; J. L. Scott, Wallingford;
S. O. Seymour, Hartford; Prest. G. W. Smith, D.D., Hartford; James
Stoddard, Watertown; Jacob Streibert, West Haven; Henry Tarrant,
