that they do not need mercy and Christ as Propitiator.  None of all
these things came into the mind of James, which the adversaries
nevertheless, defend under the pretext of this passage of James.

In the first place, then, we must ponder this, namely, that the
passage is more against the adversaries than against us.  For the
adversaries teach that man is justified by love and works.  Of faith,
by which we apprehend Christ as Propitiator, they say nothing.  Yea
they condemn this faith; nor do they condemn it only in sentences and
writings, but also by the sword and capital punishments they endeavor
to exterminate it in the Church.  How much better does James teach,
who does not omit faith, or present love in preference to faith, but
retains faith, so that in justification Christ may not be excluded as
Propitiator!  Just as Paul also, when he treats of the sum of the
Christian life, includes faith and love, 1 Tim. 1, 5: The end of the
commandment is charity out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience,
and of faith unfeigned.

Secondly, the subject itself declares that here such works are spoken
of as follow faith, and show that faith is not dead, but living and
efficacious in the heart.  James, therefore, did not believe that by
good works we merit the remission of sins and grace.  For he speaks
of the works of those who have been justified, who have already been
reconciled and accepted, and have obtained remission of sins.
Wherefore the adversaries err when they infer that James teaches that
we merit remission of sins and grace by good works, and that by our
works we have access to God, without Christ as Propitiator.




Part 8


Thirdly, James has spoken shortly before concerning regeneration,
namely, that it occurs through the Gospel.  For thus he says 1, 18:
Of His own will begat He us with the Word of Truth, that we should be
a kind of first-fruits of His creatures.  When he says that we have
been born again by the Gospel, he teaches that we have been born
again and justified by faith.  For the promise concerning Christ is
apprehended only by faith, when we set it against the terrors of sin
and of death.  James does not, therefore, think that we are born
again by our works.

From these things it is clear that James does not contradict us, who,
when censuring idle and secure minds, that imagine that they have
faith, although they do not have it, made a distinction between dead
and living faith.  He says that that is dead which does not bring
forth good works [and fruits of the Spirit: obedience, patience,
chastity, love]; he says that that is living which brings forth good
works.  Furthermore, we have frequently already shown what we term
faith.  For we do not speak of idle knowledge [that merely the
history concerning Christ should be known], such as devils have, but
of faith which resists the terrors of conscience, and cheers and
consoles terrified hearts [the new light and power which the Holy
Ghost works in the heart, through which we overcome the terrors of
death, of sin, etc.].  Such faith is neither an easy matter, as the
adversaries dream [as they say: Believe, believe, how easy it is to
believe! etc.], nor a human power [thought which I can form for
myself], but a divine power, by which we are quickened, and by which
we overcome the devil and death.  Just as Paul says to the Colossians,
2, 12, that faith is efficacious through the power of God, and
overcomes death: Wherein also ye are risen with Him through the faith
of the operation of God.  Since this faith is a new life, it
necessarily produces new movements and works.  [Because it is a new
light and life in the heart, whereby we obtain another mind and
spirit, it is living, productive, and rich in good works.]
Accordingly, James is right in denying that we are justified by such
a faith as is without works.  But when he says that we are justified
by faith and works, he certainly does not say that we are born again
by works.  Neither does he say this, that partly Christ is our
Propitiator, and partly our works are our propitiation.  Nor does he
describe the mode of justification, but only of what nature the just
are, after they have been already justified and regenerated.  [For he
is speaking of works which should follow faith.  There it is well
said: He who has faith and good works is righteous; not, indeed, on
account of the works, but for Christ's sake, through faith.  And as a
good tree should bring forth good fruit, and yet the fruit does not
make the tree good, so good works must follow the new birth, although
they do not make man accepted before God; but as the tree must first
be good, so also must man be first accepted before God by faith for
Christ's sake.  The works are too insignificant to render God
gracious to us for their sake, if He were not gracious to us for
Christ's sake.  Therefore James does not contradict St. Paul, and
does not say that by our works we merit, etc.] And here to be
justified does not mean that a righteous man is made from a wicked
man, but to be pronounced righteous in a forensic sense, as also in
the passage Rom. 2, 13: The doers of the Law shall be justified.  As,
therefore, these words: The doers of the Law shall be justified,
contain nothing contrary to our doctrine, so, too, we believe
concerning the words of James: By works a man is justified, and not
by faith alone, because men having faith and good works are certainly
pronounced righteous.  For, as we have said, the good works of saints
are righteous, and please on account of faith.  For James commends
only such works as faith produces, as he testifies when he says of
Abraham, 2, 21: Faith wrought with his works.  In this sense it is
said: The doers of the Law are justified, i.e., they are pronounced
righteous who from the heart believe God, and afterwards have good
fruits which please Him on account of faith, and accordingly, are the
fulfilment of the Law.  These things, simply spoken, contain nothing
erroneous, but they are distorted by the adversaries who attach to
them godless opinions out of their mind.  For it does not follow
hence that works merit the remission of sins; that works regenerate
hearts; that works are a propitiation, that works please without
Christ as Propitiator; that works do not need Christ as Propitiator.
James says nothing of these things, which, nevertheless, the
adversaries shamelessly infer from the words of James.

Certain other passages concerning works are also cited against us.
Luke 6, 37: Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven.  Is. 58, 7 [9]: Is it
not to deal thy bread to the hungry?...Then shalt thou call, and the
Lord will answer.  Dan. 4, 24 [27]: Break off thy sins, by showing
mercy to the poor.  Matt. 5, 3: Blessed are the poor in spirit; for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven; and v. 7: Blessed are the merciful;
for they shall obtain mercy.  Even these passages would contain
nothing contrary to us if the adversaries would not falsely attach
something to them.  For they contain two things: The one is a
preaching either of the Law or of repentance, which not only convicts
those doing wrong, but also enjoins them to do what is right; the
other is a promise which is added.  But it is not added that sins are
remitted without faith, or that works themselves are a propitiation.
Moreover, in the preaching of the Law these two things ought always
to be understood, namely: First, that the Law cannot be observed
unless we have been regenerated by faith in Christ, just as Christ
says, John 15, 5: Without Me ye can do nothing.  Secondly, and though
some external works can certainly be done, this general judgment:
Without faith it is impossible to please God, which interprets the
whole Law, must be retained: and the Gospel must be retained, that
through Christ we have access to the Father, Heb. 10, 19, Rom. 5, 2.
For it is evident that we are not justified by the Law.  Otherwise,
why would there be need of Christ or the Gospel, if the preaching of
the Law alone would be sufficient?  Thus in the preaching of
repentance, the preaching of the Law, or the Word convicting of sin,
is not sufficient, because the Law works wrath, and only accuses,
only terrifies consciences, because consciences never are at rest,
unless they hear the voice of God in which the remission of sins is
clearly promised.  Accordingly, the Gospel must be added, that for
Christ's sake sins are remitted, and that we obtain remission of sins
by faith in Christ.  If the adversaries exclude the Gospel of Christ
from the preaching of repentance, they are judged aright to be
blasphemers against Christ.

Therefore, when Isaiah, 1, 16. 18, preaches repentance: Cease to do
evil; learn to do well; seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge
the fatherless, plead for the widow.  Come now and let us reason
together, saith the Lord; though your sine be as scarlet, they shall
be white as snow, the prophet thus both exhorts to repentance, and
adds the promise.  But it would be foolish to consider in such a
sentence only the words: Relieve the oppressed; judge the fatherless.
For he says in the beginning: Cease to do evil, where he censures
impiety of heart and requires faith.  Neither does the prophet say
that through the works: Relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless,
they can merit the remission of sins _ex opere operato_, but he
commands such works as are necessary in the new life.  Yet, in the
mean time, he means that remission of sins is received by faith, and
accordingly the promise is added.  Thus we must understand all
similar passages.  Christ preaches repentance when He says: Forgive,
and He adds the promise: And ye shall be forgiven, Luke 6, 37. Nor,
indeed, does He say this, namely, that, when we forgive, by this work
of ours we merit the remission of sins _ex opere operato_, as they
term it, but He requires a new life, which certainly is necessary.
Yet, in the mean time He means that remission of sins is received by
faith.  Thus, when Isaiah says, 58, 7: Deal thy bread to the hungry,
he requires a new life.  Nor does the prophet speak of this work
alone, but, as the text indicates, of the entire repentance; yet, in
the mean time, he intends that remission of sins is received by faith.
For the position is sure, and none of the gates of hell can
overthrow it, that in the preaching of repentance the preaching of
the Law is not sufficient, because the Law works wrath and always
accuses.  But the preaching of the Gospel should be added, namely,
that in this way remission of sins is granted us, if we believe that
sins are remitted us for Christ's sake.  Otherwise, why would there
be need of the Gospel, why would there be need of Christ?  This
belief ought always to be in view, in order that it may be opposed to
those who, Christ being cast aside and the Gospel being blotted out,
wickedly distort the Scriptures to the human opinions, that by our
works we purchase remission of sins.

Thus also in the sermon of Daniel, 4, 24, faith is required.  [The
words of the prophet which were full of faith and spirit, we must not
regard as heathenish as those of Aristotle or any other heathen.
Aristotle also admonished Alexander that he should not use his power
for his own wantonness, but for the improvement of countries and men.
This was written correctly and well; concerning the office of king
nothing better can be preached or written.  But Daniel is speaking to
his king, not only concerning his office as king, but concerning
repentance, the forgiveness of sins, reconciliation to God, and
concerning sublime, great, spiritual subjects, which far transcend
human thoughts and works.] For Daniel did not mean that the king
should only bestow alms [which even a hypocrite can do], but embraces
repentance when he says: Break off [Redeem, Vulg.] thy iniquities by
showing mercy to the poor, i.e. break off thy sins by a change of
heart and works.  But here also faith is required.  And Daniel
proclaims to him many things concerning the worship of the only God,
the God of Israel, and converts the king not only to bestow alms, but
much more to faith.  For we have the excellent confession of the king
concerning the God of Israel: There is no other God that can deliver
after this sort Dan. 3, 29. Therefore, in the sermon of Daniel there
are two parts.  The one part is that which gives commandment
concerning the new life and the works of the new life.  The other
part is, that Daniel promises to the king the remission of sins.
[Now, where there is a promise, faith is required.  For the promise
cannot be received in any other way than by the heart's relying on
such word of God, and not regarding its own worthiness or
unworthiness.  Accordingly, Daniel also demands faith: for thus the
promise reads: There will be healing for thy offenses.] And this
promise of the remission of sins is not a preaching of the Law, but a
truly prophetical and evangelical voice, of which Daniel certainly
meant that it should be received in faith.  For Daniel knew that the
remission of sins in Christ was promised not only to the Israelites,
but also to all nations.  Otherwise he could not have promised to the
king the remission of sins.  For it is not in the power of man
especially amid the terrors of sin, to assert without a sure word of
God concerning God's will, that He ceases to be angry.  And the words
of Daniel speak in his own language still more clearly of repentance
and still more clearly bring out the promise.  Redeem thy sins by
righteousness and thy iniquities by favors toward the poor.  These
words teach concerning the whole of repentance.  [It is as much as to
say: Amend your life!  And it is true, when we amend our lives, we
become rid of sin.] For they direct him to become righteous, then to
do good works, to defend the miserable against injustice, as was the
duty of a king.  But righteousness is faith in the heart.  Moreover,
sins are redeemed by repentance, i.e. the obligation or guilt is
removed, because God forgives those who repent, as it is written in
Ezek. 18, 21. 22. Nor are we to infer from this that He forgives on
account of works that follow, on account of alms, but on account of
His promise He forgives those who apprehend His promise.  Neither do
any apprehend His promise, except those who truly believe, and by
faith overcome sin and death.  These, being regenerated, ought to
bring forth fruits worthy of repentance, just as John says, Matt. 3,
8. The promise, therefore, was added: So, there will be healing for
thy offenses, Dan. 4, 24. [Daniel does not only demand works, but
says: Redeem thy sins by righteousness.  Now, everybody knows that in
Scripture righteousness does not mean only external works, but
embraces faith, as Paul says: _Iustus ex fide vivet_?  The just shall
live by his faith, Heb. 10, 38. Hence, Daniel first demands faith
when he mentions righteousness and says: Redeem thy sins by
righteousness, that is, by faith toward God, by which thou art made
righteous.  In addition to this do good works, administer your office,
do not be a tyrant, but see that your government be profitable to
your country and people, preserve peace, and protect the poor against
unjust force.  These are princely alms.] Jerome here added a particle
expressing doubt, that is beside the matter, and in his commentaries
contends much more unwisely that the remission of sins is uncertain.
But let us remember that the Gospel gives a sure promise of the
remission of sins.  And to deny that there must be a sure promise of
the remission of sins would completely abolish the Gospel.  Let us
therefore dismiss Jerome concerning this passage.  Although the
promise is displayed even in the word redeem.  For it signifies that
the remission of sins is possible that sins can be redeemed, i.e.,
that their obligation or guilt can be removed, or the wrath of God
appeased.  But our adversaries, overlooking the promises, everywhere,
consider only the precepts, and attach falsely the human opinion that
remission occurs on account of works, although the text does not say
this, but much rather requires faith.  For wherever a promise is,
there faith is required.  For a promise cannot be received unless by
faith.  [The same answer must also be given in reference to the
passage from the Gospel: Forgive, and you will be forgiven.  For this
is just such a doctrine of repentance.  The first part in this
passage demands amendment of life and good works, the other part adds
the promise.  Nor are we to infer from this that our forgiving merits
for us _ex opere operato_ remission of sin.  For that is not what
Christ says, but as in other sacraments Christ has attached the
promise to an external sign, so He attaches the promise of the
forgiveness of sin in this place to external good works.  And as in
the Lord's Supper we do not obtain forgiveness of sin without faith,
_ex opere operato_, so neither in this when we forgive.  For, our
forgiving is not a good work, except it is performed by a person
whose sins have been previously forgiven by God in Christ.  If,
therefore, our forgiving is to please God, it must follow after the
forgiveness which God extends to us.  For, as a rule, Christ combines
these two, the Law and the Gospel, both faith and good works, in
order to indicate that, where good works do not follow, there is no
faith either that we may have external marks, which remind us of the
Gospel and the forgiveness of sin, for our comfort and that thus our
faith may be exercised in many ways.  In this manner we are to
understand such passages, otherwise they would directly contradict
the entire Gospel, and our beggarly works would be put in the place
of Christ, who alone is to be the propitiation, which no man is by
any means to despise.  Again, if these passages were to be understood
as relating to works, the remission of sins would be quite uncertain;
for it would rest on a poor foundation, on our miserable works.]

But works become conspicuous among men.  Human reason naturally
admires these, and because it sees only works, and does not
understand or consider faith, it dreams accordingly that these works
merit remission of sins and justify.  This opinion of the Law inheres
by nature in men's minds; neither can it be expelled, unless when we
are divinely taught.  But the mind must be recalled from such carnal
opinions to the Word of God.  We see that the Gospel and the promise
concerning Christ have been laid before us.  When, therefore, the Law
is preached, when works are enjoined, we should not spurn the promise
concerning Christ.  But the latter must first be apprehended, in
order that we may be able to produce good works, and our works may
please God, as Christ says, John 16; 5: With out Me ye can do nothing.
Therefore, if Daniel would have used such words as these: "Redeem
your sins by repentance," the adversaries would take no notice of
this passage.  Now, since he has actually expressed this thought in
apparently other words, the adversaries distort his words to the
injury of the doctrine of grace and faith, although Daniel meant most
especially to include faith.  Thus, therefore, we reply to the words
of Daniel, that, inasmuch as he is preaching repentance, he is
teaching not only of works, but also of faith, as the narrative
itself in the context testifies.  Secondly, because Daniel clearly
presents the promise, he necessarily requires faith which believes
that sins are freely remitted by God.  Although, therefore, in
repentance he mentions works, yet Daniel does not say that by these
works we merit remission of sins.  For Daniel speaks not only of the
remission of the punishment; because remission of the punishment is
sought for in vain unless the heart first receive the remission of
guilt.  Besides, if the adversaries understand Daniel as speaking
only of the remission of punishment, this passage will prove nothing
against us, because it will thus be necessary for even them to
confess that the remission of sin and free justification precede.
Afterwards even we concede that the punishments by which we are
chastised, are mitigated by our prayers and good works, and finally
by our entire repentance, according to 1 Cor. 11, 31: For if we would
judge ourselves, we should not be judged.  And Jer. 15, 19: If thou
return, then will I bring thee again.  And Zech. 1, 3: Turn ye unto
Me, and I will turn unto you.  And Ps. 50, 15: Call upon Me in the
day of trouble.

Let us, therefore, in all our encomiums upon works and in the
preaching of the Law retain this rule: that the Law is not observed
without Christ.  As He Himself has said: Without Me ye can do nothing.
Likewise that: Without faith it is impossible to please God, Heb.
11, 6. For it is very certain that the doctrine of the Law is not
intended to remove the Gospel, and to remove Christ as Propitiator.
And let the Pharisees, our adversaries, be cursed, who so interpret
the Law as to ascribe the glory of Christ to works namely, that they
are a propitiation, that they merit the remission of sins.  It
follows, therefore, that works are always thus praised, namely, that
they are pleasing on account of faith, as works do not please without
Christ as Propitiator.  By Him we have access to God, Rom. 5, 2, not
by works, without Christ as Mediator.  Therefore, when it is said,
Matt. 19, 17: If thou wilt enter into life, keep the commandments, we
must believe that without Christ the commandments are not kept, and
without Him cannot please.  Thus in the Decalog itself, in the First
Commandment Ex. 20, 6: Showing mercy unto thousands of them that love
Me and keep My commandments, the most liberal promise of the Law is
added.  But this Law is not observed without Christ.  For it always
accuses the conscience which does not satisfy the Law, and therefore
in terror, flies from the judgment and punishment of the Law.
Because the Law worketh wrath, Rom. 4, 15. Man observes the Law,
however, when he hears that for Christ's sake God is reconciled to us,
even though we cannot satisfy the Law.  When, by this faith, Christ
is apprehended as Mediator, the heart finds rest, and begins to love
God and observe the Law, and knows that now, because of Christ as
Mediator, it is pleasing to God, even though the inchoate fulfilling
of the Law be far from perfection and be very impure.  Thus we must
judge also concerning the preaching of repentance.  For although in
the doctrine of repentance the scholastics have said nothing at all
concerning faith, yet we think that none of our adversaries is so mad
as to deny that absolution is a voice of the Gospel.  And absolution
ought to be received by faith, in order that it may cheer the
terrified conscience.

Therefore the doctrine of repentance, because it not only commands
new works, but also promises the remission of sins, necessarily
requires faith.  For the remission of sins is not received unless by
