for our souls as well as for our bodies, will only be known in heaven,
and at the last day. For my part, and I say it here over her grave, and
in the presence of God, I am certain, that when the Lord Jesus shall
raise us all up again, the works of Miss Amelia will follow her, and we
shall then see that while upon earth she served God with all her heart.

"No," he added, as he wiped away the tears from his children's eyes, "I
would not wish her to return from the glory which she now enjoys, at
the same time I cannot conceal from you, that my heart mourns for her,
and that I know we have lost our consolation, our benefactress, our
faithful friend!"

"Who has not lost one?" exclaimed a poor woman, at whose side stood the
little girls who had planted the flowers; "I know very well that Miss
Amelia's mother will take her place, she is so good and kind! but it
was no little joy to receive a visit from that sweet and amiable young
lady, so good, so pious, and so full of joy. Oh! what should I have
done with my husband, so long confined to his bed, if this messenger of
goodness had not procured work for me, and recommended me to the ladies
who now employ me. And then again, what were we, until Miss Amelia
spoke to us? How much she had to put up with when I refused to read the
Holy Scriptures! and yet she was never weary of me. Oh! no; she came
day after day, to exhort and to teach me, and blessed be God, we begin
now to know something of what the Saviour has done for us.

"And," added she, drawing the little girl towards her, "I shall go on
with my dear children, reading and learning that word of God, which was
Miss Amelia's greatest joy.

"Come, come, my friends," she said, in a persuasive tone, "_we_ must
also die, and be put each in his turn, under this ground; but as our
benefactress is not dead ... (no, she is not dead, for the Lord has
said it!)--so also shall not we die, if we follow in her steps."

The poor woman then wished us good day, and moved away with her
children. We all walked on together, still speaking of Amelia. My
brother took the names and addresses of many of the poor people, with
whom he had just been conversing, and spoke a few words to them of
comfort and encouragement.

As soon as we were alone, he showed me the list of names, at the head
of which was that of the old man, and he said, "Here is a blessed
inheritance which Amelia has left us. She has done as Dorcas did: her
hands have clothed the poor, and her lips have spoken comfort to them.
Dear Anna, Amelia was not older than we are; let us remember this, for
we know not when the Lord shall call us."

How wise and pious this dear brother is! We have already been able to
pay together, two of Amelia's visits. Her mother, to whom we related
all we had heard, gave us further particulars of what the pious and
indefatigable Amelia used to do. Ah Esther, her religion was not mere
"lip-service." The Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ assisted her, and
she might have said with truth, I show "my faith by my works."

Let us take courage, then, my dear and kind sister! we lament our loss
in Amelia's death, but on her own account I lament her not. I can only
contemplate her in the presence of God, and of her Saviour, and I
rejoice to think of her delight when she entered the region of heaven.
How beautiful it must be, Esther, to behold the glory of that heaven!
to hear the voices of saints and angels, and to know that God loves us,
and will make us happy forever.

Think, sister, of the meaning of--_forever!_

Amelia's father, whom I saw a few hours ago with her excellent and
pious mother, said to me, in speaking of their darling child, "For my
own joy and comfort I should have wished to have kept her with us; but,
my dear Anna, even if I could have done so, what would have been all
our happiness, compared with that which she now possesses in the
presence of her God."

But do not suppose, my sister, that Amelia, with all her piety, was
less prudent with regard to the things of this world, than faithful
regarding those of heaven. Her mother has shown me her books, and her
different arrangements, all of which indicate that discretion spoken of
in Scripture, carried out in the most minute particulars.

First, as respects order and cleanliness in everything belonging to
her: it would be impossible to imagine a more proper arrangement than
the one she made of each article, both in her wardrobe, her
writing-table, her work-box, and her account-book.

She had not much money to devote to her works of charity, but her
industry made up for her limited means; for instance, in opening the
Bible which she generally made use of, I found in it, four or five
pages written with a great deal of care; and her journal informed her
mother, who read it, of the reason of this circumstance. It runs thus:

"As old Margaret has but one Bible, some of the leaves of which have
been lost, I have given her mine, which is quite complete, and have
taken hers, adding to it some sheets of paper, upon which I have
written the passages which were deficient. Thus I have saved the
expense of a new Bible; and it is the same thing to me."

Amelia's diary is very remarkable; her mother has allowed me to read
many portions of it, and to copy out what relates to her usual manner
of employing each day. I send it to you, dear Esther, and you will
find, as I have done, that the Spirit of God always teaches those who
trust in Him, how precious _time_ is here below. The following is what
our dear friend wrote upon this subject.

"_January 1st_, 1844--Nearly eighteen centuries, and a half have passed
away, since our Saviour took upon himself the form of human flesh for
our salvation. Those years seemed long as they succeeded each other,
but now that they are gone, they appear as nothing.

"Families, and nations, and the mighty generations of mankind, which,
in times gone by, peopled the earth, have all passed away. Nothing
remains of them here below!

"But such is not the case in heaven,--I should rather say,--in
eternity. There, all these nations still exist, no man can be absent,
but must appear before the Sovereign Judge, to answer for the use which
he has made of his time.

"How short that time is! Where are the years that David lived, and
where are those which Methuselah passed in this world? their whole
duration seems, at this distance, in the words of St. James, 'Even as a
vapor that appeareth for a little time, and then vanisheth away.'

"It will therefore be the same with me. I know not how long I shall
live here below, perhaps I shall see but a portion of this year, and
shall enter into glory before it is concluded; or perhaps I shall yet
see many more years. This the Lord knows, and I ought not to consider
that such knowledge would be of any importance to me, since that which
constitutes my _life_, is not its length or duration, but the use which
is made of it.

"It is to Jesus, then, that all my life must be devoted, without him I
can do nothing. 'My life is hid with Christ in God.' He has 'bought me
with a price,' I ought, therefore, 'to glorify God in my body, and in
my spirit, which are God's.'

"Truly to live is to know, that my thoughts and actions are all
directed to the glory of Jesus, whether upon earth by faith and hope,
or in heaven by the sight and by the glory of God.

"But here below, I have only time at my disposal; that is to say, days
composed of hours or rather, I have in reality but a single day to make
use of. Yesterday is no longer mine, and to-morrow, where is it? I have
it not yet, and perhaps shall never see it.

"Lo my earthly life is 'to-day.' What must I do then with 'to-day,'
that God may be honored and glorified in it? for after all, if I have
the happiness of counting the year 1844, as dating from a Christian
era, and not from that of a false prophet with the Mahomedans, nor yet
of a false God, with the poor Indians, it must be to Jesus Christ, from
whose birth I count my years, that those years should be dedicated.

"Here I am, therefore, in the presence of my Saviour, of whom I implore
the Spirit of wisdom and prudence to guide me in the employment of this
my day, since in reality I have but one, and that is, 'To-day.'

"But I cannot do better than walk in the footsteps of my Redeemer, and
in his conduct and conversation whilst on earth, I observe these three
things: Temperance, piety, and charity, to all of which he wholly
devoted himself, and has thus left me an example to follow.

"I will therefore imitate him first in his temperance. He rose early in
the morning--he eat frugally--he worked diligently--he wearied himself
in well-doing: in a word, he exerted the whole strength of his mind and
body in the cause of truth, but never in the cause of evil.

"These, therefore, must be settled rules, moderate sleep, moderate
repasts, moderate care and attention to the body; active employment,
always to a useful purpose, profitable to my neighbor, and never
interfering with my duties at home.

"In the next place, I must imitate Jesus in His _piety_. His Father's
will was as His daily food. What a thought! To live wholly to God, and
as He himself teaches us in His Holy Word. To do this, I must know His
Word; I must study it, meditate upon it, and learn it by heart. Besides
reading, I must pray, for prayer is the life both of my heart and soul
with God. What glory is thus permitted to me, a poor sinner, that I
_ought_, and that I _can_, live to Him, love Him, and devote myself to
Him! It is heaven already begun on earth; for in heaven my soul will
enjoy no other happiness than that of knowing God, and living to His
glory. This thought fills me with joy, and I am encouraged by it to
consecrate myself wholly to Him, as did my Lord and Saviour.

"Lastly, I will, by the grace of God, imitate Jesus in his _charity_.
How many souls there are about me to love, to comfort, to enlighten and
to assist. But I can only do it in the measure which God himself has
assigned to me. At my age, and but a girl, subject to the wishes of my
parents, I ought only to desire to do good in proportion to the means
with which the Lord has furnished me. But I must, in so doing, endeavor
to overcome selfishness, idleness, the love of ease, avarice, hardness
of heart, pride, and indifference, and I must love my neighbor as
myself. Oh! what an important undertaking, and how many excuses and
deceits this kind of charity will encounter and overcome.

"But I will look to Jesus, and pray to him; I will implore the secret
guidance of his Spirit; and since he is faithful, he will not leave me
alone, but will lead me, and enable me to walk day by day, I mean
'to-day,' in his sight, and in communion with him, who is so full of
love and gentleness."

This, my dear Esther, is what I have copied from Amelia's journal. You
see the light in which our friend regarded her life on earth, and how
much importance she attached to one _day_--a single day.

As I read what she had written, I felt my soul humbled before God, and
I trembled to think of the useless way in which I had hitherto spent my
time.

You see in particular what Amelia felt on the subject of piety; what
love her soul had for God! and this is what produced in her that
active, sincere, and constant charity.

You cannot form the least idea of the work, of kindness and benevolence
which she was enabled to accomplish. That passage, "The memory of the
just is blessed," is truly applicable to her.

Amelia was justified in her Saviour, for she trusted in him, and thus
was she also justified before God, by her faith in Jesus. The spirit of
Jesus led her in "all her way," and in whatever family she appeared,
her actions and words manifested a heavenly mind.

Her name is remembered with blessing in the hearts of all who knew her;
her counsels, her instructions, her example, and her acts of
benevolence, are continually spoken of by those who witnessed them, and
it is thus that she left behind a sweet savor of holiness, like a ray
of heavenly light.

Dear Esther, here is an example placed before us; it has been the will
of God that we should know her, that we might be charmed with her
excellence, and that the happiness both of her life and death, might
tempt us to imitate her.

No, no, my sister, she is not dead; she is rather, as the poor workman
said, at her grave, "a child of God in heaven." As _she_ followed
Jesus, let us also follow her, and let her memory be thus a blessing to
us both.

God be with you, my dear sister. I long to see you, that we may pray
the Lord together, to make us like his faithful, holy servant, the dear
and pious Amelia.

Yours, &c.,

ANNA.




IV.


The Tract found by the Way-Side.


"Take away the dross from the silver, and there shall come forth a
vessel for the finer." --Prov. XXV. 4.

Every one knows in these days what is meant by a _religious tract_. It
is a little printed pamphlet, which is sold at a very low price, or is
still oftener given away, or dropped in the streets and lanes, that
those who either purchase, or accept, or find them, may read the truths
of the Gospel, and the good advice which they contain.

This is an old-fashioned way of imparting instruction, both to high and
low. It was in use, for instance, as early as the first days of the
Reformation, when some faithful Christians of Picardy, in France,
assembled together to read the Holy Scriptures, on which account they
were exposed to persecution, death, and above all, to be burnt alive.

These true disciples of the Lord Jesus composed and distributed, with
considerable difficulty, some little pamphlets, in which were taught
the doctrines of salvation by Christ alone, and in a form which enabled
the poor and ignorant to read and understand; for it was impossible for
them at that time to procure a Bible, which was not only a scarce book,
but cost a large sum of money: indeed, almost as much as a thousand
Bibles would cost in the present day, and which, besides, they could
not carry home and read quietly to themselves, as they were able to do
with a simple tract.

At a later period, and chiefly for the last fifty years, this method
has been adopted in almost all countries where true Christian churches
and societies have been established; and even now, millions of these
tracts, adapted to all ages and conditions of men, are published and
distributed every year.

It is, however, but too true, that many tracts thus distributed are not
_religious tracts_; that is to say, the substance of them is not in
conformity with the truth of scripture. Many are published for the
purpose of upholding false religion and wicked principles, and which,
consequently, do great mischief to those who read them.

And if it be asked, "How can a good tract be distinguished from a bad
one?" we thus reply to this very natural question.

A _good tract_ is that which leads us to the Bible; which speaks of the
love of God in Christ; and which encourages the reader to be holy from
a motive of love to God.

A _bad tract_ is therefore that which does not speak of the Bible;
which tells us that salvation may be obtained by human merit, and which
consequently would persuade us to be religious from interested motives:
that is to say, to obtain pardon by means of our own good works.

Those tracts, too, which speak of man's happiness as if it came from
man alone, and not from God, and which consequently deny the truth of
God's word: these must also be called _bad tracts_, and must therefore
be carefully avoided.

The good that is done by the distribution of good tracts, can scarcely
be believed. There are many families, even in prosperity, who never
tasted real happiness until some of these evangelical writings found
their way amongst them. The following anecdote is an interesting proof
of this:

The family of a vinedresser, in the Canton of Vaud, in Switzerland,
was, unhappily, as well known in the village in which he lived, for his
bad conduct, as for his impiety. The father, whose name we will not
mention, was a proud and hard-hearted man, both intemperate and
dissolute; and his wife, who thought as little of the fear of God as
her husband did, was what might be called a _noisy babbler_.

The pastor of the village had often, but vainly, endeavored to lead
these unhappy people to a sense of religion, but he was always received
by them with scoffing and ridicule.

The family was composed of the vinedresser's three children. The
eldest, Mark, was as haughty as his father, and although he was only
fourteen years of age, he was already able to join in the disorders of
his drunken and gaming companions. He was entirely devoid of any sense
of religion. His sister, Josephine, who was rather more than twelve
years old, possessed a more amiable disposition. The pastor's wife took
much interest in this child, who could not help seeing that her parents
were not guided by the Spirit of God. Peter, the youngest, was but ten
years of age, but his brother's wicked example counteracted all the
good which he might have received from that of his more amiable sister.

About the end of May, there was to be, in a village not far distant, a
match at rifle-shooting. It was a public fete, at which all the people
in the neighborhood assembled.

On the morning of this day, Mark had answered his father with great
insolence, at which he was so much enraged, that he punished him
severely, and forbad him, besides, to go to the fete. The father went
thither himself, and Mark, after a moment's indecision, determined not
to heed the command he had received, but to follow him to the
shooting-match.

He therefore took advantage of his mother's absence, who, according to
her usual custom, was gone to gossip with some of her neighbors, and
notwithstanding the remonstrances of Josephine, he hastened over fields
and hedges, to the scene of the match.

"What is this?" cried he, picking up a little pamphlet, with a cover of
colored paper, which was lying on the path near the opening in the
hedge. "Oh! it is one of those tracts they leave about everywhere; it
will do very well to load my gun;" and so saying, he put the tract into
his pocket, and ran on as before.

But when he approached the village where they were shooting, dancing,
playing, and making a great noise, he suddenly stopped, for he
