since its appropriation at the time of the Mexican regime in California.
Moreover, Mexico had agreed to pay this interest to the object intended
by the donors of the fund, namely, "to the church, for the conversion
of the natives of California, for the establishment, maintenance and
extension of the Catholic Church, her faith and worship, in said country
of Upper and Lower California." The litigation was won through the
intervention of the United States Government which Archbishop Riordan
invoked through his counsel, and decided by arbitrators under the Hague
Convention in 1899. The first payment was made on February 2, 1903.

Perhaps it is not amiss to quote here a small portion of the speech
delivered in Washington, D. C. by Hon. Joseph Scott of Los Angeles on
the occasion of a banquet following the unveiling ceremonies of the
memorial erected in honor of Christopher Columbus by Act of Congress.
Among the speakers present at the banquet were Ex-President William
Taft (then president), Cardinal Gibbons, Speaker Champ Clark, Ex-speaker
Joseph Cannon, Congressman Underwood, Judge Victor Dowling of the
Supreme Court of New York and many other notable men of the nation.

"It affords me unbounded pleasure to have an opportunity to deliver an
expression, feeble though it be, of the sentiments of the Knights of
Columbus of the great West, and particularly of California, regarding
the significance of this great day. Mr. John Barrett of the Pan-American
Union has already given you food for sober thought in the parallel
he has drawn of the marvelous activity and resourcefulness of the
Latin-American republics. Possibly I may be permitted at this time to
inject a suggestion that, despite the remarks of the previous speaker
about Boston as the modern Athens and the seat of universal learning,
"Modern Athens" has nothing in common with the memories aroused by
contemplation of the events which we celebrate today. It may be well to
tell our friends from New England that before the so-called Anglo-Saxon
had set foot as a colonist upon the American soil, the followers of
Columbus had penetrated into the heart of Kansas and gone down as far as
Buenos Ayres. I want to lay stress upon the fact that we have not noted
too emphatically today that it was the great Spanish race, with its
strong and sterling faith, which accomplished this wonderful mission of
civilization. Too long have we endured the stress of so-called history
written by Prescott and others, some of whom ought to have been put in
the Ananias club before they were born. For nearly three centuries
the Spanish race, with its indomitable faith, pursued almost alone its
mission of civilization and evangelization of the aborigines of America.
Before the Pilgrim Fathers had landed on Plymouth Rock, the Catholic
Spaniard had acquired a knowledge of the Indian language sufficient to
enable him to translate the Bible into the Aztec Indian language, so
that the new Indian neophyte could read the story of "God's greatest
Book" in his mother tongue."



The Courage of Catholic Spain


I wish to advise those of you who speak now of a burden of four days and
nights in luxurious Pullman cars to step out on the soil of California
as though you had performed a deed of heroism, that a Spanish soldier,
Cabeza de Vaca, with the courage of primitive Christianity, walked from
Florida to the Gulf of California, though it took him seven years to
accomplish his task; and the wonderfully brave Friar Marcos de Niza
pioneered his way on foot thirteen hundred miles into the heart of
Arizona through deserts and hordes of Apaches, in his efforts to plant
the cross of civilization among the children of the new world. Nay, the
Grand Canyon of Arizona, now one of the greatest natural wonders of the
world, was seen by a young Spanish lieutenant and his twenty soldiers
three hundred years before the Anglo-Saxon took a glimpse at its
wonderful and awe-inspiring beauty. These and other similar facts are
attested by the report of the Bureau of Ethnology of Washington, as well
as by many other reliable authorities, including that singularly gifted
and scholarly student of Spanish history and folk lore, Charles F.
Lummis of Los Angeles, himself a Puritan on both sides of his house for
several generations back. It was the fortitude of this Spanish race,
coupled by its strong devotion to the faith which you and I profess,
which enabled them to solve the Indian problem as it has never been
attempted since. While under our present system of the government of
this United States, the Indian has been an outcast and a derelict to
be robbed and cheated by his white brother, yet on the other hand the
Spanish missionary brought into the life of the simple native of the new
world the wholesome light of Christianity, which made him recognize in
the Red Man the same soul which was made in the image and likeness of
the common Creator of us all. In that spirit of brotherhood and charity
he obtained the confidence and good will of the Indians, almost without
exception, throughout the length and breadth of the countries that he
explored. And while his path was beset with dangers from the grim forces
of nature, and occasionally the crown of martyrdom was given to him by
an unthinking hand of those he was coming to evangelize, yet he faltered
not in his footsteps.

Today the memory of Columbus may be coupled with and attributed, on
our part, to the splendid heroism and Christian fortitude of the great
Spanish race which continued the work of Columbus with all that it
entailed for the betterment of humanity."


In compliance with our promise not to forget the friends of the
missionaries and of their compatriots, of today, we will first speak of
California's wonderful enthusiasm in the celebration of the Bi-centenary
of Junipero Serra's birth. Of the privileged thousands who visited
Monterey on November 23, 1913 and made a pilgrimage to Serra's tomb at
San Carlos Mission, how many will efface that sight from their minds in
years to come? But this awe-inspiring sight to which Reverend Raymond
Mestres and the Franciscan Fathers of San Francisco, contributed so
much, and in which the Third Order of Saint Francis so prominently
participated will be yearly renewed. Ecclesiastical and civil
authorities, towns and cities, individuals, all had the "right
spirit." The accounts of the press were glowing. Mr. Frank Powers of
Carmel-by-the-Sea was California's representative at the celebration
which Spain did not fail to hold in honor of her illustrious son;
and Mr. Powers indeed proved a worthy representative, returning to
California with renewed enthusiasm for the saintly Serra, and his
lectures have been listened to with keen delight. And can any praise
seem superfluous for California's apostles in particular for the saintly
Serra? At the civil exercises, held in Monterey on the occasion of the
celebration we are speaking of, Senator Reginaldo del Valle, of Los
Angeles, Mr. Michael Williams and Mr. Charles Phillips of San Francisco
each paid exquisite tributes to our hero whom the opening lines of Mr.
Phillips' beautiful ode described as:

     "A young boy dreaming by the Spanish main:
         Knee-high in waving grain
         He halts at eve and dreams,
     Where green Majorca fronts the cycling sea,
         And far worlds ceaselessly
     Beckon with passing sail and swinging tide,
         And plunging galleons ride
       Home from adventure, or away, away
         To silken bright Cathay,
       Or where dark India her golden treasure yields;
     A young boy dreaming in his father's fields,
       Who plucks a lily from the bending wheat
     And stands with veiled gaze and searching eyes
         Pale with some great emprise,
       Beyond the homing waters of his isle,
         Beyond Majorca's skies;--
       And dreams and dreams the while!"

     "And they who love him wonderingly ask:
         "What lad is this of ours
         Who dreams away the hours,
     And when the windy night-tide running sings,
         So strangely seems
         Converse to hold with far compelling things?
     Or what these spirit-smiling ecstasies,"
         They reverent cry,
         "That halt him at his task
     And hold him tranced in bright reveries?
         Is this our lad, indeed,
         Who with such Heaven-given grace--
         Ay, with the light of Heaven on his face!--
         Makes question of the very world about?"

One of the sweetest features of this day was that hereafter by a
decree of Governor Hiram Johnson, who also did not fail to send a
representative to Monterey in the person of Judge Griffin, November
the twenty-fourth was declared a state holiday. May Serra day long
be welcomed by loyal Californians! We cannot close this chapter after
speaking of the bright constellation of the past which appeared in
California skies so many years ago, and whose traces we so cherish,
without saying a few words about that worthiest of worthy movements
to restore the dear old missions of El Camino Real according to their
traditional lines, here again Reverend Father Mestres of Monterey
deserves the greatest credit in this enterprise, and the Knights of
Columbus of the California councils have proved themselves great helpers
in the plan. King Alfonso, his minister, Senor Juan Riano, the Marquis
de la Vega y Inclan who will be King Alfonso's representative at the
Panama-Pacific Exposition of 1915, are hearty supporters and sponsors
of this movement, and with cooperation from faithful friends and the
sanction of the Bishop of the diocese of Monterey and Los Angeles, we
have no doubt that these glorious landmarks, some of which have alas too
long been allowed to go to "wreck and ruin" while others are still
more or less neglected, after the cruel years which extinguished their
sanctuary lamps, left their altars bare and their belfries silent save
for the hooting of the night owls, will ere long be in the proper repair
to hand down with pride to posterity; and to further repair these holy
temples and place them under their historical and original plans the
most fitting priests to whom we could entrust them (at least wherever
the necessary satisfactory arrangements are possible) are Spanish
priests, compatriots of their founders, this too would serve to continue
and strengthen the old friendly relations between Spain and California,
and as whatever Spanish priests would take charge of the missions, would
be scholarly men speaking both English and Spanish, the English speaking
congregations would be well served. About three of the old missions are
under Spanish priests now. Let us then not cease our efforts until every
mission cross gleams gloriously in the radiance of the California sun,
until the devotional chimes of mission bells peal forth again from every
silent belfry, until the altar light beams again before each tabernacle
enclosing the Eucharistic Presence, until the empty niches contain again
the images which decked them as of yore, until each tomb of sainted
missionary is restored, until mass is again daily said within these
consecrated walls, and finally until San Carlos of Carmelo is again
a worthier Carmel, "for the greater honor and glory of God" and the
praises of His Virgin Mother once more are sung about this smiling
valley where the Christian Indian children gathered the beautiful wild
flowers of the blooming meadows to adorn the hallowed shrines, ere
chimed the Angelus at evenings mellow glow.



Chapter IX


     Reverend Raymond M. Mestres of Monterey Writes Historical
     Drama--"Fray Junipero"


Beautiful among beautiful historical dramas is the mission play "Fray
Junipero" written by Reverend Raymond Mestres, pastor of San Carlos
Church (Capilla Real de San Carlos) of Monterey. Many men and women have
undertaken to write about mission times, but we may safely assert that
this good priest so unassuming in what he does, is above all qualified
to handle this subject, being first of all a religious, a native of
Barcelona, the Metropolis of the Province of Catalonia, which can claim
Junipero Serra and so many of the early Spanish missionaries, explorers
and settlers, and being too an artist and scholar in every way
acquainted with the history of the missions, having made it a special
study during his twenty-seven years of residence (as a priest) in four
mission towns of California, twenty-one of which have been spent in that
chief of mission towns, Monterey.

Unbiased, careful of detail and true to history, while not wanting in
artistic setting "Fray Junipero" carries the audience in Act I back to
the College of Fernando, when Junipero Serra received his commission to
come to California as Father President of the Missionaries who were to
christianize that "mysterious vineyard." Act II is a typical picture of
California Indian Life. Act III depicts the landing of Serra and Portola
on the shores of Monterey, the taking possession of the land in the name
of King Carlos III and the celebration of Junipero Serra's first Mass in
Monterey; all facts are taken from the archives preserved in San Carlos
Church, consequently historically authentic. Act IV pictures a piquant
fiesta scene with Spanish dancing, the scene being laid in the Carmel
Valley on the occasion of the baptism of the first white child born in
Monterey. This child was born of Spanish parents, Pasqual and Teresa
Segura and in baptism received the name of Carlos. According to the
records this baptism occurred in May 18, 1782, the ceremony being
performed by Fray Junipero Serra just two years before his death.
With very slight changes in the names this incident is taken from the
archives of San Carlos Mission. Act V represents Fray Junipero Serra
receiving the last Sacraments, his death and the grief of the people.

In writing "Fray Junipero" Reverend Raymond Mestres intended it to
commemorate the Bicentenary of our hero's birth, and was presented for
the first time in Monterey on August 28th, 1913 by local talent. This
will be an annual event at Monterey on the same date, August 28th, which
is the anniversary of Fray Junipero Serra's death. In spite of poor
advertisement the first production of this drama was a decided success.
It was intended to be played three nights, but by request a fourth night
was added.

As this sketch goes to press, the rehearsing of the second year of
the production of "Fray Junipero" begins with great improvement in the
staging, and a greater promise of success as it is now much more widely
known.

May an ancient Spanish Nativity Play for Christmastide, which Reverend
Raymond Mestres intends to translate into English, and which contains
glorious music, and a history of mission times, which this scholarly
pastor of San Carlos Church has in store, soon delight Californians and
California's yearly tide of tens of thousand visitors.




Appendix



Letter of Junipero Serra [7].


"Long live Jesus, Mary and Joseph!

"R. P. Fr. Miguel de Petra.

"My dearest nephew, brother and Sir.

"It was not for want of love that I did not answer some of your letters.
For it was not merely bodily that I left my beloved country. I could
have been communicating with many persons by letters and friends, both
in and outside our order, but, if our minds were constantly intent upon
what we once left, what would be the use of leaving it?

"I wrote a long letter to your reverence after your religious
profession. Besides, your reverence heard of me through the Padre Lector
Verger, who is at present our guardian. I received your letter when
I was among the Gentiles over three hundred leagues away from any
Christian settlement. There is my life and there, I hope, God helping,
to die. When this hour comes, some member of our province will take
