it the assurance that we shall not be left without the supply of the
necessities for which, because God has made us to feel them, He has
bound Himself to make provision. And most blessedly true is that
application of them, and many a Christian heart in days of famine has
been satisfied with the promise, when the bread that was given has been
scant.

But there is a meaning deeper than that in the words. It is true, thank
God! that we may cast all our anxiety about all outward things upon
Him, in the assurance that He who feeds the ravens will feed us, and
that if lilies can blossom into beauty without care, we shall be held
by our Father of more value than these. But there is a deeper meaning
in the provision spoken of here. What was it that God provided for
Abraham? What is it that God provides for us? A way to discharge the
arduous duties which, when they are commanded, seem all but impossible
for us, and which, the nearer we come to them, look the more dreadful
and seem the more impossible. And yet, when the heart has yielded
itself in obedience, and we are ready to do the thing that is enjoined,
there opens up before us a possibility provided by God, and strength
comes to us equal to our day, and some unexpected gift is put into our
hand, which enables us to do the thing of which Nature said: 'My heart
will break before I can do it'; and in regard to which even Grace
doubted whether it was possible for us to carry it through. If our
hearts are set in obedience to the command, the farther we go on the
path of obedience, the easier the command will appear, and to try to do
it is to ensure that God will help us to do it.

This is the main provision that God makes, and it is the highest
provision that He can make. For there is nothing in this life that we
need so much as to do the will of our Father in heaven. All outward
wants are poor compared with that. The one thing worth living for, the
one thing which being secured we are blessed, and being missed we are
miserable, is compliance in heart with the commandment of our Father;
and that compliance wrought out in life. So, of all gifts that He
bestows upon us, and of all the abundant provision out of His rich
storehouses, is not this the best, that we are made ready for any
required service? When we get to the place we shall find some lamb
'caught in the thicket by its horns'; and heaven itself will supply
what is needful for our burnt offering.

And then there is another thought here which, though we cannot
certainly say it was in the speaker's mind, is distinctly in the
historian's intention, 'The Lord will provide.' Provide what? The lamb
for the burnt offering which He has commanded. It seems probable that
that bare mountain-top which Abraham saw from afar, and named
Jehovah-jireh, was the mountain-top on which afterwards the Temple was
built. And perhaps the wood was piled for the altar, on which Abraham
was called to lay his only son, on that very piece of primitive rock
which still stands visible, though Temple and altar have long since
gone; and which for many a day was the place of the altar on which the
sacrifices of Israel were offered. It is no mere forcing of Christian
meanings on to old stories, but the discerning of that prophetic and
spiritual element which God has impressed upon these histories of the
past, especially in all their climaxes and crises, when we see in the
fact that God provided the ram which became the appointed sacrifice,
through which Isaac's life was preserved, a dim adumbration of the
great truth that the only Sacrifice which God accepts for the world's
sin is the Sacrifice which He Himself has provided.

This is the deepest meaning of all the sacrificial worship, as of
Israel so of heathen nations--God Himself will provide a Lamb. The
world had built altars, and Israel, by divine appointment, had its
altar too. All these express the want which none of them can satisfy.
They show that man needed a Sacrifice; and that Sacrifice God has
provided. He asked from Abraham less than He gives to us. Abraham's
devotion was sealed and certified because he did not withhold his son,
his only son, from God. And God's love is sealed because He hath not
withheld His only-begotten Son from us.

So this name that came from Abraham's grateful and wondering lips
contains a truth which holds true in all regions of our wants. On the
lowest level, the outward supply of outward needs; on a higher, the
means of discharging hard duties and a path through sharp trials; and,
on the highest of all, the spotless sacrifice which alone avails for
the world's sins--these are the things which God provides.

2. So, note again on what conditions He provides them.

The incident and the name became the occasion of a proverb, as the
historian tells us, which survived down to the period of his writing,
and probably long after, when men were accustomed to say, 'In the mount
of the Lord it shall be provided.' The provision of all sorts that we
need has certain conditions as to the when and the where of the persons
to whom it shall be granted. 'In the mount of the Lord it shall be
provided.' If we wish to have our outward needs supplied, our outward
weaknesses strengthened, power and energy sufficient for duty, wisdom
for perplexity, a share in the Sacrifice which taketh away the sins of
the world, we receive them all on the condition that we are found in
the place where all God's provision is treasured. If a man chooses to
sit outside the baker's shop, he may starve on its threshold. If a man
will not go into the bank, his pockets will be empty, though there may
be bursting coffers there to which he has a right. And if we will not
ascend to the hill of the Lord, and stand in His holy place by simple
faith, and by true communion of heart and life, God's amplest provision
is nought to us; and we are empty in the midst of affluence. Get near
to God if you would partake of what He has prepared. Live in fellowship
with Him by simple love, and often meditate on Him, if you would drink
in of His fulness. And be sure of this, that howsoever within His house
the stores are heaped and the treasury full, you will have neither part
nor lot in the matter, unless you are children of the house. 'In the
mount of the Lord it shall be provided.' And round it there is a waste
wilderness of famine and of death.

Further, note _when_ the provision is realised.

When the man is standing with the knife in his hand, and next minute it
will be red with the son's blood--then the call comes: 'Abraham!' and
then he sees the ram caught in the thicket. There had been a long weary
journey from their home away down in the dry, sunny south, a long tramp
over the rough hills, a toilsome climb, with a breaking heart in the
father's bosom, and a dim foreboding gradually stealing on the child's
spirit. But there was no sign of respite or of deliverance. Slowly he
piles together the wood, and yet no sign. Slowly he binds his boy, and
lays him on it, and still no sign. Slowly, reluctantly, and yet
resolvedly, he unsheathes the knife, and yet no sign. He lifts his
hand, and then it comes.

That is God's way always. Up to the very edge we are driven, before His
hand is put out to help us. Such is the law, not only because the next
moment is always necessarily dark, nor because God will deal with us in
any arbitrary fashion, and play with our fears, but because it is best
for us that we should be forced to desperation, and out of desperation
should 'pluck the flower, safety.' It is best for us that we should be
brought to say, 'My foot slippeth!' and then, just as our toes are
sliding upon the glacier, the help comes and 'Thy mercy held me up.'
'The Lord is her helper, and that right early.' When He delays, it is
not to trifle with us, but to do us good by the sense of need, as well
as by the experience of deliverance. At the last moment, never before
it, never until we have found out how much we need it, and never too
late, comes the Helper.

So 'it is provided' for the people that quietly and persistently tread
the path of duty, and go wherever His hand leads them, without asking
anything about where it does lead. The condition of the provision is
our obedience of heart and will. To Abraham doing what he was
commanded, though his heart was breaking as he did it, the help was
granted--as it always will be.

3. And so, lastly, note what we are to do with the provision when we
get it.

Abraham christened the anonymous mountain-top, not by a name that
reminded him or others of his trial, but by a name that proclaimed
God's deliverance. He did not say anything about his agony or about his
obedience. God spoke about that, not Abraham. He did not want these to
be remembered, but what he desired to hand on to later generations was
what God had done for him. Oh! dear friends, is that the way in which
we look back upon life? Many a bare, bald mountain-top in your career
and mine we have got our names for. Are they names that commemorate our
sufferings or God's blessings? When we look back on the past what do we
see? Times of trial or times of deliverance? Which side of the wave do
we choose to look at, the one that is smitten by the sunshine or the
one that is all black and purple in the shadow? The sea looked at from
the one side will be all a sunny path, and from the other dark as
chaos. Let us name the heights that lie behind us, visible to memory,
by names that commemorate, not the troubles that we had on them, but
the deliverances that on them we received from God.

This name enshrines the duty of commemoration--ay! and the duty of
expectation. 'The Lord will provide.' How do you know that, Abraham?
and his answer is, 'Because the Lord did provide.' That is a shaky kind
of argument if we use it about one another. Our resources may give out,
our patience may weary. If it is a storehouse that we have to go to,
all the corn that is treasured in it will be eaten up some day; but if
it is to some boundless plain that grows it that we go, then we can be
sure that there will be a harvest next year as there has been a harvest
last. And so we have to think of God, not as a storehouse, but as the
soil from which there comes forth, year by year and generation after
generation, the same crop of rich blessings for the needs and the
hungers of every soul. If we have to draw from reservoirs we cannot
say, 'I have gone with my pitcher to the well six times, and I shall
get it filled at the seventh.' It is more probable that we shall have
to say, 'I have gone so often that I durst not go any more'; but if we
have to go, not to a well, but to a fountain, then the oftener we go,
the surer we become that its crystal cool waters will always be ready
for us. 'Thou hast been with me in six troubles; and in seven thou wilt
not forsake me,' is a bad conclusion to draw about one another; but it
is the right conclusion to draw about God.

And so, as we look back upon our past lives, and see many a peak
gleaming in the magic light of memory, let us name them all by names
that will throw a radiance of hope on the unknown and un-climbed
difficulties before us, and say, as the patriarch did when he went down
from the mount of his trial and deliverance, 'The Lord will provide.'




GUIDANCE IN THE WAY


    'I being in the way, the Lord led me.'--GENESIS xxiv. 27.

So said Abraham's anonymous servant when telling how he had found
Rebekah at the well, and known her to be the destined bride of his
master's servant. There is no more beautiful page, even amongst the
many lovely ones in these ancient stories, than this domestic idyll of
the mission of the faithful servant from far Canaan across the desert.
The homely test by which he would determine that the maiden should be
pointed out to him, the glimpse of old-world ways at the well, the
gracious courtesy of the fair damsel, and the simple devoutness of the
speaker, who recognises in what to others were trivial commonplaces
God's guidance to the end which He had appointed, his recognition of
the divine hand moving beneath all the nothings and littlenesses of
daily life--may teach us much.

1. The first thing that these words seem to me to suggest is the
conditions under which we may be sure that God leads--'I being in the
way.'

Now, of course, some of you may know that the words of our text are, by
the Revised Version and others, rendered so as to obliterate the clause
telling where the speaker was when the Lord led him, and to make the
whole a continuous expression of the one fact--'As for me, the Lord
hath led me in the way to the house of my master's brethren.' The
literal rendering is, 'I in the way, Jehovah led me.' No doubt the
Hebrew idiom admits of the 'I' being thus emphatically premised, and
then repeated as 'me' after the verb, and possibly no more is to be
made of the words than that. But the fuller and more impressive meaning
is possible, and I venture to retain it, and to see in it the
expression of the truth that it is when we are 'in the way' that God
will certainly lead us.

So that suggests, first, how the people that have any right to expect
any kind of guidance from God are those who have their feet upon a path
which conscience approves. Many men run into all manner of perplexities
by their own folly and self-will, and never ask whether their acts are
right or wrong, wise or foolish, until they begin to taste the bitter
consequences. Then they cry to God to help them, and think themselves
very religious because they do. That is not the way to get God's help.
Such folk are like Italian brigands who had an image of the Virgin in
their hats, and sometimes had the Pope's commission in their pockets,
and therefore went out to murder and ravish, in sure and certain hope
of God's favour and protection.

But when we are 'in the way,' and know that we are doing what we ought
to do, and conscience says, 'Go on; never mind what stands against
you,' it is then, and only then, that we have a right to be sure that
the Lord will lead us. Otherwise, the best thing that can happen to us
is that the Lord should thwart us when we are on the wrong road.
Resistance, indeed, may be guidance; and it is often God's manner of
setting our feet in the way of His steps. We have no claim on Him for
guidance, indeed, unless we have submitted ourselves to His
commandments; yet His mercies go beyond our claims. Just as the
obedient child gets guidance, so the petulant and disobedient child
gets resistance, which is guidance too. The angel of the Lord stands in
front of Balaam, amongst the vines, though the seer sometimes does not
see, and blocks the path for him, and hedges up the way with his
flaming sword. Only, if we would have the sweet, gracious,
companionable guidance of our Lord, let us be sure, to begin with, that
we are 'in the way,' and not in any of the bypaths into which arrogance
and self-will and fleshly desires and the like are only too apt to
divert our feet.

Another consideration suggested by these words, 'I being in the way,'
is that if we expect guidance we must diligently do present duty. We
are led, thank God, by one step at a time. He does with His child, whom
He is teaching to read His will, as we sometimes do with our children,
when we are occupied in teaching them their first book-learning: we
cover the page up, all but the line that we want them to concentrate
their eyes upon; and then, when they have got to the end of that, slip
the hand down, low enough to allow the next line to come into view. So
often God does with us. One thing at a time is enough for the little
brains. And this is the condition of mortal life, for the most
part--though there do come rare exceptions. Not that we have to look a
long way ahead, and forecast what we shall do this time ten years off,
or to make decisions that involve a distant future--except once or
twice in a lifetime--but that we have to settle what is to be done in
this flying minute, and in the one adjacent to it. 'Do the duty that
lies nearest thee,' and the remoter duty will become clearer. There is
nothing that has more power to make a man's path plain before his feet
than that he should concentrate his better self on the manful and
complete discharge of the present moment's service. And, on the other
hand, there is nothing that will so fill our sky with mists, and blur
the marks of the faint track through the moor, as present negligence,
or still more, present sin. Iron in a ship's hull makes the magnet
tremble, and point away from its true source. He that has complied with
evil to-day is the less capable of discerning duty to-morrow; and he
that does all the duty that he knows will thereby increase the
probability that he will know all that he needs. 'If any man wills to
do His will, he shall know of the teaching'--enough, at any rate, to
direct his steps.

But there is another lesson still in the words; and that is that, if we
are to be guided, we must see to it that we expect and obey the
guidance.

This servant of Abraham's, with a very imperfect knowledge of the
divine will, had, when he set out on his road, prayed very earnestly
that God would lead him. He had ventured to prescribe a certain token,
naive in its simplicity: 'If the girl drops her pitcher, and gives us
drink gladly, and does not grudge to fill the troughs for the cattle,
that will show that she is of a good sort, and will make the right wife
for Isaac.' He had prayed thus, and he was ready to accept whomsoever
God so designated. He had not made up his mind, 'Bethuel's daughter is
a relation of my master's, and so she will be a suitable wife for his
son.' He left it all with God, and then he went straight on his road,
and was perfectly sure that he would get the guidance that he had
sought. And when it came the good man bowed and obeyed.

Now there is a picture for us all. There are many people that say, 'O
Lord! guide me.' when all the while they mean, 'Let me guide Thee.'
They are perfectly willing to accept the faintest and moat questionable
indications that may seem to point down the road where their
inclination drives them, and like Lord Nelson at Copenhagen, will put
the telescope to the blind eye when the flag is flying at the admiral's
peak, signalling 'Come out of action,' because they are determined to
stay where they are.

Do not let us forget that the first condition of securing real guidance
in our daily life is to ask it, and that the next is to look for it,
and that a third is to be quite willing to accept it, whether the
finger points down the broad road that we would like to go upon, or
through some tangled path amongst the brushwood that we would fain
avoid. And if you and I, dear brethren, in the littlenesses of our
daily life, do fulfil these conditions, the heavens will crumble, and
earth will melt, before God will leave His child untaught in the way in
which he should go.

Only, let us be patient. Do you remember what Joshua said to the
Israelites? 'Let there be a good space of vacant ground between you and
the guiding ark, that you may know by which way you ought to go.' When
men precipitately press on the heels of half-disclosed providences,
they are uncommonly apt to mistake the road. We must wait till we are
sure of God's will before we try to do it. If we are not sure of what
He would have us do, then, for the present, He would have us do nothing
until He speaks. 'I being in the way, the Lord led me.'

2. Now a word about the manner of the guidance.

There was no miracle, no supernatural voice, no pillar of cloud or
fire, no hovering glory round the head of the village maiden. All the
indications were perfectly natural and trivial. A thousand girls had
gone to the wells that day all about Haran and done the very same
things that Rebekah did. But the devout man who had prayed for
guidance, and was sure that he was getting it, was guided by her most
simple, commonplace act; and that is how we are usually to be guided.
God leaves a great deal to our common sense. His way of speaking to
common sense is by very common things. If any of us fancy that some
glow at the heart, some sudden flash as of inspiration, is the test of
a divine commandment, we have yet to learn the full meaning of the
Incarnation of Jesus Christ. For that Incarnation, amongst all its
other mighty influences, hallowed the commonest things of life and
turned them into ministers of God's purposes. So remember, God's
guidance may come to you through so insignificant a girl as Rebekah. It
may come to you through as commonplace an incident as tipping the water
of a spring out of an earthen pot into a stone trough. None the less is
it God's guidance; and what we want is the eye to see it. He will guide
us by very common indications of His providence.

3. And now, the last thing that I would say a word about is the
realisation in daily life of this guidance as a plain actual fact.

This anonymous trusted servant of Abraham's, whose name we should like
to have known, had a mere segment of the full orb of the knowledge of
God that shines upon our path. With true Oriental freedom to speak
about the deepest matters, he was not afraid nor ashamed to stand
before Bethuel and Laban, and all these other strangers that crowded
round the doorway, and say, 'The Lord led me.' There is a pattern for
some of us tongue-tied, shamefaced Christians. Whatever may be the
truth about the degradations of which heathen religion is full, there
is a great deal in heathen religion that ought to teach, and does
teach, Christendom a lesson, as to willingness to recognise and to
confess God's working in daily life. It may be very superficial; it may
be very little connected with high morality; but so far as it goes it
is a thousand-fold better than the dumb religion that characterises
such hosts of Christian people.

A realisation of the divine guidance is the talisman that makes crooked
things straight and rough places plain; that brings peace and calmness
into our hearts, amid all changes, losses, and sorrows. If we hold fast
by that faith, it will interpret for us the mysterious in the
providences concerning our own lives, and will help us to feel that, as
I said, resistance to our progress may be true guidance, and thwarting
our wills may be our highest good. For the road which we travel should,
in all its turnings, lead us to God; and whatsoever guides us to Him is
only and always blessed.

May I, for one moment, turn these words in another direction, and
remind you, dear friends, of how the sublimest application of them is
still to be realised? As a climber on a mountain-peak may look down the
vale up which he had painfully toiled for many days and see the dusty
path lying, like a sinuous snake, down all along it, so, when we get up
yonder, 'Thou shalt remember all the way by which the Lord thy God hath
led thee these many years in the wilderness,' and shalt see the green
pastures and the still waters, valleys of the shadow of death, and
burning roads with sharp flints, which have all brought thee hither at
last. We shall know then what we believe now, that the Lord does indeed
go before them who desire to follow Him, and that the God of Israel is
their reward. Then we shall say with deepened thankfulness, deepened by
complete understanding of life here, seen in the light of its attained
end, 'I being in the way, the Lord led me,' and 'I shall dwell in the
house of the Lord for ever.'




THE DEATH OF ABRAHAM


    'Then Abraham gave up the ghost, and died in a good old
    age, an old man, and   full of years; and was gathered
    to his people.'--GENESIS xxv. 8.

'Full of years' does not seem to me to be a mere synonym for longevity.
That would be an intolerable tautology, for we should then have the
same thing said three times over--'an old man,' 'in a good old age,'
'full of years.' There must be some other idea than that in the words.
If you notice that the expression is by no means a usual one, that it
is only applied to one or two of the Old Testament characters, and
those selected characters, I think you will see that there must be some
other significance in it than merely to point to length of days.

It may be well to note the instances. In addition to our text, we find
it employed, first, in reference to Isaac, in Genesis xxxv. 29, where
the words are repeated almost _verbatim_. That calm, contemplative
life, so unlike the active, varied career of his father, also attained
to this blessing at its close. Then we find that the stormy and
adventurous course of the great king David, with its wonderful
alternations both of moral character and of fortune, is represented as
being closed at last with this tranquil evening glory: 'He died in a
good old age, full of days, riches, and honour.' Once more we read of
the great high priest Jehoiada, whose history had been crowded with
peril, change, brave resistance, and strenuous effort, that with all
the storms behind him he died at last, 'full of days.' The only other
instance of the occurrence of the phrase is at the close of the book of
Job, the typical record of the good man suffering, and of the abundant
compensations given by a loving God. The fair picture of returning
prosperity and family joy, like the calm morning sunshine after a night
of storm and wreck, with which that wonderful book ends, has this for
its last touch, evidently intended to deepen the impression of peace
which is breathed over it all: 'So Job died, being old and full of
days.' These are all the instances of the occurrence of this phrase,
and I think we may fairly say that in all it is meant to suggest not
merely length of days, but some characteristic of the long life over
and above its mere length. We shall, I think, understand its meaning a
little better if we make a very slight and entirely warranted change,
and instead of reading '_full_ of years,' read '_satisfied_ with
years.' The men were satisfied with life; having exhausted its
possibilities, having drunk a full draught, having nothing more left to
wish for. The words point to a calm close, with all desires gratified,
with hot wishes stilled, with no desperate clinging to life, but a
willingness to let it go, because all which it could give had been
attained.

So much for one of the remarkable expressions in this verse. There is
another, 'He was gathered to his people,' of which we shall have more
to say presently. Enough for the present to note the peculiarity, and
to suggest that it seems to contain some dim hint of a future life, and
some glimmer of some of the profoundest thoughts about it.

We have two main things to consider.

1. The tranquil close of a life.

It is possible, then, at the end of life to feel that it has satisfied
one's wishes. Whether it does or no will depend mostly on ourselves,
and very slightly on our circumstances. Length of days, competence,
health, and friends are important; but neither these nor any other
externals will make the difference between a life which, in the
retrospect, will seem to have been sufficient for our desires, and one
which leaves a hunger in the heart. It is possible for us to make our
lives of such a sort, that whether they run on to the apparent maturity
of old age, or whether they are cut short in the midst of our days, we
may rise from the table feeling that it has satisfied our desires, met
our anticipation, and been all very good.

Possibly, that is not the way in which most of us look at life. That is
not the way in which a great many of us seem to think that it is an
eminent part of Christian and religious character to look at life. But
it is the way in which the highest type of devotion and the truest
goodness always look at it. There are people, old and young, who,
whenever they look back, whether it be over a long tract of years or
over a short one, have nothing to say about it except: 'Vanity of
vanities! all is vanity and vexation of spirit'; a retrospect of weary
disappointments and thwarted plans.

How different with some of us the forward and the backward look! Are
there not some listening to me, whose past is so dark that it flings
black shadows over their future, and who can only cherish hopes for
to-morrow, by giving the lie to and forgetting the whole of their
yesterdays? It is hard to paint the regions before us like 'the Garden
of the Lord,' when we know that the locusts of our own godless desires
have made all the land behind us desolate. If your past has been a
selfish past, a godless past, in which passion, inclination, whim,
anything but conscience and Christ have ruled, your remembrances can
scarcely be tranquil; nor your hopes bright. If you have only
'prospects drear,' when you 'backward cast your eye,' it is not
wonderful if 'forwards though you cannot see,' you will 'guess and
fear.' Such lives, when they come towards an end, are wont to be full
of querulous discontent and bitterness. We have all seen godless old
men cynical and sour, pleased with nothing, grumbling, or feebly
complaining, about everything, dissatisfied with all which life has
thus far yielded them, and yet clinging desperately to it, and afraid
to go.

Put by the side of such an end this calm picture of the old man going
down into his grave, and looking back over all those long days since he
came away from his father's house, and became a pilgrim and a stranger.
How all the hot anxieties, desires, occupations, of youth have quieted
themselves down! How far away now seem the warlike days when he fought
the invading kings! How far away the heaviness of heart when he
journeyed to Mount Moriah with his boy, and whetted the knife to slay
his son! His love had all been buried in Sarah's grave. He has been a
lonely man for many years; and yet he looks back, as God looked back
over His creative week, and feels that all has been good. 'It was all
for the best; the great procession of my life has been ordered from the
beginning to its end, by the Hand that shapes beauty everywhere, and
has made all things blessed and sweet. I have drunk a full draught; I
have had enough; I bless the Giver of the feast, and push my chair
back; and get up and go away.' He died an old man, and satisfied with
his life.

Ay! And what a contrast that makes, dear friends, to another set of
people. There is nothing more miserable than to see a man, as his years
go by, gripping harder and tighter at this poor, fleeting world that is
slipping away from him; nothing sadder than to see how, as
opportunities and capacities for the enjoyment of life dwindle, and
dwindle, and dwindle, people become almost fierce in the desire to keep
it. Why, you can see on the face of many an old man and woman a hungry
discontent, that has not come from the mere wrinkles of old age or
care; an eager acquisitiveness looking out of the dim old eyes,
tragical and awful. It is sad to see a man, as the world goes from him,
grasping at its skirts as a beggar does at the retreating passer-by
that refuses him an alms. Are there not some of us who feel that this
is our case, that the less we have before us of life here on earth, the
more eagerly we grasp at the little which still remains; trying to get
some last drops out of the broken cistern which we know can hold no
water? How different this blessed acquiescence in the fleeting away of
the fleeting; and this contented satisfaction with the portion that has
been given him, which this man had who died willingly, being satisfied
with life!

Sometimes, too, there is satiety--weariness of life which is not
satisfaction, though it looks like it. Its language is: 'Man delights
me not; nor woman neither. I am tired of it all.' Those who feel thus
sit at the table without an appetite. They think that they have seen to
the bottom of everything, and they have found everything a cheat. They
expect nothing new under the sun; that which is to be hath already
been, and it is all vanity and striving after the wind. They are at
once satiated and dissatisfied. Nothing keeps the power to charm.

How different from all this is the temper expressed in this text,
rightly understood! Abraham had had a richly varied life. It had
brought him all he wished. He has drunk a full draught, and needs no
more. He is satisfied, but that does not mean loss of interest in
present duties, occupations, or enjoyments. It is possible to keep
ourselves fully alive to all these till the end, and to preserve
something of the keen edge of youth even in old age, by the magic of
communion with God, purity of conduct, and a habitual contemplation of
all events as sent by our Father. When Paul felt himself very near his
end, he yet had interest enough in common things to tell Timothy all
about their mutual friends' occupations, and to wish to have his books
and parchments.

So, calmly, satisfied and yet not sickened, keenly appreciating all the
good and pleasantness of life, and yet quite willing to let it go,
Abraham died. So may it be with us too, if we will, no matter what the
duration or the externals of our life. If we too are his children by
faith, we shall be 'blessed with faithful Abraham.' And I beseech you
to ask yourselves whether the course of your life is such as that, if
at this moment God's great knife were to come down and cut it in two,
you would be able to say, 'Well! I have had enough, and now contentedly
I go.'

Again, it is possible at the end of life to feel that it is complete,
because the days have accomplished for us the highest purpose of life.
Scaffoldings are for buildings, and the moments and days and years of
our earthly lives are scaffolding. What are you building inside the
scaffolding, brother? What kind of a structure will be disclosed when
the scaffolding is knocked away? What is the end for which days and
years are given? That they may give us what eternity cannot take
away--a character built upon the love of God in Christ, and moulded
into His likeness. 'Man's chief end is to glorify God, and to enjoy Him
for ever.' Has your life helped you to do that? If it has, though you
be but a child, you are full of years; if it has not, though your hair
be whitened with the snows of the nineties, you are yet incomplete and
immature. The great end of life is to make us like Christ, and pleasing
to Christ. If life has done that for us, we have got the best out of
it, and our life is completed, whatever may be the number of the days.
Quality, not quantity, is the thing that determines the perfectness of
a life. And like as in northern lands, where there is only a week or
two from the melting of the snow to the cutting of the hay, the whole
harvest of a life may be gathered in a very little space, and all be
done which is needed to make the life complete. Has your life this
completeness? Can you be 'satisfied' with it, because the river of the
flowing hours has borne down some grains of gold amidst the mass of
mud, and, notwithstanding many sins and failures, you have thus far
fulfilled the end of your being, that you are in some measure trusting
and serving the Lord Jesus Christ?

Again, it is possible, at the end of life, to be _willing_ to go as
satisfied.

Most men cling to life in grim desperation, like a climber to a cliff
giving way, or a drowning man clutching at any straw. How beautiful the
contrast of the placid, tranquil acquiescence expressed in that phrase
of our text! No doubt there will always be the shrinking of the bodily
nature from death. But that may be overcome. There is no passion so
weak but in some case it has 'mated and mastered the fear of death,'
and it is possible for us all to come to that temper in which we shall
be ready for either fortune, to live and serve Him here, or to die and
enjoy Him yonder. Or, to return to an earlier illustration, it is
possible to be like a man sitting at table, who has had his meal, and
is quite contented to stay on there, restful and cheerful, but is not
unwilling to put back his chair, to get up and to go away, thanking the
Giver for what he has received.

Ah! that is the way to face the end, dear brethren, and how is it to be
done? Such a temper need not be the exclusive possession of the old. It
may belong to us at all stages of life. How is it won? By a life of
devout communion with God. The secret of it lies in obeying the
commandment and realising the truth which Abraham realised and obeyed:
'I am the Almighty God, walk before Me, and be thou perfect.' 'Fear
not, Abram, I am thy shield and thine exceeding great reward.' That is
to say, a simple communion with God, realising His presence and feeling
that He is near, will sweeten disappointment, will draw from it its
hidden blessedness, will make us victors over its pains and its woes.
Such a faith will make it possible to look back and see only blessing;
to look forward and see a great light of hope burning in the darkness.
Such a faith will check weariness, avert satiety, promote satisfaction,
and will help us to feel that life and the great hereafter are but the
outer and inner mansions of the Father's house, and death the short
though dark corridor between. So we shall be ready for life or for
death.

2. Now I must turn to consider more briefly the glimpse of the joyful
society beyond, which is given us in that other remarkable expression
of our text: 'He was gathered to his people'

That phrase is only used in the earlier Old Testament books, and there
only in reference to a few persons. It is used of Abraham, Ishmael,
Isaac, Jacob, Moses, and Aaron, and once (Judges ii. 10) of a whole
generation. If you will weigh the words, I think you will see that
there is in them a dim intimation of something beyond this present life.

'He was gathered to his people' is not the same thing as 'He died,'
for, in the earlier part of the verse, we read, 'Abraham gave up the
ghost and died ... and was gathered to his people.' It is not the same
thing as being buried. For we read in the following verse: 'And his
sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah, in the
field of Ephron, the son of Zohar the Hittite, which is before Mamre.'
It is then the equivalent neither of death nor of burial. It conveys
dimly and veiledly that Abraham was buried, and yet that was not all
that happened to him. He was buried, but also 'he was gathered to his
people.' Why! his own 'people' were buried in Mesopotamia, and his
grave was far away from theirs. What is the meaning of the expression?
Who were the people he was gathered to? In death or in burial, 'the
dust returns to the earth as it was.' What was it that was gathered to
his people?

Dimly, vaguely, veiledly, but unmistakably, as it seems to me, is here
expressed at least a premonition and feeling after the thought of an
immortal self in Abraham that was not there in what 'his sons Isaac and
Ishmael laid in the cave at Machpelah,' but was somewhere else and was
for ever. That is the first thing hinted at here--the continuance of
the personal being after death.

Is there anything more? I think there is. Now, remember, Abraham's
whole life was shaped by that commandment, 'Get thee out from thy
father's house, and from thy kindred, and from thy country.' He never
dwelt with his kindred; all his days he was a pilgrim and a sojourner,
a stranger in a strange land. And though he was living in the midst of
a civilisation which possessed great cities whose walls reached to
heaven, he pitched his tent beneath the terebinth tree at Mamre, and
would have nothing to do with the order of things around him, but
remained an exotic, a waif, an outcast in the midst of Canaan all his
life. Why? Because he 'looked for the city which hath the foundations,
whose builder and maker is God.' And now he has gone to it, he is
gathered to his people. The life of isolation is over, the true social
life is begun. He is no longer separated from those around him, or
flung amidst those that are uncongenial to him. 'He is gathered to his
people'; he dwells with his own tribe; he is at home; he is in the city.

And so, brethren, life for every Christian man must be lonely. After
all communion we dwell as upon islands dotted over a great archipelago,
each upon his little rock, with the sea dashing between us; but the
time comes when, if our hearts are set upon that great Lord, whose
presence makes us one, there shall be no more sea, and all the isolated
rocks shall be parts of a great continent. Death sets the solitary in
families. We are here like travellers plodding lonely through the night
and the storm, but soon to cross the threshold into the lighted hall,
full of friends.

If we cultivate that sense of detachment from the present, and of
having our true affinities in the unseen, if we dwell here as strangers
because our citizenship is in heaven, then death will not drag us away
from our associates, nor hunt us into a lonely land, but will bring us
where closer bonds shall knit the 'sweet societies' together, and the
sheep shall couch close by one another, because all are gathered round
the one shepherd. Then many a broken tie shall be rewoven, and the
solitary wanderer meet again the dear ones whom he had 'loved long
since, and lost awhile.'

Further, the expressions suggest that in the future men shall be
associated according to affinity and character. 'He was gathered to his
people,' whom he was like and who were like him; the people with whom
he had sympathy, the people whose lives were shaped after the fashion
of his own.

Men will be sorted there. Gravitation will come into play undisturbed;
and the pebbles will be ranged according to their weights on the great
shore where the sea has cast them up, as they are upon Chesil beach,
down there in the English Channel, and many another coast besides; all
the big ones together and sized off to the smaller ones, regularly and
steadily laid out. Like draws to like. Our spiritual affinities, our
religious and moral character, will settle where we shall be, and who
our companions will be when we get yonder. Some of us would not
altogether like to live with the people that are like ourselves, and
some of us would not find the result of this sorting to be very
delightful. Men in the Dantesque circles were only made more miserable
because all around them were of the same sort as, and some of them
worse than, themselves. And an ordered hell, with no company for the
liar but liars, and none for the thief but thieves, and none for impure
men but the impure, and none for the godless but the godless, would be
a hell indeed.

'He was gathered to his people,' and you and I will be gathered
likewise. What is the conclusion of the whole matter? Let us follow
with our thoughts, and in our lives, those who have gone into the
light, and cultivate in heart and character those graces and
excellences which are congruous with the inheritance of the saints in
light. Above all, let us give our hearts to Christ, by simple faith in
Him, to be shaped and sanctified by Him. Then our country will be where
He is, and our people will be the people in whom His love abides, and
the tribe to which we belong will be the tribe of which He is
Chieftain. So when our turn comes, we may rise thankfully from the
table in the wilderness, which He has spread for us, having eaten as
much as we desired, and quietly follow the dark-robed messenger whom
His love sends to bring us to the happy multitudes that throng the
streets of the city. There we shall find our true home, our kindred,
our King. 'So shall _we_ ever be with the Lord.'




A BAD BARGAIN


    'And the boys grew: and Esau was a cunning hunter, a
    man of the field; and Jacob was a plain man, dwelling
    in tents. And Isaac loved Esau, because he did eat of
    his venison: but Rebekah loved Jacob. And Jacob sod
    pottage: and Esau came from the field, and he was faint:
    And Esau said to Jacob, Feed me, I pray thee, with that
    same red pottage; for I am faint: therefore was his name
    called Edom. And Jacob said, Sell me this day thy
    birthright. And Esau said, Behold, I am at the point to
    die: and what profit shall this birthright do to me?
    And Jacob said, Swear to me this day; and he sware unto
    him: and he sold his birthright unto Jacob. Then Jacob
    gave Esau bread and pottage of lentiles; and he did eat
