
[Illustration: My Master, Sri Yukteswar, Disciple of Lahiri
Mahasaya--see yukteswar.jpg]

Eight o'clock was the supper hour, and sometimes found lingering
guests. My guru would not excuse himself to eat alone; none left his
ashram hungry or dissatisfied. Sri Yukteswar was never at a loss,
never dismayed by unexpected visitors; scanty food would emerge
a banquet under his resourceful direction. Yet he was economical;
his modest funds went far. "Be comfortable within your purse,"
he often said. "Extravagance will buy you discomfort." Whether in
the details of hermitage entertainment, or his building and repair
work, or other practical concerns, Master manifested the originality
of a creative spirit.

Quiet evening hours often brought one of my guru's discourses,
treasures against time. His every utterance was measured and chiseled
by wisdom. A sublime self-assurance marked his mode of expression:
it was unique. He spoke as none other in my experience ever spoke.
His thoughts were weighed in a delicate balance of discrimination
before he permitted them an outward garb. The essence of truth,
all-pervasive with even a physiological aspect, came from him like
a fragrant exudation of the soul. I was conscious always that I
was in the presence of a living manifestation of God. The weight
of his divinity automatically bowed my head before him.

If late guests detected that Sri Yukteswar was becoming engrossed
with the Infinite, he quickly engaged them in conversation. He was
incapable of striking a pose, or of flaunting his inner withdrawal.
Always one with the Lord, he needed no separate time for communion.
A self-realized master has already left behind the stepping stone
of meditation. "The flower falls when the fruit appears." But saints
often cling to spiritual forms for the encouragement of disciples.

As midnight approached, my guru might fall into a doze with the
naturalness of a child. There was no fuss about bedding. He often
lay down, without even a pillow, on a narrow davenport which was
the background for his customary tiger-skin seat.

A night-long philosophical discussion was not rare; any disciple
could summon it by intensity of interest. I felt no tiredness then,
no desire for sleep; Master's living words were sufficient. "Oh,
it is dawn! Let us walk by the Ganges." So ended many of my periods
of nocturnal edification.

My early months with Sri Yukteswar culminated in a useful lesson-"How
to Outwit a Mosquito." At home my family always used protective
curtains at night. I was dismayed to discover that in the Serampore
hermitage this prudent custom was honored in the breach. Yet the
insects were in full residency; I was bitten from head to foot. My
guru took pity on me.

"Buy yourself a curtain, and also one for me." He laughed and added,
"If you buy only one, for yourself, all mosquitoes will concentrate
on me!"

I was more than thankful to comply. Every night that I spent in
Serampore, my guru would ask me to arrange the bedtime curtains.

The mosquitoes one evening were especially virulent. But Master
failed to issue his usual instructions. I listened nervously to
the anticipatory hum of the insects. Getting into bed, I threw a
propitiatory prayer in their general direction. A half hour later,
I coughed pretentiously to attract my guru's attention. I thought
I would go mad with the bites and especially the singing drone as
the mosquitoes celebrated bloodthirsty rites.

No responsive stir from Master; I approached him cautiously. He was
not breathing. This was my first observation of him in the yogic
trance; it filled me with fright.

"His heart must have failed!" I placed a mirror under his nose;
no breath-vapor appeared. To make doubly certain, for minutes I
closed his mouth and nostrils with my fingers. His body was cold
and motionless. In a daze, I turned toward the door to summon help.

"So! A budding experimentalist! My poor nose!" Master's voice was
shaky with laughter. "Why don't you go to bed? Is the whole world
going to change for you? Change yourself: be rid of the mosquito
consciousness."

Meekly I returned to my bed. Not one insect ventured near. I realized
that my guru had previously agreed to the curtains only to please
me; he had no fear of mosquitoes. His yogic power was such that
he either could will them not to bite, or could escape to an inner
invulnerability.

"He was giving me a demonstration," I thought. "That is the yogic
state I must strive to attain." A yogi must be able to pass into,
and continue in, the superconsciousness, regardless of multitudinous
distractions never absent from this earth. Whether in the buzz of
insects or the pervasive glare of daylight, the testimony of the
senses must be barred. Sound and sight come then indeed, but to
worlds fairer than the banished Eden. {FN12-7}

The instructive mosquitoes served for another early lesson at the
ashram. It was the gentle hour of dusk. My guru was matchlessly
interpreting the ancient texts. At his feet, I was in perfect peace.
A rude mosquito entered the idyl and competed for my attention. As
it dug a poisonous hypodermic needle into my thigh, I automatically
raised an avenging hand. Reprieve from impending execution! An
opportune memory came to me of one of Patanjali's yoga aphorisms-that
on AHIMSA (harmlessness).

"Why didn't you finish the job?"

"Master! Do you advocate taking life?"

"No; but the deathblow already had been struck in your mind."

"I don't understand."

"Patanjali's meaning was the removal of DESIRE to kill." Sri
Yukteswar had found my mental processes an open book. "This world
is inconveniently arranged for a literal practice of AHIMSA. Man
may be compelled to exterminate harmful creatures. He is not under
similar compulsion to feel anger or animosity. All forms of life
have equal right to the air of MAYA. The saint who uncovers the
secret of creation will be in harmony with its countless bewildering
expressions. All men may approach that understanding who curb the
inner passion for destruction."

"Guruji, should one offer himself a sacrifice rather than kill a
wild beast?"

"No; man's body is precious. It has the highest evolutionary
value because of unique brain and spinal centers. These enable the
advanced devotee to fully grasp and express the loftiest aspects
of divinity.  No lower form is so equipped. It is true that one
incurs the debt of a minor sin if he is forced to kill an animal or
any living thing. But the VEDAS teach that wanton loss of a human
body is a serious transgression against the karmic law."

I sighed in relief; scriptural reinforcement of one's natural
instincts is not always forthcoming.

It so happened that I never saw Master at close quarters with a
leopard or a tiger. But a deadly cobra once confronted him, only
to be conquered by my guru's love. This variety of snake is much
feared in India, where it causes more than five thousand deaths
annually. The dangerous encounter took place at Puri, where Sri
Yukteswar had a second hermitage, charmingly situated near the Bay
of Bengal.  Prafulla, a young disciple of later years, was with
Master on this occasion.

"We were seated outdoors near the ashram," Prafulla told me. "A
cobra appeared near-by, a four-foot length of sheer terror. Its
hood was angrily expanded as it raced toward us. My guru gave a
welcoming chuckle, as though to a child. I was beside myself with
consternation to see Master engage in a rhythmical clapping of
hands. {FN12-8} He was entertaining the dread visitor! I remained
absolutely quiet, inwardly ejaculating what fervent prayers I could
muster. The serpent, very close to my guru, was now motionless,
seemingly magnetized by his caressing attitude. The frightful hood
gradually contracted; the snake slithered between Master's feet
and disappeared into the bushes.

"Why my guru would move his hands, and why the cobra would not
strike them, were inexplicable to me then," Prafulla concluded. "I
have since come to realize that my divine master is beyond fear of
hurt from any living creature."

One afternoon during my early months at the ashram, found Sri
Yukteswar's eyes fixed on me piercingly.

"You are too thin, Mukunda."

His remark struck a sensitive point. That my sunken eyes and
emaciated appearance were far from my liking was testified to by
rows of tonics in my room at Calcutta. Nothing availed; chronic
dyspepsia had pursued me since childhood. My despair reached an
occasional zenith when I asked myself if it were worth-while to
carry on this life with a body so unsound.

"Medicines have limitations; the creative life-force has none.
Believe that: you shall be well and strong."

Sri Yukteswar's words aroused a conviction of personally-applicable
truth which no other healer-and I had tried many!-had been able to
summon within me.

Day by day, behold! I waxed. Two weeks after Master's hidden
blessing, I had accumulated the invigorating weight which eluded
me in the past.  My persistent stomach ailments vanished with
a lifelong permanency. On later occasions I witnessed my guru's
instantaneous divine healings of persons suffering from ominous
disease-tuberculosis, diabetes, epilepsy, or paralysis. Not one
could have been more grateful for his cure than I was at sudden
freedom from my cadaverous aspect.

"Years ago, I too was anxious to put on weight," Sri Yukteswar told
me. "During convalescence after a severe illness, I visited Lahiri
Mahasaya in Benares.

"'Sir, I have been very sick and lost many pounds.'

"'I see, Yukteswar, {FN12-9} you made yourself unwell, and now you
think you are thin.'

"This reply was far from the one I had expected; my guru, however,
added encouragingly:

"'Let me see; I am sure you ought to feel better tomorrow.'

"Taking his words as a gesture of secret healing toward my receptive
mind, I was not surprised the next morning at a welcome accession
of strength. I sought out my master and exclaimed exultingly, 'Sir,
I feel much better today.'

"'Indeed! Today you invigorate yourself.'

"'No, master!' I protested. 'It was you who helped me; this is the
first time in weeks that I have had any energy.'

"'O yes! Your malady has been quite serious. Your body is frail
yet; who can say how it will be tomorrow?'

"The thought of possible return of my weakness brought me a shudder
of cold fear. The following morning I could hardly drag myself to
Lahiri Mahasaya's home.

"'Sir, I am ailing again.'

"My guru's glance was quizzical. 'So! Once more you indispose
yourself.'

"'Gurudeva, I realize now that day by day you have been ridiculing
me.' My patience was exhausted. 'I don't understand why you disbelieve
my truthful reports.'

"'Really, it has been your thoughts that have made you feel
alternately weak and strong.' My master looked at me affectionately.
'You have seen how your health has exactly followed your expectations.
Thought is a force, even as electricity or gravitation. The human
mind is a spark of the almighty consciousness of God. I could show
you that whatever your powerful mind believes very intensely would
instantly come to pass.'

"Knowing that Lahiri Mahasaya never spoke idly, I addressed him
with great awe and gratitude: 'Master, if I think I am well and
have regained my former weight, shall that happen?'

"'It is so, even at this moment.' My guru spoke gravely, his gaze
concentrated on my eyes.

"Lo! I felt an increase not alone of strength but of weight. Lahiri
Mahasaya retreated into silence. After a few hours at his feet, I
returned to my mother's home, where I stayed during my visits to
Benares.

"'My son! What is the matter? Are you swelling with dropsy?' Mother
could hardly believe her eyes. My body was now of the same robust
dimensions it had possessed before my illness.

"I weighed myself and found that in one day I had gained fifty
pounds; they remained with me permanently. Friends and acquaintances
who had seen my thin figure were aghast with wonderment. A number
of them changed their mode of life and became disciples of Lahiri
Mahasaya as a result of this miracle.

"My guru, awake in God, knew this world to be nothing but an objectivized
dream of the Creator. Because he was completely aware of his unity
with the Divine Dreamer, Lahiri Mahasaya could materialize or
dematerialize or make any change he wished in the cosmic vision.
{FN12-10}

"All creation is governed by law," Sri Yukteswar concluded. "The ones
which manifest in the outer universe, discoverable by scientists,
are called natural laws. But there are subtler laws ruling the
realms of consciousness which can be known only through the inner
science of yoga. The hidden spiritual planes also have their
natural and lawful principles of operation. It is not the physical
scientist but the fully self-realized master who comprehends the
true nature of matter.  Thus Christ was able to restore the servant's
ear after it had been severed by one of the disciples." {FN12-11}

Sri Yukteswar was a peerless interpreter of the scriptures. Many of
my happiest memories are centered in his discourses. But his jeweled
thoughts were not cast into ashes of heedlessness or stupidity. One
restless movement of my body, or my slight lapse into absent-mindedness,
sufficed to put an abrupt period to Master's exposition.

"You are not here." Master interrupted himself one afternoon with
this disclosure. As usual, he was keeping track of my attention
with a devastating immediacy.

"Guruji!" My tone was a protest. "I have not stirred; my eyelids
have not moved; I can repeat each word you have uttered!"

"Nevertheless you were not fully with me. Your objection forces me
to remark that in your mental background you were creating three
institutions. One was a sylvan retreat on a plain, another on a
hilltop, a third by the ocean."

Those vaguely formulated thoughts had indeed been present almost
subconsciously. I glanced at him apologetically.

"What can I do with such a master, who penetrates my random musings?"

[Illustration: Main building at the Mount Washington Estates in
Los Angeles, established in 1925 as American headquarters for the
Self-Realization Fellowship.--see mtwash.jpg]

[Illustration:  Self-Realization Church of All Religions, Hollywood,
California.--see hollywood.jpg]

"You have given me that right. The subtle truths I am expounding
cannot be grasped without your complete concentration. Unless
necessary I do not invade the seclusion of others' minds. Man has
the natural privilege of roaming secretly among his thoughts. The
unbidden Lord does not enter there; neither do I venture intrusion."

"You are ever welcome, Master!"

"Your architectural dreams will materialize later. Now is the time
for study!"

Thus incidentally my guru revealed in his simple way the coming of
three great events in my life. Since early youth I had had enigmatic
glimpses of three buildings, each in a different setting. In the
exact sequence Sri Yukteswar had indicated, these visions took
ultimate form. First came my founding of a boys' yoga school on a
Ranchi plain, then my American headquarters on a Los Angeles hilltop,
finally a hermitage in southern California by the vast Pacific.

Master never arrogantly asserted: "I prophesy that such and such
an event shall occur!" He would rather hint: "Don't you think it
may happen?" But his simple speech hid vatic power. There was no
recanting; never did his slightly veiled words prove false.

Sri Yukteswar was reserved and matter-of-fact in demeanor. There
was naught of the vague or daft visionary about him. His feet
were firm on the earth, his head in the haven of heaven. Practical
people aroused his admiration. "Saintliness is not dumbness! Divine
perceptions are not incapacitating!" he would say. "The active
expression of virtue gives rise to the keenest intelligence."

In Master's life I fully discovered the cleavage between spiritual
realism and the obscure mysticism that spuriously passes as
a counterpart. My guru was reluctant to discuss the superphysical
realms. His only "marvelous" aura was one of perfect simplicity.
In conversation he avoided startling references; in action he was
freely expressive. Others talked of miracles but could manifest
nothing; Sri Yukteswar seldom mentioned the subtle laws but secretly
operated them at will.

"A man of realization does not perform any miracle until he
receives an inward sanction," Master explained. "God does not wish
the secrets of His creation revealed promiscuously. {FN12-12} Also,
every individual in the world has inalienable right to his free
will. A saint will not encroach upon that independence."

The silence habitual to Sri Yukteswar was caused by his deep
perceptions of the Infinite. No time remained for the interminable
"revelations" that occupy the days of teachers without self-realization.
"In shallow men the fish of little thoughts cause much commotion.
In oceanic minds the whales of inspiration make hardly a ruffle."
This observation from the Hindu scriptures is not without discerning
humor.

Because of my guru's unspectacular guise, only a few of his
contemporaries recognized him as a superman. The popular adage: "He
is a fool that cannot conceal his wisdom," could never be applied
to Sri Yukteswar. Though born a mortal like all others, Master had
achieved identity with the Ruler of time and space. In his life I
perceived a godlike unity. He had not found any insuperable obstacle
to mergence of human with Divine. No such barrier exists, I came
to understand, save in man's spiritual unadventurousness.

I always thrilled at the touch of Sri Yukteswar's holy feet.
Yogis teach that a disciple is spiritually magnetized by reverent
contact with a master; a subtle current is generated. The devotee's
undesirable habit-mechanisms in the brain are often cauterized; the
groove of his worldly tendencies beneficially disturbed. Momentarily
at least he may find the secret veils of MAYA lifting, and glimpse
the reality of bliss. My whole body responded with a liberating
glow whenever I knelt in the Indian fashion before my guru.

"Even when Lahiri Mahasaya was silent," Master told me, "or when
he conversed on other than strictly religious topics, I discovered
that nonetheless he had transmitted to me ineffable knowledge."

Sri Yukteswar affected me similarly. If I entered the hermitage in
a worried or indifferent frame of mind, my attitude imperceptibly
changed. A healing calm descended at mere sight of my guru. Every
day with him was a new experience in joy, peace, and wisdom. Never
did I find him deluded or intoxicated with greed or emotion or
anger or any human attachment.

"The darkness of MAYA is silently approaching. Let us hie homeward
within." With these words at dusk Master constantly reminded his
disciples of their need for KRIYA YOGA. A new student occasionally
expressed doubts regarding his own worthiness to engage in yoga
practice.

"Forget the past," Sri Yukteswar would console him. "The vanished
lives of all men are dark with many shames. Human conduct is ever
unreliable until anchored in the Divine. Everything in future will
improve if you are making a spiritual effort now."

Master always had young CHELAS {FN12-13} in his hermitage. Their
spiritual and intellectual education was his lifelong interest:
even shortly before he passed on, he accepted for training two
six-year-old boys and one youth of sixteen. He directed their minds
and lives with that careful discipline in which the word "disciple"
is etymologically rooted. The ashram residents loved and revered
their guru; a slight clap of his hands sufficed to bring them
eagerly to his side. When his mood was silent and withdrawn, no one
ventured to speak; when his laugh rang jovially, children looked
upon him as their own.

Master seldom asked others to render him a personal service, nor would
he accept help from a student unless the willingness were sincere.
My guru quietly washed his clothes if the disciples overlooked that
privileged task. Sri Yukteswar wore the traditional ocher-colored
swami robe; his laceless shoes, in accordance with yogi custom,
were of tiger or deer skin.

Master spoke fluent English, French, Hindi, and Bengali; his
Sanskrit was fair. He patiently instructed his young disciples by
certain short cuts which he had ingeniously devised for the study
of English and Sanskrit.

Master was cautious of his body, while withholding solicitous
attachment. The Infinite, he pointed out, properly manifests through
physical and mental soundness. He discountenanced any extremes. A
disciple once started a long fast. My guru only laughed: "Why not
throw the dog a bone?"

Sri Yukteswar's health was excellent; I never saw him unwell.
{FN12-14} He permitted students to consult doctors if it seemed
advisable. His purpose was to give respect to the worldly custom:
"Physicians must carry on their work of healing through God's laws
as applied to matter." But he extolled the superiority of mental
therapy, and often repeated: "Wisdom is the greatest cleanser."

"The body is a treacherous friend. Give it its due; no more,"
he said.  "Pain and pleasure are transitory; endure all dualities
with calmness, while trying at the same time to remove their hold.
Imagination is the door through which disease as well as healing
enters. Disbelieve in the reality of sickness even when you are
ill; an unrecognized visitor will flee!"

Master numbered many doctors among his disciples. "Those who have
ferreted out the physical laws can easily investigate the science
of the soul," he told them. "A subtle spiritual mechanism is hidden
just behind the bodily structure." {FN12-15}

Sri Yukteswar counseled his students to be living liaisons of
Western and Eastern virtues. Himself an executive Occidental in
outer habits, inwardly he was the spiritual Oriental. He praised
the progressive, resourceful and hygienic habits of the West, and
the religious ideals which give a centuried halo to the East.

Discipline had not been unknown to me: at home Father was strict,
Ananta often severe. But Sri Yukteswar's training cannot be described
as other than drastic. A perfectionist, my guru was hypercritical
of his disciples, whether in matters of moment or in the subtle
nuances of behavior.

"Good manners without sincerity are like a beautiful dead lady,"
he remarked on suitable occasion. "Straightforwardness without
civility is like a surgeon's knife, effective but unpleasant. Candor
with courtesy is helpful and admirable."

Master was apparently satisfied with my spiritual progress, for he
seldom referred to it; in other matters my ears were no strangers
to reproof. My chief offenses were absentmindedness, intermittent
indulgence in sad moods, non-observance of certain rules of etiquette,
and occasional unmethodical ways.

"Observe how the activities of your father Bhagabati are well-organized
and balanced in every way," my guru pointed out. The two disciples
of Lahiri Mahasaya had met, soon after I began my pilgrimages
to Serampore. Father and Sri Yukteswar admiringly evaluated the
other's worth. Both had built an inner life of spiritual granite,
insoluble against the ages.

From transient teachers of my earlier life I had imbibed a few
erroneous lessons. A CHELA, I was told, need not concern himself
strenuously over worldly duties; when I had neglected or carelessly
performed my tasks, I was not chastised. Human nature finds such
instruction very easy of assimilation. Under Master's unsparing
rod, however, I soon recovered from the agreeable delusions of
irresponsibility.

"Those who are too good for this world are adorning some other,"
Sri Yukteswar remarked. "So long as you breathe the free air of
earth, you are under obligation to render grateful service. He alone
who has fully mastered the breathless state {FN12-16} is freed from
cosmic imperatives. I will not fail to let you know when you have
attained the final perfection."

My guru could never be bribed, even by love. He showed no leniency
to anyone who, like myself, willingly offered to be his disciple.
Whether Master and I were surrounded by his students or by strangers,
or were alone together, he always spoke plainly and upbraided
sharply. No trifling lapse into shallowness or inconsistency escaped
his rebuke.  This flattening treatment was hard to endure, but my
resolve was to allow Sri Yukteswar to iron out each of my psychological
kinks. As he labored at this titanic transformation, I shook many
times under the weight of his disciplinary hammer.

"If you don't like my words, you are at liberty to leave at any
time," Master assured me. "I want nothing from you but your own
improvement.  Stay only if you feel benefited."

For every humbling blow he dealt my vanity, for every tooth in my
metaphorical jaw he knocked loose with stunning aim, I am grateful
beyond any facility of expression. The hard core of human egotism
is hardly to be dislodged except rudely. With its departure, the
Divine finds at last an unobstructed channel. In vain It seeks to
percolate through flinty hearts of selfishness.

Sri Yukteswar's wisdom was so penetrating that, heedless of remarks,
he often replied to one's unspoken observation. "What a person
imagines he hears, and what the speaker has really implied, may
be poles apart," he said. "Try to feel the thoughts behind the
confusion of men's verbiage."

But divine insight is painful to worldly ears; Master was not popular
with superficial students. The wise, always few in number, deeply
revered him. I daresay Sri Yukteswar would have been the most
soughtafter guru in India had his words not been so candid and so
censorious.

"I am hard on those who come for my training," he admitted to me.
"That is my way; take it or leave it. I will never compromise. But
you will be much kinder to your disciples; that is your way. I try
to purify only in the fires of severity, searing beyond the average
toleration. The gentle approach of love is also transfiguring. The
inflexible and the yielding methods are equally effective if applied
with wisdom. You will go to foreign lands, where blunt assaults
on the ego are not appreciated. A teacher could not spread India's
message in the West without an ample fund of accommodative patience
and forbearance." I refuse to state the amount of truth I later
came to find in Master's words!

Though Sri Yukteswar's undissembling speech prevented a large
following during his years on earth, nevertheless his living spirit
manifests today over the world, through sincere students of his
KRIYA YOGA and other teachings. He has further dominion in men's
souls than ever Alexander dreamed of in the soil.

Father arrived one day to pay his respects to Sri Yukteswar. My
parent expected, very likely, to hear some words in my praise. He
was shocked to be given a long account of my imperfections. It was
Master's practice to recount simple, negligible shortcomings with
an air of portentous gravity. Father rushed to see me. "From your
guru's remarks I thought to find you a complete wreck!" My parent
was between tears and laughter.

The only cause of Sri Yukteswar's displeasure at the time was that
I had been trying, against his gentle hint, to convert a certain
man to the spiritual path.

With indignant speed I sought out my guru. He received me with
downcast eyes, as though conscious of guilt. It was the only time
I ever saw the divine lion meek before me. The unique moment was
savored to the full.

"Sir, why did you judge me so mercilessly before my astounded
father?  Was that just?"

"I will not do it again." Master's tone was apologetic.

Instantly I was disarmed. How readily the great man admitted his
fault! Though he never again upset Father's peace of mind, Master
relentlessly continued to dissect me whenever and wherever he chose.

New disciples often joined Sri Yukteswar in exhaustive criticism
of others. Wise like the guru! Models of flawless discrimination!
But he who takes the offensive must not be defenseless. The same
carping students fled precipitantly as soon as Master publicly
unloosed in their direction a few shafts from his analytical quiver.

"Tender inner weaknesses, revolting at mild touches of censure,
are like diseased parts of the body, recoiling before even delicate
handling." This was Sri Yukteswar's amused comment on the flighty
ones.

There are disciples who seek a guru made in their own image. Such
students often complained that they did not understand Sri Yukteswar.

"Neither do you comprehend God!" I retorted on one occasion. "When
a saint is clear to you, you will be one." Among the trillion
mysteries, breathing every second the inexplicable air, who may
venture to ask that the fathomless nature of a master be instantly
grasped?

Students came, and generally went. Those who craved a path of
oily sympathy and comfortable recognitions did not find it at the
hermitage. Master offered shelter and shepherding for the aeons,
but many disciples miserly demanded ego-balm as well. They departed,
preferring life's countless humiliations before any humility.
Master's blazing rays, the open penetrating sunshine of his wisdom,
were too powerful for their spiritual sickness. They sought some
lesser teacher who, shading them with flattery, permitted the fitful
sleep of ignorance.

During my early months with Master, I had experienced a sensitive
fear of his reprimands. These were reserved, I soon saw, for disciples
who had asked for his verbal vivisection. If any writhing student
made a protest, Sri Yukteswar would become unoffendedly silent.
His words were never wrathful, but impersonal with wisdom.

Master's insight was not for the unprepared ears of casual visitors; he
seldom remarked on their defects, even if conspicuous. But toward
students who sought his counsel, Sri Yukteswar felt a serious
responsibility. Brave indeed is the guru who undertakes to transform
the crude ore of ego-permeated humanity! A saint's courage roots
in his compassion for the stumbling eyeless of this world.

When I had abandoned underlying resentment, I found a marked decrease
in my chastisement. In a very subtle way, Master melted into
comparative clemency. In time I demolished every wall of rationalization
and subconscious reservation behind which the human personality
generally shields itself. {FN12-17} The reward was an effortless
harmony with my guru. I discovered him then to be trusting, considerate,
and silently loving. Undemonstrative, however, he bestowed no word
of affection.

My own temperament is principally devotional. It was disconcerting
at first to find that my guru, saturated with JNANA but seemingly
dry of BHAKTI, {FN12-18} expressed himself only in terms of
cold spiritual mathematics. But as I tuned myself to his nature,
I discovered no diminution but rather increase in my devotional
approach to God. A self-realized master is fully able to guide his
various disciples along natural lines of their essential bias.

My relationship with Sri Yukteswar, somewhat inarticulate, nonetheless
possessed all eloquence. Often I found his silent signature on my
thoughts, rendering speech inutile. Quietly sitting beside him, I
felt his bounty pouring peacefully over my being.

Sri Yukteswar's impartial justice was notably demonstrated during
the summer vacation of my first college year. I welcomed the opportunity
to spend uninterrupted months at Serampore with my guru.

"You may be in charge of the hermitage." Master was pleased over
my enthusiastic arrival. "Your duties will be the reception of
guests, and supervision of the work of the other disciples."

Kumar, a young villager from east Bengal, was accepted a fortnight
later for hermitage training. Remarkably intelligent, he quickly
won Sri Yukteswar's affection. For some unfathomable reason, Master
was very lenient to the new resident.

"Mukunda, let Kumar assume your duties. Employ your own time in
sweeping and cooking." Master issued these instructions after the
new boy had been with us for a month.

Exalted to leadership, Kumar exercised a petty household tyranny.
In silent mutiny, the other disciples continued to seek me out for
daily counsel.

"Mukunda is impossible! You made me supervisor, yet the others go
to him and obey him." Three weeks later Kumar was complaining to
our guru. I overheard him from an adjoining room.

"That's why I assigned him to the kitchen and you to the parlor."
Sri Yukteswar's withering tones were new to Kumar. "In this way you
have come to realize that a worthy leader has the desire to serve,
and not to dominate. You wanted Mukunda's position, but could not
maintain it by merit. Return now to your earlier work as cook's
assistant."

