spirit may not be dragged out of us, reluctant, and as far as we can,
resisting, but that we may offer it up as a libation, to use one
metaphor of St. Paul's, or may surrender it willingly as an act of
faith? It is wonderful to think that life and death, so unlike each
other, may be made absolutely identical in the spirit in which they are
met. You remember how the first martyr caught up the words from the
Cross, and kneeling down outside the wall of Jerusalem, with the blood
running from the wounds that the stones had made, said, 'Lord Jesus!
receive my spirit.' That is the way to die, and that is the way to live.

One word is all that time permits about the ground upon which this great
venture of faith may be made. 'Thou hast redeemed me, Lord God of
Truth.' The Psalmist, I think, uses that word 'redeemed' here, not in
its wider spiritual New Testament sense, but in its frequent Old
Testament sense, of deliverance from temporal difficulties and
calamities. And what he says is, in effect, this: 'I have had experience
in the past which makes me believe that Thou wilt extricate me from this
trouble too, because Thou art the God of Truth.' He thinks of what God
has done, and of what God is. And Peter, whom we have already found
echoing this text, echoes that part of it too, for he says, 'Let them
commit the keeping of their souls to Him in well doing, as _unto a
faithful Creator_,' which is all but parallel to 'Lord God of Truth.' So
God will continue as He has begun, and finish what He has begun.

'A faithful Creator--' He made us to need what we do need, and He is not
going to forget the wants that He Himself has incorporated with our
human nature. He is bound to help us because He made us. He is the God
of Truth, and He will help us. But if we take 'redeemed' in its highest
sense, the Psalmist, arguing from God's past mercy and eternal
faithfulness, is saying substantially what the Apostle said in the
triumphant words, 'Whom He did foreknow, them He also did predestinate
to be conformed to the image of His Son ... and whom He did predestinate
them He also ... justified, and whom He justified them He also
glorified.' 'Thou hast redeemed me.' 'Thou art the God of Truth; Thou
wilt not lift Thy hand away from Thy work until Thou hast made me all
that Thou didst bind Thyself to make me in that initial act of redeeming
me.'

So we can say, 'He that spared not His own Son, but delivered Him up for
us all, how shall He not with Him also freely give us all things?' You
have experiences, I have no doubt, in your past, on which you may well
build confidence for the future. Let each of us consult our own hearts,
and our own memories. Cannot _we_ say, 'Thou hast been my Help,' and
ought we not therefore to be sure that He will not 'leave us nor forsake
us' until He manifests Himself as the God of our salvation?

It is a blessed thing to lay ourselves in the hands of God, but the New
Testament tells us, 'It is a fearful thing to _fall into_ the hands of
the living God.' The alternative is one that we all have to
face,--either 'into Thy hands I commit my spirit,' or into those hands
to fall. Settle which of the two is to be your fate.




GOODNESS WROUGHT AND GOODNESS LAID UP


    'Oh how great is Thy goodness, which Thou hast laid up for them that
    fear Thee; which Thou hast wrought for them that trust in Thee
    before the sons of men!'--PSALM xxxi. 19.

The Psalmist has been describing, with the eloquence of misery, his own
desperate condition, in all manner of metaphors which he heaps
together--'sickness,' 'captivity,' 'like a broken vessel,' 'as a dead
man out of mind.' But in the depth of desolation he grasps at God's
hand, and that lifts him up out of the pit. 'I trusted in Thee, O Lord!
Thou art my God.' So he struggles up on to the green earth again, and he
feels the sunshine; and then he breaks out--'Oh! how great is Thy
goodness which Thou hast laid up for them that fear Thee.' So the psalm
that began with such grief, ends with the ringing call, 'Be of good
courage, and He shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in the
Lord.'

Now these great words which I have read for my text, and which derive
even additional lustre from their setting, do not convey to the hasty
English reader the precise force of the antithesis which lies in them.
The contrast in the two clauses is between goodness laid up and goodness
wrought; and that would come out a little more clearly if we transposed
the last words of the text, and instead of reading, as our Authorised
Version does, 'which Thou hast wrought for them that trusted in Thee
before the sons of men,' read 'which Thou hast wrought before the sons
of men for them that trusted in Thee.'

So I think there are, as it were, two great masses of what the Psalmist
calls 'goodness'; one of them which has been plainly manifested 'before
the sons of men,' the other which is 'laid up' in store. There are a
great many notes in circulation, but there is far more bullion in the
strong-room. Much 'goodness' has been exhibited; far more lies
concealed.

If we take that antithesis, then, I think we may turn it in two or three
directions, like a light in a man's hand; and look at it as suggesting--

I. First, the goodness already disposed--'wrought before the sons of
men'; and that 'laid up,' yet to be manifested.

Now, that distinction just points to the old familiar but yet
never-to-be-exhausted thought of the inexhaustibleness of the divine
nature. That inexhaustibleness comes out most wondrously and beautifully
in the fundamental manifestation of God on which the Old Testament
revelation is built--I mean the vision given to Moses prior to his call,
and as the basis of his message, of the bush that burned and was not
consumed. That lowly shrub flaming and not burning out was not, as has
often been supposed, the symbol of Israel which in the furnace of
affliction was not destroyed. It meant the same as the divine name, then
proclaimed; 'I AM THAT I AM,' which is but a way of saying that God's
Being is absolute, dependent upon none, determined by Himself, infinite,
and eternal, burns and is not burned up, lives and has no proclivity
towards death, works and is unwearied, 'operates unspent,' is revealed
and yet hidden, gives and is none the poorer.

And as we look upon our daily lives, and travel back in thought, some of
us over the many years which have all been crowded with instances and
illustrations of divine faithfulness and favouring care, we have to
grasp both these exclamations of our text, 'Oh! how great is Thy
goodness which Thou hast wrought,' how much greater 'is Thy goodness
which is laid up!' The table has been spread in the wilderness, and the
verities of Christian experience more than surpass the legends of hungry
knights finding banquets prepared by unseen hands in desert places. It
is as when Jesus made the multitude sit down on the green grass and
feast to the full, and yet abundance remained undiminished after
satisfying all the hungry applicants. The bread that was broken yielded
more basketfuls for to-morrow than the original quantity in the lad's
hands. The fountain rises, and the whole camp, 'themselves and their
children and their cattle,' slake their thirst at it, and yet it is full
as ever. The goodness wrought is but the fringe and first beginnings of
the mass that is laid up. All the gold that has been coined and put into
circulation is as nothing compared with the wedges and ingots of massive
bullion that lie in the strong room. God's riches are not like the
world's wealth. You very soon get to the bottom of its purse. Its
'goodness,' is very soon run dry; and nothing will yield an
unintermittent stream of satisfaction and blessing to a poor soul except
the 'river of the water of life that proceedeth out of the Throne of God
and of the Lamb.'

So, dear brethren! that contrast may suggest to us how quietly and
peacefully we may look forward to all the unknown future; and hold up to
it so as to enable us to scan its general outlines, the light of the
known and experienced past. Let our trustful prayer be; 'Thou hast been
my help: leave me not, neither forsake me, O God of my salvation!' and
the answer will certainly be: 'I will not leave thee, till I have done
unto thee that which I have spoken to thee of.' Our Memory ought to be
the mother of our Hope; and we should paint the future in the hues of
the past. Thou hast goodness 'laid up,' more than enough to match 'the
goodness Thou hast wrought.' God's past is the prophecy of God's future;
and my past, if I understand it aright, ought to rebuke every fear and
calm every anxiety. We, and only we, have the right to say, 'To-morrow
shall be as this day, and much more abundant.' That is delusion if said
by any but by those that fear and trust in the Inexhaustible God.

II. Now let us turn our light in a somewhat different direction. The
contrast here suggests the goodness that is publicly given and that
which is experienced in secret.

If you will notice, in the immediate neighbourhood of my text there come
other words which evidently link themselves with the thought of the
goodness laid up: 'Thou shalt hide them in the secret of Thy presence.'
That is where also the 'goodness' is. 'Thou shalt keep them secretly in
a pavilion ... blessed be the Lord! for He hath shewed me His marvellous
kindness in a strong city.' So, then, the goodness which is wrought, and
which can be seen by the sons of men, dwindles in comparison with the
goodness which lies in that secret place, and can only be enjoyed and
possessed by those who dwell there, and whose feet are familiar with the
way that leads to it. That is to say, if you wish the Psalmist's thought
in plain prose, all these visible blessings of ours are but pale shadows
and suggestions of the real wealth that we can have only if we live in
continual communion with God. The spiritual blessings of quiet minds and
strength for work, the joys of communion with God, the sweetness of the
hopes that are full of immortality, and all these delights and
manifestations of God's inmost love and sweetness which are granted only
to waiting hearts that shut themselves off from the tumultuous delights
of earth as the bases of their trust or the sources of their
gladness--these are fuller, better than the selectest and richest of the
joys that God's world can give. God does not put His best gifts, so to
speak, in the shop-windows; He keeps these in the inner chambers. He
does not arrange His gifts as dishonest traders do their wares, putting
the finest outside or on the top, and the less good beneath. 'Thou hast
kept the good wine until now.' It is they who inhabit 'the secret place
of the Most High,' and whose lives are filled with communion with Him,
realising His presence, seeking to know His will, reaching out the
tendrils of their hearts to twine round Him, and diligently, for His
dear sake, doing the tasks of life; who taste the selected dainties from
God's gracious hands.

How foolish, then, to order life on the principle upon which we are all
tempted to do it, and to yield to the temptation to which some of us
have yielded far too much, of fancying that the best good is the good
that we can touch and taste and handle and that men can see! No! no!
Deep down in our hearts a joy that strangers never intermeddle with nor
know, a peace that passes understanding, a present Christ and a Heaven
all but present, because Christ is present--these are the good things
for men, and these are the things which God does not, because He cannot,
fling broadcast into the world, but which He keeps, because He must, for
those that desire them, and are fit for them. 'He causeth His sun to
shine, and His rain to fall on the unthankful and on the disobedient,'
but the goodness laid up is better than the sunshine, and more
refreshing and fertilising and cleansing than the rain, and it comes,
and comes only, to them that trust Him, and live near Him.

III. And so, lastly, we may turn our light in yet another direction, and
take this contrast as suggesting the goodness wrought on earth, and the
goodness laid up in heaven.

Here we see, sometimes, the messengers coming with the one cluster of
grapes on the pole. There we shall live in the vineyard. Here we drink
from the river as it flows; there we shall be at the fountain-head. Here
we are in the vestibule of the King's house, there we shall be in the
throne room, and each chamber as we pass through it is richer and fairer
than the one preceding. Heaven's least goodness is more than earth's
greatest blessedness. All that life to come, all its conditions and
everything about it, are so strange to us, so incapable of being bodied
forth or conceived by us, and the thought of Eternity is, it seems to
me, so overwhelmingly awful that I do not wonder at even good people
finding little stimulus, or much that cheers, in the thought of passing
thither. But if we do not know anything more--and we know very little
more--let us be sure of this, that when God begins to compare His
adjectives He does not stop till He gets to the superlative degree and
that _good_ begets _better_, and the better of earth ensures the _best_
of Heaven. And so out of our poor little experience here, we may gather
grounds of confidence that will carry our thoughts peacefully even into
the great darkness, and may say, 'What Thou didst work is much, what
Thou hast laid up is more.' And the contrast will continue for ever and
ever; for all through that strange Eternity that which is wrought will
be less than that which is laid up, and we shall never get to the end of
God, nor to the end of His goodness.

Only let us take heed to the conditions--'them that fear Him, them that
trust in Him.' If we will do these things through each moment of the
experiences of a growing Christian life, and at the moment of the
experience of a Christian death, and through the eternities of the
experience of a Christian heaven, Jesus Christ will whisper to us, 'Thou
shalt see greater things than these.'




HID IN LIGHT


    'Thou shall hide them in the secret of Thy presence from the pride
    of man; Thou shalt keep them secretly in a pavilion from the strife
    of tongues.'--PSALM xxxi. 20.

The word rendered 'presence' is literally 'face,' and the force of this
very remarkable expression of confidence is considerably marred unless
that rendering be retained. There are other analogous expressions in
Scripture, setting forth, under various metaphors, God's protection of
them that love Him. But I know not that there is any so noble and
striking as this. For instance, we read of His hiding His children 'in
the secret of His tabernacle,' or tent; as an Arab chief might do a
fugitive who had eaten of his salt, secreting him in the recesses of his
tent whilst the pursuers scoured the desert in vain for their prey.
Again, we read of His hiding them 'beneath the shadow of His wing';
where the divine love is softened into the likeness of the maternal
instinct which leads a hen to gather her chickens beneath the shelter of
her own warm and outspread feathers. But the metaphor of my text is more
vivid and beautiful still. 'Thou shalt hide them in the secret of Thy
face.' The light that streams from that countenance is the hiding-place
for a poor man. These other metaphors may refer, perhaps, the one to the
temple, and the other to the outstretched wings of the cherubim that
shadowed the Mercy-seat. And, if so, this metaphor carries us still more
near to the central blaze of the Shekinah, the glory that hovered above
the Mercy-seat, and glowed in the dark sanctuary, unseen but once a year
by one trembling high priest, who had to bear with him blood of
sacrifice, lest the sight should slay. The Psalmist says, into that
fierce light a man may go, and stand in it, bathed, hid, secure. 'Thou
shalt hide them in the secret of Thy face.'

I. Now, then, let us notice, first, this hiding-place.

The 'face' of God is so strongly figurative an expression that its
metaphorical character cannot but be obvious to the most cursory reader.
The very frankness, and, we may say, the grossness of the image, saves
it from all misconception, and as with other similar expressions in the
Old Testament, at once suggests its meaning. We read, for example, of
the 'arm,' the 'hand,' the 'finger' of God, and everybody feels that
these mean His power. We read of the 'eye' of God, and everybody knows
that that means His omniscience. We read of the 'ear' of God, and we all
understand that that holds forth the blessed thought that He hears and
answers the cry of such as be sorrowful. And, in like manner, the 'face'
of God is the apprehensible part of the divine nature which turns to
men, and by which He makes Himself known. It is roughly equivalent to
the other Old and New Testament expression, the 'name of the Lord,' the
manifested and revealed side of the divine nature. And that is the
hiding-place into which men may go.

We have the other expression also in Scripture, 'the light of Thy
countenance,' and that helps us to apprehend the Psalmist's meaning.
'The light of Thy face' is 'secret.' What a paradox! Can light conceal?
Look at the daily heavens--filled with blazing stars, all invisible till
the night falls. The effulgence of the face is such that they that stand
in it are lost and hid, like the lark in the blue sky. 'A glorious
privacy of light is Thine.' There is a wonderful metaphor in the New
Testament of a woman 'clothed with the sun,' and caught up into it from
her enemies to be safe there. And that is just an expansion of the
Psalmist's grand paradox, 'Thou shalt hide them in the secret of Thy
face.' Light conceals when the light is so bright as to dazzle. They who
are surrounded by God are lost in the glory, and safe in that seclusion,
'the secret of Thy face.'

A thought may be suggested, although it is somewhat of a digression from
the main purpose of my text, but it springs naturally out of this
paradox, and may just deserve a word. Revelation is real, but revelation
has its limits. That which is revealed is 'the face of God,' but we
read, 'no man can see My face.' After all revelation He remains hidden.
After all pouring forth of His beams He remains 'the God that dwelleth
in the thick darkness,' and the light which is inaccessible is also a
darkness that can be felt. Apprehension is possible; comprehension is
impossible. What we know of God is valid and true, but we never shall
know all the depths that lie in that which we do know of Him. His face
is 'the secret'; and though men may malign Him when they say, 'Verily,
Thou art a God that hidest Thyself, O God of Israel!' and He answers
them, 'I have not spoken in secret' in a dark 'place of the earth,' it
still remains true that revelation has its mysteries born of the
greatness of its effulgence, and that all which we know of God is 'dark
with excess of light.'

But that is aside from our main purpose. Let me rather remind you of how
the thought of the secret of God's face being the secure hiding-place of
them that love Him points to this truth--that that brightness of light
has a repellent power which keeps far away from all intermingling with
it everything that is evil. The old Greek mythologies tell us that the
radiant arrows of Apollo shot forth from his far-reaching bow, wounded
to death the monsters of the slime and unclean creatures that crawled
and revelled in darkness. And the myth has a great truth in it. The
light of God's face slays evil, of whatsoever kind it is; and just as
the unlovely, loathsome creatures that live in the dark and find
themselves at ease there writhe and wriggle in torment, and die when
their shelter is taken away and they are exposed to the light beating on
their soft bodies, so the light of God's face turned upon evil things
smites them into nothingness. Thus 'the secret of His countenance' is
the shelter of all that is good.

Nor need I remind you how, in another aspect of the phrase, the 'light
of His face,' is the expression for His favour and loving regard, and
how true it is that in that favour and loving regard is the impregnable
fortress into which, entering, any man is safe. I said that the
expression the 'face of the Lord' roughly corresponded to the other one,
'the name of the Lord,' inasmuch as both meant the revealed aspect of
the divine nature. You may remember how we read, 'The name of the Lord
is a strong tower into which the righteous runneth and is safe.' The
'light' of the face of the Lord is His favour and loving regard falling
upon men. And who can be harmed with that lambent light--like sunshine
upon water, or upon a glittering shield--playing around Him?

Only let us remember that for us 'the face of God' is Jesus Christ. He
is the 'arm' of the Lord; He is the 'name' of the Lord; He is the
'face.' All that we know of God we know through and in Him; all that we
see of God we see by the shining upon us of Him who is 'the eradiation
of His glory and the express image of His person.' So the open secret of
the 'face' of God is Jesus, the hiding-place of our souls.

II. Secondly, notice God's hidden ones.

My text carries us back, by that word 'them,' to the previous verse,
where we have a double description of those who are thus hidden in the
inaccessible light of His countenance. They are 'such as fear Thee,' and
'such as trust in Thee.' Now, that latter expression is congruous with
the metaphor of my text, in so far as the words on which we are now
engaged speak about a 'hiding-place,' and the word which is translated
'trust' literally means 'to flee to a refuge.' So they that flee to God
for refuge are those whom God hides in the 'secret of His face.' Let us
think of that for a moment.

I said, in the beginning of these remarks, that there was here an
allusion, possibly, to the Temple. All temples in ancient times were
asylums. Whosoever could flee to grasp the horns of the altar, or to
sit, veiled and suppliant, before the image of the god, was secure from
his foes, who could not pass within the limits of the Temple grounds, in
which strife and murder were not permissible. We too often flee to other
gods and other temples for our refuges. Ay! and when we get there we
find that the deity whom we have invoked is only a marble image that
sits deaf, dumb, motionless, whilst we cling to its unconscious skirts.
As one of the saddest of our modern cynics once said, looking up at that
lovely impersonation of Greek beauty, the Venus de Milo, 'Ah! she is
fair; but she has no arms,' so we may say of all false refuges to which
men betake themselves. The goddess is powerless to help, however
beautiful the presentment of her may have seemed to our eyes. The evils
from which we have fled to these false deities and shelterless
sanctuaries will pursue us across the threshold; and as Elijah did with
the priests of Baal upon Carmel, will slay us at the very foot of the
altar to which we have clung, and vexed with our vain prayers. There is
only one shrine where there is a sanctuary, and that is the shrine above
which shines 'the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ'; into the
brightness of which poor men may pass and therein may hide themselves.
God hides us, and His hiding is effectual, in the secret of the light
and splendour of His face.

I said, too, that there was an allusion, as there is in all the psalms
that deal with men as God's guests, to the ancient customs of
hospitality, by which a man who has once entered the tent of the chief,
and partaken of food there, is safe, not only from his pursuers, but
from his host himself, even though that host should be the
kinsman-avenger. The red-handed murderer, who has eaten the salt of the
man whose duty it otherwise would have been to slay him where he stood,
is safe from his vengeance. And thus they who cast themselves upon God
have nothing to fear. No other hand can pluck them from the sanctuary of
His tent. He Himself, having admitted them to share His hospitality,
cannot and will not lift a hand against them. We are safe _from_ God
only when we are safe _in_ God.

But remember the condition on which this security comes. 'Thou shalt
hide _them_ in the secret of Thy face.' Whom? Those that flee for refuge
to Thee. The act of simple faith is set forth there, by which a poor
man, with all his imperfections on his head, may yet venture to put his
foot across the boundary line that separates the outer darkness from the
beam of light that comes from God's face. 'Who among us shall dwell with
the devouring fire? Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?'
That question does not mean, as it is often taken to mean--What mortal
can endure the punishments of a future life? but, Who can venture to be
God's guests? and it is equivalent to the other interrogation, 'Who
shall ascend to the hill of the Lord, or who shall stand in His holy
place?' The answer is, If you go to Him for refuge, knowing your danger,
feeling your impurity, _you_ may walk amidst all that light softened
into lambent beauty, as those Hebrew children did in the furnace of
fire, being at ease there, and feeling it well with themselves, and
having nothing about them consumed except the bonds that bound them.

Remember that Jesus Christ is the Hiding-place, and that to flee to Him
for refuge is the condition of security, and all they who thus, from the
snares of life, from its miseries, disappointments, and burdens, from
the agitation of their own hearts, from the ebullition of their own
passions, from the stings of their own conscience, or from other of the
ills that flesh is heir to, make their hiding-place--by the simple act
of faith in Jesus Christ--in the light of God's face, are thereby safe
for evermore.

But the initial act of fleeing to the refuge must be continued by
abiding in the refuge. It is of no use to take shelter in the light
unless we abide in the light. It is of no use to go to the Temple for
sanctuary unless we continue in it for sacrifice and worship. We must
'walk in the light as God is in the light.' That is to say, the
condition of being hid in God is, first of all, to take refuge in Jesus
Christ, and then to abide in Him by continual communion. 'Your life is
hid with Christ in God.' Unless we have a hidden life, deep beneath, and
high above, and far beyond the life of sense, we have no right to think
that the shelter of the Face will be security for us. The very essence
of Christianity is the habitual communion of heart, mind, and will with
God in Christ. Do you live in the light, or have you only gone there to
escape what you are afraid of? Do you live in the light by the continual
direction of thought and heart to Him, cultivating the habit of daily
and hourly communion with Him amidst the distractions of necessary duty,
care, and changing circumstances?

But not only by communion, but also by conduct, must we keep in the
light. The fugitive found outside the city of refuge was fair game for
the avenger, and if he strayed beyond its bounds there was a sword in
his back before he knew where he was. Every Christian, by each sin,
whether it be acted or only thought, casts himself out of the light into
the darkness that rings it round, and out there he is a victim to the
beasts of prey that hunt in darkness. An eclipse of the sun is not
caused by any change in the sun, but by an opaque body, the offspring
and satellite of the earth, coming between the earth and sun. And so,
when Christian men lose the light of God's face, it is not because there
is any 'variableness or shadow of turning' in Him, but because between
Him and them has come the blackness--their own offspring--of their own
sin. You are not safe if you are outside the light of His countenance.
These are the conditions of security.

III. Lastly, note what the hidden ones find in the light.

This burst of confidence in my text comes from the Psalmist immediately
after plaintively pouring out his soul under the pressure of
afflictions. His experience may teach us the interpretation of his glad
assurance.

God will keep all real evil from us if we keep near Him; but He will not
keep the externals that men call evil from us. I do not know whether
there is such a thing as filtering any poisons or malaria by means of
light, but I am sure that the light of God filters our atmosphere for
us. Though it may leave the external form of evil it takes all the
poison out of it and turns it into a harmless minister for our good. The
arrows that are launched at us may be tipped with venom when they leave
the bow, but if they pass through the radiant envelope of divine
protection that surrounds us--and they must have passed through that if
they reach us--it cleanses all the venom from the points though it
leaves the sharpness there. The evil is not an evil if it has got our
length; and its having touched us shows that He who lets it pass into
the light where His children safely dwell, knows that it cannot harm
them.

But, again, we shall find if we live in continual communion with the
revealed Face of God, that we are elevated high above all the strife of
tongues and the noise of earth. We shall 'outsoar the shadow of the
night,' and be lifted to an elevation from which all the clamours of
earth will sound faint and poor, like the noises of the city to the
dwellers on the mountain peak. Nor do we find only security there, for
the word in the second clause of my text, 'Thou shalt _keep_ them
_secretly_,' is the same as is employed in the previous verse in
reference to the treasures which God _lays up_ for them that fear Him.
The poor men that trust in God, and the wealth which He has to lavish
upon them, are both hid, and they are hid in the same place. The
'goodness wrought before the sons of men' has not emptied the reservoir.
After all expenditure the massy ingots of gold in God's storehouse are
undiminished. The mercy still to come is greater than that already
received. 'To-morrow shall be as this day and much more abundant.' This
river broadens as we mount towards its source.

Brethren! the Face of God must be either our dearest joy or our greatest
dread. There comes a time when you and I must front it, and look into
His eyes. It is for us to settle whether at that day we shall 'call upon
the rocks and the hills to hide us' from it, or whether we shall say
with rapture, 'Thou hast made us most blessed with Thy countenance'!
Which is it to be? It must be one or other. When He says, 'Seek ye My
Face,' may our hearts answer, 'Thy Face, Lord, will I seek,' that when
we see it hereafter, shining as the sun in his strength, its light may
not be darkness to our impure and horror-struck eyes.




A THREEFOLD THOUGHT OF SIN AND FORGIVENESS


    'Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is
    covered. 2. Blessed is the man unto whom the Lord imputeth not
    iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no guile.'
    --PSALM xxxii. 1, 2.

This psalm, which has given healing to many a wounded conscience, comes
from the depths of a conscience which itself has been wounded and
healed. One must be very dull of hearing not to feel how it throbs with
emotion, and is, in fact, a gush of rapture from a heart experiencing in
its freshness the new joy of forgiveness. It matters very little who
wrote it. If we accept the superscription, which many of those who
usually reject these ancient Jewish notes do in the present case, the
psalm is David's, and it fits into some of the specific details of his
great sin and penitence. But that is of very small moment. Whoever wrote
it, he sings because he must.

The psalm begins with an exclamation, for the clause would be better
translated, 'Oh! the blessedness of the man.' Then note the remarkable
accumulation of clauses, all expressing substantially the same thing,
but expressing it with a difference. The Psalmist's heart is too full to
be emptied by one utterance. He turns his jewel, as it were, round and
round, and at each turn it reflects the light from a different angle.
There are three clauses in my text, each substantially having the same
meaning, but which yet present that substantially identical meaning with
different shades. And that is true both in regard to the three words
which are employed to describe the fact of transgression, and to the
three which are employed to describe the fact of forgiveness. It is
mainly to these, and the large lessons which lie in observing the shades
of significance in them, that I wish to turn now.

I. Note the solemn picture which is here drawn of various phases of sin.

There are three words employed--'transgression,' 'sin,' 'iniquity.' They
all mean the same thing, but they mean it with a different association
of ideas and suggestions of its foulness. Let me take them in order. The
word translated 'transgression' seems literally to signify separation,
or rending apart, or departure, and hence comes to express the notion of
apostasy and rebellion.

So, then, here is this thought; all sin is a going away. From what?
Rather the question should be--from _whom_? All sin is a departure from
God. And that is its deepest and darkest characteristic. And it is the
one that needs to be most urged, for it is the one that we are most apt
to forget. We are all ready enough to acknowledge faults; none of us
have any hesitation in saying that we have done wrong, and have gone
wrong. We are ready to recognise that we have transgressed the law; but
what about the Lawgiver? The personal element in every sin, great or
small, is that it is a voluntary rending of a union which exists, a
departure from God who is with us in the deepest recesses of our being,
unless we drag ourselves away from the support of His enclosing arm, and
from the illumination of His indwelling grace.

So, dear brethren! this was the first and the gravest aspect under which
the penitent and the forgiven man in my text thought of his past, that
in it, when he was wildly and eagerly rushing after the low and sensuous
gratification of his worst desires, he was rebelling against, and
wandering far away from, the ever-present Friend, the all-encircling
support and joy, the Lord, his life. You do not understand the gravity
of the most trivial wrong act when you think of it as a sin against the
order of Nature, or against the law written on your heart, or as the
breach of the constitution of your own nature, or as a crime against
your fellows. You have not got to the bottom of the blackness until you
see that it is flat rebellion against God Himself. This is the true
devilish element in all our transgression, and this element is in it
all. Oh! if once we do get the habit formed and continued until it
becomes almost instinctive and spontaneous, of looking at each action of
our lives in immediate and direct relation to God, there would come such
an apocalypse as would startle some of us into salutary dread, and make
us all feel that 'it is an evil and a bitter thing' (and the two
characteristics must always go together), 'to depart from the living
God.' The great type of all wrongdoers is in that figure of the Prodigal
Son, and the essence of his fault was, first, that he selfishly demanded
for his own his father's goods; and, second, that he went away into a
far country. Your sins have separated between you and God. And when you
do those little acts of selfish indulgence which you do twenty times a
day, without a prick of conscience, each of them, trivial as it is, like
some newly-hatched poisonous serpent, a finger-length long, has in it
the serpent nature, it is rebellion and separation from God.

Then another aspect of the same foul thing rises before the Psalmist's
mind. This evil which he has done, which I suppose was the sin in the
matter of Bathsheba, was not only rebellion against God, but it was,
according to this text, in the second clause, 'a sin,' by which is meant
literally _missing an aim_. So this word, in its pregnant meaning,
corresponds with the signification of the ordinary New Testament word
for sin, which also implies error, or missing that which ought to be the
goal of our lives. That is to say, whilst the former word regarded the
evil deed mainly in its relation to God, this word regards it mainly in
its relation to ourselves, and that which before Him is rebellion, the
assertion of my own individuality and my own will, and therefore in
separation from His will, is, considered in reference to myself, my
fatally missing the mark to which my whole energy and effort ought to be
directed. All sin, big or little, is a blunder. It never hits what it
aims at, and if it did, it is aiming at the wrong thing. So doubly, all
transgression is folly, and the true name for the doer is 'Thou fool!'
For every evil misses the mark which, regard being had to the man's
obvious destiny, he ought to aim at. 'Man's chief end is to glorify God
and to enjoy Him for ever'; and whosoever in all his successes fails to
realise that end is a failure through and through, in whatever smaller
matters he may seem to himself and to others to succeed. He only strikes
the target in the bull's eye who lets his arrows be deflected by no
gusts of passion, nor aimed wrong by any obliquity of vision; but with
firm hand and clear eye seeks and secures the absolute conformity of his
will to the Father's will, and makes God his aim and end in all things.
'Thou hast created us for Thyself, and only in Thee can we find rest.' O
brother! whatever be your aims and ends in life, take this for the
surest verity, that you have fatally misunderstood the purpose of your
being, and the object to which you should strain, if there is anything
except God, who is the supreme desire of your heart and the goal of your
life. All sin is missing the mark which God has set up for man.

Therefore let us press to the mark where hangs the prize which whoso
possesses succeeds, whatsoever other trophies may have escaped his
grasp.

But there is another aspect of this same thought, and that is that every
piece of evil misses its own shabby mark. 'A rogue is a round-about
fool.' No man ever gets, in doing wrong, the thing he did the wrong for,
or if he gets it, he gets something else along with it that takes all
the sweet taste out of it. The thief secures the booty, but he gets
penal servitude besides. Sin tempts us with glowing tales of the delight
to be found in drinking stolen waters and eating her bread in secret;
but sin lies by suppression of the truth, if not by suggestions of the
false, because she says never a word about the sickness and the headache
that come after the debauch, nor about the poison that we drink down
along with her sugared draughts. The paltering fiend keeps the word of
promise to the ear, and breaks it to the hope. All sin, great or little,
is a blunder, and missing of the mark.

And lastly, yet another aspect of the ugly thing rises before the
Psalmist's eye. In reference to God, evil is separation and rebellion;
in reference to myself, it is an error and missing of my true goal; and
in reference to the straight standard and law of duty, it is, according
to the last of the three words for sin in the text, 'iniquity,' or,
literally, _something twisted_ or distorted. It is thus brought into
contrast with the right line of the plain, straight path in which we
ought to walk. We have the same metaphor in our own language. We talk
about things being right and wrong, by which we mean, in the one case,
parallel with the rigid law of duty, and in the other case, 'wrung,' or
wavering, crooked and divergent from it. There is a standard as well as
a Judge, and we have not only to think of evil as being rebellion
against God and separation from Him, and as, for ourselves, issuing in
fatal missing of the mark, but also as being divergent from the one
manifest law to which we ought to be conformed. The path to God is a
right line; the shortest road from earth to Heaven is absolutely
straight. The Czar of Russia, when railways were introduced into that
country, was asked to determine the line between St. Petersburg and
Moscow. He took a ruler and drew a straight line across the map, and
said, 'There!' Our Autocrat has drawn a line as straight as the road
from earth to Heaven, and by the side of it are 'the crooked, wandering
ways in which we live.'

Take these three thoughts then--as for law, divergence; as for the aim
of my life, a fatal miss; as for God, my Friend and my Life, rebellion
and separation--and you have, if not the complete physiognomy of evil,
at least grave thoughts concerning it, which become all the graver when
we think that they are true about us and about our deeds.

II. And so let me ask you to look secondly at the blessed picture drawn
here of the removal of the sin.

There are three words here for forgiveness, each of which adds its quota
to the general thought. It is 'forgiven,' 'covered,' 'not imputed.' The
accumulation of synonyms not only sets forth various aspects of pardon,
but triumphantly celebrates the completeness and certainty of the gift.

As to the first, it means literally to lift and bear away a load or
burden. As to the second, it means, plainly enough, to cover over, as
one might do some foul thing, that it may no longer offend the eye or
smell rank to Heaven. Bees in their hives, when there is anything
corrupt and too large for them to remove, fling a covering of wax over
it, and hermetically seal it, and no foul odour comes from it. And so a
man's sin is covered over and ceases to be _in evidence_, as it were
before the divine Eye that sees all things. He Himself casts a merciful
veil over it and hides it from Himself. A similar idea, though with a
modification in metaphor, is included in that last word, the sin is not
reckoned. God does not write it down in His Great Book on the debit side
of the man's account. And these three things, the lifting up and
carrying away of the load, the covering over of the obscene and ugly
thing, the non-reckoning in the account of the evil deed; these three
things taken together do set forth before us the great and blessed truth
that a man's transgressions may become, in so far as the divine heart
and the divine dealings with him are concerned, as if nonexistent.

Men tell us that that is not possible and that it is immoral to preach a
doctrine of forgiveness. O dear brethren! there is no gospel to preach
that will touch a man's heart except the gospel that begins with
this--God bears away, covers over, does not reckon to a man, his
rebellions, his errors, his departures from the law of right. Sin _is_
capable of forgiveness, and, blessed be God! every sin He is ready to
forgive. I should be ashamed of myself to stand here, and not preach a
gospel of pardon. I know not anything else that will touch consciences
and draw hearts except this gospel, which I am trying in my poor way to
lay upon your hearts.

Notice how my text includes also a glance at the condition on our part
on which this absolute and utter annihilation of our wicked past is
possible. That last clause of my text, 'In whose spirit there is no
guile,' seems to me to refer to the frank sincerity of a confession,
which does not try to tell lies to God, and, attempting to deceive Him,
really deceives only the self-righteous sinner. Whosoever opens his
heart to God, makes a clean breast of it, and without equivocation or
self-deception or the palliations which self-love teaches, says, 'I have
played the fool and erred exceedingly,' to that man the Psalmist thinks
pardon is sure to come.

Now remember that the very heart and centre of that Jewish system was an
altar, and that on that altar was sacrificed the expiatory victim. I am
not going to insist upon any theory of an atonement, but I do want to
urge this, that Christianity is nothing, if it have not explained and
taken up into itself that which was symbolised in that old ritual. The
very first words from human lips which proclaimed Christ's advent to man
were, 'Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world,'
and amongst the last words which Christ spoke upon earth, in the way of
teaching His disciples, were these, 'This is My blood, shed for many for
the remission of sins.' The Cross of Christ explains my psalm, the Cross
of Christ answers the confidence of the Psalmist, which was fed upon the
shadow of the good things to come. He has died, the Just for the unjust,
that the sins which were laid upon Him might be taken away, covered, and
not reckoned to us.

Brethren! unless my sins are taken away by the Lamb of God they remain.
Unless they are laid upon Christ, they crush me. Unless they are covered
by His expiation, they lie there before the Throne of God, and cry for
punishment. Unless His blood has wiped out the record that is against
us, the black page stands for ever. And to you and me there will be said
one day, in a voice which we dare not dispute, 'Pay Me that thou owest!'
The blacker the sin the brighter the Christ. I would that I could lay
upon all your hearts this belief, 'the blood of Jesus Christ,' and
nothing else, 'cleanses from all sin!'

III. I will touch in a word only upon the last thought suggested by the
text, and that is the blessedness of this removal of sin.

As I said, my text is really an exclamation, a gush of rapture from a
heart that is tasting the fresh-drawn blessedness of pardon. And the
rest of the psalm is little more than an explanation of the various
aspects and phases of that blessedness. Let me just run over them in the
briefest possible manner.

If we receive this forgiveness through Jesus Christ and our faith in
