reticence, and there is no ground for the conclusion that then first
began to dawn upon a disappointed enthusiast the grim reality that His
work was not going to prosper, and that martyrdom was necessary. That
is a notion that has been frequently upheld of late years, but to me
it seems altogether incongruous with the facts of the case. And, if
John's Gospel is a true record, that theory is shivered against this
text, which represents Him at the very beginning of His career--the
time when, according to that other theory, He was full of the usual
buoyant and baseless anticipations of a reformer commencing His
course--as telling Nicodemus, 'Even so _must_ the Son of Man be lifted
up.' In like manner, in the previous chapter of this same Gospel, we
have the significant though enigmatical utterance: 'Destroy this
Temple, and in three days I will raise it up'; with the Evangelist's
authoritative comment: 'He spake of the Temple of His body.' So, from
the beginning of His career, the end was clear before Him.

And why _must_ He go to the Cross? Not merely, as the other
Evangelists put it, in order that 'it might be fulfilled which was
spoken of the prophets.' It was not that Jesus must die because the
prophets had said that Messiah should, but that the prophets had said
that Messiah should because Jesus must. There was a far deeper
necessity than the fulfilment of any prophetic utterance, even the
necessity which shaped that utterance. The work of Jesus Christ could
not be done unless He died. He could not be the Saviour of the world
unless He was the sacrifice for the sins of the world.

We cannot see all the grounds of that solemn imperative, but this we
can see, that it was because of the requirements of the divine
righteousness, and because of the necessities of sinful men. And so
Christ's was no martyr's death, who had to die as the penalty of the
faithful discharge of His duty. It was not the penalty that He paid
for doing His work, but it was the work itself. Not that gracious
life, nor 'the loveliness of perfect deeds,' nor His words of sweet
wisdom, nor His acts of transcendent power, equalled only by the pity
that moved the power, completed His task, but He 'came to give His
life a ransom for many.'

'Must' is a hard word. It may express an unwelcome necessity. Was this
necessity unwelcome? When He said, 'The Son of Man must be lifted up,'
was He shrinking, or reluctantly submitting? Ah, no! He _must_ die
because He _would_ save, and He _would_ save because He _did_ love.
His filial obedience to God coincided with His pity for men: and not
merely in obedience to the requirements of the divine righteousness,
but in compassion for the necessities of sinners, necessity was laid
upon Him.

Oh, brethren! nothing held Christ to the Cross but His own desire to
save us. Neither priests nor Romans carried Him thither. What fastened
Him to it was not the nails driven by rude hands. And the reason why
He did not, as the taunters bade Him do, come down from it, was
neither a physical nor a moral necessity unwelcome to Himself, but the
yielding of His own will to do all which was needed for man's
salvation.

This sacrifice was bound to the altar by the cords of love. We have
heard of martyrs who have refused to be tied to the stake, and have
kept themselves motionless in the centre of the fierce flames by the
force of their wills. Jesus Christ fastened Himself to the Cross and
died because He would.

And, oh! if we think of that sweet, serene life as having clear before
it from the very first steps that grim end, how infinitely it gains in
pathetic beauty and in heart-touchingness! What wonderful
self-abnegation! How he was at leisure from Himself, with a heart of
pity for every sorrow, and loins girt for all service, though during
all His life the Cross closed the vista! Think that human shrinking
was felt by Him, think that it was so held back that His purpose never
faltered, think that each of us may say, 'He _must_ die because He
_would_ save me'; and then ask, 'What shall I render to the Lord for
all His benefits toward me?'

II. In a second class of these utterances, we see Christ impelled by
filial obedience and the consciousness of His mission.

'Wist ye not that I must be about My Father's business?' That was a
strange utterance for a boy of twelve. It seems to negative the
supposition that what is called the 'Messianic consciousness' dawned
upon Jesus Christ first after His baptism and the descent of the
Spirit. But however that may be, it and the similar passages to which
I have already referred, bearing upon His discharge of His work prior
to His death, teach that the necessity was an inward necessity
springing from His consciousness of Sonship, and His recognition of
the work that He had to do. And so He is our great Example of
spontaneous obedience, which does violence to itself if it does not
obey. It was instinct that sent the boy into the Temple. Where should
a Son be but in His Father's house? How could He not be doing His
Father's business?

Thus He stands before us, the pattern for the only obedience that is
worth calling so, the obedience which would be pained and ill at ease
unless it were doing the work of God. Religion is meant to make it a
second nature, or, as I have ventured to call it, an instinct--a
spontaneous, uncalculating, irrepressible desire--to be in fellowship
with God, and to be doing His will. That is the meaning of our
Christianity. There is no obedience in reluctant obedience; forced
service is slavery, not service. Christianity is given for the
specific purpose that it may bring us so into touch with Jesus Christ
as that the mind which was in Him may be in us; and that we too may be
able to say, with a kind of wonder that people should have expected to
find us in any other place, or doing anything else, 'Wist ye not that
because I am a Son, _I_ must be about my Father's business?' As
certainly as the sunflower follows the sun, so certainly will a man
animated by the mind that was in Jesus Christ, like Him find his very
life's breath in doing the Father's will.

So then, brethren, what about our grudging service? What about our
reluctant obedience? What about the widespread mistake that religion
prohibits wished-for things and enforces unwelcome duties? If my
Christianity does not make me recoil from what it forbids, and spring
eagerly to what it commends, my Christianity is of very little use. If
when in the Temple we are like idle boys in school, always casting
glances at the clock and the door, and wishing ourselves outside, we
may just as well be out as in. Glad obedience is true obedience. Only
he who can say, 'Thy law is within my heart, and I do Thy will because
I love Thee, and cannot but do as Thou desirest,' has found the joy
possible to a Christian life. It is not 'harsh and crabbed,' as those
that look upon it from the outside may 'suppose,' but musical and full
of sweetness. There is nothing more blessed than when 'I choose'
covers exactly the same ground as 'I ought.' And when duty is delight,
delight will never become disgust, nor joy pass away.

III. We see, in yet another use of this great 'must,' Christ
anticipating His future triumph.

'Other sheep I have which are not of this fold; them also I must
bring, and there shall be one flock and one Shepherd.' Striking as
these words are in themselves, they are still more striking when we
notice their connection; for they follow immediately upon His
utterance about laying down His life for the sheep. So, then, this was
a work beyond the Cross, and whatever it was, it was to be done after
He had died.

I need not point out to you how far afield Christ's vision goes out
into the dim, waste places, where on the dark mountains the straying
sheep are torn and frightened and starving. I need not dwell upon how
far ahead in the future His glance travels, or how magnificent and how
rebuking to our petty narrowness this great word is. 'There shall be
one _flock_' (not fold); and they shall be one, not because they are
within the bounds of any visible 'fold,' but because they are gathered
round the one Shepherd, and in their common relation to Him are knit
together in unity.

But what sort of a Man is this who considers that His widest work is
to be done by Him after He is dead? 'Them also I _must_ bring.' Thou?
how? when? Surely such words as these, side by side with a clear
prevision of the death that was so soon to come, are either
meaningless or the utterance of an arrogance bordering on insanity, or
they anticipate what an Evangelist declares did take place--that the
Lord was 'taken up into heaven and sat at the right hand of God,'
whilst His servants 'went everywhere preaching the Word, the Lord also
working with them and confirming the Word' with the signs He wrought.

'Them also I must bring.' That is not merely a necessity rooted in the
nature of God and the wants of men. It is not merely a necessity
springing from Christ's filial obedience and sense of a mission; but
it is a 'must' of destiny, a 'must' which recognises the sure results
of His passion; a 'must' which implies the power of the Cross to be
the reconciliation of the world. And so for all pessimistic thoughts
to-day, or at any time, and when Christian men's hearts may be
trembling for the Ark of God--although, perhaps, there may be little
reason for the tremor--and in the face of all blatant antagonisms and
of proud Goliaths despising the 'foolishness of preaching,' we fall
back upon Christ's great 'must.' It is written in the councils of
Heaven more unchangeably than the heavens; it is guaranteed by the
power of the Cross; it is certain, by the eternal life of the
crucified Saviour, that He will one day be the King of humanity, and
_must_ bring His wandering sheep to couch in peace, one flock round
one Shepherd.

IV. Lastly, we have Christ applying the greatest principle to the
smallest duty.

'Zaccheus! make haste and come down; to-day I _must_ abide in thy
house.' Why must He? Because Zaccheus was to be saved, and was worth
saving. What was the 'must'? To stop for an hour or two on His road to
the Cross. So He teaches us that in a life penetrated by the thought
of the divine will, which we gladly obey, there are no things too
great, and none too trivial, to be brought under the dominion of that
law, and to be regulated by that divine necessity. Obedience is
obedience, whether in large things or in small. There is no scale of
magnitude applicable to the distinction between God's will and that
which is not God's will. Gravitation rules the motes that dance in the
sunshine as well as the mass of Jupiter. A triangle with its apex in
the sun, and its base beyond the solar system, has the same properties
and comes under the same laws as one that a schoolboy scrawls upon his
slate. God's truth is not too great to rule the smallest duties. The
star in the East was a guide to the humble house at Bethlehem, and
there are starry truths high in the heavens that avail for our
guidance in the smallest acts of life.

So, brethren, bring your doings under that all-embracing law of
duty--duty, which is the heathen expression for the will of God. There
are great regions of life in which lower necessities have play.
Circumstances, our past, bias and temper, relationship, friendship,
civic duty, and the like--all these bring their necessities; but let
us think of them all as being, what indeed they are, manifestations to
us of the will of our Father. There are great tracts of life in which
either of two courses may be right, and we are left to the decision of
choice rather than of duty; but high above all these, let us see
towering that divine necessity. It is a daily struggle to bring 'I
will' to coincide with 'I ought'; and there is only one adequate and
always powerful way of securing that coincidence, and that is to keep
close to Jesus Christ and to drink in His spirit. Then, when duty and
delight are conterminous, 'the rough places will be plain, and the
crooked things straight, and every mountain shall be brought low, and
every valley shall be exalted,' and life will be blessed, and service
will be freedom. Joy and liberty and power and peace will fill our
hearts when this is the law of our being; 'All that the Lord hath
spoken, that _must_ I do.'




THE LAKE AND THE RIVER

'God so loved the world, that He gave His only begotten Son, that
whosoever believeth in Him should not perish, but have everlasting
life.'--JOHN iii. 16.

I venture to say that my text shows us a lake, a river, a pitcher, and
a draught. 'God so loved the world'--that is the lake. A lake makes a
river for itself--'God so loved the world that He _gave_ His... Son.'
But the river does not quench any one's thirst unless he has something
to lift the water with: 'God so loved the world that He gave His...
Son, that whosoever _believeth_ on Him.' Last comes the draught:
'shall not perish, but have _everlasting life._'

I. The great lake, God's love.

Before Jesus Christ came into this world no one ever dreamt of saying
'God _loves_.' Some of the Old Testament psalmists had glimpses of
that truth and came pretty near expressing it. But among all the 'gods
many and lords many,' there were lustful gods and beautiful gods, and
idle gods, and fighting gods and peaceful gods: but not one of whom
worshippers said, 'He loves.' Once it was a new and almost incredible
message, but we have grown accustomed to it, and it is not strange any
more to us. But if we would try to think of what it means, the whole
truth would flash up into fresh newness, and all the miseries and
sorrows and perplexities of our lives would drift away down the wind,
and we should be no more troubled with them. 'God loves' is the
greatest thing that can be said by lips.

'God ... loved the world.' Now when we speak of loving a number of
individuals--the broader the stream, the shallower it is, is it not?
The most intense patriot in England does not love her one
ten-thousandth part as well as he loves his own little girl. When we
think or feel anything about a great multitude of people, it is like
looking at a forest. We do not see the trees, we see the whole wood.
But that is not how God loves the world. Suppose I said that I loved
the people in India, I should not mean by that that I had any feeling
about any individual soul of all those dusky millions, but only that I
massed them all together; or made what people call a generalisation of
them. But that is not the way in which God loves. He loves all because
He loves each. And when we say, 'God so loved the world,' we have to
break up the mass into its atoms, and to think of each atom as being
an object of His love. We all stand out in God's love just as we
should do to one another's eyes, if we were on the top of a
mountain-ridge with a clear sunset sky behind us. Each little black
dot of the long procession would be separately visible. And we all
stand out like that, every man of us isolated, and getting as much of
the love of God as if there was not another creature in the whole
universe but God and ourselves. Have you ever realised that when we
say, 'He loved the world,' that really means, as far as each of us is
concerned, He loves _me_? And just as the whole beams of the sun come
pouring down into every eye of the crowd that is looking up to it, so
the whole love of God pours down, not upon a multitude, an
abstraction, a community, but upon every single soul that makes up
that community. He loves us all because He loves us each. We shall
never get all the good of that thought until we translate it, and lay
it upon our hearts. It is all very well to say, 'Ah yes! God is love,'
and it is all very well to say He loves 'the world.' But I will tell
you what is a great deal better--to say--what Paul said--'Who loved
_me_ and gave Himself for _me_.'

Now, there is one other suggestion that I would make to you before I
go on, and that is that all through the New Testament, but especially
in John's Gospel, 'the world' does not only mean men, but _sinful_
men, men separated from God. And the great and blessed truth taught
here is that, however I may drag myself away from God, I cannot drive
Him away from me, and that however little I may care for Him, or love
Him, or think about Him, it does not make one hairs-breadth of
difference as to the fact that He loves me. I know, of course, that if
a man does not love Him back again, God's love has to take shapes that
it would not otherwise take, which may be extremely inconvenient for
the man. But though the shape may alter, _must_ alter, the fact
remains; and every sinful soul on the earth, including Judas
Iscariot--who is said to head the list of crimes--has God's love
resting upon him.

II. The river.

Now, to go back to my metaphor, the lake makes a river. 'God so loved
the world that He gave His only begotten Son.'

So then, it was not Christ's death that turned God from hating and
being angry, but it was God's love that appointed Christ's death. If
you will only remember that, a great many of the shallow and popular
objections to the great doctrine of the Atonement disappear at once.
'God so loved ... that He gave.' But some people say that when we
preach that Jesus Christ died for our sins, that God's wrath might not
fall upon men, our teaching is immoral, because it means 'Christ came,
and so God loved.' It is the other way about, friend. 'God so loved
... that He gave.'

But now let me carry you back to the Old Testament. Do you remember
the story of the father taking his boy who carried the bundle of wood
and the fire, and tramping over the mountains till they reached the
place where the sacrifice was to be offered? Do you remember the boy's
question that brings tears quickly to the reader's eyes: 'Here is the
wood, and here is the fire, where is the lamb'? Do you not think it
would be hard for the father to steady his voice and say, 'My son, God
will provide the lamb'? And do you remember the end of that story?
'The Angel of the Lord said unto Abraham, Because thou hast done this
thing, and hast not _withheld_ thy son, _thine only son_, from Me,
therefore blessing I will bless thee,' etc. Remember that one of the
Apostles said, using the very same word that is used in Genesis as to
Abraham's giving up his son to God, 'He _spared not_ His own Son, but
delivered Him up to the death for us all.' Does not that point to a
mysterious parallel? Somehow or other--we have no right to attempt to
say how--somehow or other, God not only _sent_ His Son, as it is said
in the next verse to my text, but far more tenderly, wonderfully,
pathetically, God _gave_--gave up His Son, and the sacrifice was
enhanced, because it was His only begotten Son.

Ah! dear brethren, do not let us be afraid of following out all that
is included in that great word, 'God ... _loved_ the world.' For there
is no love which does not delight in giving, and there is no love that
does not delight in depriving itself, in some fashion, of what it
gives. And I, for my part, believe that Paul's words are to be taken
in all their blessed depth and wonderfulness of meaning when he says,
'He gave up'--as well as gave--'Him to the death for us all.'

And now, do you not think that we are able in some measure to estimate
the greatness of that little word 'so'? 'God _so_ loved'--_so_ deeply,
so holily, _so_ perfectly--that He 'gave His only begotten Son'; and
the gift of that Son is, as it were, the river by which the love of
God comes to every soul in the world.

Now there are a great many people who would like to put the middle
part of this great text of ours into a parenthesis. They say that we
should bring the first words and the last words of this text together,
and never mind all that lies between. People who do not like the
doctrine of the Cross would say, 'God so loved the world that He
gave... everlasting life'; and there an end. 'If there is a God, and
if He loves the world, why cannot He save the world without more ado?
There is no need for these interposed clauses. God so loved the world
that everybody will go to heaven'--that is the gospel of a great many
of you; and it is the gospel of a great many wise and learned people.
But it is not John's Gospel, and it is not Christ's Gospel. The
beginning and the end of the text cannot be buckled up together in
that rough-and-ready fashion. They have to be linked by a chain; and
there are two links in the chain: God forges the one, and we have to
forge the other. 'God so loved the world that He gave'--then He has
done His work. 'That whosoever believeth'--that is your work. And it
is in vain that God forges _His_ link, unless you will forge _yours_
and link it up to His. 'God so loved the world,' that is step number
one in the process; 'that He gave,' that is step number two; and then
there comes another 'that'--'that whosoever believeth,' that is step
number three; and they are all needed before you come to number four,
which is the landing-place and not a step--'should not perish, but
have everlasting life.'

III. The pitcher.

I come to what I called the pitcher, with which we draw the water for
our own use--'that whosoever believeth.' You perhaps say, 'Yes, I
believe. I accept every word of the Gospel, I quite believe that Jesus
Christ died, as a matter of history; and I quite believe that He died
for men's sins.' And what then? Is that what Jesus Christ meant by
believing? To believe _about_ Him is not to believe _on_ Him; and
unless you believe on Him you will get no good out of Him. There is
the lake, and the river must flow past the shanties in the clearing in
the forest, if the men there are to drink. But it may flow past their
doors, as broad as the Mississippi, and as deep as the ocean; but they
will perish with thirst, unless they dip in their hands, like Gideon's
men, and carry the water to their own lips. Dear friend, what you have
to do--and your soul's salvation, and your peace and joy and nobleness
in this life and in the next depend absolutely upon it--is simply to
trust in Jesus Christ and His death for your sins.

I sometimes wish we had never heard that word 'faith.' For as soon as
we begin to talk about 'faith,' people begin to think that we are away
up in some theological region far above everyday life. Suppose we try
to bring it down a little nearer to our businesses and bosoms, and
instead of using a word that is kept sacred for employment in
religious matters, and saying 'faith,' we say 'trust.' That is what
you give to your wives and husbands, is it not? And that is exactly
what you have to give to Jesus Christ, simply to lay hold of Him as a
man lays hold of the heart that loves him, and leans his whole weight
upon it. Lean hard on Him, hang on Him, or, to take the other metaphor
that is one of the Old Testament words for trust, 'flee for refuge' to
Him. Fancy a man with the avenger of blood at his back, and the point
of the pursuer's spear almost pricking his spine--don't you think he
would make for the City of Refuge with some speed? That is what you
have to do. He that believeth, and by trust lays hold of the Hand that
holds him up, will never fall; and he that does not lay hold of that
Hand will never stand, to say nothing of rising. And so by these two
links God's love of the world is connected with the salvation of the
world.

IV. The draught.

Finally, we have here the draught of living water. Did you ever think
why our text puts 'should not perish' first? Is it not because, unless
we put our trust in Him, we shall certainly perish, and because,
therefore, that certainty of perishing must be averted before we can
have 'everlasting life'?

Now I am not going to enlarge on these two solemn expressions,
'perishing' and 'everlasting life.' I only say this: men do not need
to wait until they die before they 'perish.' There are men and women
here now who are dead--dead while they live, and when they come to
die, the perishing, which is condemnation and ruin, will only be the
making visible, in another condition of life, of what is the fact
to-day. Dear brethren, you do not need to die in order to perish in
your sins, and, blessed be God, you can have everlasting life before
you die. You can have it now, and there is only one way to have it,
and that is to lay hold of Him who is the Life. And when you have
Jesus Christ in your heart, whom you will be sure to have if you trust
Him, then you will have life--life eternal, here and now, and death
will only make manifest the eternal life which you had while you were
alive here, and will perfect it in fashions that we do not yet know
anything about.

Only remember, as I have been trying to show you, the order that runs
through this text. Remember the order of these last words, and that we
must first of all be delivered from eternal and utter death, before we
can be invested with the eternal and absolute life.

Now, dear brethren, I dare say I have never spoken to the great
majority of you before; it is quite possible I may never speak to any
of you again. I have asked God to help me to speak so as that souls
should be drawn to the Saviour. And I beseech you now, as my last
word, that you would listen, not to me, but to Him. For it is He that
says to us, 'God so loved the world, that He gave His Son, that
whosoever'--'whosoever,' a blank cheque, like the M. or N. of the
Prayer-book, or the A. B. of a schedule; you can put your own name in
it--'that whosoever believeth on Him shall not perish, but
have'--here, now--'everlasting life.'




THE WEARIED CHRIST

'Jesus therefore, being wearied with His journey, sat thus on the
well.... He said unto them, I have meat to eat that ye know not
of.'--JOHN iv. 6,32.

Two pictures result from these two verses, each striking in itself,
and gaining additional emphasis by the contrast. It was during a long
hot day's march that the tired band of pedestrians turned into the
fertile valley. There, whilst the disciples went into the little
hill-village to purchase, if they could, some food from the despised
inhabitants, Jesus, apparently too exhausted to accompany them, 'sat
_thus_ on the well.' That little word _thus_ seems to have a force
difficult to reproduce in English. It is apparently intended to
enhance the idea of utter weariness, either because the word 'wearied'
is in thought to be supplied, 'sat, being thus wearied, on the well';
or because it conveys the notion which might be expressed by our 'just
as He was'; as a tired man flings Himself down anywhere and anyhow,
without any kind of preparation beforehand, and not much caring where
it is that he rests.

Thus, utterly worn out, Jesus Christ sits on the well, whilst the
western sun lengthens out the shadows on the plain. The disciples come
back, and what a change they find. Hunger gone, exhaustion ended,
fresh vigour in their wearied Master. What had made the difference?
The woman's repentance and joy. And He unveils the secret of His
reinvigoration when He says, 'I have meat to eat that ye know not
of'--the hidden manna. 'My meat is to do the will of Him that sent Me,
and to finish His work.'

Now, I think if we take just three points of view, we shall gain the
lessons of this remarkable contrast. Note, then, the wearied Christ;
the devoted Christ; the reinvigorated Christ.

I. The wearied Christ.

How precious it is to us that this Gospel, which has the loftiest
things to say about the manifest divinity of our Lord, and the glory
that dwelt in Him, is always careful to emphasise also the manifest
limitations and weaknesses of the Manhood. John never forgets either
term of his great sentence in which all the gospel is condensed, 'the
Word became flesh.' Ever he shows us 'the Word'; ever 'the flesh.'
Thus it is he only who records the saying on the Cross, 'I thirst.' It
is he who tells us how Jesus Christ, not merely for the sake of
getting a convenient opening of a conversation, or to conciliate
prejudices, but because He needed what He asked, said to the woman of
Samaria, 'Give Me to drink.' So the weariness of the Master stands
forth for us as pathetic proof that it was no shadowy investiture with
an apparent Manhood to which He stooped, but a real participation in
our limitations and weaknesses, so that work to Him was fatigue, even
though in Him dwelt the manifest glory of that divine nature which
'fainteth not, neither is weary.'

Not only does this pathetic incident teach us for our firmer faith,
and more sympathetic and closer apprehension, the reality of the
Manhood of Jesus Christ, but it supplies likewise some imperfect
measure of His love, and reveals to us one condition of His power. Ah!
if He had not Himself known weariness He never could have said, 'Come
unto Me, all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will give you
rest.' It was because Himself 'took our infirmities,' and amongst
these the weakness of tired muscles and exhausted frame, that 'He
giveth power to the faint, and to them that have no might He
increaseth strength.' The Creator must have no share in the
infirmities of the creature. It must be His unwearied power that calls
them all by their names; and because He is great in might 'not one' of
the creatures of His hand can 'fail.' But the Redeemer must
participate in that from which He redeems; and the condition of His
strength being 'made perfect in our weakness' is that our weakness
shall have cast a shadow upon the glory of His strength. The measure
of His love is seen in that, long before Calvary, He entered into the
humiliation and sufferings and sorrows of humanity; a condition of His
power is seen in that, forasmuch as the 'children were partakers of
flesh and blood, He also Himself likewise took part of the same,' not
only that 'through death He might deliver' from death, but that in
life He might redeem from the ills and sorrows of life.

Nor does that exhausted Figure, reclining on Jacob's Well, preach to
us only what _He_ was. It proclaims to us likewise what _we_ should
be. For if His work was carried on to the edge of His capacity, and if
He shrank not from service because it involved toil, what about the
professing followers of Jesus Christ, who think that they are exempted
from any form of service because they can plead that it will weary
them? What about those who say that they tread in His footsteps, and
have never known what it was to yield up one comfort, one moment of
leisure, one thrill of enjoyment, or to encounter one sacrifice, one
act of self-denial, one aching of weariness for the sake of the Lord
who bore all for them? The wearied Christ proclaims His manhood,
proclaims His divinity and His love, and rebukes us who consent to
'walk in the way of His commandments' only on condition that it can be
done without dust or heat; and who are ready to run the race that is
set before us, only if we can come to the goal without perspiration or
turning a hair. 'Jesus, being wearied with His journey, sat thus on
the well.'

II. Still further, notice here the devoted Christ.

It is not often that He lets us have a glimpse into the innermost
chambers of His heart, in so far as the impelling motives of His
course are concerned. But here He lays them bare. 'My meat is to do
the will of Him that sent Me, and to finish His work.'

Now, it is no mere piece of grammatical pedantry when I ask you to
notice that the language of the original is so constructed as to give
prominence to the idea that the aim of Christ's life was the doing of
the Father's will; and that it is the aim rather than the actual
performance and realisation of the aim which is pointed at by our
Lord. The words would be literally rendered 'My meat is _that I may
do_ the will of Him that sent Me and finish His work'--that is to say,
the very nourishment and refreshment of Christ was found in making the
accomplishment of the Father's commandment His ever-impelling motive,
His ever-pursued goal. The expression carries us into the inmost heart
of Jesus, dealing, as it does, with the one all-pervading motive
rather than with the resulting actions, fair and holy as these were.

Brethren, the secret of our lives, if they are at all to be worthy and
noble, must be the same--the recognition, not only as they say now,
that we have a mission, but that there _is_ a Sender; which is a
wholly different view of our position, and that He who sends is the
loving Father, who has spoken to us in that dear Son, who Himself made
it His aim thus to obey, in order that it might be possible for us to
re-echo His voice, and to repeat His aim. The recognition of the
Sender, the absolute submission of our wills to His, must run through
all the life. You may do your daily work, whatever it be, with this
for its motto, 'the will of the Lord be done'; and they who thus can
look at their trade, or profession, and see the trivialities and
monotonies of their daily occupations, in the transfiguring light of
that great thought, will never need to complain that life is small,
ignoble, wearisome, insignificant. As with pebbles in some clear brook
with the sunshine on it, the water in which they are sunk glorifies
and magnifies them. If you lift them out, they are but bits of dull
stone; lying beneath the sunlit ripples they are jewels. Plunge the
prose of your life, and all its trivialities, into that great stream,
and it will magnify and glorify the smallest and the homeliest.
Absolute submission to the divine will, and the ever-present thrilling
consciousness of doing it, were the secret of Christ's life, and ought
to be the secret of ours.

Note the distinction between doing the will and perfecting the work.
That implies that Jesus Christ, like us, reached forward, in each
successive act of obedience to the successive manifestations of the
Father's will, to something still undone. The work will never be
perfected or finished except on condition of continual fulfilment,
moment by moment, of the separate behests of that divine will. For the
Lord, as for His servants, this was the manner of obedience, that He
'pressed towards the mark,' and by individual acts of conformity
secured that at last the whole 'work' should have been so completely
accomplished that He might be able to say upon the Cross, 'It is
finished.' If we have any right to call ourselves His, we too have
thus to live.

III. Lastly, notice the reinvigorated Christ.

I have already pointed out the lovely contrast between the two
pictures, the beginning and the end of this incident; so I need not
dwell upon that. The disciples wondered when they found that Christ
desired and needed none of the homely sustenance that they had brought
to Him. And when He answered their sympathy rather than their
curiosity--for they did not ask Him any questions, but they said to
Him, 'Master, eat'--with 'I have meat to eat that ye know not of,'
they, in their blind, blundering fashion, could only imagine that some
one had brought Him something. So they gave occasion for the great
words upon which we have been touching.

Notice, however, that Christ here sets forth the lofty aim at
conformity to the divine will and fulfilment of the divine Work as
being the meat of the soul. It is the true food for us all. The spirit
which feeds upon such food will grow and be nourished. And the soul
which feeds upon its own will and fancies, and not upon the plain
brown bread of obedience, which is wholesome, though it be often
bitter, will feed upon ashes, which will grate upon the teeth and hurt
the palate. Such a soul will be like those wretched infants that are
discovered sometimes at 'baby-farms,' starved and stunted, and not
grown to half their right size. If you would have your spirits strong,
robust, well nourished, live by obedience, and let the will of God be
the food of your souls, and all will be well.

Souls thus fed can do without a good deal that others need. Why,
enthusiasm for anything lifts a man above physical necessities and
lower desires, even in its poorest forms. A regiment of soldiers
making a forced march, or an athlete trying to break the record, will
tramp, tramp on, not needing food, or rest, or sleep, until they have
achieved their purpose, poor and ignoble though it may be. In all
regions of life, enthusiasm and lofty aims make the soul lord of the
body and of the world.

And in the Christian life we shall be thus lords, exactly in
proportion to the depth and earnestness of our desires to do the will
of God. They who thus are fed can afford 'to scorn delights and live
laborious days.' They who thus are fed can afford to do with plain
living, if there be high impulses as well as high thinking. And sure I
am that nothing is more certain to stamp out the enthusiasm of
obedience which ought to mark the Christian life than the luxurious
fashion of living which is getting so common to-day amongst professing
Christians.

It is not in vain that we read the old story about the Jewish boys
whose faces were radiant and whose flesh was firmer when they were fed
on pulse and water than on all the wine and dainties of the Babylonish
court. 'Set a knife to thy throat if thou be a man given to appetite,'
and let us remember that the less we use, and the less we feel that we
need, of outward goods, the nearer do we approach to the condition in
which holy desires and lofty aims will visit our spirits.

I commend to you, brethren, the story of our text, in its most literal
application, as well as in the loftier spiritual lessons that may be
drawn from it. To be near Christ, and to desire to live for Him,
delivers us from dependence upon earthly things; and in those who thus
do live the old word shall be fulfilled, 'Better is a little that a
righteous man hath, than the abundance of many wicked.'




'GIVE ME TO DRINK'

'... Jesus saith unto her, Give Me to drink.... Jesus saith unto her,
I that speak unto thee am He.'--JOHN iv. 7, 26.

This Evangelist very significantly sets side by side our Lord's
conversations with Nicodemus and with the woman of Samaria. The
persons are very different: the one a learned Rabbi of reputation,
influence, and large theological knowledge of the then fashionable
kind; the other an alien woman, poor--for she had to do this menial
task of water-drawing in the heat of the day--and of questionable
character.

The diversity of persons necessitates great differences in the form of
our Lord's address to each; but the resemblances are as striking as
the divergencies. In both we have His method of gradually unveiling
the truth to a susceptible soul, beginning with symbol and a hint,
gradually enlarging the hint and translating the symbol; and finally
unveiling Himself as the Giver and the Gift. There is another
resemblance; in both the characteristic gift is that of the Spirit of
Life, and, perhaps, in both the symbol is the same. For we read in one
of 'water and the Spirit'; and in the other of the fountain within,
springing into everlasting life. However that may be, the process of
teaching is all but identical in substance in both cases, though in
form so various.

The words of our Lord which I have taken for our text now are His
first and last utterance in this conversation. What a gulf lies
between! They are linked together by the intervening sayings, and
constitute with these a great ladder, of which the foot is fast on
earth, and the top fixed in heaven. On the one hand, He owns the
lowest necessities; on the other, He makes the highest claims. Let us
ponder on this remarkable juxtaposition, and try to gather the lessons
that are plain in it.

I. First, then, I think we see here the mystery of the dependent
Christ.

'Give Me to drink': 'I am He.' Try to see the thing for a moment with
the woman's eyes. She comes down from her little village, up amongst
the cliffs on the hillside, across the narrow, hot valley, beneath the
sweltering sunshine reflected from the bounding mountains, and she
finds, in the midst of the lush vegetation round the ancient well, a
solitary, weary Jew, travel-worn, evidently exhausted--for His
disciples had gone away to buy food, and He was too wearied to go with
them--looking into the well, but having no dipper or vessel by which
to get any of its cool treasure. We lose a great deal of the meaning
of Christ's request if we suppose that it was merely a way of getting
into conversation with the woman, a 'breaking of the ice.' It was a
great deal more than that. It was the utterance of a felt and painful
necessity, which He Himself could not supply without a breach of what
He conceived to be His filial dependence. He could have brought water
out of the well. He did not need to depend upon the pitcher that the
disciples had perhaps unthinkingly carried away with them when they
went to buy bread. He did not need to ask the woman to give, but He
chose to do so. We lose much if we do not see in this incident far
more than the woman saw, but we lose still more if we do not see what
she did see. And the words which the Master spoke to her are no mere
way of introducing a conversation on religious themes; but He asked
for a draught which He needed, and which He had no other way of
getting.

So, then, here stands, pathetically set forth before us, our Lord's
true participation in two of the distinguishing characteristics of our
weak humanity--subjection to physical necessities and dependence on
kindly help. We find Him weary, hungry, thirsty, sometimes slumbering.
And all these instances are documents and proofs for us that He was a
true man like ourselves, and that, like ourselves, He depended on 'the
woman that ministered to Him' for the supply of His necessities, and
so knew the limitations of our social and else helpless humanity.

But then a wearied and thirsty man is nothing of much importance. But
here is a Man who _humbled Himself_ to be weary and to thirst. The
keynote of this Gospel, the one thought which unlocks all its
treasures, and to the elucidation of which, in all its aspects, the
whole book is devoted, is, 'The Word was made flesh.' Only when you
let in the light of the last utterance of our text, 'I that speak unto
thee am He,' do we understand the pathos, the sublimity, the depth and
blessedness of meaning which lie in the first one, 'Give Me to drink.'
When we see that He bowed Himself, and willingly stretched out His
hands for the fetters, we come to understand the significance of these
traces of His manhood. The woman says, with wonder, 'How is it that
Thou, being a Jew, askest drink of me?' and that was wonderful. But,
as He hints to her, if she had known more clearly who this Person was,
that seemed to be a Jew, a deeper wonder would have crept over her
spirit. The wonder is that the Eternal Word should need the water of
the well, and should ask it of a poor human creature.

And why this humiliation? He could, as I have said, have wrought a
miracle. He that fed five thousand, He that had turned water into wine
at the rustic marriage-feast, would have had no difficulty in
quenching His thirst if he had chosen to use His miraculous power
therefore. But He here shows us that the true filial spirit will rather
die than cast off its dependence on the Father, and the same motive
which led Him to reject the temptation in the wilderness, and to
answer with sublime confidence, 'Man doth not live by bread alone, but
by every word from the mouth of God,' forbids Him here to use other
