nobler type of religion than the one that came after it, into which
Jesus Christ was born. When devotion cools it crusts; and the crust
is superstition and formalism and punctilious attention to the
proprieties of worship and casuistry, instead of joyful obedience to
a law, and abstinence from, instead of sanctification of, earthly
delights and supplies.

So, protesting against all that, and showing the more excellent way,
and hallowing the way because He trod it, 'the Son of man came
eating and drinking.' Hence-forward every table may be a communion
table, and every meal may be a sacrament, eaten in obedience to His
dying injunction: 'This do in remembrance of Me.' If we can feel
that Christ sits with us at the feast, the feast will be pure and
good. If it is of such a sort as that we dare not fancy Him keeping
us company there, it is no place for us. Wherever Jesus Christ went
the consecration of His presence lingers still; whatever Jesus
Christ did His servants may do, if in the same spirit and in the
same manner.

He hallowed infancy when He lay an infant in His mother's arms; He
hallowed childhood when, as a boy, He was obedient to His parents;
He hallowed youth during all those years of quiet seclusion and
unnoticed service in Nazareth; He hallowed every part of human life
and experience by bearing it. Love is consecrated because He loved;
tears are sacred because He wept; life is worship, or may be made
so, because He passed through it; and death itself is ennobled and
sanctified because He has died.

Only let us remember that, if we are to exercise this blessed
hallowing of common things, of which He has set us the example, we must
use them as He did; that is, in such sort as that our communion with
God shall not be broken thereby, and that nothing in them shall darken
the vision and clip the wings of the aspiring and heavenward-gazing
spirit. Brethren! the tendency of this day--and one rejoices, in many
respects, that it is so--is to revolt against the extreme of narrowness
in the past that prescribed and proscribed a great many arbitrary and
unnecessary abstinences and practices as the sign of a Christian
profession. But whilst I would yield to no man in my joyful application
of the principle that underlies that great fact that 'He came eating
and drinking,' I do wish at this point to put in a _caveat_ which
perhaps may not be so welcome to some of you as the line of thought
that I have been pursuing. It is this: it is an error to quote
Christ's example as a cover for luxury and excess, and grasping at
material enjoyments which are not innocent in themselves, or are mixed
up with much that is not innocent. There is many a table spread by
so-called Christian people where Jesus Christ will not sit. Many a
man darkens his spirit, enfeebles his best part, blinds himself to the
things beyond, by reason of his taking the liberty, as he says, which
Christianity, broadly and generously interpreted, gives, of
participating in all outward delights. I have said that asceticism is
not the highest, but it is sometimes necessary. It is better to enjoy
and to subdue than to abstain and to suppress, but abstinence and
suppression are often essential to faithfulness and noble living. If
I find that my enjoyment of innocent things harms me, or is tending to
stimulate cravings beyond my control; or if I find that abstinence from
innocent things increases my power to help a brother, and to fight
against a desolating sin; or if things good and innocent in
themselves, and in some respects desirable and admirable, like the
theatre, for instance, are irretrievably intertwisted with evil
things, then Christ's example is no plea for our sharing in such. It
is better for us to cut off the offending hand, and so, though
maimed, to enter into life, than to keep two hands and go into the
darkness of death. Jesus Christ 'came eating and drinking,' and
therefore the highest and the best thing is that Christian people
should innocently, and with due control, and always keeping
themselves in touch with God, enjoy all outward blessings, only
subject to this law, 'whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever we do,
to do all to the glory of God,' and remembering this warning, 'He
that soweth to the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption.'

II. Now, secondly, notice the enemies' witness that Christ is the
Friend of outcasts.

As I said about the other charge, so I say of this, the facts were
facts, the inferences were errors. The slanderers saw, as nobody
could help seeing, that there was a strange kind of mutual
attraction between Jesus and publicans and sinners; that harlots as
well as little children seemed to be drawn to Him; and that He
obviously delighted in the company of those at whose presence,
partly from pride, partly from national enmity, partly from
heartless self-righteousness, Pharisaism gathered its dainty skirts
around itself in abhorrence, lest a speck should fall upon their
purity. That being the fact, low natures, who always misunderstand
lofty ones, because they can only believe in motives as low as their
own, said of Jesus, 'Ah! you can tell what sort of a man He is by
the company He keeps. He is the friend of publicans because He is a
bad Jew; the friend of sinners because He likes their wicked ways.'

There was a mysterious sense of sympathy which drew Jesus Christ to
these poor people and drew them to Him. It would have been a long
while before any penitent woman would have come in and wept over
the feet of Gamaliel and his like. It would have been a long while
before any sinful men would have found their way, with tears and yet
with trust, to these self-righteous hypocrites. But perfect purity
somehow draws the impure, though assumed sanctity always repels
them. And it is a sign, not that a man is bad, but that he is good
in a Christlike fashion, if the outcasts that durst not come near
your respectable people find themselves drawn to Him. Oh! if there
were more of us liker Jesus Christ in our purity, there would be
more of us who would deserve the calumny which is praise--'the
friend of sinners.'

It was an attestation of His love, as I need not remind you. I
suppose there is nothing more striking in the whole wonderful and
unique picture of Jesus Christ drawn in the Gospels than the way in
which two things, which we so often fancy to be contradictory, blend
in the most beautiful harmony in Him--viz. infinite tenderness and
absolute condemnation of transgression. To me the fact that these
two characteristics are displayed in perfect harmony in the life of
Jesus Christ as written in these Gospels, is no small argument for
believing the historical veracity of the picture there drawn. For I
do not know a harder thing for a dramatist, or a romancer, or a
legend-monger to effect than to combine, in one picture--without
making the combination monstrous-these two things, perfect purity
and perfect love for the impure.

But, dear brethren, remember, that if we are to believe Jesus
Christ's own words, that strange love of His, which embraced in its
pure clasp the outcasts, was not only the love of a perfect Man, but
it was the love of God Himself. 'He that hath seen Me hath seen the
Father.' When we see Jesus Christ looking across the valley to the
city, with tears in His sad and gentle eyes; and when we see harlots
and sinners coming near Him with new hope, and a strange
consciousness of a fascination which He wields; and when we see Him
opening His heart to all the impure, just as He laid His clean hand
on the leper's ulcers, let us rejoice to believe that the Friend of
publicans and sinners is God manifest in the flesh.

Then, still further, this wondrous, seeking love of His for all the
outcasts is the sign to us of His boundless hopefulness concerning
the most degraded.

The world talks of races too low to be elevated, of men too hardened
to be softened. Jesus Christ walks through the hospitals of this
world, and nowhere sees incurables. His hope is boundless, because,
first of all, He sees the dormant possibilities that slumber in the
most degraded; and because, still more, He knows that He bears in
Himself a power that will cleanse the foulest and raise the most
fallen. There are some metals that resist all attempts to volatilise
them by the highest temperature producible in our furnaces. Carry
them up into the sun and they will all pass into vapour. No man or
woman who ever lived, or will live, is so absolutely besotted, and
held by the chains of his or her sins, as that Jesus cannot set them
free. His hope for outcasts is boundless, because He knows that
every sin can be cleansed by His precious blood. Therefore,
Christianity should know nothing of desperate cases. There should be
no incurables in our estimate of the world, but our hope should be
as boundless as the Master's, who drew to Himself the publicans
and sinners, and made them saints.

I need not remind you how this is the unique glory of Christ and of
Christianity. Men have been asking the question whether Christianity
is played out or not. What has been the motive power of all the
great movements for the elevation of mankind that have occurred for
the last nineteen centuries? What was it that struck the fetters of
the slaves? What is it that sends men out amongst savage tribes? Has
there ever been found a race of men so degraded that the message of
Christ's love could not find its way into their hearts? Did not
Darwin subscribe to the Patagonian Mission--a mission which takes in
hand perhaps the lowest types of humanity in the world--and did he
not do it because his own eyes had taught him that in this strange
superstition that we call the Gospel there is a power that, somehow
or other, nothing else can wield? Brethren! if the Church begins to
lose its care for, and its power of drawing, outcasts and sinners,
it has begun to lose its hold on Christ. The sooner such a Church
dies the better, and there will be few mourners at its funeral.

The Friend of publicans and sinners has set the example to all of us
His followers. God be thanked that there are signs to-day that
Christian people are more and more waking up to the consciousness of
their obligations in regard to the outcasts in their own and other
lands. Let them go to them, as Jesus Christ did, with no false
flatteries, but with plain rebukes of sin, and yet with manifest
outgoing of the heart, and they will find that the same thing which
drew these poor creatures to the Master will draw others to the
feeblest, faintest reflection of Him in His servants.

And, last of all, dear friends, let each think that Jesus Christ is
my Friend, and your Friend, because He is the Friend of sinners, and
we are sinners. If He did not love sinners there would be nobody for
Him to love. The universality of sin, however various in its degrees
and manifestations, makes more wonderful the universal sweep of His
friendship.

How do I know that He is my Friend? 'Greater love hath no man than
this, that a man lay down his life for his friends,' and when we
were yet enemies He was our Friend, and died for us. How shall we
requite that love? 'Ye are my friends if ye do whatsoever I command
you to do.' All over the Eastern world to this day the name by which
the Patriarch Abraham is known is the 'Friend' or the 'Companion.'
Well for us, for time and for eternity, if, knowing that Jesus is
our Friend, we yield ourselves, in faith and love, to become His
friends!




THE TWO DEBTORS


    'There was a certain creditor which had two debtors;
    the one owed five hundred pence, and the other fifty.
    42. And when they had nothing to pay, he frankly
    forgave them both. Tell Me therefore, which of them
    will love him most? 43. Simon answered and said, I
    suppose that he to whom he forgave most.'--LUKE vii.41-43.

We all know the lovely story in which this parable is embedded. A
woman of notoriously bad character had somehow come in contact with
Jesus Christ, and had by Him been aroused from her sensuality and
degradation, and calmed by the assurance of forgiveness. So, when
she heard that He was in her own town, what could she do but hasten
to the Pharisee's house, and brave the cruel, scornful eyes of the
eminently respectable people that would meet her there? She carries
with her part of the spoils and instruments of her sinful adornment,
to devote it to His service; but before she can open the cruse, her
heart opens, and the hot tears flow on His feet, inflicting an indignity
where she had meant an honour. She has nothing at hand to repair the
fault, she will not venture to take her poor garment, which might have
done it, but with a touch, she loosens her long hair, and with the
ingenuity and self-abasement of love, uses that for a towel. Then,
gathering confidence from her reception, and carried further than she
had meant, she ventures to lay her sinful lips on His feet, as if asking
pardon for the tears that would come--the only lips, except those of
the traitor, that are recorded as having touched the Master. And only
then does she dare to pour upon Him her only wealth.

What says the Pharisee? Has he a heart at all? He is scandalised at
such a scene at his respectable table; and no wonder, for he could
not have known that a change had passed upon the woman, and her evil
repute was obviously notorious. He does not wonder at her having
found her way into his house, for the meal was half public. But he
began to doubt whether a Man who tolerates such familiarities from
such a person could be a prophet; or if He were, whether He could be
a good man. 'He would have known her if He had been a prophet,'
thinks he. The thought is only a questionably true one. 'If He had
known her, He would have thrust her back with His foot,' he thinks;
and that thought is obviously false. But Simon's righteousness was
of the sort that gathers up its own robes about it, and shoves back
the poor sinner into the filth. 'She is a sinner,' says he. No,
Simon! she _was_ a sinner, but she _is_ a penitent, and is
on the road to be a saint, and having been washed, she is a great
deal cleaner than thou art, who art only white-washed.

Our Lord's parable is the answer to the Pharisee's thought, and in
it Jesus shows Simon that He knows him and the woman a great deal
better than he did. There are three things to which briefly I ask
your attention--the common debt, in varying amounts; the common
insolvency; and the love, like the debt, varying in amount. Now,
note these things in order.

I. There is, first of all, the common debt.

I do not propose to dwell at all upon that familiar metaphor,
familiar to us all from its use in the Lord's Prayer, by which sin
and the guilt of sin are shadowed forth for us in an imperfect
fashion by the conception of debt. For duty neglected is a debt to
God, which can only be discharged by a penalty. And all sin, and its
consequent guilt and exposure to punishment, may be regarded under
the image of indebtedness.

But the point that I want you to notice is that these two in our
parable, though they are meant to be portraits of Simon and the
woman, are also representatives of the two classes to one or other
of which we all belong. They are both debtors, though one owes but a
tenth of what the other does. That is to say, our Lord here draws a
broad distinction between people who are outwardly respectable,
decent, cleanly living, and people who have fallen into the habit,
and are living a life, of gross and open transgression. There has
been a great deal of very pernicious loose representation of the
attitude of Christianity in reference to this matter, common in
evangelical pulpits. And I want you to observe that our Lord draws a
broad line and says, 'Yes! you, Simon, are a great deal better than
that woman was. She was coarse, unclean, her innocence gone, her
purity stained. She had been wallowing in filth, and you, with your
respectability, your rigid morality, your punctilious observance of
the ordinary human duties, you were far better than she was, and had
far less to answer for than she had.' Fifty is only a tenth of five
hundred, and there is a broad distinction, which nothing ought to be
allowed to obliterate, between people who, without religion, are
trying to do right, to keep themselves in the paths of morality and
righteousness, to discharge their duty to their fellows, controlling
their passions and their flesh, and others who put the reins upon
the necks of the horses and let them carry them where they will, and
live in an eminent manner for the world and the flesh and the devil.
And there is nothing in evangelical Christianity which in the
smallest degree obliterates that distinction, but rather it
emphasises it, and gives a man full credit for any difference that
there is in his life and conduct and character between himself and
the man of gross transgression.

But then it says, on the other side, the difference which does
exist, and is not to be minimised, is, after all, a difference of
degree. They are both debtors. They stand in the same relation to
the creditor, though the amount of the indebtedness is extremely
different. We are all sinful men, and we stand in the same relation
to God, though one of us may be much darker and blacker than the
other.

And then, remember, that when you begin to talk about the guilt of
actions in God's sight, you have to go far below the mere surface.
If we could see the infinite complexity of motives--aggravations on
the one side and palliations on the other--which go to the doing of
a single deed, we should not be so quick to pronounce that the
publican and the harlot are worse than the Pharisee. It is quite
possible that an action which passes muster in regard to the
morality of the world may, if regard be had (which God only can
exercise) to the motive for which it is done, be as bad as, if not
worse than, the lust and the animalism, drunkenness and debauchery,
crime and murder, which the vulgar scales of the world consider to
be the heavier. If you once begin to try to measure guilt, you will
have to pass under the surface appearance, and will find that many a
white and dazzling act has a very rotten inside, and that many a
very corrupt and foul one does not come from so corrupt a source as
at first sight might seem to be its origin. Let us be very modest in
our estimate of the varying guilt of actions, and remember that,
deep down below all diversities, there lies a fundamental identity,
in which there is no difference, that all of us respectable people
that never broke a law of the nation, and scarcely ever a law of
propriety, in our lives, and the outcasts, if there are any here
now, the drunkards, the sensualists, all of us stand in this respect
in the same class. We are all debtors, for we have 'all sinned and
come short of the glory of God,' A viper an inch long and the
thickness of whipcord has a sting and poison in it, and is a viper.
And if the question is whether a man has got small-pox or not, one
pustule is as good evidence as if he was spotted all over. So,
remember, he who owes five hundred and he who owes the tenth part of
it, which is fifty, are both debtors.

II. Now notice the common insolvency.

'They had nothing to pay.' Well, if there is no money, 'no effects'
in the bank, no cash in the till, nothing to distrain upon, it does
not matter very much what the amount of the debt is, seeing that
there is nothing to meet it, and whether it is fifty or five hundred
the man is equally unable to pay. And that is precisely our
position.

I admit, of course, that men without any recognition of God's
pardoning mercy, or any of the joyful impulse that comes from the
sense of Christ's redemption, or any of the help that is given by
the indwelling of the Spirit who sanctifies may do a great deal in
the way of mending their characters and making themselves purer and
nobler. But that is not the point which my text contemplates,
because it deals with a past. And the fact that lies under the
metaphor of my text is this, that none of us can in any degree
diminish our sin, considered as a debt to God. What can you and I do
to lighten our souls of the burden of guilt? What we have written we
have written. Tears will not wash it out, and amendment will not
alter the past, which stands frowning and irrevocable. If there be a
God at all, then our consciences, which speak to us of demerit,
proclaim guilt in its two elements--the sense of having done wrong,
and the foreboding of punishment therefor. Guilt cannot be dealt
with by the guilty one: it must be Some One else who deals with it.
He, and only He against whom we have sinned, can touch the great
burden that we have piled upon us.

Brother! we have nothing to pay. We may mend our ways; but that does
not touch the past. We may hate the evil; that will help to keep us
from doing it in the future, but it does not affect our
responsibility for what is done. We cannot touch it; there it stands
irrevocable, with this solemn sentence written over the black pile,
'Every transgression and disobedience shall receive its just
recompense of reward.' We have nothing to pay.

But my text suggests, further, that a condition precedent to
forgiveness is the recognition by us of our penniless insolvency.
Though it is not distinctly stated, it is clearly and necessarily
implied in the narrative, that the two debtors are to be supposed as
having come and held out a couple of pairs of empty hands, and sued
in _forma pauperis_. You must recognise your insolvency if you
expect to be forgiven. God does not accept dividends, so much in the
pound, and let you off the rest on consideration thereof. If you are
going to pay, you have to pay all; if He is going to forgive, you
have to let Him forgive all. It must be one thing or the other, and
you and I have to elect which of the two we shall stand by, and
which of the two shall be applied to us.

Oh, dear friends! may we all come and say,

  Nothing in my hand I bring,
  Simply to Thy Cross I cling.

III. And so, lastly, notice the love, which varies with the
forgiveness.

'Tell Me which of them will love him most.' Simon does not penetrate
Christ's design, and there is a dash of supercilious contempt for the
story and the question, as it seems to me, in the languid, half-courteous
answer:--'I suppose, if it were worth my while to think about such a
thing, that he to whom he forgave the most.' He did not know what a
battery was going to be unmasked. Jesus says, 'Thou hast rightly judged.'

The man that is most forgiven is the man that will love most. Well,
that answer is true if all other things about the two debtors are
equal. If they are the same sort of men, with the same openness to
sentiments of gratitude and generosity, the man who is let off the
smaller debt will generally be less obliged than the man who is let
off the larger. But it is, alas! not always the case that we can
measure benefits conferred by gratitude shown. Another element comes
in--namely, the consciousness of the benefit received--which
measures the gratitude far more accurately than the actual benefit
bestowed. And so we must take both these things, the actual amount
of forgiveness, so to speak, which is conferred, and the depth of
the sense of the forgiveness received, in order to get the measure
of the love which answers it. So that this principle breaks up into
two thoughts, of which I have only just a word or two to say.

First, it is very often true that the greatest sinners make the
greatest saints. There have been plenty of instances all down the
history of the world, and there are plenty of instances, thank God,
cropping up every day still in which some poor, wretched outcast,
away out in the darkness, living on the husks that the swine do eat,
and liking to be in the pigstye, is brought back into the Father's
house, and turns out a far more loving son and a far better servant
than the man that had never wandered away from it. 'The publicans
and the harlots' do often yet 'go into the Kingdom of God before'
the respectable people.

And there are plenty of people in Manchester that you would not
touch with a pair of tongs who, if they could be got hold of, would
make far more earnest and devoted Christians than you are. The very
strength of passion and feeling which has swept them wrong, rightly
directed, would make grand saints of them, just as the very same
conditions of climate which, at tropics, bring tornadoes and
cyclones and dreadful thunder-storms, do also bring abundant
fertility. The river which devastates a nation, dammed up within
banks, may fertilise half a continent. And if a man is brought out
of the darkness, and looks back upon the years that are wasted, that
may help him to a more intense consecration. And if he remembers the
filth out of which Jesus Christ picked him, it will bind him to that
Lord with a bond deep and sacred.

So let no outcast man or woman listening to me now despair. You can
come back from the furthest darkness, and whatever ugly things you
have in your memories and your consciences, you may make them
stepping-stones on which to climb to the very throne of God. Let no
respectable people despise the outcasts;  there may be the making in
them of far better Christians than we are.

But, on the other hand, let no man think lightly of sin. Though it
can be forgiven and swept away, and the gross sinner may become the
great saint, there will be scars and bitter memories and habits
surging up again after we thought they were dead; and the old ague
and fever that we caught in the pestilential land will hang by us
when we have migrated into a more wholesome climate. It is never
good for a man to have sinned, even though, through his sin, God may
have taken occasion to bring him near to Himself.

But the second form of this principle is always true--namely, that
those who are most conscious of forgiveness will be most fruitful of
love. The depth and fervour of our individual Christianity depends
more largely on the clearness of our consciousness of our own
personal guilt and the firmness of our grasp of forgiveness than
upon anything else.

Why is it that such multitudes of you professing Christians are such
icebergs in your Christianity? Mainly for this reason--that you have
never found out, in anything like an adequate measure, how great a
sinner you are, and how sure and sweet and sufficient Christ's
pardoning mercy is. And so you are like Simon--you will ask Jesus to
dinner, but you will not give Him any water for His feet or ointment
for His head. You will do the conventional and necessary pieces of
politeness, but not one act of impulse from the heart ever comes
from you. You discharge 'the duties of religion.' What a phrase! You
discharge the duties of religion. Ah! My brother, if you had been
down into the horrible pit and the miry clay, and had seen a hand
and a face looking down, and an arm outstretched to lift you; and if
you had ever known what the rapture was after that subterraneous
experience of having your feet set upon a rock and your goings
established, you would come to Him and you would say, 'Take me all,
O Lord! for I am all redeemed by Thee.' 'To whom little is forgiven
the same loveth little.' Does not that explain the imperfect
Christianity of thousands of us?

Fifty pence and five hundred pence are both small sums. Our Lord had
nothing to do here with the absolute amount of debt, but only with the
comparative amount of the two debts. But when He wanted to tell the
people what the absolute amount of the debt was, he did it in that
other story of the Unfaithful Servant. He owed his lord, not fifty
pence (fifty eightpences or thereabouts), not five hundred pence, but
'ten thousand talents,' which comes to near two and a half millions
of English money. And that is the picture of our indebtedness to God.
'We have nothing to pay.' Here is the payment--that Cross, that dying
Christ. Turn your faith there, my brother, and then you will get ample
forgiveness, and that will kindle love, and that will overflow in
service. For the aperture in the heart at which forgiveness enters in
is precisely of the same width as the one at which love goes out.
Christ has loved us all, and perfectly. Let us love Him back again,
who has died that we might live, and borne our sins in His own body.




LOVE AND FORGIVENESS


    'Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved
    much.'--LUKE  vii. 47.

This story contains three figures, three persons, who may stand for
us as types or representatives of the divine love and of all its
operation in the world, of the way in which it is received or rejected,
and of the causes and consequences of its reception or rejection. There
is the unloving, cleanly, respectable, self-complacent Pharisee, with
all his contempt for 'this woman.' There is the woman, with gross sin
and mighty penitence, the great burst of love that is flowing out of
her heart sweeping away before it, as it were, all the guilt of her
transgressions. And, high over all, brooding over all, loving each,
knowing each, pitying each, willing to save and be the Friend and
Brother of each, is the embodied and manifested divine Love, the
knowledge of whom is love in our hearts, and is 'life eternal.' So that
now I have simply to ask you to look with me, for a little while, at
these three persons as representing for us the divine love that comes
forth amongst sinners, and the twofold form in which that love is
received. There is, first, Christ the love of God appearing amongst
men, the foundation of all our love to Him. Then there is the woman,
the penitent sinner, lovingly recognising the divine love. And then,
last, there is the Pharisee, the self-righteous man, ignorant of
himself, and empty of all love to God. These are the three figures to
which I ask your attention now.

I. We have Christ here standing as a manifestation of the divine
love coming forth amongst sinners. His person and His words, the
part He plays in this narrative, and the parable that He speaks in
the course of it, have to be noticed under this head.

First, then, you have this idea--that He, as bringing to us the love
of God, shows it to us, as not at all dependent upon our merits or
deserts: 'He frankly forgave them both' are the deep words in which
He would point us to the source and the ground of all the love of
God. Brethren, have you ever thought what a wonderful and blessed
truth there lies in the old words of one of the Jewish prophets, 'I
do not this for your sakes, O house of Israel, but for Mine holy
Name's sake'? The foundation of all God's love to us sinful men,
that saying tells us, lies not in us, nor in anything about us, not
in anything external to God Himself. He, and He alone, is the cause
and reason, the motive and the end, of His own love to our world.
And unless we have grasped that magnificent thought as the
foundation of all our acceptance in Him, I think we have not yet
learnt half of the fullness which, even in this world, may belong to
our conceptions of the love of God--a love that has no motive but
Himself; a love that is not evoked even (if I may so say) by regard
to His creatures' wants; a love, therefore, which is eternal, being
in that divine heart before there were creatures upon whom it could
rest; a love that is its own guarantee, its own cause--safe and
firm, therefore, with all the firmness and serenity of the divine
nature-incapable of being affected by our transgression, deeper than
all our sins, more ancient than our very existence, the very essence
and being of God Himself. 'He frankly forgave them both.' If you
seek the source of divine love, you must go high up into the
mountains of God, and learn that it, as all other of His (shall I
say) emotions, and feelings, and resolutions, and purposes, owns no
reason but Himself, no motive but Himself; lies wrapped in the
secret of His nature, who is all-sufficient for His own blessedness,
and all whose work and being is caused by, and satisfied, and
terminates in His own fullness. 'God is love': therefore beneath all
considerations of what we may want--deeper and more blessed than all
thoughts of a compassion that springs from the feeling of human
distress and the sight of man's misery--lies this thought of an
affection which does not need the presence of sorrow to evoke it,
which does not want the touch of our finger to flow out, but by its
very nature is everlasting, by its very nature is infinite, by its
very nature must be pouring out the flood of its own joyous fullness
for ever and ever!

Then, again, Christ standing here for us as the representative and
revelation of this divine love which He manifests to us, tells us,
too, that whilst it is not caused by us, but comes from the nature
of God, it is not turned away by our sins. 'This man, if he were a
prophet, would have known who and what manner of woman this is that
toucheth Him,' says the unloving and self-righteous heart, 'for she
is a sinner.' Ah! there is nothing more beautiful than the
difference between the thought about sinful creatures which is
natural to a holy being, and the thought about sinful creatures
which is natural to a self-righteous being. The one is all contempt;
the other, all pity. He knew what she was, and therefore He let her
come close to Him with the touch of her polluted hand, and pour out
the gains of her lawless life and the adornments of her former
corruption upon His most blessed and most holy head. His knowledge
of her as a sinner, what did it do to His love for her? It made that
love gentle and tender, as knowing that she could not bear the
revelation of the blaze of His purity. It smoothed His face and
softened His tones, and breathed through all His knowledge and
notice of her timid and yet confident approach. 'Daughter, I know
all about it--all thy wanderings and thy vile transgressions: I know
them all, and My love is mightier than all these. They may be as the
great sea, but my love is like the everlasting mountains, whose
roots go down beneath the ocean, and My love is like the everlasting
heaven, whose brightness covers it all over.' God's love is Christ's
love; Christ's love is God's love. And this is the lesson that we
gather--that that infinite and divine loving-kindness does not turn
away from thee, my brother and my friend, because thou art a sinner,
but remains hovering about thee, with wooing invitations and with
gentle touches, if it may draw thee to repentance, and open a
fountain of answering affection in thy seared and dry heart. The
love of God is deeper than all our sins. 'For His great love
wherewith He loved us, when we were dead in sins, He quickened us.'

Sin is but the cloud behind which the everlasting sun lies in all
its power and warmth, unaffected by the cloud; and the light will
yet strike, the light of His love will yet pierce through, with its
merciful shafts bringing healing in their beams, and dispersing all
the pitchy darkness of man's transgression. And as the mists gather
themselves up and roll away, dissipated by the heat of that sun in
the upper sky, and reveal the fair earth below--so the love of
Christ shines in, molting the mist and dissipating the fog, thinning
it off in its thickest places, and at last piercing its way right
through it, down to the heart of the man that has been lying beneath
the oppression of this thick darkness, and who thought that the fog
was the sky, and that there was no sun there above. God be thanked!
the everlasting love of God that comes from the depth of His own
being, and is there because of Himself, will never be quenched
because of man's sin.

And so, in the next place, Christ teaches us here that this divine
love, when it comes forth among sinners, necessarily manifests
itself first in the form of forgiveness. There was nothing to be
done with the debtors until the debt was wiped out; there was no
possibility of other gifts of the highest sort being granted to
them, until the great score was cancelled and done away with. When
the love of God comes down into a sinful world, it must come first
and foremost as pardoning mercy. There are no other terms upon which
there can be a union betwixt the loving-kindness of God, and the
emptiness and sinfulness of my heart, except only this--that first
of all there shall be the clearing away from my soul of the sins
which I have gathered there, and then there will be space for all
other divine gifts to work and to manifest themselves. Only do not
fancy that when we speak about forgiveness, we simply mean that a
man's position in regard to the penalties of sin is altered. That is
not all the depth of the scriptural notion of forgiveness. It
includes far more than the removal of outward penalties. The heart
of it all is, that the love of God rests upon the sinner, unturned
away even by his sins, passing over his sins, and removing his sins
for the sake of Christ. My friend, if you are talking in general
terms about a great divine loving-kindness that wraps you round--if
you have a great deal to say, apart from the Gospel, about the love
of God as being your hope and confidence--I want you to reflect on
this, that the first word which the love of God speaks to sinful men
is pardon; and unless that is your notion of God's love, unless you
look to that as the first thing of all, let me tell you, you may
have before you a very fair picture of a very beautiful, tender,
good-natured benevolence, but you have not nearly reached the height
of the vigour and yet the tenderness of the Scripture notion of the
love of God. It is not a love which says, 'Well, put sin on one
side, and give the man the blessings all the same,' not a love which
has nothing to say about that great fact of transgression, not a
love which gives it the go-by, and leaves it standing: but a love
which passes into the heart through the portal of pardon, a love
which grapples with the fact of sin first, and has nothing to say to
a man until it has said that message to him.

And but one word more on this part of my subject--here we see the
love of God thus coming from Himself; not turned away by man's sins;
being the cause of forgiveness; expressing itself in pardon; and
last of all, demanding service. 'Simon, thou gavest Me no water,
thou gavest Me no kiss, My head thou didst not anoint: I expected
all these things from thee--I desired them all from thee: My love
came that they might spring in thy heart; thou hast not given them;
My love is wounded, as it were disappointed, and it turns away from
thee!' Yes, after all that we have said about the freeness and
fullness, the unmerited, and uncaused, and unmotived nature of that
divine affection--after all that we have said about its being the
source of every blessing to man, asking nothing from him, but giving
everything to him; it still remains true, that God's love, when it
comes to men, comes that it may evoke an answering echo in the human
heart, and 'though it might be much bold to enjoin, yet for love's
sake rather beseeches' us to give unto Him who has given all unto
us. There, then, stands forth in the narrative, Christ as a
revelation of the divine love amongst sinners.

II. Now, in the second place, let us look for a moment at 'this
woman' as the representative of a class of character--the penitent
lovingly recognising the divine love.

The words which I have read as my text contain a statement as to the
woman's character: 'Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she
loved much.' Allow me just one word of explanation, in the shape of
exposition, on these words. Great blunders have been built upon
them. I dare say you have seen epitaphs--(I have)--written often on
gravestones with this misplaced idea on them--'Very sinful; but
there was a great deal of love in the person; and for the sake of
the love, God passed by the sin!' Now, when Christ says 'She loved
much,' He does not mean to say that her love was the cause of her
forgiveness--not at all. He means to say that her love was the proof
of her forgiveness, and that it was so because her love was a
consequence of her forgiveness. As, for instance, we might say, 'The
woman is in great distress, for she weeps'; but we do not mean
thereby that the weeping is the reason of the distress, but the
means of our knowing the sorrow. It is the proof because it is the
consequence. Or (to put it into the simplest shape) the love does
not go before the forgiveness, but the forgiveness goes before the
love; and because the love comes after the forgiveness, it is the
sign of the forgiveness. That this is the true interpretation, you
will see if you look back for a moment at the narrative which
precedes, where He says, 'He frankly forgave them both: tell me,
therefore, which of them will love him most?' Pardon is the
pre-requisite of love, and love is a consequence of the sense of
forgiveness.

This, then, is the first thing to observe: all true love to God is
preceded in the heart by these two things--a sense of sin, and an
assurance of pardon. Brethren, there is no love possible--real,
deep, genuine, worthy of being called love of God--which does not
start with the belief of my own transgression, and with the thankful
reception of forgiveness in Christ. You do nothing to get pardon for
yourselves; but unless you have the pardon you have no love to God.
I know that sounds a very hard thing--I know that many will say it
is very narrow and very bigoted, and will ask, 'Do you mean to tell
me that the man whose bosom glows with gratitude because of earthly
blessings, has no love--that all that natural religion which is in
people, apart from this sense of forgiveness in Christ, do you mean
to tell me that this is not all genuine?' Yes, most assuredly; and I
believe the Bible and man's conscience say the same thing. I do not
for one moment deny that there may be in the hearts of those who are
in the grossest ignorance of themselves as transgressors, certain
emotions of instinctive gratitude and natural religiousness, directed
to some higher power dimly thought of as the author of their blessings
and the source of much gladness: but has that kind of thing got any
living power in it? I demur to its right to be called love to God at
all, for this reason--because it seems to me that the object that is
loved is not God, but a fragment of God. He who but says, 'I owe to
Him breath and all things; in Him I live and move, and have my being,'
has left out one-half at least of the Scriptural conception of God.
Your God, my friend, is not the God of the Bible, unless He stands
before you clothed in infinite loving-kindness indeed; but clothed
also in strict and rigid justice. Is your God perfect and entire? If
you say that you love Him, and if you do so, is it as the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ? Have you meditated on the depths of
the requirements of His law? Have you stood silent and stricken at
the thought of the blaze of His righteousness? Have you passed through
all the thick darkness and the clouds with which He surrounds His
throne, and forced your way at last into the inner light where He
dwells? Or is it a vague divinity that you worship and love? Which?
Ah, if a man study his Bible, and try to find out for himself, from
its veracious records, who and what manner of God the living God is,
there will be no love in his heart to that Being except only when he
has flung himself at His feet, and said, 'Father of eternal purity,
and God of all holiness and righteousness, forgive Thy child, a
sinful broken man--forgive Thy child, for the sake of Thy Son!' That,
and that alone, is the road by which we come to possess the love of
God, as a practical power, filling and sanctifying our souls; and
such is the God to whom alone our love ought to be rendered; and I
tell you (or rather the Bible tells you, and the Gospel and the
Cross of Christ tell you), there is no love without pardon, no
fellowship and sonship without the sense of sin and the
acknowledgment of foul transgression!

So much, then, for what precedes the love of Christ in the heart;
now a word as to what follows. 'Her sins, which are many, are
forgiven; for she loved much.' The sense of sin precedes
forgiveness: forgiveness precedes love; love precedes all acceptable
and faithful service. If you want to do, love. If you want to know,
love. This poor woman knew Christ a vast deal better than that
Pharisee there. He said, 'This man is not a prophet; He does not
understand the woman.' Ay, but the woman knew herself better than
the Pharisee knew himself, knew herself better than the Pharisee
knew her, knew Christ, above all, a vast deal better than he did.
Love is the gate of all knowledge.

This poor woman brings her box of ointment, a relic perhaps of past
evil life, and once meant for her own adornment, and pours it on His
head, lavishes offices of service which to the unloving heart seem
bold in the giver and cumbersome to the receiver. It is little she
can do, but she does it. Her full heart demands expression, and is
relieved by utterance in deeds. The deeds are spontaneous, welling
out at the bidding of an inward impulse, not drawn out by the force
of an external command. It matters not what practical purpose they
serve. The motive of them makes their glory. Love prompts them, love
justifies them, and His love interprets them, and His love accepts
them. The love which flows from the sense of forgiveness is the
source of all obedience as well as the means of all knowledge.

Brethren, we differ from each other in all respects but one, 'We
have all sinned and come short of the glory of God'; we all need the
love of Christ; it is offered to us all; but, believe me, the sole
handle by which you can lay hold of it, is the feeling of your own
sinfulness and need of pardon. I preach to you a love that you do
not need to buy, a mercy that you do not need to bribe, a grace that
is all independent of your character, and condition, and merits,
which issues from God for ever, and is lying at your doors if you
will take it. You are a sinful man; Christ died for you. He comes to
give you His forgiving mercy. Take it, be at rest. So shalt thou
love and know and do, and so shall He love and guide thee!

III. Now one word, and then I have done. A third character stands
here--the unloving and self-righteous man, all ignorant of the love
of Christ.

He is the antithesis of the woman and her character. You remember
the traditional peculiarities and characteristics of the class to
which he belonged. He is a fair specimen of the whole of them.
Respectable in life, rigid in morality, unquestionable in orthodoxy;
no sound of suspicion having ever come near his belief in all the
traditions of the elders; intelligent and learned, high up among the
ranks of Israel! What was it that made this man's morality a piece
of dead nothingness? What was it that made his orthodoxy just so
many dry words, from out of which all the life had gone? What was
it? This one thing: there was no love in it. As I said, Love is the
foundation of all obedience; without it, morality degenerates into
mere casuistry. Love is the foundation of all knowledge; without it,
religion degenerates into a chattering about Moses, and doctrines,
and theories; a thing that will neither kill nor make alive, that
never gave life to a single soul or blessing to a single heart, and
never put strength into any hand for the conflict and strife of
daily life. There is no more contemptible and impotent thing on the
face of the earth than morality divorced from love, and religious
thoughts divorced from a heart full of the love of God. Quick
corruption or long decay, and in either case death and putrefaction,
are the end of these. You and I need that lesson, my friends. It is
of no use for us to condemn Pharisees that have been dead and in
their graves for nineteen hundred years. The same thing besets us
all; we all of us try to get away from the centre, and dwell
contented on the surface. We are satisfied to take the flowers and
stick them into our little gardens, without any roots to them, when
of course they all die out! People may try to cultivate virtue
without religion, and to acquire correct notions of moral and
spiritual truth; and partially and temporarily they may succeed, but
the one will be a yoke of bondage, and the other a barren theory. I
repeat, love is the basis of all knowledge and of all right-doing.
If you have got that firm foundation laid in the soul, then the
knowledge and the practice will be builded in God's own good time;
and if not, the higher you build the temple, and the more aspiring
are its cloud-pointing pinnacles, the more certain will be its
toppling some day, and the more awful will be the ruin when it
comes. The Pharisee was contented with himself, and so there was no
sense of sin in him, therefore there was no penitent recognition of
Christ as forgiving and loving him, therefore there was no love to
Christ. Because there was no love, there was neither light nor heat
in his soul, his knowledge was barren notions, and his painful
doings were soul-destructive self-righteousness.

And so it all comes round to the one blessed message: My friend, God
hath loved us with an everlasting love. He has provided an eternal
redemption and pardon for us. If you would know Christ at all, you
