
I have formerly in this place, discoursing upon this text, explained 
the nature of the sin here condemned, with its several kinds and 
ways of practising.


II.  I shall now proceed to declare the folly of it; and to make 
good by divers reasons the assertion of the wise man, that "He who 
uttereth slander is a fool."

1.  Slandering is foolish, as sinful and wicked.

All sin is foolish upon many accounts; as proceeding from ignorance, 
error, inconsiderateness, vanity; as implying weak judgment, and 
irrational choice; as thwarting the dictates of reason, and best 
rules of wisdom; as producing very mischievous effects to ourselves, 
bereaving us of the chief goods, and exposing us to the worst evils.  
What can be more egregiously absurd than to dissent in our opinion 
and discord in our choice from infinite wisdom; to provoke by our 
actions sovereign justice, and immutable severity:  to oppose 
almighty power, and offend immense goodness; to render ourselves 
unlike and contrary in our doings, our disposition, our state, to 
absolute perfection and felicity?  What can be more desperately wild 
than to disoblige our best Friend, to forfeit His love and favour, 
to render Him our enemy, who is our Lord and our Judge, upon whose 
mere will and disposal all our subsistence, all our welfare does 
absolutely depend?  What greater madness can be conceived than to 
deprive our minds of all true content here, and to separate our 
souls from eternal bliss hereafter; to gall our consciences now with 
sore remorse, and to engage ourselves for ever in remediless 
miseries?  Such folly doth all sin include:  whence in Scripture 
style worthily goodness and wisdom are terms equivalent; sin and 
folly do signify the same thing.

If thence this practice be proved extremely sinful, it will thence 
sufficiently be demonstrated no less foolish.  And that it is 
extremely sinful may easily be shown.  It is the character of the 
superlatively wicked man:  "Thou givest thy mouth to evil, and thy 
tongue frameth deceit.  Thou sittest and speakest against thy 
brother; thou slanderest thine own mother's son."  It is, indeed, 
plainly the blackest and most hellish sin that can be; that which 
giveth the grand fiend his names, and most expresseth his nature.  
He is [Greek] (the slanderer); Satan, the spiteful adversary; the 
old snake or dragon, hissing out lies, and spitting forth venom of 
calumnious accusation; the accuser of the brethren, a murderous, 
envious, malicious calumniator; the father of lies; the grand 
defamer of God to man, of man to God, of one man to another.  And 
highly wicked surely must that practice be, whereby we grow 
namesakes to him, conspire in proceeding with him, resemble his 
disposition and nature.  It is a complication, a comprisal, a 
collection and sum of all wickedness; opposite to all the principal 
virtues (to veracity and sincerity, to charity and justice), 
transgressing all the great commandments, violating immediately and 
directly all the duties concerning our neighbour.

To lie simply is a great fault, being a deviation from that good 
rule which prescribeth truth in all our words; rendering us unlike 
and disagreeable to God, who is the God of truth (who loveth truth, 
and practiseth it in all His doings, who abominateth all falsehood); 
including a treacherous breach of faith towards mankind; we being 
all, in order to the maintenance of society, by an implicit compact, 
obliged by speech to declare our mind, to inform truly, and not to 
impose upon our neighbour; arguing pusillanimous timorousness and 
impotency of mind, a distrust in God's help, and diffidence in all 
good means to compass our designs; begetting deception and error, a 
foul and ill-favoured brood:  lying, I say, is upon such accounts a 
sinful and blamable thing; and of all lies those certainly are the 
worst which proceed from malice or from vanity, or from both, and 
which work mischief, such as slanders are.

Again, to bear any hatred or ill-will, to exercise enmity towards 
any man, to design or procure any mischief to our neighbour, whom 
even Jews were commanded to love as themselves, whose good, by many 
laws, and upon divers scores, we are obliged to tender as our own, 
is a heinous fault; and of this apparently the slanderer is most 
guilty in the highest degree.  For evidently true it is which the 
wise man affirmeth, "A lying tongue hateth those that are afflicted 
with it;" there is no surer argument of extreme hatred; nothing but 
the height of ill-will can suggest this practice.  The slanderer is 
an enemy, as the most fierce and outrageous, so the most base and 
unworthy that can be; he fighteth with the most perilous and most 
unlawful weapon, in the most furious and foul way that can be.  His 
weapon is an envenomed arrow, full of deadly poison, which he 
shooteth suddenly, and feareth not:  a weapon which by no force can 
be resisted, by no art declined, whose impression is altogether 
inevitable and unsustainable.  It is a most insidious, most 
treacherous and cowardly way of fighting; wherein manifestly the 
weakest and basest spirits have extreme advantage, and may easily 
prevail against the bravest and worthiest; for no man of honour or 
honesty can in way of resistance or requital deign to use it, but 
must infallibly without repugnance be borne down thereby.  By it the 
vile practiser achieveth the greatest mischief that can be.  His 
words are, as the psalmist saith of Doeg, devouring words:  "Thou 
lovest all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue:" and, "A man," 
saith the wise man, "that beareth false witness against his 
neighbour is a maul, and a sword, and a sharp arrow;" that is, he is 
a complicated instrument of all mischiefs; he smiteth and bruiseth 
like a maul, he cutteth and pierceth like a sword, he thus doth hurt 
near at hand; and at a distance he woundeth like a sharp arrow; it 
is hard anywhere to evade him, or to get out of his reach.  "Many," 
saith another wise man, the imitator of Solomon, "have fallen by the 
edge of the sword, but not so many as have fallen by the tongue.  
Well is he that is defended from it, and hath not passed through the 
venom thereof; who hath not drawn the yoke thereof, nor hath been 
bound in its bands.  For the yoke thereof is a yoke of iron, and the 
bands thereof are bands of brass.  The death thereof is an evil 
death, the grave were better than it."  Incurable are the wounds 
which the slanderer inflicteth, irreparable the damages which he 
causeth, indelible the marks which he leaveth.  "No balsam can heal 
the biting of a sycophant;" no thread can stitch up a good name torn 
by calumnious defamation; no soap is able to cleanse from the stains 
aspersed by a foul mouth.  Aliquid adhaerebit; somewhat always of 
suspicion and ill opinion will stick in the minds of those who have 
given ear to slander.  So extremely opposite is this practice unto 
the queen of virtues, Charity.  Its property indeed is to "believe 
all things," that is, all things for the best, and to the advantage 
of our neighbour; not so much as to suspect any evil of him without 
unavoidably manifest cause; how much more not to devise any 
falsehood against him!  It "covereth" all things, studiously 
conniving at real defects, and concealing assured miscarriages:  how 
much more not divulging imaginary or false scandals!  It disposeth 
to seek and further any the least good concerning him:  how much 
more will it hinder committing grievous outrage upon his dearest 
good name!

Again, all injustice is abominable; to do any sort of wrong is a 
heinous crime; that crime which of all most immediately tendeth to 
the dissolution of society, and disturbance of human life; which God 
therefore doth most loathe, and men have reason especially to 
detest.  And of this the slanderer is most deeply guilty.  "A 
witness of Belial scorneth judgment, and the mouth of the wicked 
devoureth iniquity," saith the wise man.  He is indeed, according to 
just estimation, guilty of all kinds whatever of injury, breaking 
all the second Table of Commands respecting our neighbour.  Most 
formally and directly he "beareth false witness against his 
neighbour:" he doth "covet his neighbour's goods;" for 'tis 
constantly out of such an irregular desire, for his own presumed 
advantage, to dispossess his neighbour of some good, and transfer it 
on himself, that the slanderer uttereth his tale:  he is ever a 
thief and robber of his good name, a deflowerer and defiler of his 
reputation, an assassin and murderer of his honour.  So doth he 
violate all the rules of justice, and perpetrateth all sorts of 
wrong against his neighbour.

He may, indeed, perhaps conceive it no great matter that he 
committeth; because he doth not act in so boisterous and bloody a 
way, but only by words, which are subtle, slim, and transient 
things:  upon his neighbour's credit only, which is no substantial 
or visible matter.  He draweth (thinks he), no blood, nor breaketh 
any bones, nor impresseth any remarkable scar; 'tis only the soft 
air he breaketh with his tongue, 'tis only a slight character that 
he stampeth on the fancy, 'tis only an imaginary stain that he 
daubeth his neighbour with; therefore he supposeth no great wrong 
done, and seemeth to himself innocent, or very excusable.  But these 
conceits arise from great inconsiderateness, or mistake:  nor can 
they excuse the slanderer from grievous injustice.  For in dealing 
with our neighbour, and meddling with his property, we are not to 
value things according to our fancy, but according to the price set 
on them by the owner; we must not reckon that a trifle, which he 
prizeth as a jewel.  Since, then, all men (especially men of honour 
and honesty) do, from a necessary instinct of nature, estimate their 
good name beyond any of their goods--yea, do commonly hold it more 
dear and precious than their very lives--we, by violently or 
fraudulently bereaving them of it, do them no less wrong than if we 
should rob or cozen them of their substance; yea, than if we should 
maim their body, or spill their blood, or even stop their breath.  
If they as grievously feel it, and resent it as deeply, as they do 
any other outrage, the injury is really as great, to them.  Even the 
slanderer's own judgment and conscience might tell him so much; for 
they who most slight another's fame, are usually very tender of 
their own, and can with no patience endure that others should touch 
it; which demonstrates the inconsiderateness of their judgment, and 
the iniquity of their practice.  It is an injustice not to be 
corrected or cured.  Thefts may be restored, wounds may be cured; 
but there is no restitution or cure of a lost good name:  it is 
therefore an irreparable injury.

Nor is the thing itself, in true judgment, contemptible; but in 
itself really very considerable.  "A good name," saith Solomon 
himself (no fool), "is rather to be chosen than great riches; and 
loving favour rather than silver and gold."  In its consequences it 
is much more so; the chief interests of a man, the success of his 
affairs, his ability to do good (for himself, his friends, his 
neighbour), his safety, the best comforts and conveniences of his 
life, sometimes his life itself, depending thereon; so that whoever 
doth snatch or filch it from him, doth not only according to his 
opinion, and in moral value, but in real effect commonly rob, 
sometimes murder, ever exceedingly wrong his neighbour.  It is often 
the sole reward of a man's virtue and all the fruit of his industry; 
so that by depriving him of that, he is robbed of all his estate, 
and left stark naked of all, excepting a good conscience, which is 
beyond the reach of the world, and which no malice or misfortune can 
divest him of.  Full then of iniquity, full of uncharitableness, 
full of all wickedness is this practice; and consequently full it is 
of folly.  No man, one would think, of any tolerable sense, should 
dare or deign to incur the guilt of a practice so vile and base, so 
indeed diabolical and detestable.  But further more particularly--

2.  The slanderer is plainly a fool, because he maketh wrong 
judgments and valuations of things, and accordingly driveth on silly 
bargains for himself, in result whereof he proveth a great loser.  
He means by his calumnious stories either to vent some passion 
boiling in him, or to compass some design which he affects, or to 
please some humour that he is possessed with:  but is any of these 
things worth purchasing at so dear a rate? can there be any valuable 
exchange for our honesty?  Is it not more advisable to suppress our 
passion, or to let it evaporate otherwise, than to discharge it in 
so foul a way?  Is it not better to let go a petty interest, than to 
further it by committing so notorious and heinous a sin; to let an 
ambitious project sink, than to buoy it up by such base means?  Is 
it not wisdom rather to smother or curb our humour, than by 
satisfying it thus to forfeit our innocence?  Can anything in the 
world be so considerable, that for its sake we should defile our 
souls by so foul a practice, making shipwreck of a good conscience, 
abandoning honour and honesty, incurring all the guilt and all the 
punishment due to so enormous a crime?  Is it not far more wisdom, 
contentedly to see our neighbour to enjoy credit and success, to 
flourish and thrive in the world, than by such base courses to sully 
his reputation, to rifle him of his goods, to supplant or cross him 
in his affairs?  We do really, when we think thus to depress him, 
and to climb up to wealth or credit by the ruins of his honour, but 
debase ourselves.  Whatever comes of it, whether he succeeds or is 
disappointed therein, assuredly he that useth such courses will 
himself be the greatest loser, and deepest sufferer.  'Tis true 
which the wise man saith, "The getting of treasures by a lying 
tongue, is a vanity tossed to and fro of them that seek death."  
And, "Woe unto them," saith the prophet, "that draw iniquity with 
cords of vanity;" that is, who by falsehood endeavour to compass 
unjust designs.

But it is not, perhaps he will pretend, to assuage a private 
passion, or to promote his particular concernment, that he makes so 
bold with his neighbour, or deals so harshly with him; but for the 
sake of orthodox doctrine, for advantage of the true Church, for the 
advancement of public good, he judgeth it expedient to asperse him.  
This indeed is the covert of innumerable slanders:  zeal for some 
opinion, or some party, beareth out men of sectarian and factious 
spirits in such practices; they may do, they may say anything for 
those fine ends.  What is a little truth, what is any man's 
reputation in comparison to the carrying on such brave designs?  But 
(to omit that men do usually prevaricate in these cases; that it is 
not commonly for love of truth, but of themselves; not so much for 
the benefit of their sect, but for their own interest, that they 
calumniate) this plea will nowise justify such practice.  For truth 
and sincerity, equity and candour, meekness and charity are 
inviolably to be observed, not only towards dissenters in opinion, 
but even towards declared enemies of truth itself; we are to bless 
them (that is, to speak well of them, and to wish well to them), not 
to curse them (that is, not to reproach them, or to wish them ill, 
much less to belie them).  Truth also, as it cannot ever need, so 
doth it always loathe and scorn the patronage and the succour of 
lies; it is able to support and protect itself by fair means; it 
will not be killed upon a pretence of saving it, or thrive by its 
own ruin.  Nor indeed can any party be so much strengthened and 
underpropped, as it will be weakened and undermined by such courses.  
No cause can stand firm upon a bottom so loose and slippery as 
falsehood is.  All the good a slanderer can do is, to disparage what 
he would maintain.  In truth, no heresy can be worse than that would 
be which should allow to play the devil in any case.  He that can 
dispense with himself to slander a Jew or a Turk, doth in so doing 
render himself worse than either of them by profession is:  for even 
they, and even pagans themselves, disallow the practice of 
inhumanity and iniquity.  All men by light of nature avow truth to 
be honourable, and faith to be indispensably observed.  He doth not 
understand what it is to be Christian, or careth not to practise 
according thereto, who can find in his heart in any case, upon any 
pretence, to calumniate.  In fine, to prostitute our conscience, or 
sacrifice our honesty, for any cause, to any interest whatever, can 
never be warrantable or wise.  Further--

3.  The slanderer is a fool, because he useth improper means and 
preposterous methods of effecting his purposes.  As there is no 
design worth the carrying on by ways of falsehood and iniquity, so 
is there scarce any, no good or lawful one at least, which may not 
more surely, more safely, more cleverly be achieved by means of 
truth and justice.  Is not always the straight way more short than 
the oblique and crooked? is not the plain way more easy than the 
rough and cragged? is not the fair way more pleasant and passable 
than the foul?  Is it not better to walk in paths that are open and 
allowed, than in those that are shut up and prohibited, than to 
clamber over walls, to break through fences, to trespass upon 
enclosures?  Surely yes:  "He that walketh uprightly, walketh 
surely."  Using strict veracity and integrity, candour and equity, 
is the best method of accomplishing good designs.  Our own industry, 
good use of the parts and faculties God hath given us, embracing 
fair opportunities, God's blessing and providence, are sufficient 
means to rely upon for procuring, in an honest way, whatever is 
convenient for us.  These are ways approved, and amiable to all men; 
they procure the best friends, and fewest enemies; they afford to 
the practises a cheerful courage, and good hope; they meet with less 
disappointment, and have no regret or shame attending them.  He that 
hath recourse to the other base means, and "maketh lies his refuge," 
as he renounceth all just and honest means, as he disclaimeth all 
hope in God's assistance, and forfeiteth all pretence to His 
blessing:  so he cannot reasonably expect good success, or be 
satisfied in any undertaking.  The supplanting way indeed seems the 
most curt and compendious way of bringing about dishonest or 
dishonourable designs:  but as good design is certainly dishonoured 
thereby, so is it apt thence to be defeated; it raises up enemies 
and obstacles, yielding advantages to whoever is disposed to cross 
us.  As in trade it is notorious that the best course to thrive is 
by dealing squarely and truly; any fraud or cozenage appearing there 
doth overthrow a man's credit, and drive away custom from him:  so 
in all other transactions, as he that dealeth justly and fairly will 
have his affairs proceed roundly, and shall find men ready to comply 
with him, so he that is observed to practise falsehood will be 
declined by some, opposed by others, disliked by all:  no man scarce 
willingly will have to do with him; he is commonly forced to stand 
out in business, as one that plays foul play.

4.  Lastly, the slanderer is a very fool, as bringing many great 
inconveniences, troubles, and mischiefs on himself.

First, "A fool's mouth," saith the wise man, "is his destruction, 
his lips are the snare of his soul:" and if any kind of speech is 
destructive and dangerous, then is this certainly most of all; for 
by no means can a man inflame so fierce anger, impress so stiff 
hatred, raise so deadly enmity against himself, and consequently so 
endanger his safety, ease and welfare, as by this practice.  Men can 
more easily endure, and sooner will forgive, any sort of abuse than 
this; they will rather pardon a robber of their goods, than a 
defamer of their good name.

Secondly, such an one indeed is not only odious to the person 
immediately concerned, but generally to all men that observe his 
practice; every man presently will be sensible how easily it may be 
his own case, how liable he may be to be thus abused, in a way 
against which there is no guard or defence.  The slanderer therefore 
is apprehended a common enemy, dangerous to all men; and thence 
rendereth all men averse from him, and ready to cross him.  Love and 
peace, tranquillity and security can only be maintained by innocent 
and true dealing:  so the psalmist hath well taught us:  "What man 
is he that desireth life, and loveth many days, that he may see 
good?  Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile."

Thirdly, all wise, all noble, all ingenuous and honest persons have 
an aversion from this practice, and cannot entertain it with any 
acceptance or complacence.  "A righteous man hateth lying," saith 
the wise man.  It is only ill-natured and ill-nurtured, unworthy and 
naughty people that are willing auditors or encouragers thereof.  "A 
wicked doer," saith the wise man again, "giveth heed to false lips; 
and a liar giveth ear to a naughty tongue."  All love of truth and 
regard to justice, and sense of humanity, all generosity and 
ingenuity, all charity and good-will to men, must be extinct in 
those who can with delight, or indeed with patience, lend an ear or 
give any countenance to a slanderer:  and is not he a very fool who 
chooseth to displease the best, only soothing the worst of men?

Fourthly, the slanderer indeed doth banish himself from all 
conversation and company, or intruding into it becomes very 
disgustful thereto; for he worthily is not only looked upon as an 
enemy to those whom he slandereth, but to those also upon whom he 
obtrudeth his calumnious discourse.  He not only wrongeth the former 
by the injury, but he mocketh the latter by the falsehood of his 
stories; implicitly charging his hearers with weakness and 
credulity, or with injustice and pravity.

Fifthly, he also derogateth wholly from his own credit in all 
matters of discourse.  For he that dareth thus to injure his 
neighbour, who can trust him in anything he speaks? what will not he 
say to please his vile humour, or further his base interest? what, 
thinks any man, will he scruple or boggle at, who hath the heart in 
thus doing wrong and mischief to imitate the devil?  Further--

Sixthly, this practice is perpetually haunted with most troublesome 
companions, inward regret and self-condemnation, fear and disquiet:  
the conscience of dealing so unworthily doth smite and rack him; he 
is ever in danger, and thence in fear to be discovered, and requited 
for it.  Of these passions the manner of his behaviour is a manifest 
indication:  for men do seldom vent their slanderous reports openly 
and loudly, to the face or in the ear of those who are concerned in 
them; but do utter them in a low voice, in dark corners, out of 
sight and hearing, where they conceit themselves at present safe 
from being called to an account.  "Swords," saith the psalmist of 
such persons, "are in their lips:  Who (say they) doth hear?"  And, 
"Whoso privily slandereth his neighbour, him will I cut off," saith 
David again, intimating the common manner of this practice.  Calumny 
is like "the plague, that walketh in darkness."  Hence appositely 
are the practisers thereof termed whisperers and backbiters:  their 
heart suffers them not openly to avow, their conscience tells them 
they cannot fairly defend their practice.  Again--

Seventhly, the consequence of this practice is commonly shameful 
disgrace, with an obligation to retract and render satisfaction:  
for seldom doth calumny pass long without being detected and 
confuted.  "He that walketh uprightly, walketh surely:  but he that 
perverteth his ways shall be known:" and, "The lip of truth shall be 
established for ever; but a lying lip is but for a moment," saith 
the great observer of things.  And when the slander is disclosed, 
the slanderer is obliged to excuse (that is, to palliate one lie 
with another, if he can do it), or forced to recant, with much 
disgrace and extreme displeasure to himself:  he is also many times 
constrained, with his loss and pain, to repair the mischief he hath 
done.

Eighthly, to this in likelihood the concernments of men, and the 
powers which guard justice, will forcibly bring him; and certainly 
his conscience will bind him thereto; God will indispensably exact 
it from him.  He can never have any sound quiet in his mind, he can 
never expect pardon from Heaven, without acknowledging his fault, 
repairing the wrong he hath done, restoring that good name of which 
he dispossessed his neighbour:  for in this no less than in other 
cases conscience cannot be satisfied, remission will not be granted, 
except due restitution be performed; and of all restitutions this 
surely is the most difficult, most laborious, and most troublesome.  
'Tis nowise so hard to restore goods stolen or extorted, as to 
recover a good opinion lost, to wipe off aspersions cast on a man's 
name, to cure a wounded reputation:  the most earnest and diligent 
endeavour can hardly ever effect this, or spread the plaster so far 
as the sore hath reached.  The slanderer therefore doth engage 
himself into great straits, incurring an obligation to repair an 
almost irreparable mischief.

Ninthly, this practice doth also certainly revenge itself, imposing 
on its actor a perfect retaliation; "a tooth for a tooth;" an 
irrecoverable infamy to himself, for the infamy he causeth to 
others.  Who will regard his fame, who will be concerned to excuse 
his faults, who so outrageously abuseth the reputation of others?  
He suffereth justly, he is paid in his own coin, will any man think, 
who doth hear him reproached.

Tenthly, in fine, the slanderer, if he doth not, by serious and sore 
repentance retract his practice, doth banish himself from heaven and 
happiness, doth expose himself to endless miseries and sorrows.  
For, if none that "maketh a lie shall enter into the heavenly city;" 
if without those mansions of joy and bliss "every one" must 
eternally abide "that loveth or maketh a lie;" if [Greek], "to all 
liars their portion" is assigned "in the lake which burneth with 
fire and brimstone;" then assuredly the capital liar, the slanderer, 
who lieth most injuriously and mischievously, shall be far excluded 
