1 Mac 3:3
So he gat his people great honour, and put on a breastplate
as a giant, and girt his warlike harness about him, and he made
battles, protecting the host with his sword.

1 Mac 3:4
In his acts he was like a lion, and like a lion's whelp
roaring for his prey.

1 Mac 3:5
For He pursued the wicked, and sought them out, and burnt up
those that vexed his people.

1 Mac 3:6
Wherefore the wicked shrunk for fear of him, and all the
workers of iniquity were troubled, because salvation prospered
in his hand.

1 Mac 3:7
He grieved also many kings, and made Jacob glad with his
acts, and his memorial is blessed for ever.

1 Mac 3:8
Moreover he went through the cities of Juda, destroying the
ungodly out of them, and turning away wrath from Israel:

1 Mac 3:9
So that he was renowned unto the utmost part of the earth,
and he received unto him such as were ready to perish.

1 Mac 3:10
Then Apollonius gathered the Gentiles together, and a great
host out of Samaria, to fight against Israel.

1 Mac 3:11
Which thing when Judas perceived, he went forth to meet him,
and so he smote him, and slew him: many also fell down slain,
but the rest fled.

1 Mac 3:12
Wherefore Judas took their spoils, and Apollonius' sword
also, and therewith he fought all his life long.

1 Mac 3:13
Now when Seron, a prince of the army of Syria, heard say that
Judas had gathered unto him a multitude and company of the
faithful to go out with him to war;

1 Mac 3:14
He said, I will get me a name and honour in the kingdom; for
I will go fight with Judas and them that are with him, who
despise the king's commandment.

1 Mac 3:15
So he made him ready to go up, and there went with him a
mighty host of the ungodly to help him, and to be avenged of the
children of Israel.

1 Mac 3:16
And when he came near to the going up of Bethhoron, Judas
went forth to meet him with a small company:

1 Mac 3:17
Who, when they saw the host coming to meet them, said unto
Judas, How shall we be able, being so few, to fight against so
great a multitude and so strong, seeing we are ready to faint
with fasting all this day?

1 Mac 3:18
Unto whom Judas answered, It is no hard matter for many to be
shut up in the hands of a few; and with the God of heaven it is
all one, to deliver with a great multitude, or a small company:

1 Mac 3:19
For the victory of battle standeth not in the multitude of an
host; but strength cometh from heaven.

1 Mac 3:20
They come against us in much pride and iniquity to destroy
us, and our wives and children, and to spoil us:

1 Mac 3:21
But we fight for our lives and our laws.

1 Mac 3:22
Wherefore the Lord himself will overthrow them before our
face: and as for you, be ye not afraid of them.

1 Mac 3:23
Now as soon as he had left off speaking, he leapt suddenly
upon them, and so Seron and his host was overthrown before him.

1 Mac 3:24
And they pursued them from the going down of Bethhoron unto
the plain, where were slain about eight hundred men of them; and
the residue fled into the land of the Philistines.

1 Mac 3:25
Then began the fear of Judas and his brethren, and an
exceeding great dread, to fall upon the nations round about
them:

1 Mac 3:26
Insomuch as his fame came unto the king, and all nations
talked of the battles of Judas.

1 Mac 3:27
Now when king Antiochus heard these things, he was full of
indignation: wherefore he sent and gathered together all the
forces of his realm, even a very strong army.

1 Mac 3:28
He opened also his treasure, and gave his soldiers pay for a
year, commanding them to be ready whensoever he should need
them.

1 Mac 3:29
Nevertheless, when he saw that the money of his treasures
failed and that the tributes in the country were small, because
of the dissension and plague, which he had brought upon the land
in taking away the laws which had been of old time;

1 Mac 3:30
He feared that he should not be able to bear the charges any
longer, nor to have such gifts to give so liberally as he did
before: for he had abounded above the kings that were before
him.

1 Mac 3:31
Wherefore, being greatly perplexed in his mind, he determined
to go into Persia, there to take the tributes of the countries,
and to gather much money.

1 Mac 3:32
So he left Lysias, a nobleman, and one of the blood royal, to
oversee the affairs of the king from the river Euphrates unto
the borders of Egypt:

1 Mac 3:33
And to bring up his son Antiochus, until he came again.

1 Mac 3:34
Moreover he delivered unto him the half of his forces, and
the elephants, and gave him charge of all things that he would
have done, as also concerning them that dwelt in Juda and
Jerusalem:

1 Mac 3:35
To wit, that he should send an army against them, to destroy
and root out the strength of Israel, and the remnant of
Jerusalem, and to take away their memorial from that place;

1 Mac 3:36
And that he should place strangers in all their quarters, and
divide their land by lot.

1 Mac 3:37
So the king took the half of the forces that remained, and
departed from Antioch, his royal city, the hundred forty and
seventh year; and having passed the river Euphrates, he went
through the high countries.

1 Mac 3:38
Then Lysias chose Ptolemee the son of Dorymenes, Nicanor, and
Gorgias, mighty men of the king's friends:

1 Mac 3:39
And with them he sent forty thousand footmen, and seven
thousand horsemen, to go into the land of Juda, and to destroy
it, as the king commanded.

1 Mac 3:40
So they went forth with all their power, and came and pitched
by Emmaus in the plain country.

1 Mac 3:41
And the merchants of the country, hearing the fame of them,
took silver and gold very much, with servants, and came into the
camp to buy the children of Israel for slaves: a power also of
Syria and of the land of the Philistines joined themselves unto
them.

1 Mac 3:42
Now when Judas and his brethren saw that miseries were
multiplied, and that the forces did encamp themselves in their
borders: for they knew how the king had given commandment to
destroy the people, and utterly abolish them;

1 Mac 3:43
They said one to another, Let us restore the decayed fortune
of our people, and let us fight for our people and the
sanctuary.

1 Mac 3:44
Then was the congregation gathered together, that they might
be ready for battle, and that they might pray, and ask mercy and
compassion.

1 Mac 3:45
Now Jerusalem lay void as a wilderness, there was none of her
children that went in or out: the sanctuary also was trodden
down, and aliens kept the strong hold; the heathen had their
habitation in that place; and joy was taken from Jacob, and the
pipe with the harp ceased.

1 Mac 3:46
Wherefore the Israelites assembled themselves together, and
came to Maspha, over against Jerusalem; for in Maspha was the
place where they prayed aforetime in Israel.

1 Mac 3:47
Then they fasted that day, and put on sackcloth, and cast
ashes upon their heads, and rent their clothes,

1 Mac 3:48
And laid open the book of the law, wherein the heathen had
sought to paint the likeness of their images.

1 Mac 3:49
They brought also the priests' garments, and the firstfruits,
and the tithes: and the Nazarites they stirred up, who had
accomplished their days.

1 Mac 3:50
Then cried they with a loud voice toward heaven, saying, What
shall we do with these, and whither shall we carry them away?

1 Mac 3:51
For thy sanctuary is trodden down and profaned, and thy
priests are in heaviness, and brought low.

1 Mac 3:52
And lo, the heathen are assembled together against us to
destroy us: what things they imagine against us, thou knowest.

1 Mac 3:53
How shall we be able to stand against them, except thou, O
God, be our help?

1 Mac 3:54
Then sounded they with trumpets, and cried with a loud voice.

1 Mac 3:55
And after this Judas ordained captains over the people, even
captains over thousands, and over hundreds, and over fifties,
and over tens.

1 Mac 3:56
But as for such as were building houses, or had betrothed
wives, or were planting vineyards, or were fearful, those he
commanded that they should return, every man to his own house,
according to the law.

1 Mac 3:57
So the camp removed, and pitched upon the south side of
Emmaus.

1 Mac 3:58
And Judas said, arm yourselves, and be valiant men, and see
that ye be in readiness against the morning, that ye may fight
with these nations, that are assembled together against us to
destroy us and our sanctuary:

1 Mac 3:59
For it is better for us to die in battle, than to behold the
calamities of our people and our sanctuary.

1 Mac 3:60
Nevertheless, as the will of God is in heaven, so let him do.

1 Mac 4:1
Then took Gorgias five thousand footmen, and a thousand of
the best horsemen, and removed out of the camp by night;

1 Mac 4:2
To the end he might rush in upon the camp of the Jews, and
smite them suddenly. And the men of the fortress were his
guides.

1 Mac 4:3
Now when Judas heard thereof he himself removed, and the
valiant men with him, that he might smite the king's army which
was at Emmaus,

1 Mac 4:4
While as yet the forces were dispersed from the camp.

1 Mac 4:5
In the mean season came Gorgias by night into the camp of
Judas: and when he found no man there, he sought them in the
mountains: for said he, These fellows flee from us

1 Mac 4:6
But as soon as it was day, Judas shewed himself in the plain
with three thousand men, who nevertheless had neither armour nor
swords to their minds.

1 Mac 4:7
And they saw the camp of the heathen, that it was strong and
well harnessed, and compassed round about with horsemen; and
these were expert of war.

1 Mac 4:8
Then said Judas to the men that were with him, Fear ye not
their multitude, neither be ye afraid of their assault.

1 Mac 4:9
Remember how our fathers were delivered in the Red sea, when
Pharaoh pursued them with an army.

1 Mac 4:10
Now therefore let us cry unto heaven, if peradventure the
Lord will have mercy upon us, and remember the covenant of our
fathers, and destroy this host before our face this day:

1 Mac 4:11
That so all the heathen may know that there is one who
delivereth and saveth Israel.

1 Mac 4:12
Then the strangers lifted up their eyes, and saw them coming
over against them.

1 Mac 4:13
Wherefore they went out of the camp to battle; but they that
were with Judas sounded their trumpets.

1 Mac 4:14
So they joined battle, and the heathen being discomfited fled
into the plain.

1 Mac 4:15
Howbeit all the hindmost of them were slain with the sword:
for they pursued them unto Gazera, and unto the plains of
Idumea, and Azotus, and Jamnia, so that there were slain of them
upon a three thousand men.

1 Mac 4:16
This done, Judas returned again with his host from pursuing
them,

1 Mac 4:17
And said to the people, Be not greedy of the spoil inasmuch
as there is a battle before us,

1 Mac 4:18
And Gorgias and his host are here by us in the mountain: but
stand ye now against our enemies, and overcome them, and after
this ye may boldly take the spoils.

1 Mac 4:19
As Judas was yet speaking these words, there appeared a part
of them looking out of the mountain:

1 Mac 4:20
Who when they perceived that the Jews had put their host to
flight and were burning the tents; for the smoke that was seen
declared what was done:

1 Mac 4:21
When therefore they perceived these things, they were sore
afraid, and seeing also the host of Judas in the plain ready to
fight,

1 Mac 4:22
They fled every one into the land of strangers.

1 Mac 4:23
Then Judas returned to spoil the tents, where they got much
gold, and silver, and blue silk, and purple of the sea, and
great riches.

1 Mac 4:24
After this they went home, and sung a song of thanksgiving,
and praised the Lord in heaven: because it is good, because his
mercy endureth forever.

1 Mac 4:25
Thus Israel had a great deliverance that day.

1 Mac 4:26
Now all the strangers that had escaped came and told Lysias
what had happened:

1 Mac 4:27
Who, when he heard thereof, was confounded and discouraged,
because neither such things as he would were done unto Israel,
nor such things as the king commanded him were come to pass.

1 Mac 4:28
The next year therefore following Lysias gathered together
threescore thousand choice men of foot, and five thousand
horsemen, that he might subdue them.

1 Mac 4:29
So they came into Idumea, and pitched their tents at
Bethsura, and Judas met them with ten thousand men.

1 Mac 4:30
And when he saw that mighty army, he prayed and said, Blessed
art thou, O Saviour of Israel, who didst quell the violence of
the mighty man by the hand of thy servant David, and gavest the
host of strangers into the hands of Jonathan the son of Saul,
and his armourbearer;

1 Mac 4:31
Shut up this army in the hand of thy people Israel, and let
them be confounded in their power and horsemen:

1 Mac 4:32
Make them to be of no courage, and cause the boldness of
their strength to fall away, and let them quake at their
destruction:

1 Mac 4:33
Cast them down with the sword of them that love thee, and let
all those that know thy name praise thee with thanksgiving.

1 Mac 4:34
So they joined battle; and there were slain of the host of
Lysias about five thousand men, even before them were they
slain.

1 Mac 4:35
Now when Lysias saw his army put to flight, and the manliness
of Judas' soldiers, and how they were ready either to live or
die valiantly, he went into Antiochia, and gathered together a
company of strangers, and having made his army greater than it
was, he purposed to come again into Judea.

1 Mac 4:36
Then said Judas and his brethren, Behold, our enemies are
discomfited: let us go up to cleanse and dedicate the sanctuary.

1 Mac 4:37
Upon this all the host assembled themselves together, and
went up into mount Sion.

1 Mac 4:38
And when they saw the sanctuary desolate, and the altar
profaned, and the gates burned up, and shrubs growing in the
courts as in a forest, or in one of the mountains, yea, and the
priests' chambers pulled down;

1 Mac 4:39
They rent their clothes, and made great lamentation, and cast
ashes upon their heads,

1 Mac 4:40
And fell down flat to the ground upon their faces, and blew
an alarm with the trumpets, and cried toward heaven.

1 Mac 4:41
Then Judas appointed certain men to fight against those that
were in the fortress, until he had cleansed the sanctuary.

1 Mac 4:42
So he chose priests of blameless conversation, such as had
pleasure in the law:

1 Mac 4:43
Who cleansed the sanctuary, and bare out the defiled stones
into an unclean place.

1 Mac 4:44
And when as they consulted what to do with the altar of burnt
offerings, which was profaned;

1 Mac 4:45
They thought it best to pull it down, lest it should be a
reproach to them, because the heathen had defiled it: wherefore
they pulled it down,

1 Mac 4:46
And laid up the stones in the mountain of the temple in a
convenient place, until there should come a prophet to shew what
should be done with them.

1 Mac 4:47
Then they took whole stones according to the law, and built a
new altar according to the former;

1 Mac 4:48
And made up the sanctuary, and the things that were within
the temple, and hallowed the courts.

1 Mac 4:49
They made also new holy vessels, and into the temple they
brought the candlestick, and the altar of burnt offerings, and
of incense, and the table.

1 Mac 4:50
And upon the altar they burned incense, and the lamps that
were upon the candlestick they lighted, that they might give
light in the temple.

1 Mac 4:51
Furthermore they set the loaves upon the table, and spread
out the veils, and finished all the works which they had begun
to make.

1 Mac 4:52
Now on the five and twentieth day of the ninth month, which
is called the month Casleu, in the hundred forty and eighth
year, they rose up betimes in the morning,

1 Mac 4:53
And offered sacrifice according to the law upon the new altar
of burnt offerings, which they had made.

1 Mac 4:54
Look, at what time and what day the heathen had profaned it,
even in that was it dedicated with songs, and citherns, and
harps, and cymbals.

1 Mac 4:55
Then all the people fell upon their faces, worshipping and
praising the God of heaven, who had given them good success.

1 Mac 4:56
And so they kept the dedication of the altar eight days and
offered burnt offerings with gladness, and sacrificed the
sacrifice of deliverance and praise.

1 Mac 4:57
They decked also the forefront of the temple with crowns of
gold, and with shields; and the gates and the chambers they
renewed, and hanged doors upon them.

1 Mac 4:58
Thus was there very great gladness among the people, for that
the reproach of the heathen was put away.

1 Mac 4:59
Moreover Judas and his brethren with the whole congregation
of Israel ordained, that the days of the dedication of the altar
should be kept in their season from year to year by the space of
eight days, from the five and twentieth day of the month Casleu,
with mirth and gladness.

1 Mac 4:60
At that time also they builded up the mount Sion with high
walls and strong towers round about, lest the Gentiles should
come and tread it down as they had done before.

1 Mac 4:61
And they set there a garrison to keep it, and fortified
Bethsura to preserve it; that the people might have a defence
against Idumea.

1 Mac 5:1
Now when the nations round about heard that the altar was
built and the sanctuary renewed as before, it displeased them
very much.

1 Mac 5:2
Wherefore they thought to destroy the generation of Jacob
that was among them, and thereupon they began to slay and
destroy the people.

1 Mac 5:3
Then Judas fought against the children of Esau in Idumea at
Arabattine, because they besieged Gael: and he gave them a great
overthrow, and abated their courage, and took their spoils.

1 Mac 5:4
Also he remembered the injury of the children of Bean, who
had been a snare and an offence unto the people, in that they
lay in wait for them in the ways.

1 Mac 5:5
He shut them up therefore in the towers, and encamped against
them, and destroyed them utterly, and burned the towers of that
place with fire, and all that were therein.

1 Mac 5:6
Afterward he passed over to the children of Ammon, where he
found a mighty power, and much people, with Timotheus their
captain.

1 Mac 5:7
So he fought many battles with them, till at length they were
discomfited before him; and he smote them.

1 Mac 5:8
And when he had taken Jazar, with the towns belonging
thereto, he returned into Judea.

1 Mac 5:9
Then the heathen that were at Galaad assembled themselves
together against the Israelites that were in their quarters, to
destroy them; but they fled to the fortress of Dathema.

1 Mac 5:10
And sent letters unto Judas and his brethren, The heathen
that are round about us are assembled together against us to
destroy us:

1 Mac 5:11
And they are preparing to come and take the fortress
whereunto we are fled, Timotheus being captain of their host.

1 Mac 5:12
Come now therefore, and deliver us from their hands, for many
of us are slain:

1 Mac 5:13
Yea, all our brethren that were in the places of Tobie are
put to death: their wives and their children also they have
carried away captives, and borne away their stuff; and they have
destroyed there about a thousand men.

1 Mac 5:14
While these letters were yet reading, behold, there came
other messengers from Galilee with their clothes rent, who
reported on this wise,

1 Mac 5:15
And said, They of Ptolemais, and of Tyrus, and Sidon, and all
Galilee of the Gentiles, are assembled together against us to
consume us.

1 Mac 5:16
Now when Judas and the people heard these words, there
assembled a great congregation together, to consult what they
should do for their brethren, that were in trouble, and
assaulted of them.

1 Mac 5:17
Then said Judas unto Simon his brother, Choose thee out men,
and go and deliver thy brethren that are in Galilee, for I and
Jonathan my brother will go into the country of Galaad.

1 Mac 5:18
So he left Joseph the son of Zacharias, and Azarias, captains
of the people, with the remnant of the host in Judea to keep it.

1 Mac 5:19
Unto whom he gave commandment, saying, Take ye the charge of
this people, and see that ye make not war against the heathen
until the time that we come again.

1 Mac 5:20
Now unto Simon were given three thousand men to go into
Galilee, and unto Judas eight thousand men for the country of
Galaad.

1 Mac 5:21
Then went Simon into Galilee, where he fought many battles
with the heathen, so that the heathen were discomfited by him.

1 Mac 5:22
And he pursued them unto the gate of Ptolemais; and there
were slain of the heathen about three thousand men, whose spoils
he took.

1 Mac 5:23
And those that were in Galilee, and in Arbattis, with their
wives and their children, and all that they had, took he away
with him, and brought them into Judea with great joy.

1 Mac 5:24
Judas Maccabeus also and his brother Jonathan went over
Jordan, and travelled three days' journey in the wilderness,

1 Mac 5:25
Where they met with the Nabathites, who came unto them in a
peaceable manner, and told them every thing that had happened to
their brethren in the land of Galaad:

1 Mac 5:26
And how that many of them were shut up in Bosora, and Bosor,
and Alema, Casphor, Maked, and Carnaim; all these cities are
strong and great:

1 Mac 5:27
And that they were shut up in the rest of the cities of the
country of Galaad, and that against to morrow they had appointed
to bring their host against the forts, and to take them, and to
destroy them all in one day.

1 Mac 5:28
Hereupon Judas and his host turned suddenly by the way of the
wilderness unto Bosora; and when he had won the city, he slew
all the males with the edge of the sword, and took all their
spoils, and burned the city with fire,

1 Mac 5:29
From whence he removed by night, and went till he came to the
fortress.

1 Mac 5:30
And betimes in the morning they looked up, and, behold, there
was an innumerable people bearing ladders and other engines of
war, to take the fortress: for they assaulted them.

1 Mac 5:31
When Judas therefore saw that the battle was begun, and that
the cry of the city went up to heaven, with trumpets, and a
great sound,

1 Mac 5:32
He said unto his host, Fight this day for your brethren.

1 Mac 5:33
So he went forth behind them in three companies, who sounded
their trumpets, and cried with prayer.

1 Mac 5:34
Then the host of Timotheus, knowing that it was Maccabeus,
fled from him: wherefore he smote them with a great slaughter;
so that there were killed of them that day about eight thousand
men.

1 Mac 5:35
This done, Judas turned aside to Maspha; and after he had
assaulted it he took and slew all the males therein, and
received the spoils thereof and and burnt it with fire.

1 Mac 5:36
From thence went he, and took Casphon, Maged, Bosor, and the
other cities of the country of Galaad.

1 Mac 5:37
After these things gathered Timotheus another host and
encamped against Raphon beyond the brook.

1 Mac 5:38
So Judas sent men to espy the host, who brought him word,
saying, All the heathen that be round about us are assembled
unto them, even a very great host.

1 Mac 5:39
He hath also hired the Arabians to help them and they have
pitched their tents beyond the brook, ready to come and fight
against thee. Upon this Judas went to meet them.

1 Mac 5:40
Then Timotheus said unto the captains of his host, When Judas
and his host come near the brook, if he pass over first unto us,
we shall not be able to withstand him; for he will mightily
prevail against us:

1 Mac 5:41
But if he be afraid, and camp beyond the river, we shall go
over unto him, and prevail against him.

1 Mac 5:42
Now when Judas came near the brook, he caused the scribes of
the people to remain by the brook: unto whom he gave
commandment, saying, Suffer no man to remain in the camp, but
let all come to the battle.

1 Mac 5:43
So he went first over unto them, and all the people after
him: then all the heathen, being discomfited before him, cast
away their weapons, and fled unto the temple that was at
Carnaim.

1 Mac 5:44
But they took the city, and burned the temple with all that
were therein. Thus was Carnaim subdued, neither could they stand
any longer before Judas.

1 Mac 5:45
Then Judas gathered together all the Israelites that were in
the country of Galaad, from the least unto the greatest, even
their wives, and their children, and their stuff, a very great
host, to the end they might come into the land of Judea.

1 Mac 5:46
Now when they came unto Ephron, (this was a great city in the
way as they should go, very well fortified) they could not turn
from it, either on the right hand or the left, but must needs
pass through the midst of it.

1 Mac 5:47
Then they of the city shut them out, and stopped up the gates
with stones.

1 Mac 5:48
Whereupon Judas sent unto them in peaceable manner, saying,
Let us pass through your land to go into our own country, and
none shall do you any hurt; we will only pass through on foot:
howbeit they would not open unto him.

1 Mac 5:49
Wherefore Judas commanded a proclamation to be made
throughout the host, that every man should pitch his tent in the
place where he was.

1 Mac 5:50
So the soldiers pitched, and assaulted the city all that day
and all that night, till at the length the city was delivered
into his hands:

1 Mac 5:51
Who then slew all the males with the edge of the sword, and
rased the city, and took the spoils thereof, and passed through
the city over them that were slain.

1 Mac 5:52
After this went they over Jordan into the great plain before
Bethsan.

1 Mac 5:53
And Judas gathered together those that came behind, and
exhorted the people all the way through, till they came into the
land of Judea.

1 Mac 5:54
So they went up to mount Sion with joy and gladness, where
they offered burnt offerings, because not one of them were slain
until they had returned in peace.

1 Mac 5:55
Now what time as Judas and Jonathan were in the land of
Galaad, and Simon his brother in Galilee before Ptolemais,

1 Mac 5:56
Joseph the son of Zacharias, and Azarias, captains of the
garrisons, heard of the valiant acts and warlike deeds which
they had done.

1 Mac 5:57
Wherefore they said, Let us also get us a name, and go fight
against the heathen that are round about us.

1 Mac 5:58
So when they had given charge unto the garrison that was with
them, they went toward Jamnia.

1 Mac 5:59
Then came Gorgias and his men out of the city to fight
against them.

1 Mac 5:60
And so it was, that Joseph and Azaras were put to flight, and
pursued unto the borders of Judea: and there were slain that day
of the people of Israel about two thousand men.

1 Mac 5:61
Thus was there a great overthrow among the children of
Israel, because they were not obedient unto Judas and his
brethren, but thought to do some valiant act.

1 Mac 5:62
Moreover these men came not of the seed of those, by whose
hand deliverance was given unto Israel.

1 Mac 5:63
Howbeit the man Judas and his brethren were greatly renowned
in the sight of all Israel, and of all the heathen, wheresoever
their name was heard of;

1 Mac 5:64
Insomuch as the the people assembled unto them with joyful
acclamations.

1 Mac 5:65
Afterward went Judas forth with his brethren, and fought
against the children of Esau in the land toward the south, where
he smote Hebron, and the towns thereof, and pulled down the
fortress of it, and burned the towers thereof round about.

1 Mac 5:66
From thence he removed to go into the land of the
Philistines, and passed through Samaria.

1 Mac 5:67
At that time certain priests, desirous to shew their valour,
were slain in battle, for that they went out to fight
unadvisedly.

1 Mac 5:68
So Judas turned to Azotus in the land of the Philistines, and
when he had pulled down their altars, and burned their carved
images with fire, and spoiled their cities, he returned into the
land of Judea.

1 Mac 6:1
About that time king Antiochus travelling through the high
countries heard say, that Elymais in the country of Persia was a
city greatly renowned for riches, silver, and gold;

1 Mac 6:2
And that there was in it a very rich temple, wherein were
coverings of gold, and breastplates, and shields, which
Alexander, son of Philip, the Macedonian king, who reigned first
among the Grecians, had left there.

1 Mac 6:3
Wherefore he came and sought to take the city, and to spoil
it; but he was not able, because they of the city, having had
warning thereof,

1 Mac 6:4
Rose up against him in battle: so he fled, and departed
thence with great heaviness, and returned to Babylon.
