chatter, and movement of a large number of active workers.

It was doubtless owing to the earthquake of December 8, 1812, which
occurred at sunrise, that a new church was built. The main altar was
overthrown, several of the figures broken, the steeple toppled over and
crashed to the ground, and the sacristy walls were badly cracked. The
padres' house as well as all the other buildings suffered.

One of the adjuncts to San Gabriel was _El Molino Viejo_,--the old mill.
Indeed there were _two_ old mills, the first one, however, built in
Padre Zalvidea's time, in 1810 to 1812, being the one that now remains.
It is about two miles from the Mission. It had to be abandoned on
account of faulty location. Being built on the hillside, its west main
wall was the wall of the deep funnel-shaped cisterns which furnished the
water head. This made the interior damp. Then, too, the chamber in which
the water-well revolved was so low that the powerful head of water
striking the horizontal wheel splashed all over the walls and worked up
through the shaft holes to the mill stones and thus wet the flour. This
necessitated the constant presence of Indian women to carry away the
meal to dry storerooms at the Mission where it was bolted by a hand
process of their own devising. On this account the mill was abandoned,
and for several years the whole of the meal for the Mission was ground
on the old-style metates.

The region adjacent to the mill was once largely inhabited by Indians,
for the foreman of the mill ranch declares that he has hauled from the
adjacent bluff as many stone pestles and mortars, metates and grinders
as would load a four-horse wagon.

It should not be forgotten that originally the mill was roofed with red
tiles made by the Indians at the Mission; but these have entirely
disappeared.

It was the habit of Padre Zalvidea to send certain of his most trusted
neophytes over to the islands of San Clemente and Catalina with a "bolt"
or two of woven serge, made at the Mission San Gabriel, to exchange with
the island Indians for their soapstone cooking vessels,--mortars, etc.
These traders embarked from a point where Redondo now is, and started
always at midnight.

In 1819 the Indians of the Guachama rancho, called San Bernardino,
petitioned for the introduction of agriculture and stock raising, and
this was practically the beginning of that _asistencia_, as will be
recorded in the chapter on the various chapels. A chapel was also much
needed at Puente, where Zalvidea had six hundred Indians at work
in 1816.

In 1822 San Gabriel was fearfully alarmed at the rumor that one hundred
and fifty Indians were bearing down upon that Mission from the Colorado
River region. It transpired that it was an Opata with despatches, and
that the company had no hostile intent. But Captain Portilla met them
and sent them back, not a little disconcerted by their inhospitable
reception.

Of the wild, political chaos that occurred in California after Mexico
became independent of Spain, San Gabriel felt occasional waves. When the
people of San Diego and the southern part of the State rebelled against
Governor Victoria, and the latter confident chief came to arrange
matters, a battle took place near Los Angeles, in which he was severely
wounded. His friends bore him to San Gabriel, and, though he had
entirely defeated his foes, so cleverly did some one work upon his fears
that he made a formal surrender, December 6, 1831. On the ninth the
leader of the rebels, the former Governor Echeandia, had a conference
with him at San Gabriel, where he pledged himself to return to Mexico
without giving further trouble; and on the twentieth he left, stopping
for awhile at San Luis Rey with Padre Peyri. It was at this time the
venerable and worthy Peyri decided to leave California, and he therefore
accompanied the deposed governor to San Diego, from which port they
sailed January 17, 1832.

After secularization San Gabriel was one of the Missions that
slaughtered a large number of her cattle for the hides and tallow. Pio
Pico states that he had the contract at San Gabriel, employing ten
vaqueros and thirty Indians, and that he thus killed over five thousand
head. Robinson says that the rascally contractors secretly appropriated
two hides for every one they turned over to the Mission.

In 1843, March 29, Micheltorena's order, restoring San Gabriel to the
padres, was carried out, and in 1844 the official church report states
that nothing is left but its vineyards in a sad condition, and three
hundred neophytes. The final inventory made by the comisionados under
Pio Pico is missing, so that we do not know at what the Mission was
valued; but June 8, 1846, he sold the whole property to Reid and Workman
in payment for past services to the government. When attacked for his
participation in what evidently seemed the fraudulent transfer of the
Mission, Pico replies that the sale "did not go through." The United
States officers, in August of the same year, dispossessed the
"purchasers," and the courts finally decreed the sale invalid.

There are a few portions of the old cactus hedge still remaining,
planted by Padre Zalvidea. Several hundreds of acres of vineyard and
garden were thus enclosed for purposes of protection from Indians and
roaming bands of horses and cattle. The fruit of the prickly pear was a
prized article of diet by the Indians, so that the hedge was of benefit
in two ways,--protection and food.

On the altar are several of the old statues, and there are some quaint
pictures upon the walls.

In the baptistry is a font of hammered copper, probably made either at
San Gabriel or San Fernando. There are several other interesting
vessels. At the rear of the church are the remains of five brick
structures, where the soap-making and tallow-rendering of the Mission
was conducted. Five others were removed a few years ago to make way for
the public road. Undoubtedly there were other buildings for the women
and male neophytes as well as the workshops.

The San Gabriel belfry is well known in picture, song, and story. Yet
the fanciful legends about the casting of the bells give way to stern
fact when they are examined. Upon the first bell is the inscription:
"Ave Maria Santisima. S. Francisco. De Paula Rvelas, me fecit." The
second: "Cast by G.H. Holbrook, Medway, Mass., 1828." The third: "Ave
Maria, Sn Jvan Nepomvseno, Rvelas me fecit, A.D., '95." The fourth:
"Fecit Benitvs a Regibvs, Ano D. 1830, Sn. Frano."

In the year 1886 a number of needed repairs were made; the windows were
enlarged, and a new ceiling put in, the latter a most incongruous
piece of work.



CHAPTER XIV

SAN LUIS OBISPO DE TOLOSA

Founded, as we have seen, by Serra himself, September I, 1772, by the
end of 1773 the Mission of San Luis Obispo could report only twelve
converts. Serra left the day after the founding, leaving Padre Cavalier
in charge, with two Indians from Lower California, four soldiers and
their corporal. Their only provisions were a few hundred pounds of flour
and wheat, and a barrel of brown sugar. But the Indians were kind, in
remembrance of Fages's goodness in shooting the bears, and brought them
venison and seeds frequently, so they "managed to subsist" until
provisions came.

Padre Cavalier built a neat chapel of logs and apartments for the
missionaries, and the soldiers soon erected their own barracks. While
the Indians were friendly, they did not seem to be particularly
attracted to the Mission, as they had more and better food than the
padre, and the only thing he had that they particularly desired was
cloth. There was no rancheria in the vicinity, but they were much
interested in the growth of the corn and beans sown by the padre, and
which, being on good and well-watered land, yielded abundantly.

[Illustration: MISSION SAN GABRIEL ARCANGEL.]

[Illustration: SAN LUIS OBISPO BEFORE RESTORATION.]

[Illustration: RUINED MISSION OF SAN JUAN CAPISTRANO. Showing campanile
and protected arched corridors.]

[Illustration: THE RESTORED MISSION OF SAN LUIS OBISPO.]

In 1776 certain gentiles, who were hostile to some Indians that were
sheltered by the padres, attacked the Mission by discharging burning
arrows upon the tule roof of the buildings, and everything was
destroyed, save the church and the granary. Rivera came at once,
captured two of the ringleaders, and sent them for punishment to the
Monterey presidio. The success of the gentiles led them to repeat their
attacks by setting fire to the Mission twice during the next ten years,
and it was these calamities that led one of the San Luis padres to
attempt the making of roof tiles. Being successful, it was not long
before all the Missions were so roofed.

In 1794 certain of the neophytes of San Luis and La Purisima conspired
with some gentiles to incite the Indians at San Luis to revolt, but the
arrest and deportation of fifteen or twenty of the ringleaders to
Monterey, to hard labor at the presidio, put a stop to the revolt.

Padres Lasuen and Tapis both served here as missionaries, and in 1798
Luis Antonio Martinez, one of the best known of the padres, began his
long term of service at San Luis. In 1794 the Mission reached its
highest population of 946 souls. It had 6500 head of cattle and horses,
6150 sheep. In 1798 it raised 4100 bushels of wheat, and in this same
year a water-power mill was erected and set in motion. San Luis was
also favored by the presence of a smith, a miller and a carpenter of
the artisan instructors, sent by the king in 1794. Looms were erected,
and cotton brought up from San Blas was woven. A new church of adobes,
with a tile roof, was completed in 1793, and that same year a portico
was added to its front.

In 1830 Padre Martinez was banished to Madrid, and at this time the
buildings at San Luis were already falling into decay, as the padre,
with far-seeing eye, was assured that the politicians had nothing but
evil in store for them. Consequently, he did not keep up things as he
otherwise would have done. He was an outspoken, frank, fearless man, and
this undoubtedly led to his being chosen as the example necessary to
restrain the other padres from too great freedom of speech and manner.

In 1834 San Luis had 264 neophytes, though after secularization the
number was gradually reduced until, in 1840, there were but 170 left.
The order of secularization was put into effect in 1835 by Manuel Jimeno
Casarin. The inventory of the property in 1836 showed $70,000. In 1839
it was $60,000. In 1840 all the horses were stolen by "New Mexican
traders," one report alone telling of the driving away of 1200 head. The
officers at Los Angeles went in pursuit of the thieves and one party
reported that it came in full sight of the foe retiring deliberately
with the stolen animals, but, as there were as many Americans as
Indians in the band, they deemed it imprudent to risk a conflict.

In December of 1846, when Fremont was marching south to co-operate with
Stockton against the Southern Californians, San Luis was thought to
harbor an armed force of hostiles. Accordingly Fremont surrounded it one
dark, rainy night, and took it by sudden assault. The fears were
unfounded, for only women, children, and non-combatants were found.

The Book of Confirmations at San Luis has its introductory pages written
by Serra. There is also a "Nota" opposite page three, and a full-page
note in the back in his clear, vigorous and distinctive hand.

There are three bells at San Luis Obispo. The largest is to the right,
the smallest in the center. On the largest bell is the following
inscription: "Me fecit ano di 1818 Manvel Vargas, Lima. Mision de Sn
Luis Obispo De La Nueba California." This latter is a circumferential
panel about midway between the top and bottom of the bell. On the middle
bell we read the same inscription, while there is none on the third.
This latter was cast in San Francisco, from two old bells which
were broken.

From a painting the old San Luis Obispo church is seen to have been
raised up on a stone and cement foundation. The corridor was without the
arches that are elsewhere one of the distinctive features, but plain
round columns, with a square base and topped with a plain square
moulding, gave support to the roof beams, on which the usual red-tiled
roof was placed.

The _fachada_ of the church retreats some fifteen or twenty feet from
the front line of the corridors. The monastery has been "restored," even
as has the church, out of all resemblance to its own honest original
self. The adobe walls are covered with painted wood, and the tiles have
given way to shingles, just like any other modern and commonplace house.
The building faces the southeast. The altar end is at the northwest. To
the southwest are the remains of a building of boulders, brick, and
cement, exactly of the same style as the asistencia building of Santa
Margarita. It seems as if it might have been built by the same hands.
Possibly in the earlier days Santa Margarita was a _vista_ of San Luis,
rather than of San Miguel, though it is generally believed that it was
under the jurisdiction of the latter.



CHAPTER XV

SAN FRANCISCO DE ASIS

The story of Bucareli's determination to found a presidio at San
Francisco, and Anza's march with the colonists for it from Sonora, has
already been recounted. When Serra and Galvez were making their original
plans for the establishment of the three first Missions of Alta
California, Serra expressed his disappointment that St. Francis was
neglected by asking: "And for our founder St. Francis there is no
Mission?" To which Galvez replied: "If St. Francis desires a Mission,
let him show us his harbor and he shall have one." It therefore seemed
providential that when Portola, Pages, and Crespi, in 1769, saw the Bay
of Monterey they did not recognize it, and were thus led on further
north, where the great Bay of San Francisco was soon afterwards
discovered and reasonably well surveyed.

Palou eventually established the Mission October 9, 1776. None of the
Indians were present to witness the ceremony, as they had fled, the
preceding month, from the attacks of certain of their enemies. When they
returned in December they brought trouble with them. They stole all in
their reach; one party discharged arrows at the corporal of the guard;
another insulted a soldier's wife; and an attempt was made to kill the
San Carlos neophyte who had been brought here. The officers shut up one
of these hostiles, whereat a party of his comrades rushed to the rescue,
fired their arrows at the Mission, and were only driven back when the
soldiers arrived and fired their muskets in the air. Next day the
sergeant went out to make arrests and another struggle ensued, in which
one was killed and one wounded. All now sued for peace, which, with
sundry floggings, was granted. For three months they now kept away from
the Mission.

In 1777 they began to return, and on October 4, Padre Serra, on his
first visit, was able to say mass in the presence of seventeen adult
native converts. Then, passing over to the presidio on October 10, as he
stood gazing on the waters flowing out to the setting sun through the
purple walls of the Golden Gate, he exclaimed with a heart too full of
thanksgiving to be longer restrained: "Thanks be to God that now our
father St. Francis with the Holy Cross of the Procession of Missions,
has reached the last limit of the Californian continent. To go farther
he must have boats."

In 1782, April 25, the corner-stone of a new church was laid at San
Francisco. Three padres were present, together with the Mission guard
and a body of troops from the presidio. In the Mission records it says:
"There was enclosed in the cavity of said corner-stone the image of our
Holy Father St. Francis, some relics in the form of bones of St. Pius
and other holy martyrs, five medals of various saints, and a goodly
portion of silver coin."

In 1785 Governor Pages complained to the viceroy, among other things,
that the presidio of San Francisco had been deprived of mass for three
years, notwithstanding the obligation of the friars to serve as
chaplains. Palou replied that the padres were under no obligation to
serve gratuitously, and that they were always ready to attend the
soldiers when their other duties allowed.

In November, 1787, Captain Soler, who for a brief time acted as
temporary governor and inspector, suggested that the presidio of San
Francisco be abandoned and its company transferred to Santa Barbara.
Later, as I have shown elsewhere, a proposition was again made for the
abandonment of San Francisco; so it is apparent that Fate herself was
protecting it for its future great and wonderful history.

In 1790 San Francisco reported 551 baptisms and 205 deaths, with a
present neophyte population of 438. Large stock had increased to 2000
head and small to 1700.

Three years later, on November 14, the celebrated English navigator,
George Vancouver, in his vessel "Discovery," sailed into San Francisco
Bay. His arrival caused quite a flutter of excitement both at the
presidio and Mission, where he was kindly entertained. The governor was
afraid of this elaborate hospitality to the hated and feared English,
and issued orders to the commandant providing for a more frigid
reception in the future, so, on Vancouver's second visit, he did not
find matters so agreeable, and grumbled accordingly.

Tiles were made and put on the church roofs in 1795; more houses were
built for the neophytes, and all roofed with tiles. Half a league of
ditch was also dug around the potrero (pasture ground) and fields.

In 1806 San Francisco was enlivened by the presence of the Russian
chamberlain, Rezanof, who had been on a special voyage around the world,
and was driven by scurvy and want of provisions to the California
settlements. He was accompanied by Dr. G.H. von Langsdorff. Langsdorff's
account of the visit and reception at several points in California is
interesting. He gives a full description of the Indians and their method
of life at the Mission; commends the zeal and self-sacrifice of the
padres; speaks of the ingenuity shown by the women in making baskets;
the system of allowing the cattle and horses to run wild, etc. Visiting
the Mission of San Jose by boat, he and his companions had quite an
adventurous time getting back, owing to the contrary winds.

Rezanof's visit and its consequences have been made the subject of much
and romantic writing. Gertrude Atherton's novel, _Rezanof_, is devoted
to this episode in his life. The burden of the story is possibly true,
viz., that the Russians in their settlements to the north were suffering
for want of the food that California was producing in abundance. Yet,
owing to the absurd Spanish laws governing California, she was forbidden
to sell to or trade with any foreign peoples or powers. Rezanof, who was
well acquainted with this prohibitory law, determined upon trying to
overcome it for the immediate relief of his suffering compatriots. He
was fairly well received when he reached San Francisco, but he could
accomplish nothing in the way of trading or the sale of the needed
provisions.

Now began a campaign of strategic waiting. To complicate (or simplify)
the situation, in the _bailes_ and _festas_ given to the distinguished
Russian, Rezanof danced and chatted with Concha Argueello, the daughter
of the stern old commandant of the post.

Did they fall in love with each other, or did they not? Some writers say
one thing and some another. Anyhow, the girl thought she had received
the honest love of a noble man and responded with ardor and devotion. So
sure was she of his affection that she finally prevailed upon her father
(so we are told) to sell to Rezanof the provisions for which he had
come. The vessel, accordingly, was well and satisfactorily laden and
Rezanof sailed away. Being a Russian subject, he was not allowed to
marry the daughter of a foreigner without the consent of his sovereign,
and he was to hurry to Moscow and gain permission to return and wed the
lady of his choice.

He never returned. Hence the accusation that he acted in bad faith to
her and her father. This charge seems to be unfounded, for it is known
that he left his vessel and started overland to reach Moscow earlier
than he could have done by ship, that he was taken seriously ill on the
trip and died.

But Concha did not know of this. No one informed her of the death of her
lover, and her weary waiting for his return is what has given the touch
of keenest pathos to the romantic story. Bret Harte, in his inimitable
style, has put into exquisite verse, the story of the waiting of this
true-hearted Spanish maiden[4]:

[4] From Poems by Bret Harte. By permission of the publishers, The
Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, Mass.

     "He with grave provincial magnates long had held serene debate
     On the Treaty of Alliance and the high affairs of state;

     He from grave provincial magnates oft had turned to talk apart
     With the Comandante's daughter on the questions of the heart,

     Until points of gravest import yielded slowly one by one,
     And by Love was consummated what Diplomacy begun;

     Till beside the deep embrasures, where the brazen cannon are,
