
    Hoc nos sequamur quisque nunc pro viribus,
  quod consecrati tu magister dogmatis
  tuis dedisti Christe sectatoribus,
  ut, cum vorandi vicerit libidinem,
  late triumphet inperator spiritus.          200

    Hoc est, quod atri livor hostis invidet,
  mundi polique quod gubernator probat,
  altaris aram quod facit placabilem,
  quod dormientis excitat cordis fidem,
  quod limat aegram pectoris rubiginem.       205

    Perfusa non sic amne flamma extinguitur,
  nec sic calente sole tabescunt nives,
  ut turbidarum scabra culparum seges
  vanescit almo trita sub ieiunio,
  si blanda semper misceatur largitas.        210

    Est quippe et illud grande virtutis genus
  operire nudos, indigentes pascere,
  opem benignam ferre supplicantibus,
  unam paremque sortis humanae vicem
  inter potentes atque egenos ducere.         215

    Satis beatus quisque dextram porrigit,
  laudis rapacem, prodigam pecuniae,
  cuius sinistra dulce factum nesciat:
  illum perennes protinus conplent opes,
  ditatque fructus faenerantem centuplex.     220




                     VII. HYMN FOR THOSE WHO FAST


  O Jesus, Light of Bethlehem,
    True Son of God, Incarnate Word;
  Thou offspring of a Virgin's womb,
    Be present at our frugal board;
  Accept our fast, our sacrifice,
    And smile upon us, gracious Lord.

  For by this holiest mystery
    The inward parts are cleansed from stain,
  And, taming all the unbridled lusts,
    Our sinful flesh we thus restrain,
  Lest gluttony and drunkenness
    Should choke the soul and cloud the brain.

  Hence appetite and luxury
    Are forced their empire to resign;
  The wanton sport, the jest obscene,
    The ignoble sway of sleep and wine,
  And all the plagues of languid sense
    Feel the strict bonds of discipline.

  For if, full fed with meat and drink,
    The flesh thou ne'er dost mortify,
  The mind, that spark of sacred flame,
    By pleasure dulled, must fail and die,
  And pent in its gross prison-house
    The soul in shameful torpor lie.

  So be thy carnal lusts controlled,
    So be thy judgment clear and bright;
  Then shall thy spirit, swift and free,
    Be gifted with a keener sight,
  And breathing in an ampler air
    To the All-Father pray aright.

  Elias by such abstinence,
    Seer of the desert, grew in grace,
  Who left the madding haunts of men
    And found a peaceful resting-place,
  Where, far from sinful crowds, he trod
    The pure and silent wilderness.

  Till by those fiery coursers drawn
    The swift car bore him through the air,
  Lest earth's defiling touch should mar
    The holiness it might not share,
  Or some polluting breath disturb
    The peace attained by fast and prayer.

  Moses, through whom from His dread throne
    The will of God to man was told,
  No food might touch till through the sky
    The sun full forty times had rolled,
  Ere God before him stood revealed,
    Lord of the heavens sevenfold.

  Tears were his meat, while bent in prayer
    Through the long night he bowed his head
  E'en to the thirsty dust, that drank
    The drops in bitter weeping shed;
  Till, at God's call, he saw the flame
    No eye may bear, and was afraid.

  The Baptist, too, was strong in fast--
    Forerunner in a later day
  Of God's Eternal Son--who made
    The byepaths plain, the crooked way
  A road direct, wherein His feet
    Might travel on without delay.

  This was the messenger's great task
    Who for God's advent zealously
  Prepared the way, the rough made smooth,
    The mountain levelled to the sea;
  That, when Truth came from heaven to earth,
    All fair and straight His path should be.

  He was not born in common wise,
    For dry and wrinkled was the breast
  Of her that bare him late in years,
    Nor found she from her labour rest,
  Till she had hailed with lips inspired
    The Maid with unborn Godhead blest.

  For him the hairy skins of beasts
    Furnished a raiment rude and wild,
  As forth into the lonely waste
    He fared, an unbefriended child,
  Who dwelt apart, lest he should be
    By evil city-life defiled.

  There, vowed to abstinence, he grew
    To manhood, and with stern disdain
  He turned from meat and drink, until
    He saw night's shadow fall again;
  And locusts and the wild bees' store
    Sufficed his vigour to sustain.

  The first was he to testify
    Of that new life which man might win;
  In Jordan's consecrating stream
    He purged the stains of ancient sin,
  And, as he made the body clean,
    The radiant Spirit entered in.

  Forth from the holy tide they came
    Reborn, from guilt's pollution free,
  As bright from out the cleansing fire
    Flows the rough gold, or as we see
  The glittering silver, purged of dross,
    Flash into polished purity.

  Now let us tell, from Holy Writ,
    Of olden fasts the fairest crown;
  How God in pity stayed His hand,
    And spared a doomed and guilty town,
  In clemency the flames withheld
    And laid His vengeful lightnings down.

  A mighty race of ancient time
    Waxed arrogant in boastful pride;
  Debauched were they, and borne along
    On foul corruption's loathsome tide,
  Till in their stiff-necked self-conceit
    They e'en the God of Heaven denied.

  At last Eternal Mercy turns
    To righteous judgment, swift and dire;
  He shakes the clouds; the mighty sword
    Flames in His hand, and in His ire
  He wields the roaring hurricane
    'Mid murky gloom and flashing fire.

  Yet in His clemency He grants
    To penitence a brief delay,
  That they might burst the bonds of lust
    And put their vanities away;
  His sentence given, He waits awhile
    And stays the hand upraised to slay.

  To warn them of the wrath to come
    The Avenger in His mercy sent
  Jonah the seer; but,--though he knew
    The threatening Judge would fain relent
  Nor wished to strike,--towards Tarshish town
    The prophet's furtive course was bent.

  As up the galley's side he climbed,
    They loosed the dripping rope, and passed
  The harbour bar: then on them burst
    The sudden fury of the blast;
  And when their peril's cause they sought,
    The lot was on the recreant cast.

  The man whose guilt the urn declares
    Alone must die, the rest to save;
  Hurled headlong from the deck, he falls
    And sinks beneath the engulfing wave,
  Then, seized by monstrous jaws, is plunged
    Into a vast and living grave.

       *       *       *       *       *

  At last the monster hurls him forth,
    As the third night had rolled away;
  Before its roar the billows break
    And lash the cliffs with briny spray;
  Unhurt the wondering prophet stands
    And hails the unexpected day.

  Thus turned again to duty's path
    To Nineveh he swiftly came,
  Their lusts rebuked and boldly preached
    God's judgment on their sin and shame;
  "Believe!" he cried, "the Judge draws nigh
    Whose wrath shall wrap your streets in flame."

  Thence to the lofty mount withdrew,
    Where he might watch the smoke-cloud lower
  O'er blasted homes and ruined halls,
    And rest beneath the shady bower
  Upspringing in swift luxury
    Of twining tendril, leaf and flower.

  But when the guilty burghers heard
    The impending doom, a dull despair
  Possessed their souls; proud senators,
    Poor craftsmen, throng the highways fair;
  Pale youth with tottering age unites,
    And women's wailing rends the air.

  A public fast they now decree,
    If they may thus Christ's anger stay:
  No food they touch: each haughty dame
    Puts silken robes and gems away,
  In sable garbed, and ashes casts
    Upon her tresses' disarray.

  In dark and squalid vesture clad
    The Fathers go: the mourning crowd
  Dons rough attire: in shaggy skins
    Enwrapped, fair maids their faces shroud
  With dusky veils, and boyish heads
    E'en to the very dust are bowed.

  The King tears off his jewelled brooch
    And rends the robe of Coan hue;
  Bright emeralds and lustrous pearls
    Are flung aside, and ashes strew
  The royal head, discrowned and bent,
    As low he kneels God's grace to sue.

  None thought to drink, none thought to eat;
    All from the table turned aside,
  And in their cradles wet with tears
    Starved babes in bitter anguish cried,
  For e'en the foster-mother stern
    To little lips the breast denied.

  The very flocks are closely penned
    By careful hands, lest they should gain
  Sweet water from the babbling stream
    Or wandering crop the dewy plain;
  And bleating sheep and lowing kine
    Within their barren stalls complain.

  Moved by such penitence, full soon
    God's grace repealed the stern decree
  And curbed His righteous wrath; for aye,
    When man repents, His clemency
  Is swift to pardon and to hear
    His children weeping bitterly.

  Yet wherefore of that bygone race
    Should we anew the story tell?
  For Christ's pure soul by fasting long
    The clogging bonds of flesh did quell;
  He Whom the prophet's voice foretold
    As GOD WITH US, Emmanuel.

  Man's body--frail by nature's law
    And bound by pleasure's easy chain--
  He freed by virtue's strong restraint,
    And gave it liberty again:
  He broke the bonds of flesh, and Lust
    Was driven from his old domain.

  Deep in the inhospitable wild
    For forty days He dwelt alone
  Nor tasted food, till, thus prepared,
    All human weakness overthrown
  By fasting's power, His mortal frame
    Rejoiced the spirit's sway to own.

  The Adversary, marvelling
    To see this creature of a day
  Endure such toil, spent all his guile
    To learn if God in human clay
  Had come indeed; but soon rebuked
    Behind His back fled shamed away.

  Therefore let each with all his might
    Follow the way the Master taught,
  The law of consecrated life
    Which Christ unto His servants brought;
  Till, with the lusts of flesh subdued,
    The spirit reigns o'er act and thought.

  'Tis this our jealous foe abhors,
    'Tis this the Lord of earth and sky
  Approves; by this the soul is made
    Thy holy altar, God Most High:
  Faith stirs within the slumbering heart
    And sin's corroding power must fly.

  Swifter than water quenches fire,
