

  VERSE 18. For if I build again the things which I destroyed, I make
  myself a transgressor.

"I have not preached to the end that I build again the things which I
destroyed. If I should do so, I would not only be laboring in vain,
but I would make myself guilty of a great wrong. By the ministry of the
Gospel I have destroyed sin, heaviness of heart, wrath, and death. I
have abolished the Law, so that it should not bother your conscience any
more. Should I now once again establish the Law, and set up the rule
of Moses? This is exactly what I should be doing, if I would urge
circumcision and the performance of the Law as necessary unto salvation.
Instead of righteousness and life, I would restore sin and death."

By the grace of God we know that we are justified through faith in
Christ alone. We do not mingle law and grace, faith and works. We keep
them far apart. Let every true Christian mark the distinction between
law and grace, and mark it well.

We must not drag good works into the article of justification as the
monks do who maintain that not only good works, but also the punishment
which evildoers suffer for their wicked deeds, deserve everlasting life.
When a criminal is brought to the place of execution, the monks try to
comfort him in this manner: "You want to die willingly and patiently,
and then you will merit remission of your sins and eternal life." What
cruelty is this, that a wretched thief, murderer, robber should be so
miserably misguided in his extreme distress, that at the very point of
death he should be denied the sweet promises of Christ, and directed to
hope for pardon of his sins in the willingness and patience with which
he is about to suffer death for his crimes? The monks are showing him
the paved way to hell.

These hypocrites do not know the first thing about grace, the Gospel,
or Christ. They retain the appearance and the name of the Gospel and
of Christ for a decoy only. In their confessional writings faith or the
merit of Christ are never mentioned. In their writings they play up
the merits of man, as can readily be seen from the following form of
absolution used among the monks.

  "God forgive thee, brother. The merit of the passion of our Lord Jesus
  Christ, and of the blessed Saint Mary, always a virgin, and of all the
  saints; the merit of thy order, the strictness of thy religion, the
  humility of thy profession, the contrition of thy heart, the good works
  thou hast done and shalt do for the love of our Lord Jesus Christ, be
  available unto thee for the remission of thy sins, the increase of thy
  worth and grace, and the reward of everlasting life. Amen."

True, the merit of Christ is mentioned in this formula of absolution.
But if you look closer you will notice that Christ's merit is belittled,
while monkish merits are aggrandized. They confess Christ with their
lips, and at the same time deny His power to save. I myself was at one
time entangled in this error. I thought Christ was a judge and had to be
pacified by a strict adherence to the rules of my order. But now I give
thanks unto God, the Father of all mercies, who has called me out of
darkness into the light of His glorious Gospel, and has granted unto me
the saving knowledge of Christ Jesus, my Lord.

We conclude with Paul, that we are justified by faith in Christ, without
the Law. Once a person has been justified by Christ, he will not be
unproductive of good, but as a good tree he will bring forth good fruit.
A believer has the Holy Spirit, and the Holy Spirit will not permit a
person to remain idle, but will put him to work and stir him up to
the love of God, to patient suffering in affliction, to prayer,
thanksgiving, to the habit of charity towards all men.


  VERSE 19. For I through the law am dead to the law, that I might live
  unto God.

This cheering form of speech is frequently met with in the Scriptures,
particularly in the writings of St. Paul, when the Law is set against
the Law, and sin is made to oppose sin, and death is arrayed against
death, and hell is turned loose against hell, as in the following
quotations: "Thou hast led captivity captive," Psalm 68:18. "O death, I
will be thy plagues; O grave, I will be thy destruction," Hosea 13:14.
"And for sin, condemned sin in the flesh," Romans 8:3.

Here Paul plays the Law against the Law, as if to say: "The Law of Moses
condemns me; but I have another law, the law of grace and liberty which
condemns the accusing Law of Moses."

On first sight Paul seems to be advancing a strange and ugly heresy.
He says, "I am dead to the law, that I might live unto God." The false
apostles said the very opposite. They said, "If you do not live to the
law, you are dead unto God."

The doctrine of our opponents is similar to that of the false apostles
in Paul's day. Our opponents teach, "If you want to live unto God,
you must live after the Law, for it is written, Do this and thou shalt
live." Paul, on the other hand, teaches, "We cannot live unto God unless
we are dead unto the Law." If we are dead unto the Law, the Law can have
no power over us.

Paul does not only refer to the Ceremonial Law, but to the whole Law.
We are not to think that the Law is wiped out. It stays. It continues to
operate in the wicked. But a Christian is dead to the Law. For example,
Christ by His resurrection became free from the grave, and yet the grave
remains. Peter was delivered from prison, yet the prison remains. The
Law is abolished as far as I am concerned, when it has driven me into
the arms of Christ. Yet the Law continues to exist and to function. But
it no longer exists for me.

"I have nothing to do with the Law," cries Paul. He could not have
uttered anything more devastating to the prestige of the Law. He
declares that he does not care for the Law, that he does not intend ever
to be justified by the Law.

To be dead to the Law means to be free of the Law. What right, then,
has the Law to accuse me, or to hold anything against me? When you see
a person squirming in the clutches of the Law, say to him: "Brother, get
things straight. You let the Law talk to your conscience. Make it talk
to your flesh. Wake up, and believe in Jesus Christ, the Conqueror of
Law and sin. Faith in Christ will lift you high above the Law into the
heaven of grace. Though Law and sin remain, they no longer concern you,
because you are dead to the Law and dead to sin."

Blessed is the person who knows how to use this truth in times of
distress. He can talk. He can say: "Mr. Law, go ahead and accuse me as
much as you like. I know I have committed many sins, and I continue to
sin daily. But that does not bother me. You have got to shout louder,
Mr. Law. I am deaf, you know. Talk as much as you like, I am dead to
you. If you want to talk to me about my sins, go and talk to my flesh.
Belabor that, but don't talk to my conscience. My conscience is a lady
and a queen, and has nothing to do with the likes of you, because my
conscience lives to Christ under another law, a new and better law, the
law of grace."

We have two propositions: To live unto the Law, is to die unto God. To
die unto the Law, is to live unto God. These two propositions go against
reason. No law-worker can ever understand them. But see to it that you
understand them. The Law can never justify and save a sinner. The Law
can only accuse, terrify, and kill him. Therefore to live unto the Law
is to die unto God. Vice versa, to die unto the Law is to live unto God.
If you want to live unto God, bury the Law, and find life through faith
in Christ Jesus.

We have enough arguments right here to conclude that justification is
by faith alone. How can the Law effect our justification, when Paul so
plainly states that we must be dead to the Law if we want to live unto
God? If we are dead to the Law and the Law is dead to us, how can it
possibly contribute anything to our justification? There is nothing left
for us but to be justified by faith alone.

This nineteenth verse is loaded with consolation. It fortifies a person
against every danger. It allows you to argue like this:

  "I confess I have sinned."
  "Then God will punish you."
  "No, He will not do that."
  "Why not? Does not the Law say so?"
  "I have nothing to do with the Law."
  "How so?"
  "I have another law, the law of liberty."
  "What do you mean--'liberty'?"
  "The liberty of Christ, for Christ has made me free from the Law that
  held me down. That Law is now in prison itself, held captive by grace
  and liberty."

By faith in Christ a person may gain such sure and sound comfort, that
he need not fear the devil, sin, death, or any evil. "Sir Devil," he
may say, "I am not afraid of you. I have a Friend whose name is Jesus
Christ, in whom I believe. He has abolished the Law, condemned sin,
vanquished death, and destroyed hell for me. He is bigger than you,
Satan. He has licked you, and holds you down. You cannot hurt me." This
is the faith that overcomes the devil.

Paul manhandles the Law. He treats the Law as if it were a thief and
a robber He treats the Law as contemptible to the conscience, in order
that those who believe in Christ may take courage to defy the Law, and
say: "Mr. Law, I am a sinner. What are you going to do about it?"

Or take death. Christ is risen from death. Why should we now fear the
grave? Against my death I set another death, or rather life, my life in
Christ.

Oh, the sweet names of Jesus! He is called my law against the Law, my
sin against sin, my death against death. Translated, it means that He is
my righteousness, my life, my everlasting salvation. For this reason was
He made the law of the Law, the sin of sin, the death of death, that
He might redeem me from the curse of the Law. He permitted the Law to
accuse Him, sin to condemn Him, and death to take Him, to abolish the
Law, to condemn sin, and to destroy death for me.

This peculiar form of speech sounds much sweeter than if Paul had said:
"I through liberty am dead to the law." By putting it in this way, "I
through the law am dead to the law," he opposes one law with another
law, and has them fight it out.

In this masterly fashion Paul draws our attention away from the Law,
sin, death, and every evil, and centers it upon Christ.


  VERSE 20. I am crucified with Christ.

Christ is Lord over the Law, because He was crucified unto the Law. I
also am lord over the Law, because by faith I am crucified with Christ.

Paul does not here speak of crucifying the flesh, but he speaks of that
higher crucifying wherein sin, devil, and death are crucified in Christ
and in me. By my faith in Christ I am crucified with Christ. Hence these
evils are crucified and dead unto me.


  VERSE 20. Nevertheless I live.

"I do not mean to create the impression as though I did not live before
this. But in reality I first live now, now that I have been delivered
from the Law, from sin, and death. Being crucified with Christ and dead
unto the Law, I may now rise unto a new and better life."

We must pay close attention to Paul's way of speaking. He says that we
are crucified and dead unto the Law. The fact is, the Law is crucified
and dead unto us. Paul purposely speaks that way in order to increase
the portion of our comfort.


  VERSE 20. Yet not I.

Paul explains what constitutes true Christian righteousness. True
Christian righteousness is the righteousness of Christ who lives in us.
We must look away from our own person. Christ and my conscience must
become one, so that I can see nothing else but Christ crucified and
raised from the dead for me. If I keep on looking at myself, I am gone.

If we lose sight of Christ and begin to consider our past, we simply
go to pieces. We must turn our eyes to the brazen serpent, Christ
crucified, and believe with all our heart that He is our righteousness
and our life. For Christ, on whom our eyes are fixed, in whom we live,
who lives in us, is Lord over Law, sin, death, and all evil.


  VERSE 20. But Christ liveth in me.

"Thus I live," the Apostle starts out. But presently he corrects
himself, saying, "Yet not I, but Christ liveth in me." He is the form of
my perfection. He embellishes my faith.

Since Christ is now living in me, He abolishes the Law, condemns sin,
and destroys death in me. These foes vanish in His presence. Christ
abiding in me drives out every evil. This union with Christ delivers me
from the demands of the Law, and separates me from my sinful self. As
long as I abide in Christ, nothing can hurt me.

Christ domiciling in me, the old Adam has to stay outside and remain
subject to the Law. Think what grace, righteousness, life, peace, and
salvation there is in me, thanks to that inseparable conjunction between
Christ and me through faith!

Paul has a peculiar style, a celestial way of speaking. "I live," he
says, "I live not; I am dead, I am not dead; I am a sinner, I am not
a sinner; I have the Law, I have no Law." When we look at ourselves we
find plenty of sin. But when we look at Christ, we have no sin. Whenever
we separate the person of Christ from our own person, we live under the
Law and not in Christ; we are condemned by the Law, dead before God.

Faith connects you so intimately with Christ, that He and you become
as it were one person. As such you may boldly say: "I am now one with
Christ. Therefore Christ's righteousness, victory, and life are mine."
On the other hand, Christ may say: "I am that big sinner. His sins and
his death are mine, because he is joined to me, and I to him."

Whenever remission of sins is freely proclaimed, people misinterpret it
according to Romans 3:8, "Let us do evil, that good may come." As
soon as people hear that we are not justified by the Law, they reason
maliciously: "Why, then let us reject the Law. If grace abounds, where
sin abounds, let us abound in sin, that grace may all the more abound."
People who reason thus are reckless. They make sport of the Scriptures
and slander the sayings of the Holy Ghost.

However, there are others who are not malicious, only weak, who may take
offense when told that Law and good works are unnecessary for salvation.
These must be instructed as to why good works do not justify, and from
what motives good works must be done. Good works are not the cause, but
the fruit of righteousness. When we have become righteous, then first
are we able and willing to do good. The tree makes the apple; the apple
does not make the tree.


  VERSE 20. And the life which I now live in the flesh I live by the
  faith of the Son of God.

Paul does not deny the fact that he is living in the flesh. He performs
the natural functions of the flesh. But he says that this is not his
real life. His life in the flesh is not a life after the flesh.

"I live by the faith of the Son of God," he says. "My speech is no
longer directed by the flesh, but by the Holy Ghost. My sight is no
longer governed by the flesh, but by the Holy Ghost. My hearing is no
longer determined by the flesh, but by the Holy Ghost. I cannot teach,
write, pray, or give thanks without the instrumentality of the flesh;
yet these activities do not proceed from the flesh, but from God."

A Christian uses earthly means like any unbeliever. Outwardly they look
alike. Nevertheless there is a great difference between them. I may live
in the flesh, but I do not live after the flesh. I do my living now "by
the faith of the Son of God." Paul had the same voice, the same tongue,
before and after his conversion. Before his conversion his tongue
uttered blasphemies. But after his conversion his tongue spoke a
spiritual, heavenly language.

We may now understand how spiritual life originates. It enters the heart
by faith. Christ reigns in the heart with His Holy Spirit, who sees,
hears, speaks, works, suffers, and does all things in and through us
over the protest and the resistance of the flesh.
