4. "The prudent lover considereth not the gift of the lover so
much as the love of the giver.  He looketh for the affection more
than the value, and setteth all gifts lower than the Beloved.
The noble lover resteth not in the gift, but in Me above every
gift.

5. "All is not lost, though thou sometimes think of Me or of My
saints, less than thou shouldest desire.  That good and sweet
affection which thou sometimes perceivest is the effect of
present grace and some foretaste of the heavenly country; but
hereon thou must not too much depend, for it goeth and cometh.
But to strive against the evil motions of the mind which come to
us, and to resist the suggestions of the devil, is a token of
virtue and great merit.

6. "Therefore let not strange fancies disturb thee, whencesoever
they arise.  Bravely observe thy purpose and thy upright
intentions towards God.  It is not an illusion when thou art
sometimes suddenly carried away into rapture, and then suddenly
art brought back to the wonted vanities of thy heart.  For thou
dost rather unwillingly undergo them than cause them; and so long
as they displease thee and thou strivest against them, it is a
merit and no loss.

7. "Know thou that thine old enemy altogether striveth to hinder
thy pursuit after good, and to deter thee from every godly
exercise, to wit, the contemplation of the Saints, the pious
remembrance of My passion, the profitable recollection of sin,
the keeping of thy own heart, and the steadfast purpose to grow
in virtue.  He suggesteth to thee many evil thoughts, that he may
work in thee weariness and terror, and so draw thee away from
prayer and holy reading.  Humble confession displeaseth him, and
if he were able he would make thee to cease from Communion.
Believe him not, nor heed him, though many a time he hath laid
for thee the snares of deceit.  Account it to be from him, when
he suggesteth evil and unclean thoughts.  Say unto him, 'Depart
unclean spirit; put on shame, miserable one; horribly unclean art
thou, who bringest such things to mine ears.  Depart from me,
detestable deceiver; thou shalt have no part in me; but Jesus
shall be with me, as a strong warrior, and thou shalt stand
confounded.  Rather would I die and bear all suffering, than
consent unto thee.  Hold thy peace and be dumb; I will not hear
thee more, though thou plottest more snares against me.  The Lord
is my light and my salvation: whom then shall I fear?  Though a
host of men should rise up against me, yet shall not my heart be
afraid.  The Lord is my strength and my Redeemer.'(1)

8. "Strive thou like a good soldier; and if sometimes thou fail
through weakness, put on thy strength more bravely than before,
trusting in My more abundant grace, and take thou much heed of
vain confidence and pride.  Because of it many are led into
error, and sometimes fall into blindness well-nigh irremediable.
Let this ruin of the proud, who foolishly lift themselves up, be
to thee for a warning and a continual exhortation to humility."

(1) Psalms xxvii. 1-3; xix. 14.


CHAPTER VII

Of hiding our grace under the guard of humility

"My Son, it is better and safer for thee to hide the grace of
devotion, and not to lift thyself up on high, nor to speak much
thereof, nor to value it greatly; but rather to despise thyself,
and to fear as though this grace were given to one unworthy
thereof.  Nor must thou depend too much upon this feeling, for it
can very quickly be turned into its opposite.  Think when thou
art in a state of grace how miserable and poor thou art wont to
be without grace.  Nor is there advance in spiritual life in this
alone, that thou hast the grace of consolation, but that thou
humbly and unselfishly and patiently takest the withdrawal
thereof; so that thou cease not from the exercise of prayer, nor
suffer thy other common duties to be in anywise neglected; rather
do thy task more readily, as though thou hadst gained more
strength and knowledge; and do not altogether neglect thyself
because of the dearth and anxiety of spirit which thou feelest.

2. "For there are many who, when things have not gone prosperous
with them, become forthwith impatient or slothful.  For the way
of a man is not in himself,(1) but it is God's to give and to
console, when He will, and as much as He will, and whom He will,
as it shall please Him, and no further.  Some who were
presumptuous because of the grace of devotion within them, have
destroyed themselves, because they would do more than they were
able, not considering the measure of their own littleness, but
rather following the impulse of the heart than the judgment of
the reason.  And because they presumed beyond what was
well-pleasing unto God, therefore they quickly lost grace.  They
became poor and were left vile, who had built for themselves
their nest in heaven; so that being humbled and stricken with
poverty, they might learn not to fly with their own wings, but
to put their trust under My feathers.  They who are as yet new
and unskilled in the way of the Lord, unless they rule themselves
after the counsel of the wise, may easily be deceived and led
away.

3. "But if they wish to follow their own fancies rather than
trust the experience of others, the result will be very dangerous
to them if they still refuse to be drawn away from their own
notion.  Those who are wise in their own conceits, seldom
patiently endure to be ruled by others.  It is better to have a
small portion of wisdom with humility, and a slender
understanding, than great treasures of sciences with vain
self-esteem.  It is better for thee to have less than much of
what may make thee proud.  He doeth not very discreetly who
giveth up himself entirely to joy, forgetting his former
helplessness and the chaste fear of the Lord, which feareth to
lose the grace offered.  Nor is he very wise, after a manly sort,
who in time of adversity, or any trouble whatsoever, beareth
himself too despairingly, and feeleth concerning Me less
trustfully than he ought.

4. "He who in time of peace willeth to be oversecure shall be
often found in time of war overdispirited and full of fears.  If
thou knewest always how to continue humble and moderate in
thyself, and to guide and rule thine own spirit well, thou
wouldest not so quickly fall into danger and mischief.  It is
good counsel that when fervour of spirit is kindled, thou
shouldest meditate how it will be with thee when the light is
taken away.  Which when it doth happen, remember that still the
light may return again, which I have taken away for a time for a
warning to thee, and also for mine own glory.  Such a trial is
often more useful than if thou hadst always things prosperous
according to thine own will.

5. "For merits are not to be reckoned by this, that a man hath
many visions or consolations, or that he is skilled in the
Scriptures, or that he is placed in a high situation; but that he
is grounded upon true humility and filled with divine charity,
that he always purely and uprightly seeketh the honour of God,
that he setteth not by himself, but unfeignedly despiseth
himself, and even rejoiceth to be despised and humbled by others
more than to be honoured."

(1) Jeremiah x. 23.


CHAPTER VIII

Of a low estimation of self in the sight of God

I will speak unto my Lord who am but dust and ashes.  If I count
myself more, behold Thou standest against me, and my iniquities
bear true testimony, and I cannot gainsay it.  But if I abase
myself, and bring myself to nought, and shrink from all
self-esteem, and grind myself to dust, which I am, Thy grace will
be favourable unto me, and Thy light will be near unto my heart;
and all self-esteem, how little soever it be, shall be swallowed
up in the depths of my nothingness, and shall perish for ever.
There Thou showest to me myself, what I am, what I was, and
whither I have come: so foolish was I and ignorant.(1)  If I am
left to myself, behold I am nothing, I am all weakness; but if
suddenly Thou look upon me, immediately I am made strong, and
filled with new joy.  And it is great marvel that I am so
suddenly lifted up, and so graciously embraced by Thee, since I
am always being carried to the deep by my own weight.

2. This is the doing of Thy love which freely goeth before me and
succoureth me in so many necessities, which guardeth me also in
great dangers and snatcheth me, as I may truly say, from
innumerable evils.  For verily, by loving myself amiss, I lost
myself, and by seeking and sincerely loving Thee alone, I found
both myself and Thee, and through love I have brought myself to
yet deeper nothingness: because Thou, O most sweet Lord, dealest
with me beyond all merit, and above all which I dare ask or
think.

3. Blessed be Thou, O my God, because though I be unworthy of all
Thy benefits, Thy bountiful and infinite goodness never ceaseth
to do good even to ingrates and to those who are turned far from
Thee.  Turn Thou us unto Thyself, that we may be grateful,
humble, and godly, for Thou art our salvation, our courage, and
our strength.

(1) Psalm lxxiii. 22.


CHAPTER IX

That all things are to be referred to God, as the final end

"My Son, I must be thy Supreme and final end, if thou desirest to
be truly happy.  Out of such purpose thy affection shall be
purified, which too often is sinfully bent upon itself and upon
created things.  For if thou seekest thyself in any matter,
straightway thou wilt fail within thyself and grow barren.
Therefore refer everything to Me first of all, for it is I who
gave thee all.  So look upon each blessing as flowing from the
Supreme Good, and thus all things are to be attributed to Me as
their source.

2. "From Me the humble and great, the poor and the rich, draw
water as from a living fountain, and those who serve Me with a
free and faithful spirit shall receive grace for grace.  But he
who will glory apart from Me, or will be delighted with any good
which lieth in himself, shall not be established in true joy, nor
shall be enlarged in heart, but shall be greatly hindered and
thrown into tribulation.  Therefore thou must not ascribe any
good to thyself, nor look upon virtue as belonging to any man,
but ascribe it all unto God, without whom man hath nothing.
I gave all, I will receive all again, and with great strictness
require I the giving of thanks.

3. "This is the Truth, and by it the vanity of boasting is put to
flight.  And if heavenly grace and true charity shall enter into
thee, there shall be no envy, nor straitening of the heart, nor
shall any self-love take possession of thee.  For divine charity
conquereth all things, and enlargeth all the powers of the soul.
If thou art truly wise, thou wilt rejoice in Me alone, thou wilt
hope in Me alone; for there is none good but one, that is God,(1)
Who is to be praised above all things, and in all things to
receive blessing."

(1) Luke xviii. 19.


CHAPTER X

That it is sweet to despise the world and to serve God

Now will I speak again, O my Lord, and hold not my peace; I will
say in the ears of my God, my Lord, and my King, who is exalted
above all, Oh how plentiful is Thy goodness which Thou hast laid
up for them that fear Thee!(1)  But what art Thou to those who
love Thee?  What to those who serve Thee with their whole heart?
Truly unspeakable is the sweetness of the contemplation of Thee,
which Thou bestowest upon those who love Thee.  In this most of
all Thou hast showed me the sweetness of Thy charity, that when I
was not, Thou madest me, and when I wandered far from Thee, Thou
broughtest me back that I might serve Thee, and commandedst me to
love Thee.

2. O Fountain of perpetual love, what shall I say concerning
Thee?  How shall I be unmindful of Thee, who didst vouchsafe to
remember me, even after I pined away and perished?  Thou hast had
mercy beyond all hope upon Thy servant, and hast showed Thy grace
and friendship beyond all deserving.  What reward shall I render
Thee for this Thy grace?  For it is not given unto all to
renounce this world and its affairs, and to take up a religious
life.  For is it a great thing that I should serve Thee, whom
every creature ought to serve?  It ought not to seem a great
thing to me to serve Thee; but rather this appeareth to me a
great and wonderful thing, that Thou vouchsafest to receive as
Thy servant one so poor and unworthy, and to join him unto Thy
chosen servants.

3. Behold all things which I have are Thine, and with them I
serve Thee.  And yet verily it is Thou who servest me, rather
than I Thee.  Behold the heaven and the earth which Thou hast
created for the service of men; they are at Thy bidding, and
perform daily whatsoever Thou dost command.  Yea, and this is
little; for Thou hast even ordained the Angels for the service of
man.  But it surpasseth even all these things, that Thou Thyself
didst vouchsafe to minister unto man, and didst promise that Thou
wouldest give Thyself unto him.

4. What shall I render unto Thee for all these Thy manifold
mercies?  Oh that I were able to serve Thee all the days of my
life!  Oh that even for one day I were enabled to do Thee service
worthy of Thyself!  For verily Thou art worthy of all service,
all honour, and praise without end.  Verily Thou art my God, and
I am Thy poor servant, who am bound to serve Thee with all my
strength, nor ought I ever to grow weary of Thy praise.  This is
my wish, this is my exceeding great desire, and whatsoever is
lacking to me, vouchsafe Thou to supply.

5. It is great honour, great glory to serve Thee, and to despise
all for Thy sake.  For they shall have great grace who of their
own will shall submit themselves to Thy most holy service.  They
who for Thy love have cast away every carnal delight shall find
the sweetest consolation of the Holy Ghost.  They who enter the
narrow way of life for Thy Name's sake, and have put away all
worldly cares, shall attain great liberty of spirit.

6. Oh grateful and delightsome service of God, whereby man is
made truly free and holy!  Oh sacred condition of the religious
servant, which maketh man equal to the Angels, well-pleasing unto
God, terrible to evil spirits, and acceptable to all faithful
ones!  Oh service to be embraced and ever desired, in which the
highest good is promised, and joy is gained which shall remain
for evermore!

(1) Psalm xxxi. 21.


CHAPTER XI

That the desires of the heart are to be examined and governed

"My Son, thou hast still many things to learn, which thou hast
not well learned yet."

2. What are they, Lord?

3. "To place thy desire altogether in subjection to My good
pleasure, and not to be a lover of thyself, but an earnest seeker
of My will.  Thy desires often excite and urge thee forward; but
consider with thyself whether thou art not more moved for thine
own objects than for My honour.  If it is Myself that thou
seekest, thou shalt be well content with whatsoever I shall
ordain; but if any pursuit of thine own lieth hidden within thee,
behold it is this which hindereth and weigheth thee down.

4. "Beware, therefore, lest thou strive too earnestly after some
desire which thou hast conceived, without taking counsel of Me;
lest haply it repent thee afterwards, and that displease thee
which before pleased, and for which thou didst long as for a
great good.  For not every affection which seemeth good is to be
forthwith followed; neither is every opposite affection to be
immediately avoided.  Sometimes it is expedient to use restraint
even in good desires and wishes, lest through importunity thou
fall into distraction of mind, lest through want of discipline
thou become a stumbling-block to others, or lest by the
resistance of others thou be suddenly disturbed and brought to
confusion.

5. "Sometimes, indeed, it is needful to use violence, and
manfully to strive against the sensual appetite, and not to
consider what the flesh may or not will; but rather to strive
after this, that it may become subject, however unwillingly, to
the spirit.  And for so long it ought to be chastised and
compelled to undergo slavery, even until it be ready for all
things, and learn to be contented with little, to be delighted
with things simple, and never to murmur at any inconvenience."


CHAPTER XII

Of the inward growth of patience, and of the struggle against
evil desires

O Lord God, I see that patience is very necessary unto me; for
many things in this life fall out contrary.  For howsoever I may
have contrived for my peace, my life cannot go on without strife
and trouble.

2. "Thou speakest truly, My Son.  For I will not that thou seek
such a peace as is without trials, and knoweth no adversities;
but rather that thou shouldest judge thyself to have found peace,
when thou art tried with manifold tribulations, and proved by
many adversities.  If thou shalt say that thou art not able to
bear much, how then wilt thou sustain the fire hereafter?  Of two
evils we should always choose the less.  Therefore, that thou
mayest escape eternal torments hereafter, strive on God's behalf
to endure present evils bravely.  Thinkest thou that the children
of this world suffer nought, or but little?  Thou wilt not find
it so, even though thou find out the most prosperous.

3. "'But,' thou wilt say, 'they have many delights, and they
follow their own wills, and thus they bear lightly their
tribulations.'

4. "Be it so, grant that they have what they list; but how long,
thinkest thou, will it last?  Behold, like the smoke those who are
rich in this world will pass away, and no record shall remain of
