[Footnote 202: The distinction between Sarvastivadin and
Mulasarvastivadin is not clear to me. I can only suggest that when a
section of the school accepted the Mahavibhasha and were known as
Vaibhashikas others who approved of the school chiefly on account of
its excellent Vinaya called themselves Primitive Sarvastivadins.]

[Footnote 203: See Sylvain Levi, _J.A._ 1908, XII. 57 ff., and
Winternitz, _Ges. Ind. Lit._ II. i. pp. 201 ff.]

[Footnote 204: The only reason for doubting it is that two stories
(Nos. 14 and 31) in the Sutralankara (which appears to be a genuine
work) refer to Kanishka as if he had reigned in the past. This may be
a poetic artifice or it may be that the stories are interpolations.
See for the traditions Watters on _Yuean Chwang_, II. 102-4 and
Takakusu in _J.R.A.S._ 1905, p. 53 who quotes the Chinese
Samyukta-ratna-pitaka-sutra and the Record of Indian Patriarchs. The
Chinese list of Patriarchs is compatible with the view that Asvaghosha
was alive about 125 A.D. for he was the twelfth Patriarch and
Bodhidharma the twenty-eighth visited China in 520. This gives about
400 years for sixteen Patriarchs, which is possible, for these
worthies were long-lived. But the list has little authority.]

[Footnote 205: The traditions are conveniently collected in the
introduction to Teitaro Suzuki's translation of _The Awakening of
Faith._]

[Footnote 206: The Saundaranandakavya.]

[Footnote 207: See Nanjio, Nos. 1182, 1351, 1250, 1299. It is
noticeable that the translator Paramartha shows a special interest in
the life and works of Asanga and Vasubandhu.]

[Footnote 208: See Winternitz, _Ges. Ind. Lit._ II. i. p. 211. It is
also noticeable that _The Awakening of Faith_ appears to quote the
Lankavatara sutra which is not generally regarded as an early
Mahayanist work.]

[Footnote 209: Nagarjuna cannot have been the founder of the Mahayana
for in his Maha-prajna-paramita-sastra (Nanjio, 1169, translation by
Kumarajiva) he cites _inter alia_ the Lotus, the Vimalakirti-sutra,
and a work called Mahayana-sastra. See _B.E.F.E.O._ 1911, p. 453. For
Nagarjuna see especially Gruenwedel, _Mythologie_, pp. 29 ff. and the
bibliography given in the notes. _Jour. Budd. Text. Soc._ V. part iv.
pp. 7 ff. Watters, _Yuean Chwang_, pp. 200 ff. Taranatha, chap. XV and
Winternitz, _Ges. Ind. Lit._ II. i. pp. 250 ff.]

[Footnote 210: He is omitted from the list of Buddhabhadra, giving the
succession according to the Sarvastivadins, to which school he did not
belong. I-Ching classes him with Asvaghosha and Aryadeva as belonging
to the early period.]

[Footnote 211: Rajatarangini, i. 173, 177.]

[Footnote 212: Edited in the _Bibliotheca Buddhica_ by De la Vallee
Poussin and (in part) in the _Journal of the Buddhist Text Soc._ See
too Walleser, _Die Mittlere Lehre des Nagarjuna nach der Tibetischen
Version uebertragen_, 1911: _nach der Chinesischen Version uebertragen_,
1912.]

[Footnote 213: The ascription of these works to Nagarjuna is probably
correct for they were translated by Kumarajiva who was sufficiently
near him in date to be in touch with good tradition.]

[Footnote 214: The name of this king, variously given as Udayana,
Jetaka and Satavahana, has not been identified with certainty from the
various transcriptions and translations in the Chinese and Tibetan
versions. See _J. Pali Text Soc._ for 1886 and I-Ching _Records of the
Buddhist Religion_ (trans. Takakusu), pp. 158 ff. The Andhra kings who
reigned from about 240 B.C. to 225 A.D. all claimed to belong to the
Satavahana dynasty. The stupa of Amaravati in the Andhra territory is
surrounded by a stone railing ascribed to the period 160-200 A.D. and
Nagarjuna may have addressed a pious king living about that time.]

[Footnote 215: For other works attributed to Nagarjuna see Nanjio,
Nos. 1169, 1179, 1180, 1186 and Walleser's introduction to _Mittlere
Lehre nach der Chinesischen Version_ The Dharmasangraha, a Sanskrit
theological glossary, is also attributed to Nagarjuna as well as the
tantric work Pancakrama. But it is not likely that the latter dates
from his epoch.]

[Footnote 216: Nanjio, No. 1188.]

[Footnote 217: The very confused legends about him suggest a
comparison with the Dravidian legend of a devotee who tore out one of
his eyes and offered it to Siva. See Gruenwedel, _Mythologie_, p. 34
and notes. Polemics against various Hinayanist sects are ascribed to
him. See Nanjio, Nos. 1259, 1260.]

[Footnote 218: Watters, _Yuean Chwang_, II. p. 286. Hsuean Chuang does
not say that the four were contemporary but that in the time of
Kumaralabdha they were called the four Suns.]

[Footnote 219: For Asanga and Vasubandhu see Peri in _B.E.F.E.O._
1911, pp. 339-390. Vincent Smith in _Early History of India_, third
edition, pp. 328-334. Winternitz, _Ges. Ind. Lit._ II. i. p. 256.
Watters, _Yuean Chwang_, I. pp. 210, 355-359. Taranatha, chap. XXII.
Gruenwedel, _Mythologie_, p. 35.]

[Footnote 220: Meghavarman. See V. Smith, _l.c._ 287.]

[Footnote 221: Two have been preserved in Sanskrit: the
Mahayana-sutralankara (Ed. V. Transl., S. Levi, 1907-1911) and the
Bodhisattva-bhumi (English summary in _Museon_, 1905-6). A brief
analysis of the literature of the Yogacara school according to Tibetan
authorities is given by Stcherbatskoi in _Museon_, 1905, pp. 144-155.]

[Footnote 222: Mahayana-sutral. XVIII. 71-73. The ominous word
_maithuna_ also occurs in this work, XVIII. 46.]

[Footnote 223: Vincent Smith, _l.c._ p. 275.]

[Footnote 224: But there are of course abundant Indian precedents,
Brahmanical as well as Buddhist, for describing various degrees of
sanctity or knowledge.]

[Footnote 225: The wooden statues of Asanga and Vasubandhu preserved
in the Kofukaji at Nara are masterpieces of art but can hardly claim
to be other than works of imagination. They date from about 800 A.D.
See for an excellent reproduction Tajima's _Select Relics_, II. X.]

[Footnote 226: See Eitel and Gruenwedel, but I do not know in what
texts this tradition is found. It is remarkable that Paramartha's life
(_T'oung Pao_, 1904, pp. 269-296) does not say either that he was
twentieth patriarch or that he worshipped Amida.]

[Footnote 227: On receiving a large donation he built three
monasteries, one for Hinayanists, one for Mahayanists and one for
nuns.]

[Footnote 228: The work consists of 600 verses (Karika) with a lengthy
prose commentary (Bhashya) by the author. The Sanskrit original is
lost but translations have been preserved in Chinese (Nanjio, Nos.
1267, 1269, 1270) and Tibetan (see Cordier, _Cat. du Fonds tibetain de
la Bib. Nat._ 1914, pp. 394, 499). But the commentary on the Bhashya
called Abhidharma-kosa-vyakhya, or Sphutartha, by Yasomitra has been
preserved in Sanskrit in Nepal and frequently cites the verses as well
as the Bhashya in the original Sanskrit. A number of European savants
are at present occupied with this literature and Sir Denison Ross (to
whom I am indebted for much information) contemplates the publication
of an Uigur text of Book I found in Central Asia. At present (1920),
so far as I know, the only portion of the Abhidharma-kosa in print is
De la Vallee Poussin's edition and translation of Book III, containing
the Tibetan and Sanskrit texts but not the Chinese (De la Vallee
Poussin--_Vasubandhu et Yasomitra_, London, 1914-18). This chapter
deals with such topics as the structure of the universe, the manner
and place of rebirth, the chain of causation, the geography of the
world, the duration and characteristics of Kalpas, and the appearance
of Buddhas and Cakravartins.]

[Footnote 229: See Nanjio, pp. 371-2, for a list of his works
translated into Chinese. Hsuean Chuang's account differs from the above
(which is taken from Paramartha) in details. He also tells a curious
story that Vasubandhu promised to appear to his friends after death
and ultimately did so, though he forgot his promise until people began
to say he had gone to hell.]




CHAPTER XXIII

INDIAN BUDDHISM AS SEEN BY THE CHINESE PILGRIMS


About the time of Vasubandhu there existed four schools of Indian
Buddhism called Vaibhashika, Sautrantika, Madhyamika and Yoga or
Yogacara.[230] They were specially concerned with philosophy and
apparently cut across the older division into eighteen sects, which at
this period seem to have differed mainly on points of discipline.
Though not of great practical importance, they long continued to play
a certain part in controversial works both Buddhist and Brahmanic. The
first two which were the older seem to have belonged to the Hinayana
and the other two even more definitely to the Mahayana. I-Ching[231]
is quite clear as to this. "There are but two kinds of the so-called
Mahayana" he says, "first the Madhyamika, second the Yoga.... These
two systems are perfectly in accordance with the noble doctrine. Can
we say which of the two is right? Both equally conform to truth and
lead us to Nirvana" and so on. But he does not say that the other two
systems are also aspects of the truth. This is the more remarkable
because he himself followed the Mula-sarvastivadins. Apparently
Sarvastivadin and Vaibhashika were different names for the same
school, the latter being applied to them because they identified
themselves with the commentary (Vibhasha) already mentioned whereas
the former and older designation came to be used chiefly with
reference to their disciplinary rules. Also there were two groups of
Sarvastivadins, those of Gandhara and those of Kashmir. The name of
Vaibhashika was applied chiefly to the latter who, if we may find a
kernel of truth in legends which are certainly exaggerated,
endeavoured to make Kashmir a holy land with a monopoly of the pure
doctrine. Vasubandhu and Asanga appear to have broken up this
isolation for they first preached the Vaibhashika doctrines in a
liberal and eclectic form outside Kashmir and then by a natural
transition and development went over to the Mahayana. But the
Vaibhashikas did not disappear and were in existence even in the
fourteenth century.[232] Their chief tenet was the real existence of
external objects. In matters of doctrine they regarded their own
Abhidharma as the highest authority.[233] They also held that Gotama
had an ordinary human body and passed first into a preliminary form of
Nirvana when he attained Buddhahood and secondly into complete Nirvana
at his death. He was superhuman only in the sense that he had
intuitive knowledge and no need to learn. Their contempt for sutras
may have been due to the fact that many of them discountenance the
Vaibhashika views and also to a knowledge that new ones were
continually being composed.

I-Ching, who ends his work by asserting that all his statements are
according to the Arya-mula-sarvastivada-nikaya and no other, gives an
interesting summary of doctrine.

"Again I say: the most important are only one or two out of eighty
thousand doctrines of the Buddha: one should conform to the worldly
path but inwardly strive to secure true wisdom. Now what is the
worldly path? It is obeying prohibitive laws and avoiding any crime.
What is the true wisdom? _It is to obliterate the distinction between
subject and object_, to follow the excellent truth and to free oneself
from worldly attachments: to do away with the trammels of the chain of
causality: further to obtain merit by accumulating good works and
_finally to realize the excellent meaning of perfect reality_."

Such a statement enables us to understand the remark which he makes
elsewhere that the same school may belong to the Hinayana and Mahayana
in different places, for, whatever may be meant by wisdom which aims
at obliterating the difference between subject and object, it is
clearly not out of sympathy with Yogacara doctrines. In another place
where he describes the curriculum followed by monks he says that they
learn the Yogacarya-sastra first and then eight compositions of Asanga
and Vasubandhu. Among the works prescribed for logic is the
Nyayadvara-sastra attributed to Nagarjuna. The monk should learn not
only the Abhidharma of the Sarvastivadins but also the Agamas,
equivalent to the Sutra-pitaka. So the study of the sutras and the
works of Asanga and Vasubandhu is approved by a Sarvastivadin.

The Sautrantikas,[234] though accounted Hinayanists, mark a step in
the direction of the Mahayana. The founder of the school was
Kumaralabdha, mentioned above. In their estimation of scripture they
reversed the views of the Vaibhashikas, for they rejected the
Abhidharma and accepted only the sutras, arguing that the Abhidharma
was practically an extract from them. As literary criticism this is
correct, if it means that the more ancient sutras are older than the
oldest Abhidharma books. But the indiscriminate acceptance of sutras
led to a creed in which the supernatural played a larger part. The
Sautrantikas not only ascribed superhuman powers to the Buddha, but
believed in the doctrine of three bodies. In philosophy, though they
were realists, they held that external objects are not perceived
directly but that their existence is inferred.[235]

Something has already been said of the two other schools, both of
which denied the reality of the external world. The differences
between them were concerned with metaphysics rather than theology and
led to no popular controversies.

Up to this point the history of Indian Buddhism has proved singularly
nebulous. The most important dates are a matter of argument, the chief
personages half mythical. But when the records of the Chinese pilgrims
commence we are in touch with something more solid. They record dates
and facts, though we must regret that they only repeat what they heard
and make no attempt to criticize Indian traditions or even to weave
them into a connected chronicle.

Fa-Hsien, the first of these interesting men, left China in 399 and
resided in India from 405 to 411, spending three years at Pataliputra
and two at Tamralipti. He visited the Panjab, Hindustan and Bengal and
his narrative leaves the impression that all these were in the main
Buddhist countries: of the Deccan which he did not visit he heard that
its inhabitants were barbarous and not Buddhists, though it contained
some Buddhist shrines. Of the Middle Kingdom (which according to his
reckoning begins with Muttra) he says that the people are free and
happy and neither kill any living creature nor drink intoxicating
liquor.[236] He does not hint at persecution though he once or twice
mentions that the Brahmans were jealous of the Buddhists. Neither does
he indicate that any strong animosity prevailed between Maha and
Hinayanists. But the two parties were distinct and he notes which
prevailed in each locality. He left China by land and found the
Hinayana prevalent at Shen-shen and Wu-i (apparently localities not
far from Lob-Nor) but the Mahayana at Khotan. Nearer India, in
countries apparently corresponding to parts of Kashmir and Gilgit, the
monks were numerous and all Hinayanist. The same was the case in
Udyana, and in Gandhara the Hinayanists were still in the majority. In
the Panjab both schools were prevalent but the Hinayana evidently
strong. In the district of Muttra the Law was still more flourishing,
monasteries and topes were numerous and ample alms were given to the
monks. He states that the professors of the Abhidharma and Vinaya made
offerings to those works, and the Mahayanists to the book
Prajna-paramita, as well as to Manjusri and Kwan-shih-yin. He found
the country in which are the sacred sites of Sravasti, Kapilavastu and
Kusinara sparsely inhabited and desolate, but this seems to have been
due to general causes, not specially to the decay of religion. He
mentions that ninety-six[237] varieties of erroneous views are found
among the Buddhists, which points to the existence of numerous but not
acutely hostile sects and says that there still existed, apparently in
Kosala, followers of Devadatta who recognized three previous Buddhas
but not Sakyamuni. He visited the birth-places of these three Buddhas
which contained topes erected in their honour.

He found Magadha prosperous and pious. Of its capital, Patna, he says
"by the side of the topes of Asoka has been made a Mahayana monastery
very grand and beautiful, there is also a Hinayana one, the two
together containing 600 or 700 monks." It is probable that this was
typical of the religious condition of Magadha and Bengal. Both schools
existed but the Mahayana was the more flourishing. Many of the old
sites, such as Rajagriha and Gaya, were deserted but there were new
towns near them and Bodh Gaya was a place of pilgrimage with three
monasteries. In the district of Tamralipti (Tamluk) on the coast of
Bengal were 22 monasteries. As his principal object was to obtain
copies of the Vinaya, he stayed three years in Patna seeking and
copying manuscripts. In this he found some difficulty, for the various
schools of the Vinaya, which he says were divided by trivial
differences only, handed down their respective versions orally. He
found in the Mahayanist monastery one manuscript of the Mahasanghika
rules and considered it the most complete, but also took down the
Sarvastivadin rules.

After the death of Vasubandhu few names of even moderate magnitude
stand out in the history of Indian Buddhism. The changes which
occurred were great but gradual and due not to the initiative of
innovators but to the assimilative power of Hinduism and to the
attractions of magical and emotional rites. But this tendency, though
it doubtless existed, did not become conspicuous until about 700 A.D.
The accounts of the Chinese pilgrims and the literature which has been
preserved suggest that in the intervening centuries the monks were
chiefly occupied with scholastic and exegetical work. The most
distinguished successors of Asanga were logicians, among whom Dinnaga
was pre-eminent. Sthiramati[238] and Gunamati appear to have belonged
to the same school and perhaps Bhavaviveka[239] too. The statements as
to his date are inconsistent but the interesting fact is recorded that
he utilized the terminology of the Sankhya for the purposes of the
Mahayana.

Throughout the middle ages the study of logic was pursued but
Buddhists and Jains rather than by Brahmans.[240] Vasubandhu composed
some treatises dealing exclusively with logic but it was his disciple
Dinnaga who separated it definitely from philosophy and theology. As
in idealist philosophy, so in pure logic there was a parallel movement
in the Buddhist and Brahmanic schools, but if we may trust the
statements of Vacaspatimisra (about 1100 A.D.) Dinnaga interpreted
the aphorisms of the Nyaya philosophy in a heterodox or Buddhist
sense. This traces the beginnings of Indian logic to a Brahmanic
source but subsequently it flourished greatly in the hands of
Buddhists, especially Dinnaga and Dharmakirti. The former appears to
have been a native of Conjevaram and a contemporary of Kalidasa. Both
the logician and the poet were probably alive in the reign of
Kumaragupta (413-455). Dinnaga spent much time in Nalanda, and though
the Sanskrit originals of his works are lost the Tibetan
translations[241] are preserved.

The Buddhist schools of logic continued for many centuries. One
flourished in Kashmir and another, founded by Candragomin, in Bengal.
Both lasted almost until the Mohammedan conquest of the two countries.

From about 470 to 530 A.D. northern India groaned under the tyranny of
the Huns. Their King Mihiragula is represented as a determined enemy
of Buddhism and a systematic destroyer of monasteries. He is said to
have been a worshipper of Siva but his fury was probably inspired less
by religious animosity than by love of pillage and slaughter.

About 530 A.D. he was defeated by a coalition of Indian princes and
died ten years later amid storms and portents which were believed to
signify the descent of his wicked soul into hell. It must have been
about this time that Bodhidharma left India for he arrived in Canton
about 520. According to the Chinese he was the son of a king of a
country called Hsiang-Chih in southern India[242] and the
twenty-eighth patriarch and he became an important figure in the
religion and art of the Far East. But no allusion to him or to any of
the Patriarchs after Vasubandhu has been found in Indian literature
nor in the works of Hsuean Chuang and I-Ching. The inference is that he
was of no importance in India and that his reputation in China was not
great before the eighth century: also that the Chinese lists of
patriarchs do not represent the traditions of northern India.

Religious feeling often ran high in southern India. Buddhists, Jains
and Hindus engaged in violent disputes, and persecution was more
frequent than in the north. It is easy to suppose that Bodhidharma
being the head of some heretical sect had to fly and followed the
example of many monks in going to China. But if so, no record of his
school is forthcoming from his native land, though the possibility
that he was more than an individual thinker and represented some
movement unknown to us cannot be denied. We might suppose too that
since Nagarjuna and Aryadeva were southerners, their peculiar
doctrines were coloured by Dravidian ideas. But our available
documents indicate that the Buddhism of southern India was almost
entirely Hinayanist, analogous to that of Ceylon and not very
sympathetic to the Tamils.

The pilgrims Sung-Yuen and Hui-Sheng[243] visited Udyana and Gandhara
during the time of the Hun domination (518-521). They found the king
of the former a pious Buddhist but the latter was governed by an
Ephthalite chieftain, perhaps Mihiragula himself, who was a worshipper
of demons. Of the Yetha or Ephthalites they make the general
observation that "their rules of politeness are very defective." But
they also say that the population of Gandhara had a great respect for
Buddhism and as they took back to China 170 volumes, "all standard
works belonging to the Great Vehicle," the Ephthalite persecution
cannot have destroyed the faith in north-western India. But the evil
days of decay were beginning. Henceforward we have no more pictures of
untroubled piety and prosperity. At best Buddhism receives royal
patronage in company with other religions; sectarian conflicts
increase and sometimes we hear of persecution. About 600 A.D. a king
of Central Bengal named Sasanka who worshipped Siva attempted to
extirpate Buddhism in his dominions and destroyed the Bo tree at Bodh
Gaya.[244] On the other hand we hear of the pious Purnavarman, king
of Magadha, who made amends for these sacrileges, and of Siladitya,
king of the country called Mo-lo-po by the Chinese, who was so careful
of animal life, that he even strained the water drunk by his horses
and elephants, lest they should consume minute insects.

We know more of Indian Buddhism in the seventh century than in the
periods which precede or follow it. The epoch was marked by the reign
of the great king, or rather emperor, Harsha-Vardhana (606-648 A.D.),
and the works written by Bana, Bhartrihari and others who frequented
his court have come down to us. Also we are fortunate in possessing
the copious narrative of Hsuean Chuang, the greatest of the Chinese
pilgrims, who spent sixteen years (629-645) in India as well as the
work known as the "Record of the Buddhist religion as practised in
India and the Malay Archipelago," composed by I-Ching who travelled in
those countries from 671 to 695. I-Ching also wrote the lives of sixty
Chinese pilgrims who visited India during the seventh century and
probably there were many others of whom we have no record.

The reign of Harsha is thus illustrated by a number of contemporary
dateable works unusual in India. The king himself wrote some Buddhist
hymns,[245] and three dramas are ascribed to him but were probably
composed by some of the literary men whom he patronized. For all that,
the religious ideas which they contain must have had his approval. The
Ratnavali and Priyadarsika are secular pieces and so far as they have
any religious atmosphere it is Brahmanic, but the Nagananda is a
Buddhist religious drama which opens with an invocation of the Buddha
and has a Jataka story for its plot.[246] Bana was himself a devout
Brahman but his historical romance Harshacarita and his novel called
Kadambari both describe a mixture of religions founded on observation
of contemporary life. In an interesting passage[247] he recounts the
king's visit to a Buddhist ascetic. The influence of the holy man
causes the more intelligent animals in his neighbourhood, such as
parrots, to devote themselves to Buddhist lore, but he is surrounded
by devotees of the most diverse sects, Jains, Bhagavatas, Pancaratras,
Lokayatikas with followers of Kapila, Kanada and many other teachers.
Mayura, another literary protege of Harsha's, was like Bana a Brahman,
and Subandhu, who flourished a little before them, ignores Buddhism in
his romance called Vasavadatta. But Bhartrihari, the still popular
gnomic poet, was a Buddhist. It is true that he oscillated between the
court and the cloister no less than seven times, but this vacillation
seems to have been due to the weakness of the flesh, not to any change
of convictions. For our purpose the gist of this literature is that
Hinduism in many forms, some of them very unorthodox, was becoming the
normal religion of India but that there were still many eminent
Buddhists and that Buddhism had sufficient prestige to attract Harsha
and sufficient life to respond to his patronage.

About 600 A.D. India was exhausted by her struggle with the Huns.
After it there remained only a multitude of small states and obscure
dynasties, but there was evidently a readiness to accept any form of
unifying and tranquillizing rule and for nearly half a century this
was provided by Harsha. He conquered northern India from the Panjab to
Bengal but failed to subdue the Deccan. Though a great part of his
reign was spent in war, learning and education flourished. Hsuean
Chuang, who was his honoured guest, gives a good account of his
administration but also makes it plain that brigandage prevailed and
that travelling was dangerous.

After 643 Harsha, who was growing elderly, devoted much attention to
religion and may be said to have become a Buddhist, while allowing
himself a certain eclectic freedom. Several creeds were represented
among his immediate relatives. Devotion to Siva was traditional in the
family: his father had been a zealous worshipper of the Sun and his
brother and sister were Buddhists of the Sammitiya sect. Harsha by no
means disowned Brahmanic worship, but in his latter years his
proclivity to Buddhism became more marked and he endeavoured to
emulate the piety of Asoka. He founded rest houses and hospitals, as
well as monasteries and thousands of stupas. He prohibited the taking
of life and the use of animal food, and of the three periods into
which his day was divided two were devoted to religion and one to
business. He also exercised a surveillance over the whole Buddhist
order and advanced meritorious members.

Hsuean Chuang has left an interesting account of the religious fetes
and spectacles organized by Harsha. At Kanauj he attended a great
assembly during which a solemn procession took place every day. A
golden image of Buddha was borne on an elephant and Harsha, dressed as
Indra, held a canopy over it, while his ally Raja Kumara,[248] dressed
as Brahma, waved a fly-whisk. It was subsequently washed by the king's
own hands and in the evening his Majesty, who like Akbar had a taste
for religious discussion, listened to the arguments of his Chinese
