first day of the week should be thus distinguished under the new
economy; for the deliverance of the Church is a more illustrious
achievement than the formation of the world; [213:5] and as the primeval
Sabbath commemorated the rest of the Creator, the Christian Sabbath
reminds us of the completion of the work of the Redeemer. "There
remaineth, therefore, the keeping of a Sabbath [213:6] to the people of
God, for he that is entered into his rest, he also hath ceased from his
own works, as God did from his." [213:7]

As many of the converts from Judaism urged the circumcision of their
Gentile brethren, they were likewise disposed to insist on their
observance of the Hebrew festivals. The apostles, at least for a
considerable time, did not deem it expedient positively to forbid the
keeping of such days; but they required that, in matters of this nature,
every one should be left to his own discretion. "One man," says Paul,
"esteemeth one day above another; another esteemeth every day alike. Let
every man be fully persuaded in his own mind." [213:8] It is obvious
that the Lord's day is not included in this compromise; for from the
morning of the resurrection there appears to have been no dispute as to
its claims, and its very title attests the general recognition of its
authority. The apostle can refer only to days which were typical and
ceremonial. Hence he says elsewhere--"Let no man judge you in meat, or
in drink, or in respect of an holyday, or of the new moon, or of the
Sabbath days--_which are a shadow of things to come, but the body is of
Christ_." [214:1]

Though the New Testament furnishes no full and circumstantial
description of the worship of the Christian Church, it makes such
incidental allusions to its various parts, as enable us to form a pretty
accurate idea of its general character. Like the worship of the
synagogue [214:2] it consisted of prayer, singing, reading the
Scriptures, and expounding or preaching. Those who joined the Church,
for several years after it was first organized, were almost exclusively
converts from Judaism, and when they embraced the Christian faith, they
retained the order of religious service to which they had been hitherto
accustomed; but by the recognition of Jesus Christ as the Messiah of
whom the law and the prophets testified, their old forms were inspired
with new life and significance. At first the heathen did not challenge
the distinction between the worship of the synagogue and the Church; and
thus it was, as has already been intimated, that for a considerable
portion of the first century, the Christians and the Jews were
frequently confounded.

It has often been asserted, that the Jews had a liturgy when our Lord
ministered in their synagogues; but the proof adduced in support of this
statement is far from satisfactory; and their prayers which are still
extant, and which are said to have been then in use, must obviously have
been written after the destruction of Jerusalem. [215:1] It is, however,
certain that the Christians in the apostolic age were not restricted to
any particular forms of devotion. The liturgies ascribed to Mark, James,
and others, are unquestionably the fabrications of later times; [215:2]
and had any of the inspired teachers of the gospel composed a book of
common prayer, it would, of course, have been received into the canon of
the New Testament. Our Lord taught His disciples to pray, and supplied
them with a model to guide them in their devotional exercises; [215:3]
but there is no evidence whatever that, in their stated services, they
constantly employed the language of that beautiful and comprehensive
formulary. The very idea of a liturgy was altogether alien to the spirit
of the primitive believers. They were commanded to give thanks "in
everything," [215:4] to pray "always _with all prayer and supplication_
in the spirit," [215:5] and to watch thereunto "with all perseverance
and supplication _for all saints_;" [215:6] and had they been limited to
a form, they would have found it impossible to comply with these
admonitions. Their prayers were dictated by the occasion, and varied
according to passing circumstances. Some of them which have been
recorded, [215:7] had a special reference to the occurrences of the day,
and could not have well admitted of repetition. In the apostolic age,
when the Spirit was poured out in such rich effusion on the Church, the
gift, as well as the grace, of prayer was imparted abundantly, so that a
liturgy would have been deemed superfluous, if not directly calculated
to freeze the genial current of devotion.

Singing, in which none but Levites were permitted to unite, [216:1] and
which was accompanied by instrumental music, constituted a prominent
part of the temple service. The singers occupied an elevated platform
adjoining the court of the priests; [216:2] and it is somewhat doubtful
whether, in that position, they were distinctly heard by the majority of
the worshippers within the sacred precincts. [216:3] As the sacrifices,
offerings, and other observances of the temple, as well as the priests,
the vestments, and even the building itself, had an emblematic meaning,
[216:4] it would appear that the singing, intermingled with the music of
various instruments of sound, was also typical and ceremonial. It seems
to have indicated that the tongue of man cannot sufficiently express the
praise of the King Eternal, and that all things, animate and inanimate,
owe Him a revenue of glory. The worship of the synagogue was more
simple. Its officers had, indeed, trumpets and cornets, with which they
published their sentences of excommunication, and announced the new
year, the fasts, and the Sabbath; [216:5] but they did not introduce
instrumental music into their congregational services. The early
Christians followed the example of the synagogue; and when they
celebrated the praises of God "in psalms, and hymns, and spiritual
songs," [216:6] their melody was "the fruit of the lips." [216:7] For
many centuries after this period, the use of instrumental music was
unknown in the Church. [217:1]

The Jews divided the Pentateuch and the writings of the Prophets into
sections, one of which was read every Sabbath in the synagogue; [217:2]
and thus, in the place set apart to the service of the God of Israel,
His own will was constantly proclaimed. The Christians bestowed equal
honour on the holy oracles; for in their solemn assemblies, the reading
of the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament formed a part of their
stated worship. [217:3] At the close of this exercise, one or more of
the elders edified the congregation, either by giving a general
exposition of the passage read, or by insisting particularly on some
point of doctrine or duty which it obviously inculcated. If a prophet
was present, he, too, had now an opportunity of addressing the auditory.
[217:4]

As apostolic Christianity aimed to impart light to the understanding,
its worship was uniformly conducted in the language of the people. It,
indeed, attested its divine origin by miracles, and it accordingly
enabled some to speak in tongues in which they had never been
instructed; but it permitted such individuals to exercise their gifts in
the church only when interpreters were present to translate their
communications. [217:5] Whilst the gift of tongues, possessed by so many
of the primitive disciples, must have attracted the attention of the
Gentile as well as of the Jewish literati, it must also have made a
powerful impression on the popular mind, more especially in large
cities; for in such places there were always foreigners to whom these
strange utterances would be perfectly intelligible, and for whom a
discourse delivered in the speech of their native country would have
peculiar charms. But in the worship of the primitive Christians there
was no attempt, in the way of embellishment or decoration, to captivate
the senses. The Church had no gorgeous temples, no fragrant incense,
[218:1] no splendid vestments. For probably the whole of the first
century, she celebrated her religious ordinances in private houses,
[218:2] and her ministers officiated in their ordinary costume. John,
the forerunner of our Saviour, "had his raiment of camel's hair, and a
leathern girdle about his loins;" [218:3] but perhaps few of the early
Christian preachers were arrayed in such coarse canonicals.

The Founder of the Christian religion instituted only two symbolic
ordinances--Baptism and the Lord's Supper. [218:4] It is universally
admitted that, in the apostolic age, baptism was dispensed to all who
embraced the gospel; but it has been much disputed whether it was also
administered to the infant children of the converts. The testimony of
Scripture on the subject is not very explicit; for, as the ordinance was
in common use amongst the Jews, [218:5] a minute description of its mode
and subjects was, perhaps, deemed unnecessary by the apostles and
evangelists. When an adult heathen was received into the Church of
Israel, it is well known that the little children of the proselyte were
admitted along with him; [219:1] and as the Christian Scriptures _no
where forbid_ the dispensation of the rite to infants, it may be
presumed that the same practice was observed by the primitive ministers
of the gospel. This inference is emphatically corroborated by the fact
that, of the comparatively small number of passages in the New Testament
which treat of its administration, no less than _five_ refer to the
baptism of whole households. [219:2] It is also worthy of remark that
these five cases are not mentioned as rare or peculiar, but as ordinary
specimens of the method of apostolic procedure. It is not, indeed,
absolutely certain that there was an infant in any of these five
households; but it is, unquestionably, much more probable that they
contained a fair proportion of little children, than that every
individual in each of them had arrived at years of maturity, and that
all these adults, without exception, at once participated in the faith
of the head of the family, and became candidates for baptism.

In the New Testament faith is represented as the grand qualification for
baptism; [219:3] but this principle obviously applies only to all who
are capable of believing; for in the Word of God faith is also
represented as necessary to salvation, [219:4] and yet it is generally
conceded that little children may be saved. Under the Jewish
dispensation infants were circumcised, and were thus recognised as
interested in the divine favour, so that, if they be excluded from the
rite of baptism, it follows that they occupy a worse position under a
milder and more glorious economy. But the New Testament forbids us to
adopt such an inference. It declares that infants should be "suffered to
come" to the Saviour; [219:5] it indicates that baptism supplies the
place of circumcision, for it connects the gospel institution with "the
circumcision of Christ;" [220:1] it speaks of children as "saints" and
as "in the Lord," [220:2] and, of course, as having received some
visible token of Church membership; and it assures them that their sins
are forgiven them "for His name's sake." [220:3] The New Testament does
not record a single case in which the offspring of Christian parents
were admitted to baptism on arriving at years of intelligence; but it
tells of the apostles exhorting the men of Judea to repent and to submit
to the ordinance, inasmuch as it was a privilege proffered to them and
_to their children_. [220:4] Nay more, Paul plainly teaches that the
seed of the righteous are entitled to the recognition of saintship; and
that, even when only one of the parents is a Christian, the offspring do
not on that account forfeit their ecclesiastical inheritance. "The
unbelieving husband," says he, "is sanctified by the wife, and the
unbelieving wife is sanctified by the husband, else were your _children_
unclean, but _now are they holy_." [220:5] This passage demonstrates
that the Apostolic Church recognised the holiness of infants, or in
other words, that it admitted them to baptism.

The Scriptures furnish no very specific instructions as to the mode of
baptism; and it is probable that, in its administration, the primitive
heralds of the gospel did not adhere to a system of rigid uniformity.
[220:6] Some have asserted that the Greek word translated _baptize_,
[220:7] in our authorised version, always signifies _immerse_, but it
has been clearly shewn [221:1] that this statement is inaccurate, and
that baptism does not necessarily imply _dipping_. In ancient times, and
in the lands where the apostles laboured, bathing was perhaps as
frequently performed by _affusion_ as immersion; [221:2] and it may be
that the apostles varied their method of baptizing according to
circumstances. [221:3] The ordinance was intended to convey the idea of
_washing_ or purifying; and it is obvious that water may be applied, in
many ways, as the means of ablution. In the sacred volume _sprinkling_
is often spoken of as equivalent to washing. [221:4]

As baptism was designed to supersede the Jewish circumcision, the Lord's
Supper was intended to occupy the place of the Jewish Passover. [221:5]
The Paschal lamb could be sacrificed nowhere except in the temple of
Jerusalem, and the Passover was kept only once a year; but the Eucharist
could be dispensed wherever a Christian congregation was collected; and
at this period it seems to have been observed every first day of the
week, at least by the more zealous and devout worshippers. [221:6] The
wine, as well as the other element, was given to all who joined in its
celebration; and the title of the "Breaking of _Bread_," [221:7] one of
the names by which the ordinance was originally distinguished, supplies
evidence that the doctrine of transubstantiation was then utterly
unknown. The word _Sacrament_, as applied to Baptism and the Holy
Supper, was not in use in the days of the apostles, and the subsequent
introduction of this nomenclature, [222:1] probably contributed to throw
an air of mystery around these institutions. The primitive disciples
considered the elements employed in them simply as signs and seals of
spiritual blessings; and they had no more idea of regarding the bread in
the Eucharist as the real body of our Saviour, than they had of
believing that the water of baptism is the very blood in which He washed
His people from their sins. They knew that they enjoyed the light of His
countenance in prayer, in meditation, and in the hearing of His Word;
and that He was not otherwise present in these symbolic ordinances.

Whilst, in the Lord's Supper, believers hold fellowship with Christ,
they also maintain and exhibit their communion with each other. "We,
being many," says Paul, "are one bread and one body, for we are all
partakers of that one bread." [222:2] Those who joined together in the
observance of this holy institution were thereby pledged to mutual love;
but every one who acted in such a way as to bring reproach upon the
Christian name, was no longer admitted to the sacred table. Paul,
doubtless, refers to exclusion from this ordinance, as well as from
intimate civil intercourse, when he says to the Corinthians--"I have
written unto you not to keep company, if any man that is called a
brother be a fornicator, or covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a
drunkard, or an extortioner; with such an one no not to eat." [222:3]

In the synagogue all cases of discipline were decided by the bench of
elders; [222:4] and it is plain, from the New Testament, that those who
occupied a corresponding position in the Christian Church, also
exercised similar authority. They are described as having the oversight
of the flock, [222:5] as bearing rule, [223:1] as watching for souls,
[223:2] and as taking care of the Church of God. [223:3] They are
instructed how to deal with offenders, [223:4] and they are said to be
entitled to obedience. [223:5] Such representations obviously imply that
they were intrusted with the administration of ecclesiastical
discipline.

This account of the functions of the spiritual rulers has been supposed
by some to be inconsistent with several statements in the apostolic
epistles. It has been alleged that, according to these letters, the
administration of discipline was vested in the whole body of the people;
and that originally the members of the Church, in their collective
capacity, exercised the right of excommunication. The language of Paul,
in reference to a case of scandal which had occurred among the
Christians of Corinth, has been often quoted in proof of the democratic
character of their ecclesiastical constitution. "It is reported
commonly," says the apostle, "that there is fornication, among you, and
such fornication as is not so much as named among the Gentiles, that one
should have his father's wife..... Therefore _put away from among
yourselves that wicked person_." [223:6] The admonition was obeyed, and
the application of discipline seems to have produced a most salutary
impression upon the mind of the offender. In his next letter the apostle
accordingly alludes to this circumstance, and observes--"Sufficient to
such a man is this punishment, which was _inflicted of many_." [223:7]
These words have been frequently adduced to shew that the government of
the Corinthian Church was administered by the whole body of the
communicants.

The various statements of Scripture, if rightly understood, must exactly
harmonize, and a closer investigation of the case of this transgressor
is all that is required to prove that he was not tried and condemned by
a tribunal composed of the whole mass of the members of the Church of
Corinth. His true history reveals facts of a very different character.
For reasons which it would, perhaps, be now in vain to hope fully to
explore, he seems to have been a favourite among his fellow-disciples;
many of them, prior to their conversion, had been grossly licentious;
and, it may be, that they continued to regard certain lusts of the flesh
with an eye of comparative indulgence. [224:1] Some of them probably
considered the conduct of this offender as only a legitimate exercise of
his Christian liberty; and they appear to have manifested a strong
inclination to shield him from ecclesiastical censure. Paul, therefore,
felt it necessary to address them in the language of indignant
expostulation. "_Ye are puffed up_," says he, "and have not rather
mourned that he that hath done this deed might be taken away from among
you....._Your glorying is not good_. Know ye not that a little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump." [224:2] At the same time, as an apostle bound
to vindicate the reputation of the Church, and to enforce the rules of
ecclesiastical discipline, he solemnly announces his determination to
have the offender excommunicated. "I verily," says he, "as absent in
body, but present in spirit, _have judged_ already as though I were
present, concerning him that hath so done this deed, in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, _when ye are gathered together_, and my spirit, with
the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, _to deliver such an one unto Satan_
for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the
day of the Lord Jesus." [224:3] To deliver any one to Satan is to expel
him from the Church, for whoever is not in the Church is in the world,
and "the whole world lieth in the wicked one." [224:4] This discipline
was designed to teach the fornicator to mortify his lusts, and it thus
aimed at the promotion of his highest interests; or, as the apostle
expresses it, he was to be excommunicated "for the destruction of the
flesh, [225:1] that the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus." It is obvious that the Church of Corinth was now in a state of
great disorder. A partisan spirit had crept in amongst its members;
[225:2] and it seems probable that those elders [225:3] who were anxious
to maintain wholesome discipline were opposed and overborne. The
fornicator had in some way contrived to make himself so popular that an
attempt at his expulsion would, it was feared, throw the whole society
into hopeless confusion. Under these circumstances Paul felt it
necessary to interpose, to assert his apostolic authority, and to insist
upon the maintenance of ecclesiastical order. Instead, however, of
consulting the people as to the course to be pursued, he peremptorily
delivers his _judgment_, and requires them to hold a solemn
assembly that they may listen to the public announcement [225:4] of a
sentence of excommunication. He, of course, expected that their rulers
would concur with him in this decision, and that one of them would
officially publish it when they were "gathered together."

When the case is thus stated, it is easy to understand why the apostle
required all the disciples to "put away" from among themselves "that
wicked person." Had they continued to cherish the spirit which they had
recently displayed, they might either have encouraged the fornicator to
refuse submission to the sentence, or they might have rendered it
comparatively powerless. He therefore reminds them that they too should
seek to promote the purity of ecclesiastical fellowship; and that they
were bound to cooperate in carrying out a righteous discipline. They
were to cease to recognize this fallen disciple as a servant of Christ;
they were to withdraw themselves from his society; they were to decline
to meet him on the same terms, as heretofore, in social intercourse; and
they were not even to eat in his company. Thus would the reputation of
the Church be vindicated; for in this way it would be immediately known
to all who were without that he was no longer considered a member of the
brotherhood.

The Corinthians were awakened to a sense of duty by this apostolic
letter, and acted up to its instructions. The result was most
satisfactory. When the offender, saw that he was cut off from the
Church, and that its members avoided his society, he was completely
humbled. The sentence of the apostle, or the eldership, if opposed or
neglected by the people, might have produced little impression; but "the
punishment which was inflicted of many"--the immediate and entire
abandonment of all connexion with him by the disciples at
Corinth--overwhelmed him with shame and terror. He felt as a man smitten
by the judgment of God; he renounced his sin; and he exhibited the most
unequivocal tokens of genuine contrition. In due time he was restored to
Church fellowship; and the apostle then exhorted his brethren to readmit
him to intercourse, and to treat him with kindness and confidence. "Ye
ought," says he, "rather to forgive him and comfort him, lest perhaps
such an one should be swallowed up with overmuch sorrow. Wherefore I
beseech you that ye would confirm your love toward him." [227:1]

This case of the Corinthian fornicator has been recorded for the
admonition and guidance of believers in all generations. It teaches that
every member of a Christian Church is bound to use his best endeavours
to promote a pure communion; and that he is not guiltless if, prompted
by mistaken charity or considerations of selfishness, he is not prepared
to co-operate in the exclusion of false brethren. Many an immoral
minister has maintained his position, and has thus continued to bring
discredit on the gospel, simply because those who had witnessed his
misconduct were induced to suppress their testimony; and many a church
court has been prevented from enforcing discipline by the clamours or
intimidation of an ignorant and excited congregation. The command--"Put
away from among yourselves that wicked person," is addressed to the
people, as well as to the ministry; and all Christ's disciples should
feel that, in vindicating the honour of His name, they have a common
interest, and share a common responsibility. Every one cannot be a
member of a church court; but every one can aid in the preservation of
church discipline. He may supply information, or give evidence, or
encourage a healthy tone of public sentiment, or assist, by petition or
remonstrance, in quickening the zeal of lukewarm judicatories. And
discipline is never so influential as when it is known to be sustained
by the approving verdict of a pious and intelligent community. The
punishment "inflicted of many"--the withdrawal of the confidence and
countenance of a whole church--is a most impressive admonition to a
proud sinner.

In the apostolic age the sentence of excommunication had a very
different significance from that which was attached to it at a
subsequent period. Our Lord pointed out its import with equal precision
and brevity when he said--"If thy brother....neglect to hear the church,
[228:1] let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican." [228:2]
The Israelites could have no religious fellowship with heathens, or the
worshippers of false gods; and they could have no personal respect for
publicans, or Roman tax-gatherers, who were regarded as odious
representatives of the oppressors of their country. To be "unto them as
an heathen" was to be excluded from the privileges of their church; and
to be "unto them as a publican" was to be shut out from their society in
the way of domestic intercourse. When the apostle says--"Now we command
you, brethren, that _ye withdraw yourselves_ from every brother that
walketh disorderly and not after the ordinance [228:3] which he received
of us," [228:4] he doubtless designed to intimate that those who were
excommunicated should be admitted neither to the intimacy of private
friendship nor to the sealing ordinances of the gospel. But it did not
follow that the disciples were to treat such persons with insolence or
inhumanity. They were not at liberty to act thus towards heathens and
publicans; for they were to love even their enemies, and they were to
imitate the example of their Father in heaven who "maketh his sun to
rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on
the unjust." [228:5] It is obvious from the address of the apostle to
the Thessalonians that the members of the Church were not forbidden to
speak to those who were separated from communion; and that they were not
required to refuse them the ordinary charities of life. They were simply
to avoid such an intercourse as implied a community of faith, of
feeling, and of interest. "If any man," says he, "obey not our word by
this epistle, note that man, and _have no company with him_, that he may
be ashamed. Yet _count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a
brother_." [229:1]

How different was this discipline from that which was established,
several centuries afterwards, in the Latin Church! The spirit and usages
of paganism then supplanted the regulations of the New Testament, and
the excommunication of Christianity was converted into the
excommunication of Druidism. [229:2] Our Lord taught that "whoever would
not hear the church" should be treated as a heathen man and a publican;
but the time came when he who forfeited his status as a member of the
Christian commonwealth was denounced as a monster or a fiend. Paul
declared that the person excommunicated, instead of being counted as an
enemy, should be admonished as a brother; but the Latin Church, in a
long list of horrid imprecations, [229:3] invoked a curse upon every
member of the body of the offender, and commanded every one to refuse to
him the civility of the coldest salutation! The early Church acted as a
faithful monitor, anxious to reclaim the sinner from the error of his
ways: the Latin Church, like a tyrant, refuses to the transgressor even
that which is his due, and seeks either to reduce him to slavery, or to
drive him to despair.





CHAPTER II.

THE EXTRAORDINARY TEACHERS OF THE APOSTOLIC CHURCH; AND ITS ORDINARY
OFFICE-BEARERS, THEIR APPOINTMENT, AND ORDINATION.


Paul declares that Christ "gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and
some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of
the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body
of Christ." [230:1] In another place the same writer, when speaking of
those occupying positions of prominence in the ecclesiastical community,
makes a somewhat similar enumeration. "God," says he, "hath set some in
the church, first, apostles; secondarily, prophets; thirdly, teachers;
after that, miracles; then, gifts of healings, helps, governments,
diversities of tongues." [230:2]

These two passages, presenting something like catalogues of the most
prominent characters connected with the Apostolic Church, throw light
upon each other. They mention the ordinary, as well as the
extraordinary, ecclesiastical functionaries. Under the class of ordinary
office-bearers must be placed those described as "pastors and teachers,"
"helps," and "governments." The evangelists, such as Timothy, [230:3]
Titus, and Philip, [230:4] seem to have had a special commission to
assist in organizing the infant Church; [230:5] and, as they were
furnished with supernatural endowments, [231:1] they may be considered
extraordinary functionaries. The apostles themselves clearly belong to
the same denomination. They all possessed the gift of inspiration
[231:2] they all received their authority immediately from Christ;
[231:3] they all "went in and out with Him" during His personal
ministry; and, as they all saw Him after He rose from the dead, they
could all attest His resurrection. [231:4] It is plain, too, that the
ministrations of "the prophets," as well as of those who wrought
"miracles," who possessed "gifts of healings," and who had "diversities
of tongues," must also be designated extraordinary.

It is probable that by the "helps," of whom Paul here speaks, he
understands _the deacons_, [231:5] who were originally appointed to
relieve the apostles of a portion of labour which they felt to be
inconvenient and burdensome. [231:6] The duties of the deacons were not
strictly of a spiritual character; these ministers held only a
subordinate station among the office-bearers of the Church; and, even in
dealing with its temporalities, they acted under the advice and
direction of those who were properly entrusted with its government.
Hence, perhaps, they were called "helps" or attendants. [231:7]

When these helps and the extraordinary functionaries are left out of the
apostolic catalogues, it is rather singular that, in the passage
addressed to the Ephesians, we have nothing remaining but "PASTORS AND
TEACHERS;" and, in that to the Corinthians, nothing but "TEACHERS" AND
"GOVERNMENTS." There are good grounds for believing that these two
residuary elements are identical,--the "pastors," mentioned
before[232:1] the teachers in one text, being equivalent to the
"governments" mentioned after them in the other.[232:2] Nor is it
strange that those entrusted with the ecclesiastical government should
be styled pastors or shepherds; for they are the guardians and rulers of
"the flock of God." [232:3] Thus, it appears that the ordinary
office-bearers of the Apostolic Church were pastors, teachers, and
helps; or, teachers, rulers, and deacons.

In the apostolic age we read likewise of elders and bishops; and in the
New Testament these names are often used interchangeably.[232:4] The
elders or bishops, were the same as the pastors and teachers; for they
had the charge of the instruction and government of the Church.[232:5]
Hence elders are required to act as faithful pastors under Christ, the
Chief Shepherd.[232:6] It appears, too, that whilst some of the elders
were only pastors, or rulers, others were also teachers. The apostle
says accordingly--"Let the elders that _rule_ well, be counted worthy of
double honour, especially those that _labour in the word and
doctrine_".[232:7] We may thus see that the teachers, governments, and
helps, mentioned by Paul when writing to the Corinthians, are the same
as the "bishops and deacons" of whom he speaks elsewhere. [233:1]

In primitive times there were, generally, a plurality of elders, as well
as a plurality of deacons, in every church or congregation; [233:2] and
each functionary was expected to apply himself to that particular
department of his office which he could manage most efficiently. Some
elders possessed a peculiar talent for expounding the gospel in the way
of preaching, or, as it was occasionally called, prophesying; [233:3]
others excelled in delivering hortatory addresses to the people; others
displayed great tact and sagacity in conducting ecclesiastical business,
or in dealing personally with offenders, or with penitents; whilst
others again were singularly successful in imparting private instruction
to catechumens. Some deacons were frequently commissioned to administer
to the wants of the sick; and others, who were remarkable for their
shrewdness and discrimination, were employed to distribute alms to the
indigent. In one of his epistles Paul pointedly refers to the multiform
duties of these ecclesiastical office-bearers-"Having then," says he,"
gifts, differing according to the grace that is given to us, whether
prophecy, let us prophesy according to the proportion of faith; or
ministry (of the deacon), let us wait on our ministering; or he that
teacheth, on teaching; or he that exhorteth, on exhortation; he that
giveth, let him do it with simplicity; he that ruleth, with diligence;
he that sheweth mercy, with cheerfulness." [233:4] It has been supposed
by some that all the primitive elders, or bishops, were preachers; but
the records of apostolic times warrant no such conclusion. These elders
were appointed simply to "take care of the Church of God;" [233:5] and
it was not necessary that each individual should perform all the
functions of the pastoral office. Even at the present day a single
preacher is generally sufficient to minister to a single congregation.
When Paul requires that the elders who rule well, though they may not
"labour in the word and doctrine," shall be counted worthy of double
honour, [234:1] is language distinctly indicates that there were then
persons designated elders who did not preach, and who, notwithstanding,
were entitled to respect as exemplary and efficient functionaries. It is
remarkable that when the apostle enumerates the qualifications of a
bishop, or elder, [234:2] he scarcely refers to oratorical endowments.
He states that the ruler of the Church should be grave, sober, prudent,
and benevolent; but, as to his ability to propagate his principles, he
employs only one word--rendered in our version "apt to teach." [234:3]
This does not imply that he must be qualified to _preach_, for
_teaching_ and _preaching_ are repeatedly distinguished in the New
Testament; [234:4] neither does it signify that he must become a
professional tutor, for, as has already been intimated, all elders are
not expected to labour in the word and doctrine; it merely denotes that
he should be able and willing, as often as an opportunity occurred, to
communicate a knowledge of divine truth. All believers are required to
"exhort one another daily," [235:1] "_teaching_ and admonishing one
another," [235:2] being "ready always to give an answer to every man
that asketh them a reason of the hope that is in them;" [235:3] and
those who "watch for souls" should be specially zealous in performing
these duties of their Christian vocation. The word which has been
supposed to indicate that every elder should be a public instructor
occurs in only one other instance in the New Testament; and in that case
it is used in a connexion which serves to illustrate its meaning. Paul
there states that whilst such as minister to the Lord should avoid a
controversial spirit, they should at the same time be willing to supply
explanations to objectors, and to furnish them with information. "The
servant of the Lord," says he, "must not strive, but be gentle unto all
men, _apt to teach_, patient, in meekness _instructing_ those that
oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth." [235:4] Here the _aptness to teach_ refers
apparently to a talent for winning over gainsayers by means of
instruction communicated in private conversation. [235:5]

But still preaching is the grand ordinance of God, as well for the
edification of saints as for the conversion of sinners; and it was,
therefore, necessary that at least some of the session or eldership
connected with each flock should be competent to conduct the
congregational worship. As spiritual gifts were more abundant in the
apostolic times than afterwards, it is probable that at first several of
the elders [236:1] were found ready to take part in its celebration. By
degrees, however, nearly the whole service devolved on one individual;
and this preaching elder was very properly treated with peculiar
deference. [236:2] He was accordingly soon recognized as the stated
president of the presbytery, or eldership.

It thus appears that the preaching elder held the most honourable
position amongst the ordinary functionaries of the Apostolic Church.
Whilst his office required the highest order of gifts and
accomplishments, and exacted the largest amount of mental and even
physical exertion, the prosperity of the whole ecclesiastical community
depended mainly on his acceptance and efficiency. The people are
accordingly frequently reminded that they are bound to respect and
sustain their spiritual instructors. "Let him that is taught in the
word," says Paul, "communicate unto him that teacheth in all good
things." [236:3] "The Scripture saith--Thou shalt not muzzle the ox that
treadeth out the corn; and, The labourer is worthy of his reward."
[236:4] "So hath the Lord ordained that they which preach the gospel
should live of the gospel." [236:5]

The apostles held a position which no ministers after them could occupy,
for they were sip pointed by our Lord himself to organize the Church. As
they were to carry out instructions which they had received from His own
lips, and as they were armed with the power of working miracles, [236:6]
they possessed an extraordinary share of personal authority. Aware that
their circumstances were peculiar, and that their services would be
available until the end of time, [236:7] they left the ecclesiastical
government, as they passed away one after another, to the care of the
elders who had meanwhile shared in its administration. [237:1] As soon
as the Church began to assume a settled form, they mingled with these
elders on terms of equality; and, as at the Council of Jerusalem,
[237:2] sat with them in the same deliberative assemblies. When Paul
addressed the elders of Ephesus for the last time, and took his solemn
farewell of them, [237:3] he commended the Church to their charge, and
emphatically pressed upon them the importance of fidelity and vigilance.
[237:4] In his Second Epistle to Timothy, written in the prospect of his
martyrdom, he makes no allusion to the expediency of selecting another
individual to fill his place. The apostles had fully executed their
commission when, as wise master-builders, they laid the foundation of
the Church and fairly exhibited the divine model of the glorious
structure; and as no other parties could produce the same credentials,
no others could pretend to the same authority. But even the apostles
repeatedly testified that they regarded the preaching of the Word as the
highest department of their office. It was, not as church rulers, but as
church teachers, that they were specially distinguished. "We will give
ourselves," said they, "continually to prayer, and _to the ministry of
the Word_." [237:5] "Christ sent me," said Paul, "not to baptize, but to
preach the gospel." [238:1] "Unto me, who am less than the least of all
saints, is this grace given, that I should preach among the Gentiles the
unsearchable riches of Christ." [238:2]

But though, according to the New Testament, the business of ruling
originally formed only a subordinate part of the duty of the church
teacher, some have maintained that ecclesiastical government pertains to
a higher function than ecclesiastical instruction; and that the apostles
instituted a class of spiritual overseers to whose jurisdiction all
other preachers are amenable. They imagine that, in the Pastoral
Epistles, they find proofs of the existence of such functionaries;
[238:3] and they contend that Timothy and Titus were diocesan bishops,
respectively of Ephesus and Crete. But the arguments by which they
endeavour to sustain these views are quite inconclusive. Paul says to
Timothy--"I besought thee to abide still at Ephesus, when I went into
Macedonia, that _thou mightest charge_ some that _they teach no other
doctrine_;" [239:1] and it has hence been inferred that the evangelist
was the only minister in the capital of the Proconsular Asia who was
sufficiently authorized to oppose heresiarchs. It happens, however, that
in this epistle the writer says also to his correspondent--"_Charge them
that are rich_ in this world that they be not high-minded, nor trust in
uncertain riches;" [239:2] so that, according to the same method of
interpretation, it would follow that Timothy was the only preacher in
the place who was at liberty to admonish the opulent. When Paul
subsequently stood face to face with the elders of Ephesus [239:3] he
told them that it was their common duty to discountenance and resist
false teachers; [239:4] and he had therefore now no idea of entrusting
that responsibility to any solitary individual. The reason why the
service was pressed specially on Timothy is sufficiently apparent. He
had been trained up by Paul himself; he was a young minister remarkable
for intelligence, ability, and circumspection; and he was accordingly
deemed eminently qualified to deal with the errorists. Hence at this
juncture his presence at Ephesus was considered of importance; and the
apostle besought him to remain there whilst he himself was absent on
another mission.

The argument founded on the instructions addressed to Titus is equally
unsatisfactory. Paul says to him--"For this cause left I thee in Crete,
that thou shouldest set in order the things that are wanting, and ordain
[240:1] elders in every city as I had appointed thee;" [240:2] and from
these words the inference has been drawn that to Titus alone was
committed the ecclesiastical oversight of all the churches of the
island. But the words of the apostle warrant no such sweeping
conclusion. Apollos, [240:3] and probably other ministers equal in
authority to the evangelist, were now in Crete, and were, no doubt,
ready to co-operate with him in the business of church organization.
Titus, besides, had no right to act without the concurrence of the
people; for, in all cases, even when the apostles were officiating, the
church members were consulted in ecclesiastical appointments. [240:4] It
is probable that the evangelist had much administrative ability, and
this seems to have been the great reason why he was left behind Paul in
Crete. The apostle expected that, with his peculiar energy and tact, he
would stimulate the zeal of the people, as well as of the other
preachers; and thus complete, as speedily as possible, the needful
ecclesiastical arrangements.

When Paul once said to the high priest of Israel--"_Sittest thou to
judge me_ after the law, and commandest me to be smitten contrary to the
law" [240:5]--he had no intention of declaring that the dignitary he
addressed was the only member of the Jewish council who had the right of
adjudication. [240:6] The court consisted of at least seventy
individuals, every one of whom had a vote as effective as that of the
personage with whom he thus remonstrated. It is said that the high
priest at this period was not even the president of the Sanhedrim.
[241:1] Paul was perfectly aware of the constitution of the tribunal to
which Ananias belonged; and he merely meant to remind his oppressor that
the circumstances in which he was placed added greatly to the iniquity
of his present procedure. Though only one of the members of a large
judicatory he was not the less accountable. Thus too, when Jesus said to
Paul himself--"I send _thee_" to the Gentiles, "to open their eyes, and
to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto
God" [241:2]--it was certainly not understood that the apostle was to be
the only labourer in the wide field of heathendom. The address simply
intimated that he was individually commissioned to undertake the
service. And though there were other ministers at Ephesus and Crete,
Paul reminds Timothy and Titus that he had left them there to perform
specific duties, and thus urges upon them the consideration of their
personal responsibility. Though surrounded by so many apostles and
evangelists, he tells us that there rested on himself daily "the care of
all the churches;" [241:3] for he believed that the whole commonwealth
of the saints had a claim on his prayers, his sympathy, and his
services; and he desired to cherish in the hearts of his young brethren
the same feeling of individual obligation. Hence, in these Pastoral
Epistles, he gives his correspondents minute instructions respecting all
the departments of the ministerial office, and reminds them how much
depends on their personal faithfulness. Hence he here points out to them
how they are to deport themselves in public and in private; [241:4] as
preachers of the Word, and as members of church judicatories; [241:5]
towards the rich and the poor, masters and slaves, young men and widows.
[242:1] But there is not a single advice addressed to Timothy and Titus
in any of these three epistles which may not be appropriately given to
any ordinary minister of the gospel, or which necessarily implies that
either of these evangelists exercised exclusive ecclesiastical authority
in Ephesus or Crete. [242:2]

The legend that Timothy and Titus were the bishops respectively of
Ephesus and Crete appears to have been invented about the beginning of
the fourth century, and at a time when the original constitution of the
Church had been completely, though silently, revolutionized. [242:3] It
is obvious that, when the Pastoral Epistles were written, these
ministers were not permanently located in the places with which their
names have been thus associated. [242:4] The apostle John resided
principally at Ephesus during the last thirty years of the first
century; [242:5] so that, according to this tale, the beloved disciple
must have been nearly all this time under the ecclesiastical supervision
of Timothy! The story otherwise exhibits internal marks of absurdity and
fabrication. It would lead us to infer that Paul must have distributed
most unequally the burden of official labour; for whilst Timothy is said
to have presided over the Christians of a single city, Titus is
represented as invested with the care of a whole island celebrated in
ancient times for its _hundred cities_. [243:1] It is well known that
long after this period, and when the distinction between the president
of the presbytery and his elders was fully established, a bishop had the
charge of only one church, so that the account of the episcopate of
Titus over all Crete must be rejected as a monstrous fiction.

On the occasion of an ambitious request from James and John, our Lord
expounded to His apostles one of the great principles of His
ecclesiastical polity. "Jesus called them to him, and saith unto
them--Ye know that they which are accounted to rule over the Gentiles
exercise lordship over them; and their great ones exercise authority
upon them. _But so shall it not be among you_, but whosoever will be
great among you, shall be your minister, and whosoever of you will be
chiefest, shall be servant of all. For even the Son of man came not to
be ministered unto, but to minister, and to give his life a ransom for
many." [243:2] The teaching elder holds the most honourable position in
the Church, simply because his office is the most laborious, the most
responsible, and the most useful. And no minister of the Word is
warranted to exercise lordship over his brethren, for all are equally
the servants of the same Divine Master. He is the greatest who is most
willing to humble himself, to spend, and to be spent, that Christ may be
exalted. Even the Son of man came, not to be ministered unto, but to
minister; it was His meat and His drink to do the will of His Father in
heaven; He was ready to give instruction to many or to few; at the sea
or by the wayside; in the house, the synagogue, or the corn-field; on
the mountain or in the desert; when sitting in the company of publicans,
or when He had not where to lay His head. He who exhibits most of the
spirit and character of the Great Teacher is the most illustrious of
Christ's ministers.

The primitive Church was pre-eminently a free society; and, with a view
to united action, its members were taught to consult together respecting
all matters of common interest. Whilst the elders were required to
beware of attempting to domineer over each other, they were also warned
against deporting themselves as "lords over God's heritage." [244:1] All
were instructed to be courteous, forbearing, and conciliatory; and each
individual was made to understand that he possessed some importance.
Though the apostles, as inspired rulers of the Christian commonwealth,
might have done many things on their own authority, yet, even in
concerns comparatively trivial, as well as in affairs of the greatest
consequence, they were guided by the wishes of the people. When an
apostle was to be chosen in the place of Judas, the multitude were
consulted. [244:2] When deputies were required to accompany Paul in a
journey to be undertaken for the public service, the apostle did not
himself select his fellow-travellers, but the churches concerned,
proceeded, by a regular vote, to make the appointment. [244:3] When
deacons A or elders were to be nominated, the choice rested with the
congregation. [244:4] The records of the apostolic age do not mention
any ordinary church functionary who was not called to his office by
popular suffrage. [244:5]

But though, in apostolic times, the communicants were thus freely
entrusted with the elective franchise, the constitution of the primitive
Church was not purely democratic; for while its office-bearers were
elected for life, and whilst its elders or bishops formed a species of
spiritual aristocracy, the powers of the people and the rulers were so
balanced as to check each other's aberrations, and to promote the
healthful action of all parts of the ecclesiastical body. When a deacon
or a bishop was elected, he was not permitted, without farther ceremony,
to enter upon the duties of his vocation. He was bound to submit himself
to the presbytery, that they might ratify the choice by ordination; and
this court, by refusing the imposition of hands, could protect the
Church against the intrusion of incompetent or unworthy candidates.
[245:1]

Among the Jews every ordained elder was considered qualified to join in
the ordination of others. [245:2] The same principle was acknowledged in
the early Christian Church; and when any functionary was elected, he was
introduced to his office by the presbytery of the city or district with
which he was connected. There is no instance in the apostolic age in
which ordination was conferred by a single individual, Paul and Barnabas
were separated to the work to which the Lord had called them by the
ministers of Antioch; [245:3] the first elders of the Christian Churches
of Asia Minor were set apart by Paul and Barnabas; [245:4] Timothy was
invested with ecclesiastical authority by "the laying on of the hands of
the presbytery;" [245:5] and even the seven deacons were ordained by the
twelve apostles acting, for the time, as the presbytery of Jerusalem.
[245:6]

Towards the conclusion of the Epistle to the Romans, [245:7] Paul
mentions Phoebe, "a servant [245:8] of the Church which is at Cenchrea;"
and from this passage some have inferred that the apostles instituted an
order of _deaconesses_. It is scarcely safe to build such an hypothesis
on the foundation of a solitary text of doubtful significance. It may be
that Phoebe was one of the poor widows supported by the Church; [246:1]
and that, as such, she was employed by the elders in various little
services of a confidential or benevolent character. It is probable that,
at one period, she had been in more comfortable circumstances, and that
she had then distinguished herself by her humane and obliging
disposition; for Paul refers apparently to this portion of her history
when he says, "she hath been a succourer of many, and of myself also."
[246:2]

In the primitive age all the members of the same Church were closely
associated. As brethren and sisters in the faith, they took a deep
interest in each other's prosperity; and they regarded the afflictions
of any single disciple as a calamity which had befallen the whole
society. Each individual was expected in some way to contribute to the
well-being of all. Even humble Phoebe could be the bearer of an
apostolic letter to the Romans; and, on her return to Cenchrea, could
exert a healthful influence among the younger portion of the female
disciples, by her advice, her example, and her prayers. The industrious
scribe could benefit the brotherhood by writing out copies of the
gospels or epistles; and the pleasant singer, as he joined in the holy
psalm, could thrill the hearts of the faithful by his notes of grave
sweet melody. By establishing a plurality of both elders and deacons in
every worshipping society, the apostles provided more efficiently, as
well for its temporal, as for its spiritual interests; and the most
useful members of the congregation were thus put into positions in which
their various graces and endowments were better exhibited and exercised.
