temples of the Holy Spirit, and the influences of sin fall away from
them.

But the hindrances that are always acting to undermine or destroy any
such spiritual power in us are manifold, and seldom far away from our
life.

The world outside is always with us and acting in this way, distracting
thought, setting up its own standards, drawing us into its channels, and
deadening the Spirit in us.  This is one of the inevitable conditions of
life as you will have to live it, and the man who is in earnest
recognises it as a paramount reason why he should never drop out of his
personal practice the habit of separate prayer and communion with God.  Or
again, we may, and often do, let these hindrances grow up within us
through our own fault, and quite apart from any active influences of the
outer world.

We contract a dulness of spirit, so that spiritual things have no
interest and faith has no living power in the heart; and all this very
often not because any person, or anything outside of us, can be said to
have led us away and entangled us, but simply because we have taken no
pains to keep our life within the range of spiritual influences; we have
let prayer slip out of it; we have lived in no spiritual companionship;
we have done nothing to keep our soul alive in us.  This is how men
choose the lower life, and surrender their birthright out of pure
inertia, so that they lose their spiritual capacity.

But worst of all hindrances to the indwelling of God's Holy Spirit in any
life is the harbouring of sensual appetite or craving, passion, or
indulgence.  No man can expect the Holy Spirit of God to make its home in
such unclean company.  It is on this account that there is nothing which
so soon grows to depraved habit, to God-abandoned state, as sensual
appetite; nothing which so rapidly dulls the higher affections in the
heart and saps all the finer elements of life.

Therefore, when we are thinking of God's gift of the Holy Ghost, and of
spiritual power as the saving and uplifting influence in our soul, we do
well to reflect a little on those hindrances which will be fatal to all
such power in us, if they are allowed to take possession of our life and
to prevail in it.

 We do well to reflect in this way, because such reflection will make us
very careful against harbouring or encouraging any of these fatal
hindrances, and careful also against any other form of spiritual waste.

There is no surer guide to a right use of all liberty than this
reflection upon the power of the indwelling spirit in us, and the things
that add to it or destroy it.

Recognising that this Spirit, which, in the language of your confirmation
prayer, is the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel
and ghostly strength, the Spirit of knowledge and true godliness and of
holy fear; recognising that this Spirit, with its sevenfold gifts, is the
saving element in all free life, you begin to look with fresh feelings on
all your leisure hours, on all your hours of liberty, when you are
released from task work or supervision, when your life is what you
yourselves are making it, and you begin to consider whether these times,
as you spend them, are indeed times of growth or, it may be, of waste,
times of genuine freedom or of slavery to some form of lower life.  When
you think of this Holy Spirit of God as a power in every good life, it
becomes a very real question what and of what sort is the _power_ that is
holding sway over you in your leisure hours.

This is indeed a question which never sleeps, and to-day we ask, What is
your Whitsuntide answer to it?

If there be any one to whom such a question is not yet a matter of living
concern, it is the purpose of this Pentecostal festival to rouse him to
new thoughts about it.

If there be any older person in this congregation who lets his years slip
from him, not caring or forgetting the importance of it, and not striving
to leaven all his hours of work or leisure with the thought of this
indwelling Spirit from above; or if there should be any young boy who, in
utter thoughtlessness, or from perversity or coarseness, or any induced
depravity of taste, allows any evil spirit to bear rule in his life, our
prayer for such an one to-day is that the baptism of fire may descend
upon his soul, and the power of a new spirit be felt in it.

And indeed there is not one of us but needs to come at such a time with
this same prayer for his own life; for our own experience is too often
very like the vision of Ezekiel.  Under the influences that come between
us and the Spirit of the living God, our soul is in continual danger of
being like the prophet's valley of dry bones, which lay lifeless,
unmoved, till the breath of the Lord breathed over them, and the breath
came into them, and they lived, and stood up upon their feet, an
exceeding great army.

So we pray that our life may prove responsive to these influences of the
Pentecostal season.  And the first response it gives is when it rises up
in the consciousness of the Spirit of God as a living power in the heart,
a power to drive out evil, and to inspire and strengthen us for what is
good.

And if, under the inspiring associations of this historic and holy day,
you feel your soul touched with a new spirit or consciousness rising up
in you from the grave of its own dead self to new desires and new
thoughts, and a new sense of the living nearness of the Holy Ghost the
Comforter, then you know--and you need no prophet to tell you--that the
Pentecostal gift has not failed, and there is good hope that you will not
spoil either your youth or your manhood with any form of ignoble life.




 XIX.  SANCTIFIED FOR SERVICE.


   "We are labourers together with God; ye are God's husbandry; ye are
   God's building."--1 COR. iii. 9.

In this passage St. Paul is rebuking the Corinthians for that spirit of
party which was dividing them into followers of this or that teacher and
so destroying their unity in Christ.  You do not belong, he says, to Paul
or to Apollos; _we_ have no claim upon you; ye are not to be called by
_our_ name: you are _God's_ husbandry, and _God's_ building, not ours; we
are but labourers in His service and ministers for your good.  Therefore,
see to it that you live as one society in Christ Jesus, discarding all
divisions, factions, and party passions and watchwords, imbued with one
spirit.  It is a noble exhortation to unity of life and purpose; but we
may notice in it more than this.

 As Paul himself disclaims all personal merit--as he presses it on their
attention that neither is he that planteth anything nor he that watereth,
but God that giveth the increase, he is unconsciously exhibiting to us an
example of that rare humility which is characteristic of all the greatest
and most effective workers; whilst in the vivid and expressive metaphors
of my text--ye are God's husbandry, God's building--he makes us to feel
the value and the dignity of each human soul.

It would be interesting to dwell on these calls to unity of life in
Christ, and the close connection between such unity and the spirit of
humility; in fact, we might say, the absolute necessity of the spirit of
humility and self-forgetfulness in individuals if there is to be unity in
the society.  And we might apply the thoughts with much profit to our own
social relations, for they are never out of date; but I desire to turn to-
day to that which is suggested by these descriptive metaphors, the value
and dignity of each human life.

 St. Paul pressed it on these Corinthians that their souls were nothing
less than the seed-field of which God Himself was the Husbandman, or the
temple built by His hand; and they could hardly have listened to such
language without being stirred to take care how they sowed in that field,
or without feeling the consequent value of their life in the sight of
God.

If they were thus the objects of the Divine care they could not be
thought of as insignificant units in a crowded city; or as living an
obscure life which was of no particular importance, as they might
otherwise have been tempted to fancy, as we are still sometimes tempted
to think about an individual life.  This picture of each life amongst us
in its relation to God, as His seed-field or His temple, is a continual
reminder that where a human soul is concerned there is no such thing as
insignificance or obscurity.

As St. Paul thought of that little company--a company small and obscure
to the outward eye--what he saw in them was the temple of the Holy Ghost,
and the spiritual life that was breathing there was a Divine life; and
this intense conviction of the value of each soul and each society and
its consequent sanctity was a never-failing inspiration to him.

Through it he saw in every one who listened to his words, as he went from
city to city, a man created and endowed with a Divine mission and Divine
capacity, if they could only be roused.

It transformed every soul that crossed his path, so that he looked on
life with new eyes.  The common crowd had a new interest for him, the
suffering poor, the downtrodden slave, the heathen in his blindness, the
degraded sinner.

And it has been so with all the great servants of God; out of this
feeling the love of souls has grown in men.

But this feeling of the value of each individual life, because of the
Divine element and presence in it, is a peculiar gift of the Christian
revelation.

In the ancient pagan world a man's life was of little account; it is out
of the Bible that this new thought has come that every soul has in it an
indefinite element of Divine possibilities, and is therefore of value in
the sight of God.  It is by virtue of this contribution to our thought
that the Bible is truly described as the Great Charter of human rights,
and as the source of the great stream of charity and self-sacrifice, of
that enthusiasm of humanity which more than all else separates and
distinguishes our life from that of heathen antiquity.

It would indeed be difficult to point to any one single thing which makes
so great a difference between the quality of one man's life and another's
as the presence or absence of this feeling about the value, the
possibilities, the sanctity of each individual soul.

"Let man estimate himself," said Pascal, "let him estimate himself at his
true value, honour himself in his capacities, and despise himself in his
neglect of those capacities."  Yes, if a man is once brought to this
condition that he feels the greatness of the ends for which God has made
him, and that he estimates his life by the possibilities of growth that
are in it, and by the thought of the Divine influences that work in it;
and if he despises himself for neglect of these capacities or
possibilities and of these influences, he has awoke to a sense of the
first word of Christ and His Apostles.

Your soul is God's seed-field, God's building; we are labourers together
with God.  Such a description of each individual life is very significant
everywhere, and not least in such a society as ours.

To us who are here in this society as masters they are just a parable of
our own life; setting forth to each of us what should be his estimate of
his own work and aim and purpose, exhibiting to him his field of work
with the Divine light on it, and interpreting to him his own endeavours
as a fellow-labourer with God, hoping to contribute in some degree
towards the filling in and completing that Divine plan, that ideal
picture of the life of every one of you which is in the heavens, and
which in imagination he sees as a thing some day to be realised, and the
realisation of which, or its failure, may largely depend on his own share
in our life and work.  It is this feeling that every heart contains the
germ of some perfection that makes our life so profoundly interesting,
and, it may be added, our responsibilities for the cultivation or neglect
of any such germ or capacity so serious and engrossing.

But to you, too, these apostolic suggestions about the Divine influences
at work in each heart, and the value of each life in God's sight, and the
Divine voices claiming to be heard in it, should be quite as stimulative
as they are to us.

They have in them the germ of all striving after purity and goodness, and
of all hatred of sin, and enthusiasm for the uplifting of social life.

The words of Paul to his Corinthian converts may furnish you with new
interpretations of your own daily life and duty.

 If they were God's husbandry, or God's building, are not you?  If the
Spirit of God dwelt in them, how does He not dwell likewise in you?
striving for your growth in holiness and good purpose, and for your
salvation from sin and its defilements, as he strove for theirs?

And if it was good for every man in that Corinthian community to be
warned how he built upon the foundation of life that had been laid in
Christ; if it was good for them to be reminded that every man's work
would be made manifest, and that the fire would try it, of what sort it
was; it is good also for us, masters and boys alike, to remember that we
are living under the same law, and that we should take care lest haply we
be found to be working against God.

That Epistle of St. Paul's was written in pain and anguish of heart.  The
seeds of Christian life which he had sown among them, the purifying
influences of the Holy Spirit which were working among them through him
and his fellow-labourers, all these ought to have produced fruits easily
described, such as peace and love, and purity, and good works; but
instead of these, and threatening their destruction, there had sprung up
dissension and strife, party spirit, self-conceit, and gross sins which I
need not name.

In all this there was grief, disappointment, bitterness; for did they not
prove that his work was threatened with failure?

Yet in all that storm of feeling his chief exhortation is this reminder
of the dignity of their calling.  In the midst of all their sin and
failure, though he does not spare rebuke and warning, he always aims at
inspiring them by uplifting.  And we know that this is the true method,
because there is nothing which exercises an influence so strong to uplift
and purify as the feeling of our kinship with the life above us, and that
we are degrading our life when we forget this or ignore it.  And herein
is the value of this word of his that God is dwelling and working in us.
"Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, that the Holy Ghost dwelleth
in you, and that God's temple is holy? and if any man destroy the temple
of God, him shall God destroy."

Let us then begin again our common life with a determination to bear in
mind the possibilities and the sanctity of each separate soul that comes
amongst us.

Living in crowds, we are apt to forget this; and, forgetting it, some
treat their own souls as if they were of no value, and some the souls of
others, and so the work of sin and waste goes on from generation to
generation.

But in our best moments, in our times of serious thought, if we have been
once enlightened, we can never again cease to feel the dignity and the
value of each human life.

When we think of God's care for us we feel it; when we think of the
possibilities He has ordained for us we feel it; when we think of the
endless life that lies before us we feel it; above all, we never fail to
feel it when our thoughts revert to any life that has been snatched away
from us.  Some of you are thinking to-day of the master whose home is
darkened by the presence of the angel of death.  You think of her whom
God has taken, who was moving among you not so long ago, as your tender,
considerate, and helpful friend.  It may be that you were not
uninfluenced by her self-devotion and holiness.

When you think of such an one you feel no doubt about the value and the
sanctity of each human life.

Well, then, transfer this feeling to your own life, or to the life of the
boy who sits beside you, or who lives as your companion.  In the purpose
of our common Father, your lives also are destined for holy uses.

To remember this may be a safeguard against temptation or sinful habit;
it may inspire you with a new feeling of the value of _all_ the lives
around you, and a new sense of the duty you owe to the good life of this
society in which God has placed you, that you may prove a vessel of
honour sanctified for His service.




 XX.  HE THAT OVERCOMETH.


   "He that overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his God,
   and he shall be My son."--REVELATION xxi. 7.

Year by year as at this time, when the week of our Saviour's Passion and
Death is just in front of us, and the shadow of His Cross is falling over
us, one generation after another of the boys of this school gather here,
and in the face of the congregation, young and old, they take upon them
the vows of a Christian life.  So we met last Thursday, and your vow is
still fresh upon a great many of you, as indeed it can hardly fail to be
fresh in the memory of every one in this congregation who has ever taken
it.  Let us pause for a moment and repeat its plain words.  You have
declared your faith in God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost, the Father, the Redeemer, the Sanctifier of your life.  You have
vowed that you renounce the devil and his works, that you renounce
covetous desires, that you renounce the carnal desires of the flesh, so
that you will not follow nor be led by them.  And you have vowed that you
will keep God's holy will and commandments, and walk in them all the days
of your life.  And you take this upon you, let us hope, in sincerity and
honesty of purpose.

And, if so, the text I have read to you declares God's promise, if you
persevere, just as another text in the same chapter declares that into
the City of God there shall not enter anything that defileth or worketh
abomination or maketh a lie.  This, then, is the promise--"He that
overcometh shall inherit all things; and I will be his God, and he shall
be My son."  But as we think of this and look forward, we have to
remember that this life to which you are dedicated is not an easy matter.
If you are to succeed in it, you have to think of it always as a life
under a vow, as in fact a consecrated life, consecrated by your own
promise and profession.  And this is a great safeguard if you bear it
always in mind.

It is indeed the first condition of safety from the attacks and the
impulses of sin, this consciousness which you will carry about with you,
that you are self-dedicated--that there was a day on which you said "I
will"--so that if you are to be true to your profession and declared
purpose, you will strive to keep near to God in the spirit, and you will
have no dealings with the devil and his works, and you will resist all
the degrading solicitations of the flesh, and will live in the atmosphere
of things that are pure and of good report.

To have conceived such a purpose as this, to have opened your heart to
its influence, to have lived in it even for a little while, to have felt
its purifying and strengthening breath upon your soul even for a few
weeks, may be enough, as some of you know very well, to lift your life up
to a new level, so that it becomes and is felt by you to be a quite
different life from what you lived before--a life of new thoughts, of new
notions about what is good or what is evil, about the degrading character
of sin and the misery and hatefulness of it, as also about the happiness
of a life that is inspired by good aims and purposes, and is free from a
sense of God's wrath upon you for some low standard of conduct, or some
sinful appetite or passion.  If you have once felt the influence of this
change in your heart, you know the difference henceforth between the
higher life and the lower, the life that is clinging to God, however
feebly, and is in the way of salvation, and the life of sin which will
inevitably end in degradation and in death.

But this life in Christ to which you are dedicated is not an easy one;
let us not suppose it.  It is a noble life, and every one who strives to
live it is doing something to ennoble his society; but it is not an easy
life.  It is never so represented to us in the Bible.  There is a sense
no doubt in which our Lord invites us to see how easy is His yoke
compared with the yoke of sin--but He Himself calls upon every believer
to take up his cross and follow Him.  That call may bring to any of us
not peace but a sword.  St. Paul sets the Christian life before us as a
race to be run with patience; as a conflict which will sometimes be very
hard.  In St. James we see it as the discipline of sore temptation, and
in St. Peter it is the fiery trial that is to try us.

And again, in the Revelation of St. John, we have this picture of
blessing only to those that endure, and to those who have not defiled
their garments, and those who have come through great tribulation.

And all our personal experience confirms this language of Holy Scripture,
reminding us, as it does, how hard it is for an individual to keep in the
narrow way of the spotless Christian life, and how it is still harder to
stamp the mark of Christian purpose upon a society.

Yet these are the two things to which God is calling us.  These you have
in fact vowed that you will strive after; and if you are unfaithful in
either respect, if you give up your effort for an easy, drifting life,
you are letting go your confirmation vows; and whereas you were intended
to be the salt of your society, your salt will lose its savour.  To
consider this just now may save some of you from discouragement and some
from waste and failure.

Men are stronger to meet their difficulties if they know that they have
to meet them or else to fail and sink.  And so it will be with you.  You
