strive hard along with His Messenger, those having ampleness of means
ask permission of you and say: Leave us (behind), that we may be with
those who sit.

009.087
Y: They prefer to be with (the women), who remain behind (at home):
their hearts are sealed and so they understand not.

P: They are content that they should be with the useless and their
hearts are sealed, so that they apprehend not.

S: They preferred to be with those who remained behind, and a seal is
set on their hearts so they do not understand.

009.088
Y: But the Messenger, and those who believe with him, strive and fight
with their wealth and their persons: for them are (all) good things:
and it is they who will prosper.

P: But the messenger and those who believe with him strive with their
wealth and their lives. Such are they for whom are the good things.
Such are they who are the successful.

S: But the Messenger and those who believe with him strive hard with
their property and their persons; and these it is who shall have the
good things and these it is who shall be successful.

009.089
Y: Allah hath prepared for them gardens under which rivers flow, to
dwell therein: that is the supreme felicity.

P: Allah hath made ready for them Gardens underneath which rivers flow,
wherein they will abide. That is the supreme triumph.

S: Allah has prepared for them gardens beneath which rivers flow, to
abide in them; that is the great achievement.

009.090
Y: And there were, among the desert Arabs (also), men who made excuses
and came to claim exemption; and those who were false to Allah and His
Messenger (merely) sat inactive. Soon will a grievous penalty seize the
Unbelievers among them.

P: And those among the wandering Arabs who had an excuse came in order
that permission might be granted them. And those who lied to Allah and
His messenger sat at home. A painful doom will fall on those of them
who disbelieve.

S: And the defaulters from among the dwellers of the desert came that
permission may be given to them and they sat (at home) who lied to
Allah and His Messenger; a painful chastisement shall afflict those of
them who disbelieved.

009.091
Y: There is no blame on those who are infirm, or ill, or who find no
resources to spend (on the cause), if they are sincere (in duty) to
Allah and His Messenger: no ground (of complaint) can there be against
such as do right: and Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: Not unto the weak nor unto the sick nor unto those who can find
naught to spend is any fault (to be imputed though they stay at home)
if they are true to Allah and His messenger. Not unto the good is there
any road (of blame). Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: It shall be no crime in the weak, nor in the sick, nor in those who
do not find what they should spend (to stay behind), so long as they
are sincere to Allah and His Messenger; there is no way (to blame)
against the doers of good; and Allah is Forgiving, Merciful;

009.092
Y: Nor (is there blame) on those who came to thee to be provided with
mounts, and when thou saidst, "I can find no mounts for you," they
turned back, their eyes streaming with tears of grief that they had no
resources wherewith to provide the expenses.

P: Nor unto those whom, when they came to thee (asking) that thou
shouldst mount them, thou didst tell: I cannot find whereon to mount
you. They turned back with eyes flowing with tears, for sorrow that
they could not find the means to spend.

S: Nor in those who when they came to you that you might carry them, you
said: I cannot find that on which to carry you; they went back while
their eyes overflowed with tears on account of grief for not finding
that which they should spend.

009.093
Y: The ground (of complaint) is against such as claim exemption while
they are rich. They prefer to stay with the (women) who remain behind:
Allah hath sealed their hearts; so they know not (What they miss).

P: The road (of blame) is only against those who ask for leave of thee
(to stay at home) when they are rich. They are content to be with the
useless. Allah hath sealed their hearts so that they know not.

S: The way (to blame) is only against those who ask permission of you
though they are rich; they have chosen to be with those who remained
behind, and Allah has set a seal upon their hearts so they do not know.

009.094
Y: They will present their excuses to you when ye return to them. Say
thou: "Present no excuses: we shall not believe you: Allah hath already
informed us of the true state of matters concerning you: It is your
actions that Allah and His Messenger will observe: in the end will ye
be brought back to Him Who knoweth what is hidden and what is open:
then will He show you the truth of all that ye did."

P: They will make excuse to you (Muslims) when ye return unto them. Say:
Make no excuse, for we shall not believe you. Allah hath told us
tidings of you. Allah and His messenger will see your conduct, and then
ye will be brought back unto Him Who knoweth the Invisible as well as
the Visible, and He will tell you what ye used to do.

S: They will excuse themselves to you when you go back to them. Say:
Urge no excuse, by no means will we believe you; indeed Allah has
informed us of matters relating to you; and now Allah and His Messenger
will see your doings, then you shall be brought back to the Knower of
the unseen and the seen, then He will inform you of what you did.

009.095
Y: They will swear to you by Allah, when ye return to them, that ye may
leave them alone. So leave them alone: For they are an abomination, and
Hell is their dwelling-place,-a fitting recompense for the (evil) that
they did.

P: They will swear by Allah unto you, when ye return unto them, that ye
may let them be. Let them be, for lo! they are unclean, and their abode
is hell as the reward for what they used to earn.

S: They will swear to you by Allah when you return to them so that you
may turn aside from them; so do turn aside from them; surely they are
unclean and their abode is hell; a recompense for what they earned.

009.096
Y: They will swear unto you, that ye may be pleased with them but if ye
are pleased with them, Allah is not pleased with those who disobey.

P: They swear unto you, that ye may accept them. Though ye accept them.
Allah verily accepteth not wrongdoing folk.

S: They will swear to you that you may be pleased with them; but if you
are pleased with them, yet surely Allah is not pleased with the
transgressing people.

009.097
Y: The Arabs of the desert are the worst in Unbelief and hypocrisy, and
most fitted to be in ignorance of the command which Allah hath sent
down to His Messenger: But Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.

P: The wandering Arabs are more hard in disbelief and hypocrisy, and
more likely to be ignorant of the limits which Allah hath revealed unto
His messenger. And Allah is Knower, Wise.

S: The dwellers of the desert are very hard in unbelief and hypocrisy,
and more disposed not to know the limits of what Allah has revealed to
His Messenger; and Allah is Knowing, Wise.

009.098
Y: Some of the desert Arabs look upon their payments as a fine, and
watch for disasters for you: on them be the disaster of evil: for Allah
is He That heareth and knoweth (all things).

P: And of the wandering Arabs there is he who taketh that which he
expendeth (for the cause of Allah) as a loss, and awaiteth (evil) turns
of fortune for you (that he may be rid of it). The evil turn of fortune
will be theirs. Allah is Hearer, Knower.

S: And of the dwellers of the desert are those who take what they spend
to be a fine, and they wait (the befalling of) calamities to you; on
them (will be) the evil calamity; and Allah is Hearing, Knowing.

009.099
Y: But some of the desert Arabs believe in Allah and the Last Day, and
look on their payments as pious gifts bringing them nearer to Allah and
obtaining the prayers of the Messenger. Aye, indeed they bring them
nearer (to Him): soon will Allah admit them to His Mercy: for Allah is
Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: And of the wandering Arabs there is he who believeth in Allah and the
Last Day, and taketh that which he expendeth and also the prayers of
the messenger as acceptable offerings in the sight of Allah. Lo! verily
it is an acceptable offering for them. Allah will bring them into His
mercy. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: And of the dwellers of the desert are those who believe in Allah and
the latter day and take what they spend to be (means of) the nearness
of Allah and the Messenger's prayers; surely it shall be means of
nearness for them; Allah will make them enter into His mercy; surely
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

009.100
Y: The vanguard (of Islam)- the first of those who forsook (their homes)
and of those who gave them aid, and (also) those who follow them in
(all) good deeds,- well-pleased is Allah with them, as are they with
Him: for them hath He prepared gardens under which rivers flow, to
dwell therein for ever: that is the supreme felicity.

P: And the first to lead the way, of the Muhajirin and the Ansar, and
those who followed them in goodness - Allah is well pleased with them
and they are well pleased with Him, and He hath made ready for them
Gardens underneath which rivers flow, wherein they will abide for ever.
That is the supreme triumph.

S: And (as for) the foremost, the first of the Muhajirs and the Ansars,
and those who followed them in goodness, Allah is well pleased with
them and they are well pleased with Him, and He has prepared for them
gardens beneath which rivers flow, to abide in them for ever; that is
the mighty achievement.

009.101
Y: Certain of the desert Arabs round about you are hypocrites, as well
as (desert Arabs) among the Medina folk: they are obstinate in
hypocrisy: thou knowest them not: We know them: twice shall We punish
them: and in addition shall they be sent to a grievous penalty.

P: And among those around you of the wandering Arabs there are
hypocrites, and among the townspeople of Al-Madinah (there are some
who) persist in hypocrisy whom thou (O Muhammad) knowest not. We, We
know them, and We shall chastise them twice; then they will be
relegated to a painful doom.

S: And from among those who are round about you of the dwellers of the
desert there are hypocrites, and from among the people of Medina
(also); they are stubborn in hypocrisy; you do not know them; We know
them; We will chastise them twice then shall they be turned back to a
grievous chastisement.

009.102
Y: Others (there are who) have acknowledged their wrong-doings: they
have mixed an act that was good with another that was evil. Perhaps
Allah will turn unto them (in Mercy): for Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful.

P: And (there are) others who have acknowledged their faults. They mixed
a righteous action with another that was bad. It may be that Allah will
relent toward them. Lo! Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: And others have confessed their faults, they have mingled a good deed
and an evil one; may be Allah will turn to them (mercifully); surely
Allah is Forgiving, Merciful.

009.103
Y: Of their goods, take alms, that so thou mightest purify and sanctify
them; and pray on their behalf. Verily thy prayers are a source of
security for them: And Allah is One Who heareth and knoweth.

P: Take alms of their wealth, wherewith thou mayst purify them and mayst
make them grow, and pray for them. Lo! thy prayer is an assuagement for
them. Allah is Hearer, Knower.

S: Take alms out of their property, you would cleanse them and purify
them thereby, and pray for them; surely your prayer is a relief to
them; and Allah is Hearing, Knowing.

009.104
Y: Know they not that Allah doth accept repentance from His votaries and
receives their gifts of charity, and that Allah is verily He, the
Oft-Returning, Most Merciful?

P: Know they not that Allah is He Who accepteth repentance from His
bondmen and taketh the alms, and that Allah is He Who is the Relenting,
the Merciful.

S: Do they not know that Allah accepts repentance from His servants and
takes the alms, and that Allah is the Oft-returning (to mercy), the
Merciful?

009.105
Y: And say: "Work (righteousness): Soon will Allah observe your work,
and His Messenger, and the Believers: Soon will ye be brought back to
the knower of what is hidden and what is open: then will He show you
the truth of all that ye did."

P: And say (unto them): Act! Allah will behold your actions, and (so
will) His messenger and the believers, and ye will be brought back to
the Knower of the Invisible and the Visible, and He will tell you what
ye used to do.

S: And say: Work; so Allah will see your work and (so will) His
Messenger and the believers; and you shall be brought back to the
Knower of the unseen and the seen, then He will inform you of what you
did.

009.106
Y: There are (yet) others, held in suspense for the command of Allah,
whether He will punish them, or turn in mercy to them: and Allah is
All-Knowing, Wise.

P: And (there are) others who await Allah's decree, whether He will
punish them or will forgive them. Allah is Knower, Wise.

S: And others are made to await Allah's command, whether He chastise
them or whether He turn to them (mercifully), and Allah is Knowing,
Wise.

009.107
Y: And there are those who put up a mosque by way of mischief and
infidelity - to disunite the Believers - and in preparation for one who
warred against Allah and His Messenger aforetime. They will indeed
swear that their intention is nothing but good; But Allah doth declare
that they are certainly liars.

P: And as for those who chose a place of worship out of opposition and
disbelief, and in order to cause dissent among the believers, and as an
outpost for those who warred against Allah and His messenger aforetime,
they will surely swear: We purposed naught save good. Allah beareth
witness that they verily are liars.

S: And those who built a masjid to cause harm and for unbelief and to
cause disunion among the believers and an ambush to him who made war
against Allah and His Messenger before; and they will certainly swear:
We did not desire aught but good; and Allah bears witness that they are
most surely liars.

009.108
Y: Never stand thou forth therein. There is a mosque whose foundation
was laid from the first day on piety; it is more worthy of the standing
forth (for prayer) therein. In it are men who love to be purified; and
Allah loveth those who make themselves pure.

P: Never stand (to pray) there. A place of worship which was found upon
duty (to Allah) from the first day is more worthy that thou shouldst
stand (to pray) therein, wherein are men who love to purify themselves.
Allah loveth the purifiers.

S: Never stand in it; certainly a masjid founded on piety from the very
first day is more deserving that you should stand in it; in it are men
who love that they should be purified; and Allah loves those who purify
themselves.

009.109
Y: Which then is best? - he that layeth his foundation on piety to Allah
and His good pleasure? - or he that layeth his foundation on an
undermined sand-cliff ready to crumble to pieces? and it doth crumble
to pieces with him, into the fire of Hell. And Allah guideth not people
that do wrong.

P: Is he who founded his building upon duty to Allah and His good
pleasure better; or he who founded his building on the brink of a
crumbling, overhanging precipice so that it toppled with him into the
fire of hell? Allah guideth not wrongdoing folk.

S: Is he, therefore, better who lays his foundation on fear of Allah and
(His) good pleasure, or he who lays his foundation on the edge of a
cracking hollowed bank, so it broke down with him into the fire of
hell; and Allah does not guide the unjust people.

009.110
Y: The foundation of those who so build is never free from suspicion and
shakiness in their hearts, until their hearts are cut to pieces. And
Allah is All-Knowing, Wise.

P: The building which they built will never cease to be a misgiving in
their hearts unless their hearts be torn to pieces. Allah is Knower,
Wise.

S: The building which they have built will ever continue to be a source
of disquiet in their hearts, except that their hearts get cut into
pieces; and Allah is Knowing, Wise.

009.111
Y: Allah hath purchased of the believers their persons and their goods;
for theirs (in return) is the garden (of Paradise): they fight in His
cause, and slay and are slain: a promise binding on Him in truth,
through the Law, the Gospel, and the Qur'an: and who is more faithful
to his covenant than Allah? then rejoice in the bargain which ye have
concluded: that is the achievement supreme.

P: Lo! Allah hath bought from the believers their lives and their wealth
because the Garden will be theirs: they shall fight in the way of Allah
and shall slay and be slain. It is a promise which is binding on Him in
the Torah and the Gospel and the Qur'an. Who fulfilleth His covenant
better than Allah? Rejoice then in your bargain that ye have made, for
that is the supreme triumph.

S: Surely Allah has bought of the believers their persons and their
property for this, that they shall have the garden; they fight in
Allah's way, so they slay and are slain; a promise which is binding on
Him in the Taurat and the Injeel and the Quran; and who is more
faithful to his covenant than Allah? Rejoice therefore in the pledge
which you have made; and that is the mighty achievement.

009.112
Y: Those that turn (to Allah) in repentance; that serve Him, and praise
Him; that wander in devotion to the cause of Allah: that bow down and
prostrate themselves in prayer; that enjoin good and forbid evil; and
observe the limit set by Allah;- (These do rejoice). So proclaim the
glad tidings to the Believers.

P: (Triumphant) are those who turn repentant (to Allah), those who serve
(Him), those who praise (Him), those who fast, those who bow down,
those who fall prostrate (in worship), those who enjoin the right and
who forbid the wrong and those who keep the limits (ordained) of Allah
- And give glad tidings to believers!

S: They who turn (to Allah), who serve (Him), who praise (Him), who
fast, who bow down, who prostrate themselves, who enjoin what is good
and forbid what is evil, and who keep the limits of Allah; and give
good news to the believers.

009.113
Y: It is not fitting, for the Prophet and those who believe, that they
should pray for forgiveness for Pagans, even though they be of kin,
after it is clear to them that they are companions of the Fire.

P: It is not for the Prophet, and those who believe, to pray for the
forgiveness of idolaters even though they may be near of kin (to them)
after it hath become clear that they are people of hell-fire.

S: It is not (fit) for the Prophet and those who believe that they
should ask forgiveness for the polytheists, even though they should be
near relatives, after it has become clear to them that they are inmates
of the flaming fire.

009.114
Y: And Abraham prayed for his father's forgiveness only because of a
promise he had made to him. But when it became clear to him that he was
an enemy to Allah, he dissociated himself from him: for Abraham was
most tender-hearted, forbearing.

P: The prayer of Abraham for the forgiveness of his father was only
because of a promise he had promised him, but when it had become clear
unto him that he (his father) was an enemy to Allah he (Abraham)
disowned him. Lo! Abraham was soft of heart, long-suffering.

S: And Ibrahim asking forgiveness for his sire was only owing to a
promise which he had made to him; but when it became clear to him that
he was an enemy of Allah, he declared himself to be clear of him; most
surely Ibrahim was very tender-hearted forbearing.

009.115
Y: And Allah will not mislead a people after He hath guided them, in
order that He may make clear to them what to fear (and avoid)- for
Allah hath knowledge of all things.

P: It was never Allah's (part) that He should send a folk astray after
He had guided them until He had made clear unto them what they should
avoid. Lo! Allah is Aware of all things.

S: It is not (attributable to) Allah that He should lead a people astray
after He has guided them; He even makes clear to them what they should
guard against; surely Allah knows all things.

009.116
Y: Unto Allah belongeth the dominion of the heavens and the earth. He
giveth life and He taketh it. Except for Him ye have no protector nor
helper.

P: Lo! Allah! Unto Him belongeth the Sovereignty of the heavens and the
earth. He quickeneth and He giveth death. And ye have, instead of
Allah, no protecting friend nor helper.

S: Surely Allah's is the kingdom of the heavens and the earth; He brings
to life and causes to die; and there is not for you besides Allah any
Guardian or Helper.

009.117
Y: Allah turned with favour to the Prophet, the Muhajirs, and the
Ansar,- who followed him in a time of distress, after that the hearts
of a part of them had nearly swerved (from duty); but He turned to them
(also): for He is unto them Most Kind, Most Merciful.

P: Allah hath turned in mercy to the Prophet, and to the Muhajirin and
the Ansar who followed him in the hour of hardship. After the hearts of
a party of them had almost swerved aside, then turned He unto them in
mercy. Lo! He is Full of Pity, Merciful for them.

S: Certainly Allah has turned (mercifully) to the Prophet and those who
fled (their homes) and the helpers who followed him in the hour of
straitness after the hearts of a part of them were about to deviate,
then He turned to them (mercifully); surely to them He is
Compassionate, Merciful.

009.118
Y: (He turned in mercy also) to the three who were left behind; (they
felt guilty) to such a degree that the earth seemed constrained to
them, for all its spaciousness, and their (very) souls seemed
straitened to them,- and they perceived that there is no fleeing from
Allah (and no refuge) but to Himself. Then He turned to them, that they
might repent: for Allah is Oft-Returning, Most Merciful.

P: And to the three also (did He turn in mercy) who were left behind,
when the earth, vast as it is, was straitened for them, and their own
souls were straitened for them till they bethought them that there is
no refuge from Allah save toward Him. Then turned He unto them in mercy
that they (too) might turn (repentant unto Him). Lo! Allah! He is the
Relenting, the Merciful.

S: And to the three who were left behind, until the earth became strait
to them notwithstanding its spaciousness and their souls were also
straitened to them; and they knew it for certain that there was no
refuge from Allah but in Him; then He turned to them (mercifully) that
they might turn (to Him); surely Allah is the Oft-returning (to mercy),
the Merciful.

009.119
Y: O ye who believe! Fear Allah and be with those who are true (in word
and deed).

P: O ye who believe! Be careful of your duty to Allah, and be with the
truthful.

S: O you who believe! be careful of (your duty to) Allah and be with the
true ones.

009.120
Y: It was not fitting for the people of Medina and the Bedouin Arabs of
the neighbourhood, to refuse to follow Allah's Messenger, nor to prefer
their own lives to his: because nothing could they suffer or do, but
was reckoned to their credit as a deed of righteousness,- whether they
suffered thirst, or fatigue, or hunger, in the cause of Allah, or trod
paths to raise the ire of the Unbelievers, or received any injury
whatever from an enemy: for Allah suffereth not the reward to be lost
of those who do good;-

P: It is not for the townsfolk of Al-Madinah and for those around them
of the wandering Arabs so stay behind the messenger of Allah and prefer
their lives to his life. That is because neither thirst nor toil nor
hunger afflicteth them in the way of Allah, nor step they any step that
angereth the disbelievers, nor gain they from the enemy a gain, but a
good deed is recorded for them therefor. Lo! Allah loseth not the wages
of the good.

S: It did not beseem the people of Medina and those round about them of
the dwellers of the desert to remain behind the Messenger of Allah, nor
should they desire (anything) for themselves in preference to him; this
is because there afflicts them not thirst or fatigue or hunger in
Allah's way, nor do they tread a path which enrages the unbelievers,
nor do they attain from the enemy what they attain, but a good work is
written down to them on account of it; surely Allah does not waste the
reward of the doers of good;

009.121
Y: Nor could they spend anything (for the cause) - small or great- nor
cut across a valley, but the deed is inscribed to their credit: that
Allah may requite their deed with the best (possible reward).

P: Nor spend they any spending, small or great, nor do they cross a
valley, but it is recorded for them, that Allah may repay them the best
of what they used to do.

S: Nor do they spend anything that may be spent, small or great, nor do
they traverse a valley, but it is written down to their credit, that
Allah may reward them with the best of what they have done.

009.122
Y: Nor should the Believers all go forth together: if a contingent from
every expedition remained behind, they could devote themselves to
studies in religion, and admonish the people when they return to them,-
that thus they (may learn) to guard themselves (against evil).

P: And the believers should not all go out to fight. Of every troop of
them, a party only should go forth, that they (who are left behind) may
gain sound knowledge in religion, and that they may warn their folk
when they return to them, so that they may beware.

S: And it does not beseem the believers that they should go forth all
together; why should not then a company from every party from among
them go forth that they may apply themselves to obtain understanding in
religion, and that they may warn their people when they come back to
them that they may be cautious?

009.123
Y: O ye who believe! fight the unbelievers who gird you about, and let
them find firmness in you: and know that Allah is with those who fear
Him.

P: O ye who believe! Fight those of the disbelievers who are near to
you, and let them find harshness in you, and know that Allah is with
those who keep their duty (unto Him).

S: O you who believe! fight those of the unbelievers who are near to you
and let them find in you hardness; and know that Allah is with those
who guard (against evil).

009.124
Y: Whenever there cometh down a sura, some of them say: "Which of you
has had his faith increased by it?" Yea, those who believe,- their
faith is increased and they do rejoice.

P: And whenever a surah is revealed there are some of them who say:
Which one of you hath thus increased in faith? As for those who
believe, it hath increased them in faith and they rejoice (therefor).

S: And whenever a Chapter is revealed, there are some of them who say:
Which of you has it strengthened in faith? Then as for those who
believe, it strengthens them in faith and they rejoice.

009.125
Y: But those in whose hearts is a disease,- it will add doubt to their
doubt, and they will die in a state of Unbelief.

P: But as for those in whose hearts is disease, it only addeth
wickedness to their wickedness, and they die while they are
disbelievers.

S: And as for those in whose hearts is a disease, it adds uncleanness to
their uncleanness and they die while they are unbelievers.

009.126
Y: See they not that they are tried every year once or twice? Yet they
turn not in repentance, and they take no heed.

P: See they not that they are tested once or twice in every year? Still
they turn not in repentance, neither pay they heed.

S: Do they not see that they are tried once or twice in every year, yet
they do not turn (to Allah) nor do they mind.

009.127
Y: Whenever there cometh down a Sura, they look at each other, (saying),
"Doth anyone see you?" Then they turn aside: Allah hath turned their
hearts (from the light); for they are a people that understand not.

P: And whenever a surah is revealed, they look one at another (as who
should say): Doth anybody see you? Then they turn away. Allah turneth
away their hearts because they are a folk who understand not.

S: And whenever a Chapter is revealed, they cast glances at one another:
Does any one see you? Then they turn away: Allah has turned away their
hearts because they are a people who do not understand.

009.128
Y: Now hath come unto you a Messenger from amongst yourselves: it
grieves him that ye should perish: ardently anxious is he over you: to
the Believers is he most kind and merciful.

P: There hath come unto you a messenger, (one) of yourselves, unto whom
aught that ye are overburdened is grievous, full of concern for you,
for the believers full of pity, merciful.

S: Certainly a Messenger has come to you from among yourselves; grievous
to him is your falling into distress, excessively solicitous respecting
you; to the believers (he is) compassionate,

009.129
Y: But if they turn away, Say: "Allah sufficeth me: there is no god but
He: On Him is my trust,- He the Lord of the Throne (of Glory) Supreme!"

P: Now, if they turn away (O Muhammad) say: Allah sufficeth me. There is
no God save Him. In Him have I put my trust, and He is Lord of the
Tremendous Throne.

S: But if they turn back, say: Allah is sufficient for me, there is no
god but He; on Him do I rely, and He is the Lord of mighty power.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 10:

                               YUNUS (JONAH)
 Total Verses: 109 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

010.001
Y: A.L.R. These are the ayats of the Book of Wisdom.

P: Alif. Lam. Ra. These are verses of the Wise Scripture.

S: Alif Lam Ra. These are the verses of the wise Book.

010.002
Y: Is it a matter of wonderment to men that We have sent Our inspiration
to a man from among themselves?- that he should warn mankind (of their
danger), and give the good news to the Believers that they have before
their Lord the lofty rank of truth. (But) say the Unbelievers: "This is
indeed an evident sorcerer!"

P: Is it a wonder for mankind that We have inspired a man among them,
saying: Warn mankind and bring unto those who believe the good tidings
that they have a sure footing with their Lord? The disbelievers say:
Lo! this is a mere wizard.

S: What! is it a wonder to the people that We revealed to a man from
among themselves, saying: Warn the people and give good news to those
who believe that theirs is a footing of firmness with their Lord. The
unbelievers say: This is most surely a manifest enchanter.

010.003
Y: Verily your Lord is Allah, who created the heavens and the earth in
six days, and is firmly established on the throne (of authority),
regulating and governing all things. No intercessor (can plead with
Him) except after His leave (hath been obtained). This is Allah your
Lord; Him therefore serve ye: will ye not receive admonition?

P: Lo! your Lord is Allah Who created the heavens and the earth in six
Days, then He established Himself upon the Throne, directing all
things. There is no intercessor (with Him) save after His permission.
That is Allah, your Lord, so worship Him. Oh, will ye not remind?

S: Surely your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth in
six periods, and He is firm in power, regulating the affair, there is
no intercessor except after His permission; this is Allah, your Lord,
therefore serve Him; will you not then mind?

010.004
Y: To Him will be your return- of all of you. The promise of Allah is
true and sure. It is He Who beginneth the process of creation, and
repeateth it, that He may reward with justice those who believe and
work righteousness; but those who reject Him will have draughts of
boiling fluids, and a penalty grievous, because they did reject Him.

P: Unto Him is the return of all of you; it is a promise of Allah in
truth. Lo! He produceth creation, then reproduceth it, that He may
reward those who believe and do good works with equity; while, as for
those who disbelieve, theirs will be a boiling drink and painful doom
because they disbelieved.

S: To Him is your return, of all (of you); the promise of Allah (made)
in truth; surely He begins the creation in the first instance, then He
reproduces it, that He may with justice recompense those who believe
and do good; and (as for) those who disbelieve, they shall have a drink
of hot water and painful punishment because they disbelieved.

010.005
Y: It is He Who made the sun to be a shining glory and the moon to be a
light (of beauty), and measured out stages for her; that ye might know
the number of years and the count (of time). Nowise did Allah create
this but in truth and righteousness. (Thus) doth He explain His Signs
in detail, for those who understand.

P: He it is Who appointed the sun a splendour and the moon a light, and
measured for her stages, that ye might know the number of the years,
and the reckoning. Allah created not (all) that save in truth. He
detaileth the revelations for people who have knowledge.

S: He it is Who made the sun a shining brightness and the moon a light,
and ordained for it mansions that you might know the computation of
years and the reckoning. Allah did not create it but with truth; He
makes the signs manifest for a people who know.

010.006
Y: Verily, in the alternation of the night and the day, and in all that
Allah hath created, in the heavens and the earth, are signs for those
who fear Him.

P: Lo! in the difference of day and night and all that Allah hath
created in the heavens and the earth are portents, verily, for folk who
ward off (evil).

S: Most surely in the variation of the night and the day, and what Allah
has created in the heavens and the earth, there are signs for a people
who guard (against evil).

010.007
Y: Those who rest not their hope on their meeting with Us, but are
pleased and satisfied with the life of the present, and those who heed
not Our Signs,-

P: Lo! those who expect not the meeting with Us but desire the life of
the world and feel secure therein, and those who are neglectful of Our
revelations,

S: Surely those who do not hope in Our meeting and are pleased with this
world's life and are content with it, and those who are heedless of Our
communications:

010.008
Y: Their abode is the Fire, because of the (evil) they earned.

P: Their home will be the Fire because of what they used to earn.

S: (As for) those, their abode is the fire because of what they earned.

010.009
Y: Those who believe, and work righteousness,- their Lord will guide
them because of their faith: beneath them will flow rivers in gardens
of bliss.

P: Lo! those who believe and do good works, their Lord guideth them by
their faith. Rivers will flow beneath them in the Gardens of Delight,

S: Surely (as for) those who believe and do good, their Lord will guide
them by their faith; there shall flow from beneath them rivers in
gardens of bliss.

010.010
Y: (This will be) their cry therein: "Glory to Thee, O Allah!" And
"Peace" will be their greeting therein! and the close of their cry will
be: "Praise be to Allah, the Cherisher and Sustainer of the worlds!"

P: Their prayer therein will be: Glory be to Thee, O Allah! and their
greeting therein will be: Peace. And the conclusion of their prayer
will be: Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds!

S: Their cry in it shall be: Glory to Thee, O Allah! and their greeting
in it shall be: Peace; and the last of their cry shall be: Praise be to
Allah, the Lord of the worlds.

010.011
Y: If Allah were to hasten for men the ill (they have earned) as they
would fain hasten on the good,- then would their respite be settled at
once. But We leave those who rest not their hope on their meeting with
Us, in their trespasses, wandering in distraction to and fro.

P: If Allah were to hasten on for men the ill (that they have earned) as
they would hasten on the good, their respite would already have
expired. But We suffer those who look not for the meeting with Us to
wander blindly on in their contumacy.

S: And if Allah should hasten the evil to men as they desire the
hastening on of good, their doom should certainly have been decreed for
them; but We leave those alone who hope not for Our meeting in their
inordinacy, blindly wandering on.

010.012
Y: When trouble toucheth a man, He crieth unto Us (in all postures)-
lying down on his side, or sitting, or standing. But when We have
solved his trouble, he passeth on his way as if he had never cried to
Us for a trouble that touched him! thus do the deeds of transgressors
seem fair in their eyes!

P: And if misfortune touch a man he crieth unto Us, (while reclining) on
his side, or sitting or standing, but when We have relieved him of the
misfortune he goeth his way as though he had not cried unto Us because
of a misfortune that afflicted him. Thus is what they do made (seeming)
fair unto the prodigal.

S: And when affliction touches a man, he calls on Us, whether lying on
his side or sitting or standing; but when We remove his affliction from
him, he passes on as though he had never called on Us on account of an
affliction that touched him; thus that which they do is made
fair-seeming to the extravagant.

010.013
Y: Generations before you We destroyed when they did wrong: their
messengers came to them with clear-signs, but they would not believe!
thus do We requite those who sin!

P: We destroyed the generations before you when they did wrong; and
their messengers (from Allah) came unto them with clear proofs (of His
Sovereignty) but they would not believe. Thus do We reward the guilty
folk.

S: And certainly We did destroy generations before you when they were
unjust, and their messengers had come to them with clear arguments, and
they would not believe; thus do We recompense the guilty people.

010.014
Y: Then We made you heirs in the land after them, to see how ye would
behave!

P: Then We appointed you viceroys in the earth after them, that We might
see how ye behave.

S: Then We made you successors in the land after them so that We may see
how you act.

010.015
Y: But when Our Clear Signs are rehearsed unto them, those who rest not
their hope on their meeting with Us, Say: "Bring us a reading other
than this, or change this," Say: "It is not for me, of my own accord,
to change it: I follow naught but what is revealed unto me: if I were
to disobey my Lord, I should myself fear the penalty of a Great Day (to
come)."

P: And when Our clear revelations are recited unto them, they who look
not for the meeting with Us say: Bring a Lecture other than this, or
change it. Say (O Muhammad): It is not for me to change it of my
accord. I only follow that which is inspired in me. Lo! if I disobey my
Lord I fear the retribution of an awful Day.

S: And when Our clear communications are recited to them, those who hope
not for Our meeting say: Bring a Quran other than this or change it.
Say: It does not beseem me that I should change it of myself; I follow
naught but what is revealed to me; surely I fear, if I disobey my Lord,
the punishment of a mighty day.

010.016
Y: Say: "If Allah had so willed, I should not have rehearsed it to you,
nor would He have made it known to you. A whole life-time before this
have I tarried amongst you: will ye not then understand?"

P: Say: If Allah had so willed I should not have recited it to you nor
would He have made it known to you. I dwelt among you a whole lifetime
before it (came to me). Have ye then no sense?

S: Say: If Allah had desired (otherwise) I would not have recited it to
you, nor would He have taught it to you; indeed I have lived a lifetime
among you before it; do you not then understand?

010.017
Y: Who doth more wrong than such as forge a lie against Allah, or deny
His Signs? But never will prosper those who sin.

P: Who doeth greater wrong than he who inventeth a lie concerning Allah
and denieth His revelations? Lo! the guilty never are successful.

S: Who is then more unjust than who forges a lie against Allah or (who)
gives the lie to His communications? Surely the guilty shall not be
successful.

010.018
Y: They serve, besides Allah, things that hurt them not nor profit them,
and they say: "These are our intercessors with Allah." Say: "Do ye
indeed inform Allah of something He knows not, in the heavens or on
earth?- Glory to Him! and far is He above the partners they ascribe (to
Him)!"

P: They worship beside Allah that which neither hurteth them nor
profiteth them, and they say: These are our intercessors with Allah.
Say: Would ye inform Allah of (something) that He knoweth not in the
heavens or in the earth? Praised be He and High Exalted above all that
ye associate (with Him)!

S: And they serve beside Allah what can neither harm them nor profit
them, and they say: These are our intercessors with Allah. Say: Do you
(presume to) inform Allah of what He knows not in the heavens and the
earth? Glory be to Him, and supremely exalted is He above what they set
up (with Him).

010.019
Y: Mankind was but one nation, but differed (later). Had it not been for
a word that went forth before from thy Lord, their differences would
have been settled between them.

P: Mankind were but one community; then they differed; and had it not
been for a word that had already gone forth from thy Lord it had been
judged between them in respect of that wherein they differ.

S: And people are naught but a single nation, so they disagree; and had
not a word already gone forth from your Lord, the matter would have
certainly been decided between them in respect of that concerning which
they disagree.

010.020
Y: They say: "Why is not a sign sent down to him from his Lord?" Say:
"The Unseen is only for Allah (to know), then wait ye: I too will wait
with you."

P: And they will say: If only a portent were sent down upon him from his
Lord! Then say, (O Muhammad): The Unseen belongeth to Allah. So wait!
Lo! I am waiting with you.

S: And they say: Why is not a sign sent to him from his Lord? Say: The
unseen is only for Allah; therefore wait-- surely I too, with you am of
those who wait.

010.021
Y: When We make mankind taste of some mercy after adversity hath touched
them, behold! they take to plotting against Our Signs! Say: "Swifter to
plan is Allah!" Verily, Our messengers record all the plots that ye
make!

P: And when We cause mankind to taste of mercy after some adversity
which had afflicted them, behold! they have some plot against Our
revelations. Say: Allah is more swift in plotting. Lo! Our messengers
write down that which ye plot.

S: And when We make people taste of mercy after an affliction touches
them, lo! they devise plans against Our communication. Say: Allah is
quicker to plan; surely Our messengers write down what you plan.

010.022
Y: He it is Who enableth you to traverse through land and sea; so that
ye even board ships;- they sail with them with a favourable wind, and
they rejoice there at; then comes a stormy wind and the waves come to
them from all sides, and they think they are being overwhelmed: they
cry unto Allah, sincerely offering (their) duty unto Him saying, "If
thou dost deliver us from this, we shall truly show our gratitude!"

P: He it is Who maketh you to go on the land and the sea till, when ye
are in the ships and they sail with them with a fair breeze and they
are glad therein, a storm-wind reacheth them and the wave cometh unto
them from every side and they deem that they are overwhelmed therein;
(then) they cry unto Allah, making their faith pure for Him only: If
Thou deliver us from this, we truly will be of the thankful.

S: He it is Who makes you travel by land and sea; until when you are in
the ships, and they sail on with them in a pleasant breeze, and they
rejoice, a violent wind overtakes them and the billows surge in on them
from all sides, and they become certain that they are encompassed
about, they pray to Allah, being sincere to Him in obedience: If Thou
dost deliver us from this, we will most certainly be of the grateful
ones.

010.023
Y: But when He delivereth them, behold! they transgress insolently
through the earth in defiance of right! O mankind! your insolence is
against your own souls,- an enjoyment of the life of the present: in
the end, to Us is your return, and We shall show you the truth of all
that ye did.

P: Yet when He hath delivered them, behold! they rebel in the earth
wrongfully. O mankind! Your rebellion is only against yourselves. (Ye
have) enjoyment of the life of the world; then unto Us is your return
and We shall proclaim unto you what ye used to do.

S: But when He delivers them, lo! they are unjustly rebellious in the
earth. O men! your rebellion is against your own souls-- provision
(only) of this world's life-- then to Us shall be your return, so We
will inform you of what you did.

010.024
Y: The likeness of the life of the present is as the rain which We send
down from the skies: by its mingling arises the produce of the earth-
which provides food for men and animals: (It grows) till the earth is
clad with its golden ornaments and is decked out (in beauty): the
people to whom it belongs think they have all powers of disposal over
it: There reaches it Our command by night or by day, and We make it
like a harvest clean-mown, as if it had not flourished only the day
before! thus do We explain the Signs in detail for those who reflect.

P: The similitude of the life of the world is only as water which We
send down from the sky, then the earth's growth of that which men and
cattle eat mingleth with it till, when the earth hath taken on her
ornaments and is embellished, and her people deem that they are masters
of her, Our commandment cometh by night or by day and We make it as
reaped corn as if it had not flourished yesterday. Thus do we expound
the revelations for people who reflect.

S: The likeness of this world's life is only as water which We send down
from the cloud, then the herbage of the earth of which men and cattle
eat grows luxuriantly thereby, until when the earth puts on its golden
raiment and it becomes garnished, and its people think that they have
power over it, Our command comes to it, by night or by day, so We
render it as reaped seed; produce, as though it had not been in
existence yesterday; thus do We make clear the communications for a
people who reflect.

010.025
Y: But Allah doth call to the Home of Peace: He doth guide whom He
pleaseth to a way that is straight.

P: And Allah summoneth to the abode of peace, and leadeth whom He will
to a straight path.

S: And Allah invites to the abode of peace and guides whom He pleases
into the right path.

010.026
Y: To those who do right is a goodly (reward)- Yea, more (than in
measure)! No darkness nor shame shall cover their faces! they are
companions of the garden; they will abide therein (for aye)!

P: For those who do good is the best (reward) and more (thereto).
Neither dust nor ignominy cometh near their faces. Such are rightful
owners of the Garden; they will abide therein.

S: For those who do good is good (reward) and more (than this); and
blackness or ignominy shall not cover their faces; these are the
dwellers of the garden; in it they shall abide.

010.027
Y: But those who have earned evil will have a reward of like evil:
ignominy will cover their (faces): No defender will they have from (the
wrath of) Allah: Their faces will be covered, as it were, with pieces
from the depth of the darkness of night: they are companions of the
Fire: they will abide therein (for aye)!

P: And those who earn ill-deeds, (for them) requital of each ill-deed by
the like thereof; and ignominy overtaketh them - They have no protector
from Allah - as if their faces had been covered with a cloak of darkest
night. Such are rightful owners of the Fire; they will abide therein.

S: And (as for) those who have earned evil, the punishment of an evil is
the like of it, and abasement shall come upon them-- they shall have
none to protect them from Allah-- as if their faces had been covered
with slices of the dense darkness of night; these are the inmates of
the fire; in it they shall abide.

010.028
Y: One day shall We gather them all together. Then shall We say to those
who joined gods (with Us): "To your place! ye and those ye joined as
'partners'." We shall separate them, and their 'Partners' shall say: "It
was not us that ye worshipped!"

P: On the day when We gather them all together, then We say unto those
who ascribed partners (unto Us): Stand back, ye and your (pretended)
partners (of Allah)! And We separate them, the one from the other, and
their (pretended) partners say: It was not us ye worshipped.

S: And on the day when We will gather them all together, then We will
say to those who associated others (with Allah): Keep where you are,
you and your associates; then We shall separate them widely one from
another and their associates would say: It was not us that you served:

010.029
Y: "Enough is Allah for a witness between us and you: we certainly knew
nothing of your worship of us!"

P: Allah sufficeth as a witness between us and you, that we were unaware
of your worship.

S: Therefore Allah is sufficient as a witness between us and you that we
were quite unaware of your serving (us).

010.030
Y: There will every soul prove (the fruits of) the deeds it sent before:
they will be brought back to Allah their rightful Lord, and their
invented falsehoods will leave them in the lurch.

P: There doth every soul experience that which it did aforetime, and
they are returned unto Allah, their rightful Lord, and that which they
used to invent hath failed them.

S: There shall every soul become acquainted with what it sent before,
and they shall be brought back to Allah, their true Patron, and what
they devised shall escape from them.

010.031
Y: Say: "Who is it that sustains you (in life) from the sky and from the
earth? or who is it that has power over hearing and sight? And who is
it that brings out the living from the dead and the dead from the
living? and who is it that rules and regulates all affairs?" They will
soon say,

"Allah". Say, "will ye not then show piety (to Him)?"
P: Say (unto them, O Muhammad): Who provideth for you from the sky and
the earth, or Who owneth hearing and sight; and Who bringeth forth the
living from the dead and bringeth forth the dead from the living; and
Who directeth the course? They will say: Allah. Then say: Will ye not
then keep your duty (unto Him)?

S: Say: Who gives you sustenance from the heaven and the earth? Or Who
controls the hearing and the sight? And Who brings forth the living
from the dead, and brings forth the dead from the living? And Who
regulates the affairs? Then they will say: Allah. Say then: Will you
not then guard (against evil)?

010.032
Y: Such is Allah, your real Cherisher and Sustainer: apart from truth,
what (remains) but error? How then are ye turned away?

P: Such then is Allah, your rightful Lord. After the Truth what is there
saving error? How then are ye turned away!

S: This then is Allah, your true Lord; and what is there after the truth
but error; how are you then turned back?

010.033
Y: Thus is the word of thy Lord proved true against those who rebel:
Verily they will not believe.

P: Thus is the Word of thy Lord justified concerning those who do wrong:
that they believe not.

S: Thus does the word of your Lord prove true against those who
transgress that they do not believe.

010.034
Y: Say: "Of your 'partners', can any originate creation and repeat it?"
Say: "It is Allah Who originates creation and repeats it: then how are
ye deluded away (from the truth)?"

P: Say: Is there of your partners (whom ye ascribe unto Allah) one that
produceth Creation and then reproduceth it? Say: Allah produceth
Creation, then reproduceth it. How then, are ye misled!

S: Say: Is there any one among your associates who can bring into
existence the creation in the first instance, then reproduce it? Say:
Allah brings the creation into existence, then He reproduces it; how
are you then turned away?

010.035
Y: Say: "Of your 'partners' is there any that can give any guidance
towards truth?" Say: "It is Allah Who gives guidance towards truth, is
then He Who gives guidance to truth more worthy to be followed, or he
who finds not guidance (himself) unless he is guided? what then is the
matter with you? How judge ye?"

P: Say: Is there of your partners (whom ye ascribe unto Allah) one that
leadeth to the Truth? Say: Allah leadeth to the Truth. Is He Who
leadeth to the Truth more deserving that He should be followed, or he
who findeth not the way unless he (himself) be guided. What aileth you?
How judge ye?

S: Say: Is there any of your associates who guides to the truth? Say:
Allah guides to the truth. Is He then Who guides to the truth more
worthy to be followed, or he who himself does not go aright unless he
is guided? What then is the matter with you; how do you judge?

010.036
Y: But most of them follow nothing but fancy: truly fancy can be of no
avail against truth. Verily Allah is well aware of all that they do.

P: Most of them follow not but conjecture. Assuredly conjecture can by
no means take the place of truth. Lo! Allah is Aware of what they do.

S: And most of them do not follow (anything) but conjecture; surely
conjecture will not avail aught against the truth; surely Allah is
cognizant of what they do.

010.037
Y: This Qur'an is not such as can be produced by other than Allah; on
the contrary it is a confirmation of (revelations) that went before it,
and a fuller explanation of the Book - wherein there is no doubt - from
the Lord of the worlds.

P: And this Qur'an is not such as could ever be invented in despite of
Allah; but it is a confirmation of that which was before it and an
exposition of that which is decreed for mankind - Therein is no doubt -
from the Lord of the Worlds.

S: And this Quran is not such as could be forged by those besides Allah,
but it is a verification of that which is before it and a clear
explanation of the book, there is no doubt in it, from the Lord of the
worlds.

010.038
Y: Or do they say, "He forged it"? say: "Bring then a Sura like unto it,
and call (to your aid) anyone you can besides Allah, if it be ye speak
the truth!"

P: Or say they: He hath invented it? Say: Then bring a surah like unto
it, and call (for help) on all ye can besides Allah, if ye are
truthful.

S: Or do they say: He has forged it? Say: Then bring a Chapter like this
and invite whom you can besides Allah, if you are truthful.

010.039
Y: Nay, they charge with falsehood that whose knowledge they cannot
compass, even before the elucidation thereof hath reached them: thus
did those before them make charges of falsehood: but see what was the
end of those who did wrong!

P: Nay, but they denied that, the knowledge whereof they could not
compass, and whereof the interpretation (in events) hath not yet come
unto them. Even so did those before them deny. Then see what was the
consequence for the wrong-doers!

S: Nay, they reject that of which they have no comprehensive knowledge,
and the final sequel of it has not yet come to them; even thus did
those before them reject (the truth); see then what was the end of the
unjust.

010.040
Y: Of them there are some who believe therein, and some who do not: and
thy Lord knoweth best those who are out for mischief.

P: And of them is he who believeth therein, and of them is he who
believeth not therein, and thy Lord is Best Aware of the corrupters.

S: And of them is he who believes in it, and of them is he who does not
believe in it, and your Lord best knows the mischief-makers.

010.041
Y: If they charge thee with falsehood, say: "My work to me, and yours to
you! ye are free from responsibility for what I do, and I for what ye
do!"

P: And if they deny thee, say: Unto me my work, and unto you your work.
Ye are innocent of what I do, and I am innocent of what ye do.

S: And if they call you a liar, say: My work is for me and your work for
you; you are clear of what I do and I am clear of what you do.

010.042
Y: Among them are some who (pretend to) listen to thee: But canst thou
make the deaf to hear,- even though they are without understanding?

P: And of them are some who listen unto thee. But canst thou make the
deaf to hear even though they apprehend not?

S: And there are those of them who hear you, but can you make the deaf
to hear though they will not understand?

010.043
Y: And among them are some who look at thee: but canst thou guide the
blind,- even though they will not see?

P: And of them is he who looketh toward thee. But canst thou guide the
blind even though they see not?

S: And there are those of them who look at you, but can you show the way
to the blind though they will not see?

010.044
Y: Verily Allah will not deal unjustly with man in aught: It is man that
wrongs his own soul.

P: Lo! Allah wrongeth not mankind in aught; but mankind wrong
themselves.

S: Surely Allah does not do any injustice to men, but men are unjust to
themselves.

010.045
Y: One day He will gather them together: (It will be) as if they had
tarried but an hour of a day: they will recognise each other: assuredly
those will be lost who denied the meeting with Allah and refused to
receive true guidance.

P: And on the day when He shall gather them together, (when it will
seem) as though they had tarried but an hour of the day, recognising
one another, those will verily have perished who denied the meeting
with Allah and were not guided.

S: And on the day when He will gather them as though they had not stayed
but an hour of the day, they will know each other. They will perish
indeed who called the meeting with Allah to be a lie, and they are not
followers of the right direction.

010.046
Y: Whether We show thee (realised in thy life-time) some part of what We
promise them,- or We take thy soul (to Our Mercy) (Before that),- in
any case, to Us is their return: ultimately Allah is witness, to all
that they do.

P: Whether We let thee (O Muhammad) behold something of that which We
promise them or (whether We) cause thee to die, still unto Us is their
return, and Allah, moreover, is Witness over what they do.

S: And if We show you something of what We threaten them with, or cause
you to die, yet to Us is their return, and Allah is the bearer of
witness to what they do.

010.047
Y: To every people (was sent) a messenger: when their messenger comes
(before them), the matter will be judged between them with justice, and
they will not be wronged.

P: And for every nation there is a messenger. And when their messenger
cometh (on the Day of Judgment) it will be judged between them fairly,
and they will not be wronged.

S: And every nation had a messenger; so when their messenger came, the
matter was decided between them with justice and they shall not be
dealt with unjustly.

010.048
Y: They say: "When will this promise come to pass,- if ye speak the
truth?"

P: And they say: When will this promise be fulfilled, if ye are
truthful?

S: And they say: When will this threat come about, if you are truthful?

010.049
Y: Say: "I have no power over any harm or profit to myself except as
Allah willeth. To every people is a term appointed: when their term is
reached, not an hour can they cause delay, nor (an hour) can they
advance (it in anticipation)."

P: Say: I have no power to hurt or benefit myself, save that which Allah
willeth. For every nation there is an appointed time. When their time
cometh, then they cannot put it off an hour, nor hasten (it).

S: Say: I do not control for myself any harm, or any benefit except what
Allah pleases; every nation has a term; when their term comes, they
shall not then remain behind for an hour, nor can they go before (their
time).

010.050
Y: Say: "Do ye see,- if His punishment should come to you by night or by
day,- what portion of it would the sinners wish to hasten?"

P: Say: Have ye thought: When His doom cometh unto you as a raid by
night, or in the (busy) day; what is there of it that the guilty ones
desire to hasten?

S: Say: Tell me if His punishment overtakes you by night or by day! what
then is there of it that the guilty would hasten on?

010.051
Y: "Would ye then believe in it at last, when it actually cometh to
pass?" (It will then be said): 'Ah! now? and ye wanted (aforetime) to
hasten it on!'

P: Is it (only) then, when it hath befallen you, that ye will believe?
What! (Believe) now, when (until now) ye have been hastening it on
(through disbelief)?

S: And when it comes to pass, will you believe in it? What! now (you
believe), and already you wished to have it hastened on.

010.052
Y: "At length will be said to the wrong-doers: 'Taste ye the enduring
punishment! ye get but the recompense of what ye earned!'"

P: Then will it be said unto those who dealt unjustly Taste the torment
of eternity. Are ye requited aught save what ye used to earn?

S: Then it shall be said to those who were unjust: Taste abiding
chastisement; you are not requited except for what you earned.

010.053
Y: They seek to be informed by thee: "Is that true?" Say: "Aye! by my
Lord! it is the very truth! and ye cannot frustrate it!"

P: And they ask thee to inform them (saying): Is it true? Say: Yea, by
my Lord, verily it is true, and ye cannot escape.

S: And they ask you: Is that true? Say: Aye! by my Lord! it is most
surely the truth, and you will not escape.

010.054
Y: Every soul that hath sinned, if it possessed all that is on earth,
would fain give it in ransom: They would declare (their) repentance
when they see the penalty: but the judgment between them will be with
justice, and no wrong will be done unto them.

P: And if each soul that doeth wrong had all that is in the earth it
would seek to ransom itself therewith; and they will feel remorse
within them, when they see the doom. But it hath been judged between
them fairly and they are not wronged.

S: And if every soul that has done injustice had all that is in the
earth, it would offer it for ransom, and they will manifest regret when
they see the chastisement and the matter shall be decided between them
with justice and they shall not be dealt with unjustly.

010.055
Y: Is it not (the case) that to Allah belongeth whatever is in the
heavens and on earth? Is it not (the case) that Allah's promise is
assuredly true? Yet most of them understand not.

P: Lo! verily all that is in the heavens and the earth is Allah's. Lo!
verily Allah's promise is true. But most of them know not.

S: Now surely Allah's is what is in the heavens and the earth; now
surely Allah's promise is true, but most of them do not know.

010.056
Y: It is He Who giveth life and who taketh it, and to Him shall ye all
be brought back.

P: He quickeneth and giveth death, and unto Him ye will be returned.

S: He gives life and causes death, and to Him you shall be brought back.

010.057
Y: O mankind! there hath come to you a direction from your Lord and a
healing for the (diseases) in your hearts,- and for those who believe,
a guidance and a Mercy.

P: O mankind! There hath come unto you an exhortation from your Lord, a
balm for that which is in the breasts, a guidance and a mercy for
believers.

S: O men! there has come to you indeed an admonition from your Lord and
a healing for what is in the breasts and a guidance and a mercy for the
believers.

010.058
Y: Say: "In the bounty of Allah. And in His Mercy,- in that let them
rejoice": that is better than the (wealth) they hoard.

P: Say: In the bounty of Allah and in His mercy: therein let them
rejoice. It is better than what they hoard.

S: Say: In the grace of Allah and in His mercy-- in that they should
rejoice; it is better than that which they gather.

010.059
Y: Say: "See ye what things Allah hath sent down to you for sustenance?
Yet ye hold forbidden some things thereof and (some things) lawful."
Say: "Hath Allah indeed permitted you, or do ye invent (things) to
attribute to Allah?"

P: Say: Have ye considered what provision Allah hath sent down for you,
how ye have made of it lawful and unlawful? Hath Allah permitted you,
or do ye invent a lie concerning Allah?

S: Say: Tell me what Allah has sent down for you of sustenance, then you
make (a part) of it unlawful and (a part) lawful. Say: Has Allah
commanded you, or do you forge a lie against Allah?

010.060
Y: And what think those who invent lies against Allah, of the Day of
Judgment? Verily Allah is full of bounty to mankind, but most of them
are ungrateful.

P: And what think those who invent a lie concerning Allah (will be their
plight) upon the Day of Resurrection? Lo! Allah truly is Bountiful
toward mankind, but most of them give not thanks.

S: And what will be the thought of those who forge lies against Allah on
the day of resurrection? Most surely Allah is the Lord of grace towards
men, but most of them do not give thanks.

010.061
Y: In whatever business thou mayest be, and whatever portion thou mayest
be reciting from the Qur'an,- and whatever deed ye (mankind) may be
doing,- We are witnesses thereof when ye are deeply engrossed therein.
Nor is hidden from thy Lord (so much as) the weight of an atom on the
earth or in heaven. And not the least and not the greatest of these
things but are recorded in a clear record.

P: And thou (Muhammad) art not occupied with any business and thou
recitest not a Lecture from this (Scripture), and ye (mankind) perform
no act, but We are Witness of you when ye are engaged therein. And not
an atom's weight in the earth or in the sky escapeth your Lord, nor
what is less than that or greater than that, but it is (written) in a
clear Book.

S: And you are not (engaged) in any affair, nor do you recite concerning
it any portion of the Quran, nor do you do any work but We are
witnesses over you when you enter into it, and there does not lie
concealed from your Lord the weight of an atom in the earth or in the
heaven, nor any thing less than that nor greater, but it is in a clear
book.

010.062
Y: Behold! verily on the friends of Allah there is no fear, nor shall
they grieve;

P: Lo! verily the friends of Allah are (those) on whom fear (cometh)
not, nor do they grieve?

S: Now surely the friends of Allah-- they shall have no fear nor shall
they grieve.

010.063
Y: Those who believe and (constantly) guard against evil;-

P: Those who believe and keep their duty (to Allah).

S: Those who believe and guarded (against evil):

010.064
Y: For them are glad tidings, in the life of the present and in the
Hereafter; no change can there be in the words of Allah. This is indeed
the supreme felicity.

P: Theirs are good tidings in the life of the world and in the Hereafter
- There is no changing the Words of Allah - that is the Supreme
Triumph.

S: They shall have good news in this world's life and in the hereafter;
there is no changing the words of Allah; that is the mighty
achievement.

010.065
Y: Let not their speech grieve thee: for all power and honour belong to
Allah: It is He Who heareth and knoweth (all things).

P: And let not their speech grieve thee (O Muhammad). Lo! power
belongeth wholly to Allah. He is the Hearer, the Knower.

S: And let not their speech grieve you; surely might is wholly Allah's;
He is the Hearing, the Knowing.

010.066
Y: Behold! verily to Allah belong all creatures, in the heavens and on
earth. What do they follow who worship as His "partners" other than
Allah? They follow nothing but fancy, and they do nothing but lie.

P: Lo! is it not unto Allah that belongeth whosoever is in the heavens
and whosoever is in the earth? Those who follow aught instead of Allah
follow not (His) partners. They follow only a conjecture, and they do
but guess.

S: Now, surely, whatever is in the heavens and whatever is in the earth
is Allah's; and they do not (really) follow any associates, who call on
others besides Allah; they do not follow (anything) but conjectures,
and they only lie.

010.067
Y: He it is That hath made you the night that ye may rest therein, and
the day to make things visible (to you). Verily in this are signs for
those who listen (to His Message).

P: He it is Who hath appointed for you the night that ye should rest
therein and the day giving sight. Lo! herein verily are portents for a
folk that heed.

S: He it is Who made for you the night that you might rest in it, and
the day giving light; most surely there are signs in it for a people
who would hear.

010.068
Y: They say: "Allah hath begotten a son!" - Glory be to Him! He is
self-sufficient! His are all things in the heavens and on earth! No
warrant have ye for this! say ye about Allah what ye know not?

P: They say: Allah hath taken (unto Him) a son - Glorified be He! He
hath no needs! His is all that is in the heavens and all that is in the
earth. Ye have no warrant for this. Tell ye concerning Allah that which
ye know not?

S: They say: Allah has taken a son (to Himself)! Glory be to Him: He is
the Self-sufficient: His is what is in the heavens and what is in the
earth; you have no authority for this; do you say against Allah what
you do not know?

010.069
Y: Say: "Those who invent a lie against Allah will never prosper."

P: Say: Verily those who invent a lie concerning Allah will not succeed.

S: Say: Those who forge a lie against Allah shall not be successful.

010.070
Y: A little enjoyment in this world!- and then, to Us will be their
return, then shall We make them taste the severest penalty for their
blasphemies.

P: This world's portion (will be theirs), then unto Us is their return.
Then We make them taste a dreadful doom because they used to
disbelieve.

S: (It is only) a provision in this world, then to Us shall be their
return; then We shall make them taste severe punishment because they
disbelieved.

010.071
Y: Relate to them the story of Noah. Behold! he said to his people:
"O my people, if it be hard on your (mind) that I should stay (with you)
and commemorate the signs of Allah,- yet I put my trust in Allah. Get
ye then an agreement about your plan and among your partners, so your
plan be on to you dark and dubious. Then pass your sentence on me, and
give me no respite."

P: Recite unto them the story of Noah, when he told his people: O my
people! If my sojourn (here) and my reminding you by Allah's
revelations are an offence unto you, in Allah have I put my trust, so
decide upon your course of action you and your partners. Let not your
course of action be in doubt for you. Then have at me, give me no
respite.

S: And recite to them the story of Nuh when he said to his people: O my
people! if my stay and my reminding (you) by the communications of
Allah is hard on you-- yet on Allah do I rely-- then resolve upon your
affair and (gather) your associates, then let not your affair remain
dubious to you, then have it executed against me and give me no
respite:

010.072
Y: "But if ye turn back, (consider): no reward have I asked of you: my
reward is only due from Allah, and I have been commanded to be of those
who submit to Allah's will (in Islam)."

P: But if ye are averse I have asked of you no wage. My wage is the
concern of Allah only, and I am commanded to be of those who surrender
(unto Him).

S: But if you turn back, I did not ask for any reward from you; my
reward is only with Allah, and I am commanded that I should be of those
who submit.

010.073
Y: They rejected Him, but We delivered him, and those with him, in the
Ark, and We made them inherit (the earth), while We overwhelmed in the
flood those who rejected Our Signs. Then see what was the end of those
who were warned (but heeded not)!

P: But they denied him, so We saved him and those with him in the ship,
and made them viceroys (in the earth), while We drowned those who
denied Our revelations. See then the nature of the consequence for
those who had been warned.

S: But they rejected him, so We delivered him and those with him in the
ark, and We made them rulers and drowned those who rejected Our
communications; see then what was the end of the (people) warned.

010.074
Y: Then after him We sent (many) messengers to their peoples: they
brought them Clear Signs, but they would not believe what they had
already rejected beforehand. Thus do We seal the hearts of the
transgressors.

P: Then, after him, We sent messengers unto their folk, and they brought
them clear proofs. But they were not ready to believe in that which
they before denied. Thus print We on the hearts of the transgressors.

S: Then did We raise up after him messengers to their people, so they
came to them with clear arguments, but they would not believe in what
they had rejected before; thus it is that We set seals upon the hearts
of those who exceed the limits.

010.075
Y: Then after them sent We Moses and Aaron to Pharaoh and his chiefs
with Our Signs. But they were arrogant: they were a people in sin.

P: Then, after them, We sent Moses and Aaron unto Pharaoh and his chiefs
with Our revelations, but they were arrogant and were a guilty folk.

S: Then did We send up after them Musa and Haroun to Firon and his
chiefs with Our signs, but they showed pride and they were a guilty
people.

010.076
Y: When the Truth did come to them from Us, they said: "This is indeed
evident sorcery!"

P: And when the Truth from Our presence came unto them, they said: Lo!
this is mere magic.

S: So when the truth came to them from Us they said: This is most surely
clear enchantment!

010.077
Y: Said Moses: "Say ye (this) about the truth when it hath (actually)
reached you? Is sorcery (like) this? But sorcerers will not prosper."

P: Moses said: Speak ye (so) of the Truth when it hath come unto you? Is
this magic? Now magicians thrive not.

S: Musa said: Do you say (this) of the truth when it has come to you? Is
it magic? And the magicians are not successful.

010.078
Y: They said: "Hast thou come to us to turn us away from the ways we
found our fathers following,- in order that thou and thy brother may
have greatness in the land? But not we shall believe in you!"

P: They said: Hast thou come unto us to pervert us from that (faith) in
which we found our fathers, and that you two may own the place of
greatness in the land? We will not believe you two.

S: They said: Have you come to us to turn us away from what we found our
fathers upon, and (that) greatness in the land should be for you two?
And we are not going to believe in you.

010.079
Y: Said Pharaoh: "Bring me every sorcerer well versed."

P: And Pharaoh said: Bring every cunning wizard unto me.

S: And Firon said: Bring to me every skillful magician.

010.080
Y: When the sorcerers came, Moses said to them: "Throw ye what ye (wish)
to throw!"

P: And when the wizards came, Moses said unto them: Cast your cast!

S: And when the magicians came, Musa said to them: Cast down what you
have to cast.

010.081
Y: When they had had their throw, Moses said: "What ye have brought is
sorcery: Allah will surely make it of no effect: for Allah prospereth
not the work of those who make mischief."

P: And when they had cast, Moses said: That which ye have brought is
magic. Lo! Allah will make it vain. Lo! Allah upholdeth not the work of
mischief-makers.

S: So when they cast down, Musa said to them: What you have brought is
deception; surely Allah will make it naught; surely Allah does not make
the work of mischief-makers to thrive.

010.082
Y: "And Allah by His words doth prove and establish His truth, however
much the sinners may hate it!"

P: And Allah will vindicate the Truth by His words, however much the
guilty be averse.

S: And Allah will show the truth to be the truth by His words, though
the guilty may be averse (to it).

010.083
Y: But none believed in Moses except some children of his people,
because of the fear of Pharaoh and his chiefs, lest they should
persecute them; and certainly Pharaoh was mighty on the earth and one
who transgressed all bounds.

P: But none trusted Moses, save some scions of his people, (and they
were) in fear of Pharaoh and their chiefs, that he would persecute
them. Lo! Pharaoh was verily a tyrant in the land, and lo! he verily
was of the wanton.

S: But none believed in Musa except the offspring of his people, on
account of the fear of Firon and their chiefs, lest he should persecute
them; and most surely Firon was lofty in the land; and most surely he
was of the extravagant.

010.084
Y: Moses said: "O my people! If ye do (really) believe in Allah, then in
Him put your trust if ye submit (your will to His)."

P: And Moses said: O my people! If ye have believed in Allah then put
trust in Him, if ye have indeed surrendered (unto Him)!

S: And Musa said: O my people! if you believe in Allah, then rely on Him
(alone) if you submit (to Allah).

010.085
Y: They said: "In Allah do we put out trust. Our Lord! make us not a
trial for those who practise oppression;"

P: They said: In Allah we put trust. Our Lord! Oh, make us not a lure
for the wrongdoing folk;

S: So they said: On Allah we rely: O our Lord! make us not subject to
the persecution of the unjust people:

010.086
Y: "And deliver us by Thy Mercy from those who reject (Thee)."

P: And, of Thy mercy, save us from the folk that disbelieve.

S: And do Thou deliver us by Thy mercy from the unbelieving people.

010.087
Y: We inspired Moses and his brother with this Message: "Provide
dwellings for your people in Egypt, make your dwellings into places of
worship, and establish regular prayers: and give glad tidings to those
who believe!"

P: And We inspired Moses and his brother, (saying): Appoint houses for
your people in Egypt and make your houses oratories, and establish
worship. And give good news to the believers.

S: And We revealed to Musa and his brother, saying: Take for your people
houses to abide in Egypt and make your houses places of worship and
keep up prayer and give good news to the believers.

010.088
Y: Moses prayed: "Our Lord! Thou hast indeed bestowed on Pharaoh and his
chiefs splendour and wealth in the life of the present, and so, Our
Lord, they mislead (men) from Thy Path. Deface our Lord, the features
of their wealth, and send hardness to their hearts, so they will not
believe until they see the grievous penalty."

P: And Moses said: Our Lord! Lo! Thou hast given Pharaoh and his chiefs
splendour and riches in the life of the world, Our Lord! that they may
lead men astray from Thy way. Our Lord! Destroy their riches and harden
their hearts so that they believe not till they see the painful doom.

S: And Musa said: Our Lord! surely Thou hast given to Firon and his
chiefs finery and riches in this world's life, to this end, our Lord,
that they lead (people) astray from Thy way: Our Lord! destroy their
riches and harden their hearts so that they believe not until they see
the painful punishment.

010.089
Y: Allah said: "Accepted is your prayer (O Moses and Aaron)! So stand ye
straight, and follow not the path of those who know not."

P: He said: Your prayer is heard. Do ye twain keep to the straight path,
and follow not the road of those who have no knowledge.

S: He said: The prayer of you both has indeed been accepted, therefore
continue in the right way and do not follow the path of those who do
not know.

010.090
Y: We took the Children of Israel across the sea: Pharaoh and his hosts
followed them in insolence and spite. At length, when overwhelmed with
the flood, he said: "I believe that there is no god except Him Whom the
Children of Israel believe in: I am of those who submit (to Allah in
Islam)."

P: And We brought the Children of Israel across the sea, and Pharaoh
with his hosts pursued them in rebellion and transgression, till, when
the (fate of) drowning overtook him, he exclaimed: I believe that there
is no God save Him in Whom the Children of Israel believe, and I am
of those who surrender (unto Him).

S: And We made the children of Israel to pass through the sea, then
Firon and his hosts followed them for oppression and tyranny; until
when drowning overtook him, he said: I believe that there is no god but
He in Whom the children of Israel believe and I am of those who submit.

010.091
Y: (It was said to him): "Ah now!- But a little while before, wast thou
in rebellion!- and thou didst mischief (and violence)!"

P: What! Now! When hitherto thou hast rebelled and been of the
wrong-doers?

S: What! now! and indeed you disobeyed before and you were of the
mischief-makers.

010.092
Y: "This day shall We save thee in the body, that thou mayest be a sign
to those who come after thee! but verily, many among mankind are
heedless of Our Signs!"

P: But this day We save thee in thy body that thou mayst be a portent
for those after thee. Lo! most of mankind are heedless of Our portents.

S: But We will this day deliver you with your body that you may be a
sign to those after you, and most surely the majority of the people are
heedless to Our communications.

010.093
Y: We settled the Children of Israel in a beautiful dwelling-place, and
provided for them sustenance of the best: it was after knowledge had
been granted to them, that they fell into schisms. Verily Allah will
judge between them as to the schisms amongst them, on the Day of
Judgment.

P: And We verily did allot unto the Children of Israel a fixed abode,
and did provide them with good things; and they differed not until the
knowledge came unto them. Lo! thy Lord will judge between them on the
Day of Resurrection concerning that wherein they used to differ.

S: And certainly We lodged the children of Israel in a goodly abode and
We provided them with good things; but they did not disagree until the
knowledge had come to them; surely your Lord will judge between them on
the resurrection day concerning that in which they disagreed.

010.094
Y: If thou wert in doubt as to what We have revealed unto thee, then ask
those who have been reading the Book from before thee: the Truth hath
indeed come to thee from thy Lord: so be in no wise of those in doubt.

P: And if thou (Muhammad) art in doubt concerning that which We reveal
unto thee, then question those who read the Scripture (that was) before
thee. Verily the Truth from thy Lord hath come unto thee. So be not
thou of the waverers.

S: But if you are in doubt as to what We have revealed to you, ask those
who read the Book before you; certainly the truth has come to you from
your Lord, therefore you should not be of the disputers.

010.095
Y: Nor be of those who reject the signs of Allah, or thou shalt be of
those who perish.

P: And be not thou of those who deny the revelations of Allah, for then
wert thou of the losers.

S: And you should not be of those who reject the communications of
Allah, (for) then you should be one of the losers.

010.096
Y: Those against whom the word of thy Lord hath been verified would not
believe-

P: Lo! those for whom the word of thy Lord (concerning sinners) hath
effect will not believe,

S: Surely those against whom the word of your Lord has proved true will
not believe,

010.097
Y: Even if every Sign was brought unto them,- until they see (for
themselves) the penalty grievous.

P: Though every token come unto them, till they see the painful doom.

S: Though every sign should come to them, until they witness the painful
chastisement.

010.098
Y: Why was there not a single township (among those We warned), which
believed,- so its faith should have profited it,- except the people of
Jonah? When they believed, We removed from them the penalty of ignominy
in the life of the present, and permitted them to enjoy (their life)
for a while.

P: If only there had been a community (of all those that were destroyed
of old) that believed and profited by its belief as did the folk of
Jonah! When they believed We drew off from them the torment of disgrace
in the life of the world and gave them comfort for a while.

S: And wherefore was there not a town which should believe so that their
belief should have profited them but the people of Yunus? When they
believed, We removed from them the chastisement of disgrace in this
world's life and We gave them provision till a time.

010.099
Y: If it had been thy Lord's will, they would all have believed,- all
who are on earth! wilt thou then compel mankind, against their will, to
believe!

P: And if thy Lord willed, all who are in the earth would have believed
together. Wouldst thou (Muhammad) compel men until they are believers?

S: And if your Lord had pleased, surely all those who are in the earth
would have believed, all of them; will you then force men till they
become believers?

010.100
Y: No soul can believe, except by the will of Allah, and He will place
doubt (or obscurity) on those who will not understand.

P: It is not for any soul to believe save by the permission of Allah. He
hath set uncleanness upon those who have no sense.

S: And it is not for a soul to believe except by Allah's permission; and
He casts uncleanness on those who will not understand.

010.101
Y: Say: "Behold all that is in the heavens and on earth"; but neither
Signs nor Warners profit those who believe not.

P: Say: Behold what is in the heavens and the earth! But revelations and
warnings avail not folk who will not believe.

S: Say: Consider what is it that is in the heavens and the earth; and
signs and warners do not avail a people who would not believe.

010.102
Y: Do they then expect (any thing) but (what happened in) the days of
the men who passed away before them? Say: "Wait ye then: for I, too,
will wait with you."

P: What expect they save the like of the days of those who passed away
before them? Say: Expect then! I am with you among the expectant.

S: What do they wait for then but the like of the days of those who
passed away before them? Say: Wait then; surely I too am with you of
those who wait.

010.103
Y: In the end We deliver Our messengers and those who believe: Thus is
it fitting on Our part that We should deliver those who believe!

P: Then shall We save Our messengers and the believers, in like manner
(as of old). It is incumbent upon Us to save believers.

S: Then We deliver Our messengers and those who believe-- even so (now),
it is binding on Us (that) We deliver the believers.

010.104
Y: Say: "O ye men! If ye are in doubt as to my religion, (behold!) I
worship not what ye worship, other than Allah! But I worship Allah -
Who will take your souls (at death): I am commanded to be (in the
ranks) of the Believers,"

P: Say (O Muhammad): O mankind! If ye are in doubt of my religion, then
(know that) I worship not those whom ye worship instead of Allah, but I
worship Allah Who causeth you to die, and I have been commanded to be
of the believers.

S: Say: O people! if you are in doubt as to my religion, then (know
that) I do not serve those whom you serve besides Allah but I do serve
Allah, Who will cause you to die, and I am commanded that I should be
of the believers.

010.105
Y: "And further (thus): 'set thy face towards religion with true piety,
and never in any wise be of the Unbelievers;'"

P: And, (O Muhammad) set thy purpose resolutely for religion, as a man
by nature upright, and be not of those who ascribe partners (to Allah).

S: And that you should keep your course towards the religion uprightly;
and you should not be of the polytheists.

010.106
Y: "'Nor call on any, other than Allah;- Such will neither profit thee
nor hurt thee: if thou dost, behold! thou shalt certainly be of those
who do wrong.'"

P: And cry not, beside Allah, unto that which cannot profit thee nor
hurt thee, for if thou didst so then wert thou of the wrong-doers.

S: And do not call besides Allah on that which can neither benefit you
nor harm you, for if you do then surely you will in that case be of the
unjust.

010.107
Y: If Allah do touch thee with hurt, there is none can remove it but He:
if He do design some benefit for thee, there is none can keep back His
favour: He causeth it to reach whomsoever of His servants He pleaseth.
And He is the Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.

P: If Allah afflicteth thee with some hurt, there is none who can remove
it save Him; and if He desireth good for thee, there is none who can
repel His bounty. He striketh with it whom He will of his bondmen. He
is the Forgiving, the Merciful.

S: And if Allah should afflict you with harm, then there is none to
remove it but He; and if He intends good to you there is none to repel
His grace; He brings it to whom He pleases of His servants; and He is
the Forgiving, the Merciful.

010.108
Y: Say: "O ye men! Now Truth hath reached you from your Lord! those who
receive guidance, do so for the good of their own souls; those who
stray, do so to their own loss: and I am not (set) over you to arrange
your affairs."

P: Say: O mankind! Now hath the Truth from your Lord come unto you. So
whosoever is guided, is guided only for (the good of) his soul, and
whosoever erreth erreth only against it. And I am not a warder over
you.

S: Say: O people! indeed there has come to you the truth from your Lord,
therefore whoever goes aright, he goes aright only for the good of his
own soul, and whoever goes astray, he goes astray only to the detriment
of it, and I am not a custodian over you.

010.109
Y: Follow thou the inspiration sent unto thee, and be patient and
constant, till Allah do decide: for He is the best to decide.

P: And (O Muhammad) follow that which is inspired in thee, and forbear
until Allah give judgment. And He is the Best of Judges.

S: And follow what is revealed to you and be patient till Allah should
give judgment, and He is the best of the judges.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 11:

                                 HUD (HUD)
 Total Verses: 123 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

011.001
Y: A. L. R. (This is) a Book, with verses basic or fundamental (of
established meaning), further explained in detail,- from One Who is
Wise and Well-acquainted (with all things):

P: Alif. Lam. Ra. (This is) a Scripture the revelations whereof are
perfected and then expounded. (It cometh) from One Wise, Informed,

S: Alif Lam Ra (This is) a Book, whose verses are made decisive, then
are they made plain, from the Wise, All-aware:

011.002
Y: (It teacheth) that ye should worship none but Allah. (Say):
"Verily I am (sent) unto you from Him to warn and to bring glad tidings:"

P: (Saying): Serve none but Allah. Lo! I am unto you from Him a warner
and a bringer of good tidings.

S: That you shall not serve (any) but Allah; surely I am a warner for
you from Him and a giver of good news,

011.003
Y: "(And to preach thus), 'Seek ye the forgiveness of your Lord, and
turn to Him in repentance; that He may grant you enjoyment, good (and
true), for a term appointed, and bestow His abounding grace on all who
abound in merit! But if ye turn away, then I fear for you the penalty
of a great day:'"

P: And (bidding you): Ask pardon of your Lord and turn to Him repentant.
He will cause you to enjoy a fair estate until a time appointed. He
giveth His bounty unto every bountiful one. But if ye turn away, lo!
(then) I fear for you the retribution of an awful Day.

S: And you that ask forgiveness of your Lord, then turn to Him; He will
provide you with a goodly provision to an appointed term and bestow His
grace on every one endowed with grace, and if you turn back, then
surely I fear for you the chastisement of a great day.

011.004
Y: "'To Allah is your return, and He hath power over all things.'"

P: Unto Allah is your return, and He is Able to do all things.

S: To Allah is your return, and He has power over all things.

011.005
Y: Behold! they fold up their hearts, that they may lie hid from Him! Ah
even when they cover themselves with their garments, He knoweth what
they conceal, and what they reveal: for He knoweth well the (inmost
secrets) of the hearts.

P: Lo! now they fold up their breasts that they may hide (their
thoughts) from Him. At the very moment when they cover themselves with
their clothing, Allah knoweth that which they keep hidden and that
which they proclaim. Lo! He is Aware of what is in the breasts (of
men).

S: Now surely they fold up their breasts that they may conceal (their
enmity) from Him; now surely, when they use their garments as a
covering, He knows what they conceal and what they make public; surely
He knows what is in the breasts.

011.006
Y: There is no moving creature on earth but its sustenance dependeth on
Allah: He knoweth the time and place of its definite abode and its
temporary deposit: All is in a clear Record.

P: And there is not a beast in the earth but the sustenance thereof
dependeth on Allah. He knoweth its habitation and its repository. All
is in a clear Record.

S: And there is no animal in the earth but on Allah is the sustenance of
it, and He knows its resting place and its depository all (things) are
in a manifest book.

011.007
Y: He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days - and His
Throne was over the waters - that He might try you, which of you is
best in conduct. But if thou wert to say to them, "Ye shall indeed be
raised up after death", the Unbelievers would be sure to say, "This is
nothing but obvious sorcery!"

P: And He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six Days - and
His Throne was upon the water - that He might try you, which of you is
best in conduct. Yet if thou (O Muhammad) sayest: Lo! ye will be raised
again after death! those who disbelieve will surely say: This is naught
but mere magic.

S: And He it is Who created the heavens and the earth in six periods--
and His dominion (extends) on the water-- that He might manifest to
you, which of you is best in action, and if you say, surely you shall
be raised up after death, those who disbelieve would certainly say:
This is nothing but clear magic.

011.008
Y: If We delay the penalty for them for a definite term, they are sure
to say, "What keeps it back?" Ah! On the day it (actually) reaches
them, nothing will turn it away from them, and they will be completely
encircled by that which they used to mock at!

P: And if We delay for them the doom until a reckoned time, they will
surely say: What withholdeth it? Verily on the day when it cometh unto
them, it cannot be averted from them, and that which they derided will
surround them.

S: And if We hold back from them the punishment until a stated period of
time, they will certainly say: What prevents it? Now surely on the day
when it will come to them, it shall not be averted from them and that
which they scoffed at shall beset them.

011.009
Y: If We give man a taste of Mercy from Ourselves, and then withdraw it
from him, behold! he is in despair and (falls into) blasphemy.

P: And if we cause man to taste some mercy from Us and afterward
withdraw it from him, lo! he is despairing, thankless.

S: And if We make man taste mercy from Us, then take it off from him,
most surely he is despairing, ungrateful.

011.010
Y: But if We give him a taste of (Our) favours after adversity hath
touched him, he is sure to say, "All evil has departed from me:"
Behold! he falls into exultation and pride.

P: And if We cause him to taste grace after some misfortune that had
befallen him, he saith: The ills have gone from me. Lo! he is exultant,
boastful;

S: And if We make him taste a favor after distress has afflicted him, he
will certainly say: The evils are gone away from me. Most surely he is
exulting, boasting;

011.011
Y: Not so do those who show patience and constancy, and work
righteousness; for them is forgiveness (of sins) and a great reward.

P: Save those who persevere and do good works. Theirs will be
forgiveness and a great reward.

S: Except those who are patient and do good, they shall have forgiveness
and a great reward.

011.012
Y: Perchance thou mayest (feel the inclination) to give up a part of
what is revealed unto thee, and thy heart feeleth straitened lest they
say, "Why is not a treasure sent down unto him, or why does not an angel
come down with him?" But thou art there only to warn! It is Allah that
arrangeth all affairs!

P: A likely thing, that thou wouldst forsake aught of that which hath
been revealed unto thee, and that thy breast should be straitened for
it, because they say: Why hath not a treasure been sent down for him,
or an angel come with him? Thou art but a warner, and Allah is in
charge of all things.

S: Then, it may be that you will give up part of what is revealed to you
and your breast will become straitened by it because they say: Why has
not a treasure been sent down upon him or an angel come with him? You
are only a warner; and Allah is custodian over all things.

011.013
Y: Or they may say, "He forged it," Say, "Bring ye then ten suras
forged, like unto it, and call (to your aid) whomsoever ye can, other
than Allah!- If ye speak the truth!"

P: Or they say: He hath invented it. Say: Then bring ten surahs, the
like thereof, invented, and call on everyone ye can beside Allah, if ye
are truthful!

S: Or, do they say: He has forged it. Say: Then bring ten forged
chapters like it and call upon whom you can besides Allah, if you are
truthful.

011.014
Y: "If then they (your false gods) answer not your (call), know ye that
this revelation is sent down (replete) with the knowledge of Allah, and
that there is no god but He! will ye even then submit (to Islam)?"

P: And if they answer not your prayer, then know that it is revealed
only in the knowledge of Allah; and that there is no God save Him.
Will ye then be (of) those who surrender?

S: But if they do not answer you, then know that it is revealed by
Allah's knowledge and that there is no god but He; will you then
submit?

011.015
Y: Those who desire the life of the present and its glitter,- to them we
shall pay (the price of) their deeds therein,- without diminution.

P: Whoso desireth the life of the world and its pomp, We shall repay
them their deeds herein, and therein they will not be wronged.

S: Whoever desires this world's life and its finery, We will pay them in
full their deeds therein, and they shall not be made to suffer loss in
respect of them.

011.016
Y: They are those for whom there is nothing in the Hereafter but the
Fire: vain are the designs they frame therein, and of no effect and the
deeds that they do!

P: Those are they for whom is naught in the Hereafter save the Fire.
(All) that they contrive here is vain and (all) that they are wont to
do is fruitless.

S: These are they for whom there is nothing but fire in the hereafter,
and what they wrought in it shall go for nothing, and vain is what they
do.

011.017
Y: Can they be (like) those who accept a Clear (Sign) from their Lord,
and whom a witness from Himself doth teach, as did the Book of Moses
before it,- a guide and a mercy? They believe therein; but those of the
Sects that reject it,- the Fire will be their promised meeting-place.
Be not then in doubt thereon: for it is the truth from thy Lord: yet
many among men do not believe!

P: Is he (to be counted equal with them) who relieth on a clear proof
from his Lord, and a witness from Him reciteth it, and before it was
the Book of Moses, an example and a mercy? Such believe therein, and
whoso disbelieveth therein of the clans, the Fire is his appointed
place. So be not thou in doubt concerning it. Lo! it is the Truth from
thy Lord; but most of mankind believe not.

S: Is he then who has with him clear proof from his Lord, and a witness
from Him recites it and before it (is) the Book of Musa, a guide and a
mercy? These believe in it; and whoever of the (different) parties
disbelieves in it, surely it is the truth from your Lord, but most men
do not believe.

011.018
Y: Who doth more wrong than those who invent a lie against Allah? They
will be turned back to the presence of their Lord, and the witnesses
will say, "These are the ones who lied against their Lord! Behold! the
Curse of Allah is on those who do wrong!-"

P: Who doeth greater wrong than he who inventeth a lie concerning Allah?
Such will be brought before their Lord, and the witnesses will say:
These are they who lied concerning their Lord. Now the curse of Allah
is upon wrong-doers,

S: And who is more unjust than he who forges a lie against Allah? These
shall be brought before their Lord, and the witnesses shall say: These
are they who lied against their Lord. Now surely the curse of Allah is
on the unjust.

011.019
Y: "Those who would hinder (men) from the path of Allah and would seek
in it something crooked: these were they who denied the Hereafter!"

P: Who debar (men) from the way of Allah and would have it crooked, and
who are disbelievers in the Hereafter.

S: Who turn away from the path of Allah and desire to make it crooked;
and they are disbelievers in the hereafter.

011.020
Y: They will in no wise frustrate (His design) on earth, nor have they
protectors besides Allah! Their penalty will be doubled! They lost the
power to hear, and they did not see!

P: Such will not escape in the earth, nor have they any protecting
friends beside Allah. For them the torment will be double. They could
not bear to hear, and they used not to see.

S: These shall not escape in the earth, nor shall they have any
guardians besides Allah; the punishment shall be doubled for them, they
could not bear to hear and they did not see.

011.021
Y: They are the ones who have lost their own souls: and the (fancies)
they invented have left them in the lurch!

P: Such are they who have lost their souls, and that which they used to
invent hath failed them.

S: These are they who have lost their souls, and what they forged is
gone from them.

011.022
Y: Without a doubt, these are the very ones who will lose most in the
Hereafter!

P: Assuredly in the Hereafter they will be the greatest losers.

S: Truly in the hereafter they are the greatest losers.

011.023
Y: But those who believe and work righteousness, and humble themselves
before their Lord,- They will be companions of the gardens, to dwell
therein for aye!

P: Lo! those who believe and do good works and humble themselves before
their Lord: such are rightful owners of the Garden; they will abide
therein.

S: Surely (as to) those who believe and do good and humble themselves to
their Lord, these are the dwellers of the garden, in it they will
abide.

011.024
Y: These two kinds (of men) may be compared to the blind and deaf, and
those who can see and hear well. Are they equal when compared? Will ye
not then take heed?

P: The similitude of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and
the seer and the hearer. Are they equal in similitude? Will ye not then
be admonished?

S: The likeness of the two parties is as the blind and the deaf and the
seeing and the hearing: are they equal in condition? Will you not then
mind?

011.025
Y: We sent Noah to his people (with a mission): "I have come to you with
a Clear Warning:"

P: And We sent Noah unto his folk (and he said): Lo! I am a plain warner
unto you.

S: And certainly We sent Nuh to his people: Surely I am a plain warner
