seen the former building of the Temple, before the Babylonians destroyed
it, called to mind how far off it was yet from that beauty and excellency
which it had in the old times past before.  For then, indeed, would they
have thought the Temple worthily repaired if it had answered to the
ancient pattern and to the majesty of the first Temple.  Paul, because he
would amend the abuse of the Lord's Supper, which the Corinthians even
then began to corrupt, he set before them Christ's institution to follow,
saying: "I have delivered unto you that which I first received of the
Lord."  And when Christ did confute the error of the Pharisees, "Ye
must," saith He, "return to the first beginning; for from the beginning
it was not thus."  And when He found great fault with the priests for
their uncleanness of life and covetousness, and would cleanse the Temple
from all evil abuses, "This house," saith He, "at the first beginning it
was a house of prayer," wherein all the people might devoutly and
sincerely pray together.  And so it were your part to use it now also at
this day, for it was not builded to the end it should be a "den of
thieves."  Likewise all the good and commendable princes mentioned of in
the Scriptures were praised specially by these words, that they had
walked in the ways of their father David: that is, because they had
returned to the first and original foundation, and had restored religion
even to the perfection wherein David left it.  And therefore, when we
likewise saw all things were quite trodden under foot of these men, and
that nothing remained in the temple of God but pitiful spoils and decays,
we reckoned it the wisest and the safest way to set before our eyes those
churches which we know for a surety that they never had erred, nor never
had private mass, nor prayers in a strange and barbarous language, nor
this corrupting of sacraments, and other toys.

And forsomuch as our desire was to have the Temple of the Lord restored
anew, we would seek none other foundation than the same which we know was
long ago laid by the Apostles, that is to wit, "Our Saviour, Jesus
Christ."  And forasmuch as we heard God Himself speaking unto us in His
word, and saw also the notable examples of the old and primitive Church;
again, how uncertain a matter it was to wait for a general council, and
that the success thereof would be much more uncertain, but specially
forsomuch as we were most ascertained of God's will, and counted it a
wickedness to be too careful and overcumbered about the judgments of
mortal men: we could no longer stand taking advice with flesh and blood,
but rather thought good to do the same thing, that both might rightly be
done, and hath also many a time been done, as well of good men as of many
Catholic bishops--that is, to remedy our own churches by a provincial
synod.  For thus know we the old fathers used to put in experience before
they came to the public universal council.  There remain yet at this day
canons written in councils of free cities, as of Carthage under Cyprian,
as of Ancyra, Neocaesarea, and Gangra, which is in Paphlagonia, as some
think, before that the name of the general council at Nice was ever heard
of.  After this fashion in old time did they speedily meet with and cut
short those heretics, the Pelagians and the Donatists at home, by private
disputation, without any general council.  Thus, also, when the Emperor
Constantine evidently and earnestly took part with Auxentius, the bishop
of the Arians' faction, Ambrose, the bishop of the Christians, appealed
not unto a general council, where he saw no good could be done, by reason
of the emperor's might and great labour, but appealed to his own clergy
and people, that is to say, to a provincial synod.  And thus it was
decreed in the council at Nice that the bishops should assemble twice
every year.  And in the council at Carthage it was decreed that the
bishops should meet together in each of their provinces at least once in
the year, which was done, as saith the council of Chalcedon, of purpose
that if any errors and abuses had happened to spring up anywhere, they
might immediately at the first entry be destroyed where they first began.
So likewise when Secundus and Palladius rejected the council at Aquileia,
because it was not a general and a common council, Ambrose, bishop of
Milan, made answer that no man ought to take it for a new or strange
matter that the bishops of the west part of the world did call together
synods, and make private assemblies in their provinces, for that it was a
thing before then used by the west bishops no few times, and by the
bishops of Greece used oftentimes and commonly to be done.  And so
Charles the Great, being emperor, held a provincial council in Germany
for putting away images, contrary to the second council at Nice.  Neither,
pardy, even amongst us is this so very a strange and new a trade.  For we
have had ere now in England provincial synods, and governed our churches
by home-made laws.  What should one say more?  Of a truth, even those
greatest councils, and where most assembly of people ever was (whereof
these men use to make such an exceeding reckoning), compare them with all
the churches which throughout the world acknowledge and profess the name
of Christ, and what else, I pray you, can they seem to be but certain
private councils of bishops and provincial synods?  For admit,
peradventure, Italy, France, Spain, England, Germany, Denmark, and
Scotland meet together, if there want Asia, Greece, Armenia, Persia,
Media, Mesopotamia, Egypt, Ethiopia, India, and Mauritania, in all which
places there be both many Christian men and also bishops, how can any
man, being in his right mind, think such a council to be a general
council? or where so many parts of the world do lack how can they truly
say they have the consent of the whole world?  Or what manner of council,
ween you, was the same last at Trident?  Or how might it be termed a
general council, when out of all Christian kingdoms and nations there
came unto it but only forty bishops, and of the same some so cunning that
they might be thought meet to be sent home again to learn their grammar,
and so well learned that they had never studied divinity.

Whatsoever it be, the truth of the Gospel of Jesus Christ dependeth not
upon councils, nor, as St. Paul saith, upon mortal creature's judgment.
And if they which ought to be careful for God's Church will not be wise,
but slack their duty, and harden their hearts against God and His Christ,
going on still to pervert the right ways of the Lord, God will stir up
the very stones, and make children and babes cunning, whereby there may
ever be some to confute these men's lies.  For God is able (not only
without councils), but also, will the councils, nill the councils, to
maintain and advance His own kingdom.  "Full many be the thoughts of
man's heart" (saith Solomon); "but the counsel of the Lord abideth
steadfast:" "There is no wisdom, there is no knowledge, there is no
counsel against the Lord."  "Things endure not" (saith Hilarius), "that
be set up with men's workmanship: by another manner of means must the
Church of God be builded and preserved: for that Church is grounded upon
the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, and is holden fast together
by one corner stone, which is Christ Jesu."

But marvellous notable, and to very good purpose for these days, be
Hierom's words: "Whosoever" (saith he) "the devil hath deceived, and
enticed to fall asleep, as it were with the sweet and deathly
enchantments of the mermaids the Syrens, those persons doth God's word
awake up, saying unto them, Arise, thou that sleepest; lift up thyself,
and Christ shall give thee light.  Therefore, at the coming of Christ, of
God's word, of the ecclesiastical doctrine, and of the full destruction
of Nineveh, and of that most beautiful harlot, then, then shall the
people, which heretofore had been cast in a trance under their masters,
be raised up, and shall make haste to go to the mountains of the
Scripture; and there shall they find hills, Moses verily, and Joshua the
son of Nun, other hills also, which are the Prophets; and hills of the
New Testament, which are the Apostles and the Evangelists.  And when the
people shall flee for succour to such hills, and shall be exercised in
the reading of those kind of mountains, though they find not one to teach
them (for the harvest shall be great, but the labourers few), yet shall
the good desire of the people be well accepted, in that they have gotten
them to such hills; and the negligence of their masters shall be openly
reproved."  These be Hierom's sayings, and that so plain, as there
needeth no interpreter.  For they agree so just with the things we now
see with our eyes have already come to pass, that we may verily think
that he meant to foretell, as it were, by the spirit of prophecy, and to
paint before our face the universal state of our time; the fall of the
most gorgeous harlot Babylon; the repairing again of God's Church; the
blindness and sloth of the bishops, and the good will and forwardness of
the people.  For who is so blind, that he seeth not these men be the
masters, by whom the people, as saith Hierom, hath been led into error
and lulled asleep?  Or who sooth not Rome, that is their Nineveh, which
sometime was painted with fairest colours, but now, her vizard being
palled off, is both better seen and less set by?  Or who seeth not that
good men, being awaked, as it were, out of their dead sleep at the light
of the Gospel and at the voice of God, have resorted to the hills of the
Scriptures, waiting not at all for the councils of such masters?

But, by your favour, some will say, these things ought not to have been
attempted without the Bishop of Rome's commandment, forsomuch as he only
is the knot and band of Christian society.  He only is that priest of
Levi's order whom God signified in the Deuteronomy, from whom counsel in
matters of weight and true judgment ought to be fetched; and whoso
obeyeth not his judgment, the same man ought to be killed in the sight of
his brethren; and that no mortal creature hath authority to be judge over
him, whatsoever he do: that Christ reigneth in heaven, and he in earth;
that he alone can do as much as Christ or God Himself can do, because
Christ and he have but one council-house; that without him is no faith,
no hope, no Church; and whoso goeth from him quite casteth away and
renounceth his own salvation.  Such talk have the canonists, the Pope's
parasites, surely, but with small discretion or soberness.  For they
could scant say more, at least they could not speak more highly of Christ
Himself.

As for us, truly we have fallen from the Bishop of Rome upon no manner of
worldly respect or commodity.  And would to Christ he so behaved himself
as this falling away needed not; but so the case stood, that unless we
left him we could not come to Christ.  Neither will he now make any other
league with us than such a one as Nahas the king of the Ammonites would
have made in times past with them of the city of Jabez, which was to put
out the right eye of each one of the inhabitants.  Even so will the Pope
pluck from us the holy Scripture, the Gospel of our salvation, and all
the confidence which we have in Christ Jesu.  And upon other condition
can he not agree upon peace with us.

For whereas some use to make so great a vaunt, that the Pope is only
Peter's successor, as though thereby he carried the Holy Ghost in his
bosom, and cannot err, this is but a matter of nothing, and a very
trifling tale.  God's grace is promised to a good mind, and to one that
feareth God, not unto sees and successions.  "Riches," saith Hierom, "may
make a bishop to be of more might than the rest: but all the bishops,"
whosoever they be, "are the successors of the Apostles."  If so be the
place and consecrating only be sufficient, why then Manasses succeeded
David, and Caiaphas succeeded Aaron.  And it hath been often seen, that
an idol hath stand in the temple of God.  In old time Archidamus the
Lacedaemonian boasted much of himself, how he came of the blood of
Hercules.  But one Nicostratus in this wise abated his pride: "Nay,"
quoth he, "thou seemest not to descend from Hercules.  For Hercules
destroyed ill men, but thou makest good men evil."  And when the
Pharisees bragged of their lineage, how they were of the kindred and
blood of Abraham: "Ye," saith Christ, "seek to kill me, a man which have
told you the truth, as I heard it from God.  Thus Abraham never did.  Ye
are of your father the devil, and will needs obey his will."

Yet notwithstanding, because we will grant somewhat to succession, tell
us, hath the Pope alone succeeded Peter?  And wherein, I pray you?  In
what religion? in what office? in what piece of his life hath he
succeeded him?  What one thing (tell me) had Peter ever like unto the
Pope, or the Pope like unto Peter?  Except peradventure they will say
thus: that Peter, when he was at Rome, never taught the Gospel, never fed
the flock, took away the keys of the kingdom of heaven, hid the treasures
of his Lord, sat him down only in his castle in S. John Lateran, and
pointed out with his finger all the places of purgatory, and kinds of
punishments, committing some poor souls to be tormented, and other some
again suddenly releasing thence at his own pleasure, taking money for so
doing: or that he gave order to say private masses in every corner: or
that he mumbled up the holy service with a low voice, and in an unknown
language: or that he hanged up the Sacrament in every temple, and on
every altar, and carried the same about before him whithersoever he went,
upon an ambling jannet, with lights and bells; or that he consecrated
with his holy breath, oil, wax, wool, bells, chalices, churches, and
altars, or that he sold jubilees, graces, liberties, advowsons,
preventions, first fruits, palls, the wearing of palls, bulls,
indulgences, and pardons; or that he called himself by the name of the
head of the Church, the highest bishop, bishop of bishops, alone most
holy: or that by usurping he took upon himself the right and authority
over other folk's churches; or that he exempted himself from the power of
any civil government; or that he maintained wars, and set princes
together at variance: or that he sitting in his chair, with his triple
crown full of labels, with sumptuous and Persian-like gorgeousness, with
his royal sceptre, with his diadem of gold, and glittering with stones,
was carried about, not upon palfrey, but upon the shoulders of noble men.
These things, no doubt, did Peter at Rome in times past, and left them in
charge to his successors, as you would say, from hand to hand; for these
things be now-a-days done at Rome by the popes, and be so done, as though
nothing else ought to be done.  Or contrariwise, peradventure they had
rather say thus, that the Pope doth now all the same things, which we
know Peter did many a day ago: that is, that he runneth up and down into
every country to preach the gospel, not only openly abroad, but also
privately from house to house: that he is diligent, and applieth that
business in season and out of season, in due time and out of due time:
that he doth the part of an evangelist, that he fulfilleth the work and
ministry of Christ, that he is the watchman of the House of Israel,
receiveth answers and words at God's mouth; and even as he receiveth
them, so delivereth them over to the people: that he is the salt of the
earth: that he is the light of the world: that he doth not feed his own
self, but his flock: that he doth not entangle himself with the worldly
cares of this life: that he doth not use a sovereignty over the Lord's
people: that he seeketh not to have other men minister to him, but
himself rather to minister unto others: that he taketh all bishops as his
fellows and equals; that he is subject to princes, as to persons sent
from God: that he giveth to Caesar that which is Caesar's: and that he,
as the old bishops of Rome did without any question, calleth the emperor
his lord.  Unless, therefore, the popes do the like now-a-days, and Peter
did the things aforesaid, there is no cause at all why they should glory
so of Peter's name, and of his succession.

Much less cause have they to complain of our departing, and to call us
again to be fellows and friends with them, and to believe as they
believe.  Men say, that one Cobilon, a Lacedaemonian, when he was sent
ambassador to the king of the Persians to treat of a league, and found by
chance them of the court playing at dice, he returned straightway home
again, leaving his message undone.  And when he was asked why he did
slack to do the things which he had received by public commission to do,
he made answer, he thought it should be a great reproach to his
commonwealth to make a league with dicers.  But if we should content
ourselves to return to the Pope, and to his popish errors, and to make a
covenant not only with dicers, but also with men far more ungracious and
wicked than any dicers be; besides that this should be a great blot to
our good name, it should also be a very dangerous matter, both to kindle
God's wrath against us, and to clog and condemn our own souls for ever.
For of very truth we have departed from him, who we saw had blinded the
whole world this many a hundred year: from him, who too far
presumptuously was wont to say, "he could not err," and whatsoever he did
"no mortal man had power to condemn him, neither kings, nor emperors, nor
the whole clergy," nor yet all the people in the world together; no, and
though he should carry away with him to hell a thousand souls from him
who took upon him power to command, not only men, but even God's angels,
to go, to return, to lead souls into purgatory, and to bring them back
again when he list himself: whom Gregory said, without all doubt, is the
very forerunner and standard-bearer of Antichrist, and hath utterly
forsaken the Catholic faith, from whom also these ringleaders of ours,
who now with might and main resist the gospel, and the truth, which they
know to be the truth, have ere this departed every one of their own
accord and goodwill, and would even now also gladly depart from him, if
the note of inconstancy and shame, and their own estimation among the
people, were not a let unto them.  In conclusion, we have departed from
him, to whom we were not bound, and who had nothing to say for himself,
but only I know not what virtue or power of the place where he dwelleth,
and a continuance of succession.

And as for us, we of all others most justly have left him.  For our
kings, yea, even they which with greatest reverence did follow and obey
the authority and faith of the bishops of Rome, have long since found and
felt well enough the yoke and tyranny of the Pope's kingdom.  For the
bishops of Rome took the crown off from the head of our King Henry the
Second, and compelled him to put aside all majesty, and like a mere
private man to come unto their legate with great submission and humility,
so as all his subjects might laugh him to scorn.  More than this, they
caused bishops and monks, and some part of the nobility, to be in the
field against our King John, and set all the people at liberty from their
oaths, whereby they ought allegiance to their king; and at last, wickedly
and most abominably they bereaved the king, not only of his kingdom, but
also of his life.  Besides this, they excommunicated and cursed king
Henry the Eighth, that most famous prince, and stirred up against him,
sometime the Emperor, sometime the French king: and as much as in them
was, put in adventure our realm to have been a very prey and spoil.  Yet
were they but fools and mad, to think that either so mighty a prince
could be scared with bugs and rattles; or else, that so noble and great a
kingdom might so easily, even at one morsel, be devoured and swallowed
up.

And yet, as though all this were too little, they would needs make all
the realm tributary to them, and exacted thence yearly most unjust and
wrongful taxes.  So dear cost us the friendship of the city of Rome.
Wherefore, if they have gotten these things of us by extortion, through
their fraud and subtle sleights, we see no reason why we may not pluck
away the same from them again by lawful ways and just means.  And if our
kings in that darkness and blindness of former times, gave them these
things of their own accord and liberality for religion's sake, being
moved with a certain opinion of their feigned holiness; now when
ignorance and error is espied out, may the kings, their successors, take
them away again, seeing they have the same authority the kings their
ancestors had before.  For the gift is void, except it be hallowed by the
will of the giver, and that cannot seem a perfect will, which is dimmed
and hindered by error.




THE RECAPITULATION OF THE APOLOGY.


Thus, good Christian reader, ye see how it is no new thing, though at
this day the religion of Christ be entertained with despites and checks,
being but lately restored, and as it were, coming up again anew;
forsomuch as the like hath chanced both to Christ Himself and to His
Apostles: yet nevertheless, for fear ye may suffer yourself to be led
amiss and seduced with these exclamations of our adversaries, we have
declared at large unto you the very whole manner of our religion, what
our opinion is of God the Father, of His only Son Jesus Christ, of the
Holy Ghost, of the Church, of the Sacraments, of the ministry, of the
Scriptures, of ceremonies, and of every part of Christian belief.  We
have said, that we abandon and detest, as plagues and poisons, all those
old heresies which either the sacred Scriptures, or the ancient councils
have utterly condemned: that we call home again, as much as ever we can,
the right discipline of the Church, which our adversaries have quite
brought into a poor and weak case.  That we punish all licentiousness of
life, and unruliness of manners, by the old and long-continued laws, and
with as much sharpness as is convenient, and lieth in our power.  That we
maintain still the state of kingdoms, in the same condition and plight
wherein we have found them, without any diminishing or alteration,
reserving unto our princes their majesties and worldly pre-eminence, safe
and without impairing, to our possible power.  That we have so gotten
ourselves away from that Church, which they had made a den of thieves,
and wherein nothing was in good frame, or once like to the Church of God,
and which, themselves confessed, had erred many ways, even as Lot in
times past gat him out of Sodom, or Abraham out of Chaldea, not upon a
desire of contention, but by the warning of God Himself.  And that we
have searched out of the Holy Bible, which we are sure cannot deceive,
one sure form of religion, and have returned again unto the primitive
Church of the ancient fathers and Apostles; that is to say, to the first
ground and beginning of things, as unto the very foundations and
headsprings of Christ's Church.  And in very truth we have not tarried
for in this matter the authority or consent of the Tridentine council,
wherein we saw nothing done uprightly, nor by good order; where also
everybody was sworn to the maintenance of one man; where our prince's
ambassadors were contemned; where not one of our divines could be heard,
and where parts-taking and ambition was openly and earnestly procured and
wrought; but, as the holy fathers in former time, and as our predecessors
have commonly done, we have restored our churches by a provincial
convocation, and have clean shaken off, as our duty was, the yoke and
tyranny of the bishop of Rome, to whom we were not bound; who also had no
manner of thing like, neither to Christ, nor to Peter, nor to an Apostle,
nor yet like to any bishop at all.  Finally, we say, that we agree
amongst ourselves touching the whole judgment and chief substance of
Christian religion, and with one mouth, and with one spirit, do worship
God, and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Wherefore, O Christian and godly reader, forasmuch as thou seest the
reasons and causes, both why we have restored religion, and why we have
forsaken these men, thou oughtest not to marvel, though we have chosen to
obey our Master Christ, rather than men.  Paul hath given us warning how
we should not suffer ourselves to be carried away with such sundry
learnings, and to fly their companies, in especial, which would sow
debate and variances, clean contrary to the doctrine which they had
received of Christ and the Apostles.  Long since have these men's crafts
and treacheries decayed, and vanished, and fled away at the sight and
light of the Gospel, even as the owl doth at the sun-rising.  And albeit
their trumpery be built up, and reared as high as the sky, yea even, in a
moment, and as it were of the own self, falleth it down again to the
ground and cometh to nought.  For you must not think that all these
things have come to pass rashly, or at adventure; it hath been God's
pleasure, that, against all men's wills well nigh, the Gospel of Jesu
Christ should be spread abroad throughout the whole world at these days.
And, therefore, men, following God's biddings, have of their own free
will resorted unto the doctrine of Jesus Christ.  And for our parts,
truly we have sought hereby, neither glory, nor wealth, nor pleasure, nor
ease.  For there is plenty of all these things with our adversaries.  And
when we were of their side, we enjoyed such worldly commodities much more
liberally and bountifully than we do now.  Neither do we eschew concord
and peace, but to have peace with man we will not be at war with God.  The
name of peace is a sweet and pleasant thing, saith Hilarius; but yet
beware, saith he, "peace is one thing, and bondage is another."  For if
it should so be, as they seek to have it, that Christ should be commanded
to keep silence, that the truth of the Gospel should be betrayed, that
horrible errors should be cloaked, that Christian men's eyes should be
bleared, and that they might be suffered to conspire openly against God;
this were not a peace, but a most ungodly covenant of servitude.  There
is a peace, saith Nazianzen, that is unprofitable; again, there is a
discord, saith he, that is profitable.  For we must conditionally desire
peace, so far as is lawful before God, and so far as we may conveniently.
For otherwise Christ Himself brought not peace into the world, but a
sword.  Wherefore, if the pope will have us be reconciled to him, his
duty is first to be reconciled to God.  For from thence, saith Cyprian,
spring schisms and sects, because men seek not the Head, and have not
their recourse to the fountain (of the Scriptures), and keep not the
rules given by the heavenly Teacher.  For, saith he, that is not peace,
but war; neither is he joined unto the Church, which is severed from the
Gospel.  As for these men, they used to make a merchandise of the name of
peace.  For that peace which they so fain would have, is only a rest of
