instantly names it by its words when played on instruments. Such a voice
was given it by Lowell Mason's "Bethany," (1856). (Why not "Bethel,"
instead, every one who notes the imagery of the words must wonder.)
"Bethany" appealed to the popular heart, and long ago (in America) hymn
and tune became each other's property. It is even simpler than the
English tunes, and a single hearing fixes it in memory.


"I NEED THEE EVERY HOUR."

Mrs. Annie Sherwood Hawks, who wrote this hymn in 1872, was born in
Hoosick, N.Y., in 1835.

She sent the hymn (five stanzas) to Dr. Lowry, who composed its tune,
adding a chorus, to make it more effective. It first appeared in a small
collection of original songs prepared by Lowry and Doane for the
National Baptist Sunday School Association, which met at Cincinnati, O.,
November, 1872, and was sung there.

    I need Thee every hour,
      Most gracious Lord,
    No tender voice like Thine
      Can peace afford.

  CHORUS.
    I need Thee, Oh, I need Thee,
    Every hour I need Thee;
    Oh, bless me now, my Saviour,
      I come to Thee!

One instance, at least, of a hymn made doubly impressive by its chorus
will be attested by all who have sung or heard the pleading words and
music of Mrs. Hawks' and Dr. Lowry's "I need Thee, Oh, I need Thee."


"I GAVE MY LIFE FOR THEE."

This was written in her youth by Frances Ridley Havergal, and was
suggested by the motto over the head of Christ in the great picture,
"Ecce Homo," in the Art Gallery of Dusseldorf, Prussia, where she was at
school. The sight--as was the case with young Count Zinzendorf--seems to
have had much to do with the gifted girl's early religious experience,
and indeed exerted its influence on her whole life. The motto read "I
did this for thee; what doest thou for me?" and the generative effect of
the solemn picture and its question soon appeared in the hymn that
flowed from Miss Havergal's heart and pen.

    I gave my life for thee,
      My precious blood I shed,
    That thou might'st ransomed be
      And quickened from the dead.
    I gave my life for thee:
    What hast thou given for me?

Miss Frances Ridley Havergal, sometimes called "The Theodosia of the
19th century," was born at Astley, Worcestershire, Eng., Dec. 14, 1836.
Her father, Rev. William Henry Havergal, a clergyman of the Church of
England, was himself a poet and a skilled musician, and much of the
daughter's ability came to her by natural bequest as well as by
education. Born a poet, she became a fine instrumentalist, a composer
and an accomplished linguist. Her health was frail, but her life was a
devoted one, and full of good works. Her consecrated _words_ were
destined to outlast her by many generations.

"Writing is _praying_ with me," she said. Death met her in 1879, when
still in the prime of womanhood.


_THE TUNE._

The music that has made this hymn of Miss Havergal familiar in America
is named from its first line, and was composed by the lamented Philip P.
Bliss (christened Philipp Bliss[14]), a pupil of Dr. George F. Root.

[Footnote 14: Mr. Bliss himself changed the spelling of his name,
preferring to let the third P. do duty alone, as a middle initial.]

He was born in Rome, Pa., Jan. 9, 1838, and less than thirty-nine years
later suddenly ended his life, a victim of the awful railroad disaster
at Ashtabula O., Dec. 29, 1876, while returning from a visit to his aged
mother. His wife, Lucy Young Bliss, perished with him there, in the
swift flames that enveloped the wreck of the train.

The name of Mr. Bliss had become almost a household word through his
numerous popular Christian melodies, which were the American beginning
of the series of _Gospel Hymns_. Many of these are still favorite
prayer-meeting tunes throughout the country and are heard in
song-service at Sunday-school and city mission meetings.


"JESUS KEEP ME NEAR THE CROSS."

This hymn, one of the best and probably most enduring of Fanny J.
Crosby's sacred lyrics, was inspired by Col. 1:29.

Frances Jane Crosby (Mrs. Van Alstyne) the blind poet and hymnist, was
born in Southeast, N.Y., March 24, 1820. She lost her eyesight at the
age of six. Twelve years of her younger life were spent in the New York
Institution for the Blind, where she became a teacher, and in 1858 was
happily married to a fellow inmate, Mr. Alexander Van Alstyne, a
musician.

George F. Root was for a time musical instructor at the Institution, and
she began early to write words to his popular song-tunes. "Rosalie, the
Prairie Flower," and the long favorite melody, "There's Music in the
Air" are among the many to which she supplied the text and the song
name.

She resides in Bridgeport, Ct., where she enjoys a serene and happy old
age. She has written over six thousand hymns, and possibly will add
other pearls to the cluster before she goes up to join the singing
saints.

    Jesus, keep me near the Cross,
      There a precious Fountain
    Free to all, a healing stream,
      Flows from Calv'ry's mountain.

  CHORUS.
    In the Cross, in the Cross
      Be my glory ever,
    Till my raptured soul shall find
      Rest beyond the river.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Near the Cross! O Lamb of God,
      Bring its scenes before me;
    Help me walk from day to day
      With its shadows o'er me.

  CHORUS.

William Howard Doane, writer of the music to this hymn, was born in
Preston, Ct., Feb. 3, 1831. He studied at Woodstock Academy, and
subsequently acquired a musical education which earned him the degree of
Doctor of Music conferred upon him by Denison University in 1875. Having
a mechanical as well as musical gift, he patented more than seventy
inventions, and was for some years engaged with manufacturing concerns,
both as employee and manager, but his interest in song-worship and in
Sunday-school and church work never abated, and he is well known as a
trainer of choirs and composer of some of the best modern devotional
tunes. His home is in Cincinnati, O.


"I WOULD NOT LIVE ALWAY."

This threnody (we may almost call it) of W.A. Muhlenberg, illustrating
one phase of Christian experience, was the outpouring of a poetic
melancholy not uncommon to young and finely strung souls. He composed it
in his twenties,--long before he became "Doctor" Muhlenberg,--and for
years afterwards tried repeatedly to alter it to a more cheerful tone.
But the poem had its mission, and it had fastened itself in the public
imagination, either by its contagious sentiment or the felicity of its
tune, and the author was obliged to accept the fame of it as it
originally stood.

William Augustus Muhlenberg D.D. was born in Philadelphia, Sept. 16,
1796, the great-grandson of Dr. Henry M. Muhlenberg, founder of the
Lutheran church in America. In 1817 he left his ancestral communion, and
became an Episcopal priest.

As Rector of St. James church, Lancaster, Pa., he interested himself in
the improvement of ecclesiastical hymnody, and did much good reforming
work. After a noble and very active life as promoter of religious
education and Christian union, and as a friend and benefactor of the
poor, he died April, 8, 1877, in St. Luke's Hospital, N.Y.


_THE TUNE._

This was composed by Mr. George Kingsley in 1833, and entitled
"Frederick" (dedicated to the Rev. Frederick T. Gray). Issued first as
sheet music, it became popular, and soon found a place in the hymnals.
Dr. Louis Benson says of the conditions and the fancy of the time, "The
standard of church music did not differ materially from that of parlor
music.... Several editors have attempted to put a newer tune in the
place of Mr. Kingsley's. It was in vain, simply because words and melody
both appeal to the same taste."

[Illustration: Frances Ridley Havergal]


"SUN OF MY SOUL, MY SAVIOUR DEAR."

This gem from Keble's _Christian Year_ illustrates the life and
character of its pious author, and, like all the hymns of that
celebrated collection, is an incitive to spiritual thought for the
thoughtless, as well as a language for those who stand in the Holy of
Holies.

The Rev. John Keble was born in Caln, St. Aldwyn, April 25, 1792. He
took his degree of A.M. and was ordained and settled at Fairford, where
he began the parochial work that ceased only with his life. He died at
Bournmouth, March 29, 1866.

His settlement at Fairford, in charge of three small curacies, satisfied
his modest ambition, though altogether they brought him only about L100
per year. Here he preached, wrote his hymns and translations, performed
his pastoral work, and was happy. Temptation to wider fields and larger
salary never moved him.


_THE TUNE._

The music to this hymn of almost unparalleled poetic and spiritual
beauty was arranged from a German Choral of Peter Ritter (1760-1846) by
William Henry Monk, Mus. Doc., born London, 1823. Dr. Monk was a
lecturer, composer, editor, and professor of vocal music at King's
College. This noble tune appears sometimes under the name "Hursley" and
supersedes an earlier one ("Halle") by Thomas Hastings.

    Sun of my soul, my Saviour dear,
    It is not night if Thou be near.
    O may no earth-born cloud arise
    To hide Thee from Thy servants' eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

    Abide with me from morn till eve,
    For without Thee I cannot live
    Abide with me when night is nigh,
    For without Thee I cannot die.

The tune "Hursley" is a choice example of polyphonal sweetness in
uniform long notes of perfect chord.

The tune of "Canonbury," by Robert Schumann, set to Keble's hymn, "New
every morning is the love," is deservedly a favorite for flowing long
metres, but it could never replace "Hursley" with "Sun of my soul."


"DID CHRIST O'ER SINNERS WEEP?"

The Rev. Benjamin Beddome wrote this tender hymn-poem while pastor of
the Baptist Congregation at Bourton-on-the-water, Gloucestershire, Eng.
He was born at Henley, Chatwickshire, Jan. 23, 1717. Settled in 1743,
he remained with the same church till his death, Sept. 3, 1795. His
hymns were not collected and published till 1818.


_THE TUNE._

"Dennis," a soft and smoothly modulated harmony, is oftenest sung to the
words, and has no note out of sympathy with their deep feeling.

    Did Christ o'er sinners weep,
      And shall our cheeks be dry?
    Let floods of penitential grief
      Burst forth from every eye.

    The Son of God in tears
      Admiring angels see!
    Be thou astonished, O my soul;
      He shed those tears for thee.

    He wept that we might weep;
      Each sin demands a tear:
    In heaven alone no sin is found,
      And there's no weeping there.

The tune of "Dennis" was adapted by Lowell Mason from Johann Georg
Naegeli, a Swiss music publisher, composer and poet. He was born in
Zurich, 1768. It is told of him that his irrepressible genius once
tempted him to violate the ethics of authorship. While publishing
Beethoven's three great solo sonatas (Opus 31) he interpolated two bars
of his own, an act much commented upon in musical circles, but which
does not seem to have cost him Beethoven's friendship. Possibly, like
Murillo to the servant who meddled with his paintings, the great master
forgave the liberty, because the work was so good.

Naegeli's compositions are mostly vocal, for school and church use,
though some are of a gay and playful nature. The best remembered of his
secular and sacred styles are his blithe aria to the song of Moore,
"Life let us cherish, while yet the taper glows" and the sweet choral
that voices Beddome's hymn.


"MY JESUS, I LOVE THEE."

The real originator of the _Coronation Hymnal_, a book into whose making
went five years of prayer, was Dr. A.J. Gordon, late Pastor of the
Clarendon St. Baptist church, Boston. While the volume was slowly taking
form and plan he was wont to hum to himself, or cause to be played by
one of his family, snatches and suggestions of new airs that came to him
in connection with his own hymns, and others which seemed to have no
suitable music. The anonymous hymn, "My Jesus, I Love Thee," he found in
a London hymn-book, and though the tune to which it had been sung in
England was sent to him some time later, it did not sound sympathetic.
Dissatisfied, and with the ideal in his mind of what the feeling should
be in the melody to such a hymn, he meditated and prayed over the words
till in a moment of inspiration the beautiful air sang itself to him[15]
which with its simple concords has carried the hymn into the chapels of
every denomination.

[Footnote 15: The fact that this sweet melody recalls to some a similar
tune sung sixty years ago reminds us again of the story of the tune
"America." It is not impossible that an unconscious _memory_ helped to
shape the air that came to Dr. Gordon's mind; though unborrowed
similarities have been inevitable in the whole history of music.]

    My Jesus, I love Thee, I know Thou art mine,
    For Thee all the pleasures of sin I resign;
    My gracious Redeemer, my Saviour art Thou,
    If ever I loved Thee, my Jesus, 'tis now.

       *       *       *       *       *

    I will love Thee in life, I will love Thee in death,
    And praise Thee as long as Thou lendest me breath,
    And say when the death-dew lies cold on my brow,
    If ever I loved Thee, my Jesus, 'tis now.

    In mansions of glory and endless delight
    I'll ever adore Thee, unveiled to my sight,
    And sing, with the glittering crown on my brow,
    If ever I loved Thee, my Jesus, 'tis now.

The memory of the writer returns to a day in a railway-car en route to
the great Columbian Fair in Chicago when the tired passengers were
suddenly surprised and charmed by the music of this melody. A young
Christian man and woman, husband and wife, had begun to sing "My Jesus,
I love Thee." Their voices (a tenor and soprano) were clear and sweet,
and every one of the company sat up to listen with a look of mingled
admiration and relief. Here was something, after all, to make a long
journey less tedious. They sang all the four verses and paused. There
was no clapping of hands, for a reverential hush had been cast over the
audience by the sacred music. Instead of the inevitable applause that
follows mere entertainment, a gentle but eager request for more secured
the repetition of the delightful duet. This occurred again and again,
till every one in the car--and some had never heard the tune or words
before--must have learned them by heart. Fatigue was forgotten, miles
had been reduced to furlongs in a weary trip, and a company of strangers
had been lifted to a holier plane of thought.

Besides this melody there are four tunes by Dr. Gordon in his
collection, three of them with his own words. In all there are eleven of
his hymns. Of these the "Good morning in Glory," set to his music, is an
emotional lyric admirable in revival meetings, and the one beginning "O
Holy Ghost, Arise" is still sung, and called for affectionately as
"Gordon's Hymn."

Rev. Adoniram Judson Gordon D.D. was born in New Hampton, N.H., April
19, 1836, and died in Boston, Feb. 2d, 1895, after a life of unsurpassed
usefulness to his fellowmen and devotion to his Divine Master. Like
Phillips Brooks he went to his grave "in all his glorious prime," and
his loss is equally lamented. He was a descendant of John Robinson of
Leyden.




CHAPTER IV.

MISSIONARY HYMNS.


"JESUS SHALL REIGN WHERE'ER THE SUN."

One of Watts' sublimest hymns, this Hebrew ode to the final King and His
endless dominion expands the majestic prophesy in the seventy-second
Psalm:

    Jesus shall reign where'er the sun
    Does his successive journeys run,
    His kingdom stretch from shore to shore
    Till moons shall wax and wane no more.

The hymn itself could almost claim to be known "where'er the sun" etc.,
for Christian missionaries have sung it in every land, if not in every
language.

One of the native kings in the South Sea Islands, who had been converted
through the ministry of English missionaries, substituted a Christian
for a pagan constitution in 1862. There were five thousand of his
subjects gathered at the ceremonial, and they joined as with one voice
in singing this hymn.


_THE TUNE._

"Old Hundred" has often lent the notes of its great plain-song to the
sonorous lines, and "Duke Street," with superior melody and scarcely
inferior grandeur, has given them wings; but the choice of many for
music that articulates the life of the hymn would be the tune of
"Samson," from Handel's Oratorio so named. It appears as No. 469 in the
_Evangelical Hymnal_.

Handel had no peer in the art or instinct of making a note speak a word.


"JOY TO THE WORLD! THE LORD IS COME!"

This hymn, also by Watts, is often sung as a Christmas song; but "The
Saviour Reigns" and "He Rules the World" are bursts of prophetic triumph
always apt and stimulating in missionary meetings.

Here, again, the great Handel lends appropriate aid, for "Antioch," the
popular tone-consort of the hymn, is an adaptation from his "Messiah."
The arrangement has been credited to Lowell Mason, but he seems to have
taken it from an English collection by Clark of Canterbury.


"O'ER THE GLOOMY HILLS OF DARKNESS."

_Dros y brinian tywyl niwliog._

This notable hymn was written, probably about 1750, by the Rev. William
Williams, a Welsh Calvinistic Methodist, born at Cefnycoed, Jan. 7,
1717, near Llandovery. He began the study of medicine, but took deacon's
orders, and was for a time an itinerant preacher, having left the
established Church. Died at Pantycelyn, Jan. 1, 1781.

His hymn, like the two preceding, antedates the great Missionary
Movement by many years.

    O'er the gloomy hills of darkness
      Look my soul! be still, and gaze!
    See the promises advancing
      To a glorious Day of grace!
        Blessed Jubilee,
    Let thy glorious morning dawn!

    Let the dark, benighted pagan,
      Let the rude barbarian see
    That divine and glorious conquest
      Once obtained on Calvary.
        Let the Gospel
    Loud resound from pole to pole.

This song of anticipation has dropped out of the modern hymnals, but the
last stanza lingers in many memories.

    Fly abroad, thou mighty Gospel!
      Win and conquer, never cease;
    May thy lasting wide dominion
      Multiply and still increase.
        Sway Thy scepter,
    Saviour, all the world around!


_THE TUNE._

Oftener than any other the music of "Zion" has been the expression of
William Williams' Missionary Hymn. It was composed by Thomas Hastings,
in Washington, Ct., 1830.


"HASTEN, LORD, THE GLORIOUS TIME."

    Hasten, Lord, the glorious time
      When beneath Messiah's sway
    Every nation, every clime
      Shall the Gospel call obey.
    Mightiest kings its power shall own,
      Heathen tribes His name adore,
    Satan and his host o'erthrown
      Bound in chains shall hurt no more.

Miss Harriet Auber, the author of this melodious hymn, was a daughter of
James Auber of London, and was born in that city, Oct. 4, 1773. After
leaving London she led a secluded life at Broxbourne and Hoddesdon, in
Hertfordshire, writing devotional poetry and sacred songs and
paraphrases.

Her _Spirit of the Psalms_, published in 1829, was a collection of
lyrics founded on the Biblical Psalms. "Hasten Lord," etc., is from Ps.
72, known for centuries to Christendom as one of the Messianic Psalms.
Her best-known hymns have the same inspiration, as--

    Wide, ye heavenly gates, unfold.

    Sweet is the work, O Lord.

    With joy we hail the sacred day.

Miss Auber died in Hoddesdon, Jan. 20, 1862. She lived to witness and
sympathise with the pioneer missionary enterprise of the 19th century,
and, although she could not stand among the leaders of the battle-line
in extending the conquest of the world for Christ, she was happy in
having written a campaign hymn which they loved to sing. (It is curious
that so pains-taking a work as Julian's _Dictionary of Hymns and
Hymn-writers_ credits "With joy we hail the sacred day" to both Miss
Auber and Henry Francis Lyte. Coincidences are known where different
hymns by different authors begin with the same line; and in this case
one writer was dead before the other's works were published. Possibly
the collector may have seen a forgotten hymn of Lyte's, with that first
line.)

The tune that best interprets this hymn in spirit and in living _music_
is Lowell Mason's "Eltham." Its harmony is like a chime of bells.


"LET PARTY NAMES NO MORE."

    Let party names no more
      The Christian world o'erspread;
    Gentile and Jew, and bond and free,
      Are one in Christ the Head.

This hymn of Rev. Benjamin Beddome sounds like a prelude to the grand
rally of the Christian Churches a generation later for united advance
into foreign fields. It was an after-sermon hymn--like so many of Watts
and Doddridge--and spoke a good man's longing to see all sects stand
shoulder to shoulder in a common crusade.

Tune--Boylston.


"WATCHMAN, TELL US OF THE NIGHT."

The tune written to this pealing hymn of Sir John Bowring by Lowell
Mason has never been superseded. In animation and vocal splendor it
catches the author's own clear call, echoing the shout of Zion's
sentinels from city to city, and happily reproducing in movement and
phrase the great song-dialogue. Words and music together, the piece
ranks with the foremost missionary lyrics. Like the greater Mason-Heber
world-song, it has acquired no arbitrary name, appearing in Mason's own
tune-books under its first hymn-line and likewise in many others. A few
hymnals have named it "Bowring," (and why not?) and some later ones
simply "Watchman."

      1.
    Watchman, tell us of the night.
      What its signs of promise are!
              (Antistrophe)
    Traveler, on yon mountain height.
      See that glory-beaming star!

      2
    Watchman, does its beauteous ray
      Aught of hope or joy foretell?
              (Antistrophe)
    Trav'ler, yes; it brings the day,
      Promised day of Israel.

      3
    Watchman, tell us of the night;
      Higher yet that star ascends.
              (Antistrophe)
    Trav'ler, blessedness and light
      Peace and truth its course portends.

      4
    Watchman, will its beams alone
      Gild the spot that gave them birth?
              (Antistrophe)
    Trav'ler, ages are its own.
      See! it bursts o'er all the earth.


"YE CHRISTIAN HERALDS, GO PROCLAIM."

In some versions "Ye Christian _heroes_," etc.

Professor David R. Breed attributes this stirring hymn to Mrs. Vokes (or
Voke) an English or Welsh lady, who is supposed to have written it
somewhere near 1780, and supports the claim by its date of publication
in _Missionary and Devotional Hymns_ at Portsea, Wales, in 1797. In this
Dr. Breed follows (he says) "the accepted tradition." On the other hand
the _Coronation Hymnal_ (1894) refers the authorship to a Baptist
minister, the Rev. Bourne Hall Draper, of Southampton (Eng.), born 1775,
and this choice has the approval of Dr. Charles Robinson. The question
occurs whether, when the hymn was published in good faith as Mrs.
Vokes', it was really the work of a then unknown youth of twenty-two.

The probability is that the hymn owns a mother instead of a father--and
a grand hymn it is; one of the most stimulating in Missionary
song-literature.

The stanza--

    God shield you with a wall of fire!
    With flaming zeal your breasts inspire;
    Bid raging winds their fury cease,
    And hush the tumult into peace,

--has been tampered with by editors, altering the last line to "Calm the
troubled seas," etc., (for the sake of the longer vowel;) but the
substitution, "_He'll_ shield you," etc., in the first line, turns a
prayer into a mere statement.

The hymn was--and should remain--a God-speed to men like William
Carey, who had already begun to think and preach his immortal motto,
"Attempt great things for God; expect great things of God."


_THE TUNE_

Is the "Missionary Chant," and no other. Its composer, Heinrich
Christopher Zeuner, was born in Eisleben, Saxony, Sept. 20, 1795. He
came to the United States in 1827, and was for many years organist at
Park Street Church, Boston, and for the Handel and Haydn Society. In
1854 he removed to Philadelphia where he served three years as organist
to St. Andrews Church, and Arch Street Presbyterian. He became insane in
1857, and in November of that year died by his own hand.

He published an oratorio "The Feast of Tabernacles," and two popular
books, the _American Harp_, 1832, and _The Ancient Lyre_, 1833. His
compositions are remarkably spirited and vigorous, and his work as a
tune-maker was much in demand during his life, and is sure to continue,
in its best examples, as long as good sacred music is appreciated.

To another beautiful missionary hymn of Mrs. Vokes, of quieter tone, but
songful and sweet, Dr. Mason wrote the tune of "Migdol." It is its
musical twin.

    Soon may the last glad song arise
    Through all the millions of the skies.
    That song of triumph which records
    That "all the earth is now the Lord's."


"ON THE MOUNTAIN TOP APPEARING."

This admired and always popular church hymn was written near the
beginning of the last century by the Rev. Thomas Kelly, born in Dublin,
1760. He was the son of the Hon. Chief Baron Thomas Kelly of that city,
a judge of the Irish Court of Common Pleas. His father designed him for
the legal profession, but after his graduation at Trinity College he
took holy orders in the Episcopal Church, and labored as a clergyman
among the scenes of his youth for more than sixty years, becoming a
Nonconformist in his later ministry. He was a sweet-souled man, who made
troops of friends, and was honored as much for his piety as for his
poetry, music, and oriental learning.

"I expect never to die," he said, when Lord Plunkett once told him he
would reach a great age. He finished his earthly work on the 14th of
May, 1855, when he was eighty-five years old. But he still lives. His
zeal for the coming of the Kingdom of Christ prompted his best hymn.

