
           [Footnote 195: _Lima-loa_. The long-armed, the god of the
           mirage, who made his appearance at Mana, Kauai.]

           [Footnote 196: _Poloai_. To converse with, to have dealings
           with one.]

           [Footnote 197: _Koolau-wahine_. The sea-breeze at Mana. There
           is truth as well as poetry in the assertion made in this
           verse. The warm moist air, rising from the heated sands of
           Mana, did undoubtedly draw in the cool breeze from the
           ocean--a fruitful dalliance.]

           [Footnote 198: _Kino-lau_. Having many (400) bodies, or
           metamorphoses, said of Kawelo.]

           [Footnote 199: _Kawelo_. A sorcerer who lived in the region of
           Mana. His favorite metamorphosis was into the form of a
           shark. Even when in human form he retained the gills of a
           fish and had the mouth of a shark at the back of his
           shoulders, while to the lower part of his body were attached
           the tail and flukes of a shark. To conceal these monstrous
           appendages he wore over his shoulders a _kihei_ of kapa and
           allowed himself to be seen only while in the sitting posture.
           He sometimes took the form of a worm, a moth, a caterpillar,
           or a butterfly to escape the hands of his enemies. On land he
           generally appeared as a man squatting, after the manner of a
           Hawaiian gardener while weeding his garden plot.

           The cultivated lands of Kawelo lay alongside the
           much-traveled path to the beach where the people of the
           neighborhood resorted to bathe, to fish, and to swim in the
           ocean. He made a practice of saluting the passers-by and of
           asking them, "Whither are you going?" adding the caution,
           "Look to it that you are not swallowed head and tail by the
           shark; he has not breakfasted yet" (_E akahele oukou o pau
           po'o, pau hi'u i ka mano; aohe i paina i kakahiaka o ka
           mano_). As soon as the traveler had gone on his way to the
           ocean, Kawelo hastened to the sea and there assumed his
           shark-form. The tender flesh of children was his favorite
           food. The frequent utterance of the same caution, joined to
           the great mortality among the children and youth who resorted
           to the ocean at this place, caused a panic among the
           residents. The parents consulted a soothsayer, who surprised
           them with the information that the guilty one was none other
           than the innocent-looking farmer, Kawelo. Instructed by the
           soothsayer, the people made an immense net of great strength
           and having very fine meshes. This they spread in the ocean at
           the bathing place. Kawelo, when caught in the net, struggled
           fiendishly to break away, but in vain. According to
           directions, they flung the body of the monster into an
           enormous oven which they had heated to redness, and supplied
           with fresh fuel for five times ten days--_elima anahulu_. At
           the end of that time there remained only gray ashes. The
           prophet had commanded them that when this had been
           accomplished they must fill the pit of the oven with dry
           dirt; thus doing, the monster would never come to life. They
           neglected this precaution. A heavy rain flooded the
           country--the superhuman work of the sorcerer--and from the
           moistened ashes sprang into being a swarm of lesser sharks.
           From them have come the many species of shark that now infest
           our ocean.

           The house which once was Kawelo's ocean residence is still
           pointed out, 7 fathoms deep, a structure regularly built of
           rocks.]

           [Footnote 200: _Maha-maha i'a_. The gills or fins of a fish
           such as marked Kawelo.]

           [Footnote 201: _Aona_. A word of doubtful meaning; according
           to one it means lucky. That expounder (T---- P----) says it
           should, or-might be, _haona_; he instances the phrase _iwi
           paou_, in which the word _paoa_ has a similar, but not
           identical, form and means lucky bone.]

           [Footnote 202: _Ka-maile_. A place on Kauai where prevailed the
           custom of throwing firebrands down the lofty precipice of
           Nuololo. This amusement made a fine display at night. As the
           fire-sticks fell they swayed and drifted in the breeze,
           making it difficult for one standing below to premise their
           course through the air and to catch one of them before it
           struck the ground or the water, that being one of the objects
           of the sport. When a visitor had accomplished this feat, he
           would sometimes mark his flesh with the burning stick that he
           might show the brand to his sweetheart as a token of his
           fidelity.]

                              [Translation]

                                 _Song_

                                CANTO IV

                I will not chase the mirage of Mana,
                That man-fooling mist of god Lima-loa,
                Which still deceives the stranger--
                And came nigh fooling me--the tricksy water!
            5   The mirage of Mana, is a fraud; it
                Wantons with the witch Koolau.
                A friend has turned up at Wailua,
                Changeful Kawelo, with gills like a fish,
                Has power to bring luck in any queer shape.
           10   As a stranger now am I living,
                Aye, living.
                You flaunt like a person of wealth,
                Yours the fish, till it comes to my hook.
                I am blest at receiving from you:
           15   Like fire-sticks flung at Ka-maile--
                The visitor vainly chases the brand:
                Fool! he burns his flesh to gain, the red mark,
                A sign for the girl he loves, oho!

                                 _Mele_

                                 PALE V

                  (Ai-ha'a, a he Ko'i-honua paha)

                Kauhua Ku, ka Lani, i-loli ka moku;
                Hookohi ke kua-koko o ka Lani;
                He kua-koko, pu-koko i ka honua;
                He kna-koko kapu no ka Lani;
[Page 81]   5   He ko'i ula ana a maku'i i ka ala,
                Hoomau ku-wa mahu ia,
                Ka maka o ke ahi alii e a nei.
                Ko mai ke keiki koko a ka Lani,
                Ke keiki he nuuhiwa ia Hitu-kolo,
           10   O ke keiki hiapo anuenue, iloko o ka manawa,
                O hi ka wai nui o ka nuuhiwa a Ke-opu-o-lani,
                O ua alii lani alewa-lewa nei,
                E u-lele, e ku nei ma ka lani;
                O ka Lani o na mu'o-lau o Liliha,
           15   Ka hakina, ka pu'e, ka maka, o Kuhi-hewa a Lola--
                Kalola, nana ke keiki laha-laha;
                Ua kela, he kela ka pakela
                O na pahi'a loa o ka pu likoliko i ka lani
                O kakoo hulu manu o o-ulu,
           20   O ka hulu o-ku'i lele i ka lani,
                O hiapo o ka manu leina a Pokahi,
                O Ka-lani-opu'u hou o ka moku,
                O na kupuna koikoi o Keoua, o ka Lani Kui-apo-iwa.

                              [Translation]

                                 _Song_

                                CANTO V

(To be recited in bombastic style, or, it may be, distinctly)

                Big with child is the Princess Ku;
                The whole island suffers her whimsies;
                The pangs of labor are on her;
                Labor that stains the land with blood,
            5   Blood-clots of the heavenly born,
                To preserve and guard the royal line,
                The spark of king-fire now glowing:
                A child is he of heavenly stock,
                Like the darling of Hitu-kolo,
           10   First womb-fruit born to love's rainbow.
                A bath for this child of heaven's breast,
                This mystical royal offspring,
                Who ranks with the heavenly peers,
                This tender bud of Liliha,
           15   This atom, this parcel, this flame,
                In the line Kuhi-hewa of Lola--
                Ka-lola, who mothered a babe prodigious,
                For glory and splendor renowned,
                A scion most comely from heaven,
           20   The finest down of the new-grown plume,
                From bird whose moult floats to heaven,
                Prime of the soaring birds of Pokahi,
                The prince, heaven-flower of the island,
                Ancestral sire of Ke-oua,
           25   And of King Kui-apo-iwa.

[Page 82]

           The heaping up of adulations, of which this mele is a capital
           instance, was not peculiar to Hawaiian poetry. The Roman
           Senate bestowed divinity on its emperors by vote; the
           Hawaiian bard laureate, careering on his Pegasus, thought to
           accomplish the same end by piling Ossa on Pelion with
           high-flown phrases; and every loyal subject added his
           contribution to the cairn that grew heavenward.

           In Hawaii, as elsewhere, the times of royal debasement, of
           aristocratic degeneracy, of doubtful or disrupted succession,
           have always been the times of loudest poetic insistence on
           birth-rank and the occasion for the most frenzied utterance
           of high-sounding titles. This is a disease that has grown
           with the decay of monarchy.

           Applying this criterion to the mele above given, it may be
           judged to be by no means a product wholly of the archaic
           period. While certain parts, say from the first to the tenth
           verses, inclusive, bear the mark of antiquity, the other
           parts do not ring clear. It seems as if some poet of
           comparatively modern times had revamped an old mele to suit
           his own ends. Of this last part two verses were so glaringly
           an interpolation that they were expunged from the text.

           The effort to translate into pure Anglo-Saxon this vehement
           outpour of high-colored phrases has made heavy demands on the
           vocabulary and has strained the idioms of our speech
           well-nigh to the point of protest.

           In lines 1, 2, 4, 8, 14, and 23 the word _Lani_ means a
           prince or princess, a high chief or king, a heavenly one. In
           lines 12, 13, 18, and 20 the same word _lani_ means the
           heavens, a concept in the Hawaiian mind that had some
           far-away approximation to the Olympus of classic Greece.

                                 _Mele_

                Ooe no paha ia, e ka lau o ke aloha,
                Oia no paha ia ke kau mai nei ka hali'a.
                Ke hali'a-li'a mai nei ka maka,
                Manao hiki mai no paha an anei.
            5   Hiki mai no la ia, na wai e uwe aku?
                Ua pau kau la, kau ike iaia;
                Ka manawa oi' e ai ka manao iloko.
                Ua luu iho nei an i ke kai nui;
                Nui ka ukiuki, paio o ka naau.
           10   Aone kanaka eha ole i ke aloha.
                A wahine e oe, kanaka e au;
                He mau alualu ka ha'i e lawe.
                Ike aku i ke kula i'a o Ka-wai-nui.
                Nui ka opala ai o Moku-lana.
           15   Lana ka limu pae hewa o Makau-wahine.
                O ka wahine no oe, o ke kane no ia.
                Hiki mai no la ia, na wai e uwe aku?
                Hoi mai no la ia, a ia wai e uwe aku?

[Page 83]

                                   [Translation]

                                       _Song_

                Methinks it is you, leaf plucked from Love's tree,
                You mayhap, that stirs my affection.
                There's a tremulous glance of the eye,
                The thought she might chance yet to come:
            5   But who then would greet her with song?
                Your day has flown, your vision of her--
                A time this for gnawing the heart.
                I've plunged just now in deep waters:
                Oh the strife and vexation of soul!
           10   No mortal goes scathless of love.
                A wife thou estranged, I a husband estranged,
                Mere husks to be cast to the swine.[203]
                Look, the swarming of fish at the weir!
                Their feeding grounds on the reef
           15   Are waving with mosses abundant.
                Thou art the woman, that one your man--
                At her coming who'll greet her with song?
                Her returning, who shall console?

           [Footnote 203: In the original, _He mau alualu ka, ha'i e
           lawe_, literally "Some skins for another to take."]

           This song almost explains itself. It is the soliloquy of a
           lover estranged from his mistress. Imagination is alive in
           eye and ear to everything that may bring tidings of her, even
           of her unhoped-for return. Sometimes he speaks as if
           addressing the woman who has gone from him, or he addresses
           himself, or he personifies some one who speaks to him, as in
           the sixth line: "Your day has flown, ..."

           The memory of past vexation and anguish extorts the
           philosophic remark, "No mortal goes scathless of love." He
           gives over the past, seeks consolation in a new
           attachment--he dives, _lu'u_, into the great ocean, "deep
           waters," of love, at least in search of love. The old self
           (selves), the old love, he declares to be only _alualu_,
           empty husks.

           He--it is evidently a man--sets forth the wealth of comfort,
           opulence, that surrounds him in his new-found peace. The
           scene, being laid in the land Kailua, Oahu--the place to
           which the enchanted tree _Maka-lei_[204] was carried long ago,
           from which time its waters abounded in fish--fish are
           naturally the symbol of the opulence that now bless his life.
           But, in spite of the new-found peace and prosperity that
           attend him, there is a lonely corner in his heart; the old
           question echoes in its vacuum, "Who'll greet her with song?
           who shall console?"

           [Footnote 204: _Maka-lei_. (See note _b_, p. 17.)]

[Page 84]

                              _Mele_

                O Ewa, aina kai ula i ka lepo,
                I ula i ka makani anu Moa'e,
                Ka manu ula i ka lau ka ai,
                I palahe'a ula i ke kai o Kuhi-a.

            5   Mai kuhi mai oukou e, owau ke kalohe;
                Aohe na'u, na lakou no a pau.
                Aohe hewa kekahi keiki a ke kohe.
                Ei' a'e; oia no palm ia.
                I lono oukou ia wai, e, ua moe?

           10   Oia kini poai o lakou la paha?
                Ike aku ia ka mau'u hina-hina--
                He hina ko'u, he aka mai ko ia la.
                I aka mai oe i kou la manawa le'a;
                A manawa ino, nui mai ka nuku,

           15   Hoomokapu, hoopale mai ka maka,
                Hoolahui wale mai i a'u nei.
                E, oia paha; ae, oia no paha ia.

                           [Translation]

                               _Song_

                Ewa's lagoon is red with dirt--
                Dust blown by the cool Moa'e,
                A plumage red on the taro leaf,
                An ocherous tint in the bay.

            5   Say not in your heart that I am the culprit.
                Not I, but they, are at fault.
                No child of the womb is to blame.
                There goes, likely he is the one.
                Who was it blabbed of the bed defiled?

           10   It must have been one of that band.
                But look at the rank grass beat down--
                For my part, I tripped, the other one smiled.
                You smiled in your hour of pleasure;
                But now, when crossed, how you scold!

           15   Avoiding the house, averting the eyes--
                You make of me a mere stranger.
                Yes it's probably so, he's the one.

           A poem this full of local color. The plot of the story, as it
           may be interpreted, runs somewhat as follows: While the man
           of the house, presumably, is away, it would seem--fishing,
           perhaps, in the waters of Ewa's "shamrock lagoon"--the
           mistress sports with a lover. The culprit impudently defends
           himself with chaff and dust-throwing. The hoodlums, one of
           whom is himself the sinner, have been blabbing, says he.
[Page 85]
           His accuser points to the beaten down _hina-hina_ grass as
           evidence against him. At this the brazen-faced culprit
           parries the stroke with a humorous euphemistic description,
           in which he plays on the word _hina_, to fall. Such verbal
           tilting in ancient Hawaii was practically a defense against a
           charge of moral obliquity as decisive and legitimate as was
           an appeal to arms in the times of chivalry. He
           euphemistically speaks of the beaten herbage as the result of
           his having tripped and fallen, at which, says he, the woman
           smiled, that is she fell in with his proposals. He gives
           himself away; but that doesn't matter.

           It requires some study to make out who is the speaker in the
           tit-for-tat of the dialogue.


                               _Mele_

                             (Ai-ha'a)

                He lua i ka Hikina,
                Ua ena e Pele;
                Ke haoloolo e la ke ao,
                Ke lele la i-luna, i-lalo;
            5   Kawewe ka o-o i-lalo i akea;
                A ninau o Wakea,
                Owai nei akua e eli nei?
                Owan no, o Pele,
                Nona i eli aku ka lua i Niihau a a.

           10   He lua i Niihau, ua ena e Pele.
                He haoloolo e la ke ao,
                Ke lele la i-luna, i-lalo;
                Kawewe ka o-o i-lalo i akea;
                A ninau o Wakea,
           15   Owai nei akua e eli nei?
                Owau no, o Pele,
                Nana i eli aku ka lua i Kauai a a.

                He lua i Kauai ua ena e Pele.
                Ke haoloolo e la ke ao,
           20   Ke lele la i-luna, i-lalo;
                Kawewe ka o-o i-Ialo i akea;
                Ninau o Wakea,
                Owai nei akua e eli nei?
                Owau no, o Pele,
           25   Nana i eli ka lua i Oahu a a.

                He lua i Oahu, ua ena e Pele.
                Ke haoloolo e la ke ao,
                Ke lele la i-luna, i-lalo;
                Kawewe ka o-o i-lalo i akea;
           30   A ninau o Wakea,
                Owai nei akua e eli nei?
                Owau no, o Pele,
                Nana i eli ka lua i Molokai a a.

[Page 86]       He lua i Molokai, ua ena e Pele.
           35   Ke haoloolo e la ke ao,
                Ke lele la i-luna, i-lalo;
                Kawewe ka o-o i-lalo, i akea.
                Ninau o Wakea,
                Owai nei akua e eli nei?
           40   Owau no, o Pele,
                Nana i eli aku ka lua i Lanai a a.

                He lua i Lanai, ua ena e Pele.
                Ke haoloolo e la ke ao,
                Ke lele la i-luna, i-lalo;
           45   Kawewe ka o-o i-lalo i akea.
                Ninau o Wakea,
                Owai nei akua e eli nei?
                Owau no, o Pele,
                Nana i eli aku ka lua i Maul a a.

           50   He lua i Maui, ua ena e Pele.
                Ke haoloolo e la ke ao,
                Ke lele la i-luna, i-lalo;
                Kawewe ka o-o i-lalo, i akea.
                Ninau o Wakea,
           55   Owai, nei akua e eli nei?
                Owau no, o Pele,
                Nana i eli aku ka lua i Hu'ehu'e a a.

                He lua i Hu'ehu'e, ua ena e Pele.
                Ke haoloolo e la ke ao,
           60   Ke lele la i-luna, i-lalo;
                Kawewe ka o-o i-lalo, i akea.
                Eli-eli, kau mai!

                           [Translation]

                              _Song_

                          (In turgid style)

                A pit lies (far) to the East,
                Pit het by the Fire-queen Pele.
                Heaven's dawn is lifted askew,
                One edge tilts up, one down, in the sky;
            5   The thud of the pick is heard in the ground.
                The question is asked by Wakea,
                What god's this a-digging?
                It is I, it is Pele,
                Who dug Mihau deep down till it burned,
           10   Dug fire-pit red-heated by Pele.

                Night's curtains are drawn to one side,
                One lifts, one hangs in the tide.
                Crunch of spade resounds in the earth.
                Wakea 'gain urges the query,
           15   What god plies the spade in the ground?
                Quoth Pele, 'tis I:
[Page 87]       I mined to the fire neath Kauai,
                On Kauai I dug deep a pit,
                A fire-well flame-fed by Pele.

           20   The heavens are lifted aslant,
                One border moves up and one down;
                There's a stroke of o-o 'neath the ground.
                Wakea, in earnest, would know,
                What demon's a-grubbing below?
           25   I am the worker, says Pele:
                Oahu I pierced to the quick,
                A crater white-heated by Pele.

                Now morn lights one edge of the sky;
                The light streams up, the shadows fall down;
           30   There's a clatter of tools deep down.
                Wakea, in passion, demands,
                What god this who digs 'neath the ground?
                It is dame Pele who answers;
                Hers the toil to dig down to fire,
           35   To dig Molokai and reach fire.

                Now morning peeps from the sky
                With one eye open, one shut.
                Hark, ring of the drill 'neath the plain!
                Wakea asks you to explain,
           40   What imp is a-drilling below?
                It is I, mutters Pele:
                I drilled till flame shot forth on Lanai,
                A pit candescent by Pele.

                The morning looks forth aslant;
           45   Heaven's curtains roll up and roll down;
                There's a ring of o-o 'neath the sod.
                Who, asks Wakea, the god,
                Who is this devil a-digging?
                'Tis I, 'tis Pele, I who
           50   Dug on Maui the pit to the fire:
                Ah, the crater of Maui,
                Red-glowing with Pele's own fire!

                Heaven's painted one side by the dawn,
                Her curtains half open, half drawn;
           55   A rumbling is heard far below.
                Wakea insists he will know
                The name of the god that tremors the land.
                'Tis I, grumbles Pele,
                I have scooped out the pit Hu'e-hu'e,
           60   A pit that reaches to fire,
                A fire fresh kindled by Pele.

                Now day climbs up to the East;
                Morn folds the curtains of night;
                The spade of sapper resounds 'neath the plain:
           65   The goddess is at it again!
[Page 88]
           This mele comes to us stamped with the hall-mark of
           antiquity. It is a poem of mythology, but with what story it
           connects itself, the author knows not.

           The translation here given makes no profession of absolute,
           verbal literalness. One can not transfer a metaphor bodily,
           head and horns, from one speech to another. The European had
           to invent a new name for the boomerang or accept the name by
           which the Australian called it. The Frenchman, struggling
           with the English language, told a lady he was _gangrened_, he
           meant he was _mortified_. The cry for literalism is the cry
           for an impossibility; to put the chicken back into its shell,
           to return to the bows and arrows of the stone age.

           To make the application to the mele in question: the word
           _hu-olo-olo_, for example, which is translated in several
           different ways in the poem, is of such generic and
           comprehensive meaning that one word fails to express its
           meaning. It is, by the way, not a word to be found in any
           dictionary. The author had to grope his way to its meaning by
           following the trail of some Hawaiian pathfinder who, after
           beating about the bush, finally had to acknowledge that the
           path had become so much overgrown since he last went that way
           that he could not find it.

           The Arabs have a hundred or more words meaning
           sword--different kinds of swords. To them our word sword is
           very unspecific. Talk to an Arab of a sword--you may exhaust
           the list of special forms that our poor vocabulary compasses,
           straight sword, broadsword, saber, scimitar, yataghan,
           rapier, and what hot, and yet not hit the mark of Ms
           definition.

                                  _Mele_

                Haku'i ka uahi o ka lua, pa i ka lani;
                Ha'aha'a Hawaii, moku o Keawe i hanau ia.
                Kiekie ke one o Malama ia Lohiau,
                I a'e 'a mai e ke alii o Kahiki,
            5   Nana i hele kai uli, kai ele,
                Kai popolo-hu'a a Kane,
                Ka wa i po'i ai ke Kai-a-ka-Mna-lii,
                Kai nu'u, kai lewa.

                Hoopua o Kane i ka la'i;
           10   Pa uli-hiwa mai la ka uka o ke ahi a Laka,
                Oia wahine kihene lehua o Hopoe,
                Pu'e aku-o na hala,
                Ka hala o Panaewa,
                O Panaewa nui, moku lehua;
           15   Ohia kupu ha-o'e-o'e;
                Lehua ula, i will ia e lie ahi.
                A po, e!

                Po Puna, po Hilo!
                Po i ka uahi o ku'u aina.
           20   Ola ia kini!
                Ke a mai la ke ahi!
[Page 89]
