think sadly of the Child-that-Was.  But we bring the love that we might
have given and did give, to lavish it upon the Child-that-Is.  We think
hopefully of the Child-that-Is-to-Be, but we realize that all his
possibilities are locked in the Child-that-Is.  And so the world's
future salvation is in our cradles, in our homes and in our nurseries
to-day.  To train our Children for God is the highest of all high tasks.

And notice that this woman was to receive wages for her work.  What
were her wages?  I suppose the princess sent down a little coin at the
end of each week, but do you think that is all the pay that this mother
got?  I feel confident that she never counted this as pay at all.  But
she received her reward, she received her wages.  And they were wages
that were rich in worth beyond all our fondest dreams.  First, there
was given unto her the fine privilege of loving.  And Paul, who knew
what was priceless, Paul, who knew what was of supreme value, said that
love was the soul's finest treasure.  And he meant not the privilege of
being loved, as fine as that is, but the higher privilege of loving.
And it has been given by the grace of God to the mothers of men to be
the world's greatest lovers.

  "If I were hanged on the highest hill,
    Mother o' mine, O mother o' mine!
  I know whose love would follow me still,
    Mother o' mine, O mother o' mine!

  "If I were drowned in the deepest sea,
    Mother o' mine, O mother o' mine!
  I know whose tears would come down to me,
    Mother o' mine, O mother o' mine!

  "If I were damned of body and soul,
    I know whose prayers would make me whole,
  Mother o' mine, O mother o' mine!"


To her was given, in the second place, the fine reward of
self-sacrifice.  She had the privilege of giving.  She had the
privilege of offering her life a willing sacrifice upon the altar of
her home.  It is blessed to receive, but it is more blessed to give.
And the rewards of motherhood are the highest rewards because she is
the most godlike giver that this world knows.

Then, she was rewarded, in the third place, by the making of a great
life.  She became the mother of a good man.  Her faith became his
faith.  "By faith Moses was hidden."  That was by his mother's faith.
But in the next verse we read this, "By faith Moses, when he was come
to years, refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter."  That
was by his own faith.  Where did he get that rare jewel?  He got it
from the training of his mother.  He saw it in her life.  It looked out
from her eyes.  It spoke through her lips.  He drank it in as he lay in
her arms.

"When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which
dwelt first in thy grandmother Lois and in thy mother Eunice, and I am
persuaded is in thee also."  Oh, if you are here a man of faith, a
woman of faith, the chances are you secured that precious treasure at
the hands of a God-loving and a God-trusting mother.

So this despised slave woman, this mother has this to her credit, that
she mothered and trained one of the greatest men that ever set foot on
this earth.  She took a little boy named Moses to her heart and trained
him for God.  She had him for a little while.  Then he went away to the
big University.  But he stood true.  She speaks to him as she holds him
close in the twilight.  She says, "Laddie, do not forget how God has
watched over you.  One day when death was suspended above your baby
head by a thread, one day when your life was frailer than a gossamer
thread, I took a queer little basket and lined it with pitch, and also
with faith and with prayer.  And I put you afloat, and God preserved
you and sent you back into these arms.  And I carried you and cared for
you.  And now when you are grown you won't forget.  You won't prove
disloyal to your mother and you won't forget your mother's God."

And Moses did not forget.  And one day the little laddie who had once
been carried about in the arms of a slave mother, was a big
broad-shouldered man.  And he had a big broad-shouldered faith, and he
trusted in a big broad-shouldered God.  And in the strength of that
faith, and in the might of that God he lifted an enslaved people in his
arms and carried them clean across the wilderness.  And he made
possible an Isaiah and a Jeremiah and a David.  And he made possible
the birth of Jesus Christ.  And he became the blesser and enricher of
all the nations of the earth.  And this mother, whose name is not well
known in the annals of men, but whose name is known in Heaven to-day,
had the rich reward of knowing that she mothered a man who fathered a
nation and blessed a world.

Oh, it is a blessed reward, the reward of success in the high
enterprise of motherhood.  I know of no joy that can come to a father's
or a mother's heart that is comparable to the joy that their own
children can give them.  I have seen sweet-faced mothers look upon
their children when there was enough joy in those faces to have raised
the temperature of Heaven.

But while it is true that none can bring us so much joy, it is also
true that none can so utterly break our hearts.  To see disease take
our children in hand and wreck their bodies is painful, but it is as
joy in comparison to seeing sin steal the moral rose from their cheek
and the sparkle of innocence and purity from their eyes.  But the
deepest of all damning griefs is that grief that comes to us when we
realize that we failed, and that their ruin is due to sin and
unfaithfulness in ourselves.

Do you hear the wild outcry from that broken-hearted king named David?
There he stands upon the wall and looks away across the wistful plain.
A lone runner is coming.  He knows he is a messenger from the
battlefield.  "Good tidings," he shouts.  But the king has no ear for
good tidings.  His one question is this, "Is the young man Absalom
safe?"  And the runner does not rightly answer his question.  Then the
second messenger comes with the news of his son's death.  And there is
no more pathetic cry in literature than that that breaks from the lips
of this pathetic king.  "O my son Absalom, O Absalom, my son, my son!"
He is sobbing over his lost boy.  But there is an added pang to his
grief.  It is the awful pang that comes from the torturing fear that he
himself is in large measure responsible for the loss of his boy.  And
there is no more bitter agony than that.

Oh, men and women, let us who are fathers and mothers spare ourselves
David's terrible agony.  Let us spare our children Absalom's tragic
ruin.  Let us give ourselves the joys of this old time mother.  While
our children are about us, may we hear the very voice of God speaking
to us on their behalf, saying: "Take this child and train it for me and
I will give thee thy wages."  And wages we shall receive just as surely
as did this mother of Moses.  We will be privileged to love, to give,
to bless.  And God Himself can give no richer reward than that.




XV

A GOOD MAN'S HELL--MANASSEH

_Jeremiah 15:4_

"And I will cause them to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth
because of Manasseh."  The prophet of the Lord is here fixing the
responsibility for the downfall of Jerusalem.  He says that the wreck
was due in an especial sense to one man.  He makes it very plain that
it was one man's hands that had planted the infernal bomb that was
destined in later years to blast the foundation from under the nation.
"I will cause them to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth
because of Manasseh."

Had a jury at that day been impanelled to try this man Manasseh I do
not know whether they would have found him guilty or not.  Possibly
they would.  It is also possible that they would not.  Had they failed
to have done so it would have been because they did not know the facts;
they were not entirely familiar with all the evidence in the case.  But
when God sought the man upon whose shoulders rested the chief
responsibility for the wreck of the nation, He fixed on this man.  When
Manasseh stood on trial before Him, charged with the terrible crime of
blasting a kingdom, he was found guilty.

It was a startling verdict.  It is all the more startling when we
realize that Manasseh in the last years of his life was a good man.  It
was only his earlier years that were spent in sin.  In his old age he
was a saint.  In the last years of his reign he knew God and did all
that he could to undo the evils of an ill-spent yesterday.  But in
spite of the saintliness of the eventide, in spite of his winter-time
goodness, the full influence of his life was not a blessing but a
curse.  It did not make for upbuilding.  It made for terrible downfall
and ruin.

Take a glance at his life's story.  It is full of interest.  Every
young heart in the world should make a study of the life of this man.
How it gives the lie to many of our false and easy conceptions of sin.
How urgent it presses home the truth that the only salvation that can
mean the most is the salvation that grips us from life's earliest
moment to its very last.

Manasseh came to the throne when he was only twelve years of age.  He
had not been long in his position of influence and power till he turned
utterly away from the Lord and began to wallow in every form of sin.
There was no dirty idolatry that he did not practise.  There was no
false belief to which he did not seem willing to give hospitality.
There was scarcely any form of evil of which he was not guilty.

And his career of godlessness was all the more inexcusable because of
the good opportunities that he had.  He was the son of a great and good
father.  His father was Hezekiah.  And Hezekiah was one of the best
kings that Judah ever had.  He was a man of spiritual power.  He was a
man who served as saving salt to his kingdom throughout his entire
reign.  When the Assyrians hung like a threatening storm cloud over his
weak little nation, it was the compelling might of his prayer that
stood as a wall between them and their enemy.  So, Manasseh was the son
of a great saint.

And mark me, it is no small privilege to be the child of a godly father
or of a saintly mother.  If God granted to you to open your baby eyes
to look into other eyes that were "homes of silent prayer," if He sent
you to grow up in a home where the family altar and the saintly life
made Christ real, then He has given you an opportunity unspeakably
great.  And as great as is your opportunity, just so great is your
responsibility.  How hard must be the sentence upon that boy or that
girl who breaks away from such saving and sanctifying influences to go
into the far country.

Not only was the guilt of Manasseh intensified by the fact that he had
a saintly father.  It was intensified further by the fact that he was
repeatedly warned.  Though he turned his back on God and though he gave
himself up to a perfect orgy of wrong doing, God did not forget him and
did not give him up.  He sent to him messenger after messenger to bring
home his guilt and to invite him back to the pardon and peace of his
Father's presence.  But seemingly the more he was warned the deeper he
plunged into sin.

And you who are in sin, you are even more guilty than he, because to
you God has sent warning after warning, rebuke after rebuke.  God has
given you calls and invitations without number.  He has called you
through your conscience.  He has called you through your wretchedness
and restlessness and hunger of heart.  He has called you through your
longing for usefulness.  He has called you through your sorrow and your
pain and your losses.  He has called you through ten thousand mercies.
Oh, believe me, our need to-night is not so much for more light as it
is for courage to live up to the light we have.

Not only was Manasseh guilty because he sinned in spite of the help of
a godly father and in spite of repeated warnings.  His guilt was
deepened yet more because he knew that he did not sin alone.  When he
went away from God he carried a kingdom with him.  The reign of
Hezekiah had been a righteous reign.  With the coming of Manasseh to
the throne there was a violent reaction, akin to that that followed
upon the restoration of Charles II to the throne of England.  You know
how that when Charles came to the throne the court life was changed
into a brothel.  Charles lived in open and notorious adultery, and the
rottenness of the throne led to the rottenness of the kingdom.  Such
was the case here.  Manasseh not only fell but he drew a kingdom after
him.

It is profoundly true that no man ever sins alone.  Your influence will
not be so wide as that of Manasseh, yet however obscure your life may
be this is true, that it will set in motion influences that will
literally outlast the world.  I have control over my own action before
it is done, but after it is done I seek to control it in vain.  If it
is a fiendish act it laughs its devilish and derisive laughter in my
face and says, "Control me if you can."

Now, there came a time when this great sinner began to pay the penalty
for his sin.  Retribution slipped in by the guards at the door one day
and took the king rudely by the shoulder.  It shook him and shook him
so roughly that his crown fell from his head and his sceptre dropped
from his hand.  Then it dragged him from his throne and dressed him in
chains and sent him a captive into a foreign country.

Retribution, suffering for sin, does not always come as it came to this
king.  It does not always come at once but come it does.  That is as
sure as the fact of God.  There are some shallow souls that fancy that
because sin does not pay off every Saturday night that it does not pay
at all.  But to hold such views is to spit in the face of a most open
and palpable fact.  Manasseh had a fancy that he was a much freer man
than his father had been, far more broad-minded, but he waked one day,
as every man wakes sooner or later, to discover that sin did not mean
freedom, that it only meant slavery.

Now, what effect did this degradation and shame and suffering have on
the king?  Suffering has very opposite influences on different types of
character.  Sometimes it hardens us, it makes us only the more bitter
and rebellious.  But suffering did not have that effect on Manasseh.
It made him think, and it is a tremendously good day when God can get a
man to think.  He thought, I dare say, of his saintly father.  He
thought of his father's God.  This story is another evidence of how all
but impossible it is for a child to break finally away from the saving
influence of a truly good father or truly good mother.

This experience not only made him think but it sent him to his knees in
an agony of prayer.  He came to hate the sin that had been the ruin of
him.  He asked God for forgiveness.  And God did forgive him.  Truly,
"though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow."  No
man ever goes so far away from God, no man ever lives in sin so long
but that if he will return to God, God will receive him and will give
him abundant pardon.

Not only did God save this man.  He brought him again to his throne.
And he who had once been a captive in a strange land wore his crown
once more.  And for the remaining years of his life he was a devout
follower of the Lord.  He did his best to undo the evils of the earlier
years of his reign.  He tore down the altars to false gods that he had
builded.  He tried to bring his people back to the new and saving faith
that he had found.  His conversion was genuine and lasting.

But what was the result?  He did not succeed.  He found that it was
easier to lead folks astray than it was to bring them back after he had
led them astray.  He was a good man.  He knew God.  But this was his
hell, that he had to stand in utter helplessness and see his nation
totter to its ruin because of the sins that he had committed.  He was
not even able to save his own home.  His boy became a godless idolater,
as he himself had been during the best years of his life.

So we are brought face to face with this fact.  Repentance will bring
us salvation whenever we repent, but there is one thing that repentance
cannot do.  It cannot save us from the consequences of our sin.  Go out
into the field of life and sow tares for half a century, if you dare.
Even then God will forgive you if you will come in repentance to Him,
but there is one thing that God will not do and cannot do.  He cannot
change the tares that you have sown into wheat.  I may be exceedingly
sorry for my wrong sowing, I will be, but the seed will grow none the
less.

Did it ever occur to you how many faces the Prodigal missed on his way
back home?  Many a splendid young fellow that caroused with him as he
went into the far country did not enjoy the fatted calf with him when
he came back to the peace and plenty of his Father's house.  Some of
them had gone into eternity and others had gone beyond his influence
forever more.

While I was in Huntington a few weeks ago, the pastor for whom I was
preaching told me of a young friend of his who carried his little baby
in to see a noted eye specialist.  The child's eyes were very bad.  The
physician examined them and shook his head.  "Her eyes will never get
better," he said, "but will get worse.  She will be blind before she is
grown."  And the father's face went white and he said, "Doctor, you
know my youth wasn't what it ought to have been.  Can that be the
cause?"  And the doctor said, "You needn't to have told me.  Certainly
it is the cause."  And it was a broken-hearted man that left that
office that day.  And it was a broken-hearted and praying and penitent
man that kissed his child to sleep that night.  Oh, God will forgive
him, but there is one thing that that forgiveness will not include and
that is daylight for his little girl.

"I will cause them to be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth
because of Manasseh."  And Manasseh is good and pure and blood-washed,
but the influences that he set in motion have gone beyond his reach
forever more.  What a fearful fact is this!  I am talking to young men
and women and you have your lives before you.  You may give them to
sin, and you may be saved at the last moment.  That is a possibility,
though it is a slight one.  But such a salvation may mean the wrecking
of many another life.  The only safe way is to repent before you waste
your life.  Repent before you sin.

Do you remember Esau's pathetic story?  He sold his birthright for one
mess of lentils.  Nor was he at all displeased with his bargain.  At
least that was true for a little while, but there came a time when he
was sorry.  There came a time when his foolish bartering broke his
heart.  And the story says that he found no place for repentance though
he sought it diligently and with tears.

That does not mean, of course, that God refused to forgive Esau.  The
moment we turn in penitent surrender to our Lord He will save us and
give us an abundant pardon, however far we may have gone into sin.  God
forgave him when he repented, but there was one thing that his
repentance could not do.  It could not undo the past.  It could not put
him again in the light of the morning of life.  It could not place in
his hands the opportunities of yesterday.  The good that he might have
done and the service that he might have rendered and the crowns that he
might have won had passed beyond the reach of his hand forever.
Repentance saved his soul but it did not save his life.

And what a startling chapter is the story of the sin of David.  David
was a whole-hearted man.  He never did anything by halves.  When he
sinned he sinned with a horrible abandon.  Few men have dirtier pages
in their life's history than that of David's sin against the house of
Uriah.  But as his sin was whole-hearted so also was his repentance.
We can hear his heart-broken cry for pardon across the centuries: "Have
mercy upon me, O God, according to thy loving kindness.  According unto
the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions.  Wash
me from my iniquity and cleanse me from my sin; for I acknowledge my
transgression and my sin is ever before me."  It is the heart-broken
cry of the penitent who has not one good word to say for himself.  And
God heard his prayer and washed him and made him whiter than snow.

But beyond that God with all His love and tenderness could not go.  He
could not save David from the consequences of his sin.  His bloody and
lustful deed became possessed of a power beyond his control.  "Down!"
he cries to it in helpless horror.  But it will not down.  "Then where
are you going?" he asks, all a-tremble with dread.  And the fiendish
deed answers, "I am going to steal the purity of your daughter Tamar.
I am going to make your son Ammon into a rapist.  I am going to make
your handsome boy Absalom into a murderer."

When I was a boy there was a family living neighbors to us, all of whom
were outside the Church.  But when the children were almost all grown
and the father was an old man he became a Christian.  But instead of
being influential in bringing his children to Christ they seemed only
to be ashamed of him.  He did not seem to have the slightest power to
influence a single one of them for good.  I would not say that he was
not saved, I think he was, but I think his years spent in sin cost him
the salvation of his children.

E. J. Bulgin said that he was holding a meeting some years ago in a
city in Kentucky.  A girl was converted in his meeting.  She was in the
early bloom of young womanhood.  She belonged to a wealthy and
prominent family.  Her mother was not a Christian.  The girl wanted to
join the Church and the mother objected.  The preacher went to see the
mother and prayed with her and plead with her.  She said she wanted her
daughter to have her coming out dance soon and therefore she should not
join the Church.  And the preacher left that home with a heavy heart.

Three years later he was holding a meeting in a neighboring town.  A
long distance call came asking him if he would not come and conduct the
funeral of Nellie, the girl who had not been allowed to join the
Church.  He went.  The undertaker said that it was a request of the
mother that the preacher ride with her and her other daughter to the
cemetery.  The journey was made in silence.  The remains were being
lowered when the mother ordered the undertaker to open the coffin
again.  All the crowd was requested to stand back.  They moved some
fifty feet away.  Then leaning on the preacher's arm the mother showed
him her daughter.  And lying upon her breast was a little armful of
shame.

That was all.  The grave was filled and on the way back home the
penitent and heart-broken mother found Christ.  She said to her
daughter, "Mary, I have found Jesus.  I have found the salvation that I
rejected three years ago."  And Mary answered, "No, Mother, you have
found salvation, it is true.  But it is not the salvation that was
offered to you three years ago.  Your salvation then would have
included the salvation of Nellie.  Now it means only the salvation of
yourself."

Heart, you may be saved at another time.  Many a father is saved after
he has wrecked his boys.  This mother was saved after she had destroyed
her daughter.  Manasseh was saved after he had ruined his kingdom.  But
I submit to you that it is not the largest salvation.  It is a
salvation that may yet leave you with a burning hell in your own heart,
the hell of the memory of evil you can never undo, and wrongs you can
never right, and of lost men and women, led away from God by your
influence that you can never lead back again.

Therefore, because of these startling and palpable facts, I come to you
with this oft-repeated word of our Lord upon my lips: "Now is the
accepted time.  To-day is the day of salvation."  Seek not to make
religion into a fire escape.  Give God your life now and in so doing
you will both save yourself and those who are influenced by you.
"Therefore, choose you this day whom you will serve."




XVI

A SHREWD FOOL--THE RICH FARMER

_Luke 12:16-21_

"And he spake a parable unto them, saying, The ground of a certain rich
man brought forth plentifully: and he thought within himself, saying,
What shall I do, because I have no room where to bestow my fruits?  And
he said, This will I do: I will pull down my barns and build greater
and there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods.  And I will say to
my soul, Soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years; take thine
ease, eat, drink, and be merry.  But God said unto him, Thou fool, this
night thy soul shall be required of thee: then whose shall those things
be, which thou hast provided?  So is he that layeth up treasure for
himself, and is not rich toward God."

I count with confidence on your interest in this sermon.  You will be
interested, in the first place, because the picture that our Lord has
given us in this wonderful story is the picture of a real man.  This
farmer is no wax figure.  He is no bloodless nonentity.  He is
altogether human stuff.  And we are interested in real folks.

Then we are interested in this man, in the second place, because he is
successful.  We are naturally interested in the people who make good.
If you go out on the street to-morrow and start to tell your friends
how you failed, the chances are that they will turn their backs upon
you to listen to the man, with triumph in his face and victory in his
voice, who is telling how he succeeded.  We are great success
worshippers.  And the man who wins the prizes of life interests us very
keenly.

But there is a shock for us in the story.  The Master calls our shrewd
hero a fool.  "Thou fool."  That is a harsh and jarring word.  It
insults us.  It shakes its fist in our faces.  It cuts us like a whip.
It offends us.  We do not like the ugly name in the least.

"Thou fool."  Our Master frowns upon our using such language at all.
He will not trust us with such a sharp sword.  He will not suffer us to
hurl such a thunderbolt.  He forbids us, under a terrible penalty, to
call our brother a fool.  And yet He calls this keen and successful
farmer a fool.  And He doesn't do so lightly and flippantly, but there
seems to ring through it scorn and indignation--positive anger, anger
that is all the more terrible because it is the anger of love.

Why did the Master call this man a fool?  He did not get the idea from
the man himself.  This well-to-do farmer would never have spoken of
himself in that way.  He regarded himself as altogether fit and
mentally well furnished.  Nor did the Master get His idea from the
man's neighbors.  They looked upon this man with admiration.  There may
have been a bit of envy mingled with their admiration, but they
certainly did not regard him as a fool.  They no more did so than we
regard the man that is like him as a fool to-day.

Why then did the Master label him with this ugly name?  It was not
because he had a prejudice against him.  Jesus was no soured
misanthrope.  He was no snarling cynic.  He did not resent a man just
because he had made a success.  He was not an I. W. W. growling over
real or fancied wrongs.  No, the reason that Jesus called him a fool is
because no other name would exactly fit him.

It is well, however, that the Master labeled this picture.  Had He not
done so you and I might have been tempted to put the wrong label on it.
We might have labeled it "The Wise Man," or some such fine name.  But
had we done so it would have been a colossal blunder.  Had we done so I
am persuaded that the very fiends would have howled with derisive
laughter.  For when we see this man as he really is, when we see him
through the eyes of Him who sees things clearly, then we realize that
there is only one name that will exactly fit him.  Then we know that
that one name is the short ugly one by which he is called--"Fool."

But why is he a fool?  In what does his foolishness consist?  Certainly
it does not consist in the fact that he has made a success.  He is not
a fool simply because he is rich.  The Bible is a tremendously
reasonable book.  It is the very climax of sanity.  It is the acme of
good common sense.  It never rails against rich men simply because they
are rich.  It no more does that than it lauds poor men because they are
poor.  It frankly recognizes the danger incident to the possession of
riches.  It makes plain the fact that the rich man is a greatly tempted
man.  But never is he condemned simply because he is rich.

The truth of the matter is that riches in themselves are counted
neither good nor bad, neither moral nor immoral.  The Bible recognizes
money as a real force.  What is done with this force depends upon the
one who controls it.  Money is condensed energy.  It is pent-up power.
It is lassoed lightning.  It is a Niagara that I can hold in my hand
and put into my pocket.  It is a present day Aladdin's lamp.  If I
possess this lamp a million genii stand ready to do my bidding.
Whatever service I demand, that will they do, whether that service look
toward the making of men or the wrecking of men.

In case I live for self they are able to assist me in all my selfish
enterprises.  They can provide a winter palace in the city and a summer
palace in the mountains or down by the sea.  They can adorn my walls
with the choicest of paintings.  They can put the finest of carpets
upon my floors.  They can make possible tours abroad and private boxes
at the theatre.  They can search the treasure houses of the world and
bring to me their rarest jewels.  They can give me a place among the
select four hundred, with whole columns about myself in the society
page of the Metropolitan Daily.

Even this is not all.  If I, their master, am so minded, these powerful
genii will defeat for me the ends of justice.  They will override the
constitution.  They will enable me to put a stain upon the very flag of
my own country.  They will make it possible for me at times to
disregard the rights of others.  When occasion demands they may even
purchase at my desire the honor of manhood and the virtue of womanhood.

On the other hand, if I am a good man, I may set these genii to the
doing of tasks great and worthwhile.  I may command them to give
clothing to the naked and food to the hungry.  I can order them to
build better schools for the education of the world.  I can compel them
to build better churches for the worship of God.  I can send them with
a chance in their hands for the unfortunate and the handicapped.  I can
make it impossible for one to say of that bright lad:--

  "But knowledge to his eyes her ample scroll,
    Rich with the spoils of time, did ne'er unroll.
  Chill penury suppressed his noble rage,
    And froze the genial current of the soul."


In fact there is no high task that man is called upon to perform but
that these mighty genii can be of assistance.  They can help "to heal
the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and
recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are
bruised."  They can even make their master friends who will one day
receive him into everlasting habitations.

  "Dug from the mountain side, washed in the glen,
    Servant am I of the Master of men.
  Earn me, I bless you; steal me, I curse you;
    Grip me and hold me, a fiend shall possess you.
  Lie for me, die for me, covet me, take me,
    Angel or devil, I am what you make me."


Nor was this man a fool because he had accumulated his money
dishonestly.  The man who does accumulate money dishonestly is a fool.
So says the prophet Jeremiah and every clear thinking man must agree
with him.  There is a way of getting money that makes money a curse
rather than a blessing.  There is a way of getting money that makes the
very eagle upon it to turn vulture to tear at your heart.

But this man had not made his money after that fashion.  He had never
run a saloon nor a gambling house nor a sweatshop.  There is no hint
that he had failed to pay an adequate wage to his laborers.  James
calls upon the rich men of his day to weep and howl because they were
guilty in this respect.  But no such charge as this is laid against
this man.  Nor had he robbed the widow or the fatherless.  "An orphan's
curse will drag to hell a spirit from on high," but no such curse was
on this man.
