by the pretended divine approval or command. A special license was
produced, allowing Mahomet a double number of wives; the discreditable
affair of Mary the Coptic slave was justified in a separate Sura; and
the passion for the wife of his own adopted son and bosom friend was the
subject of an inspired message in which the Prophet's scruples were
rebuked by God; a divorce permitted, and marriage with the object of his
unhallowed desires enjoined."--Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, pp.
317-8.]

[Footnote 139: "But the darker shades of character as well as the
brighter must be depicted by a faithful historian. Magnanimity or
moderation are nowhere discernible as features in the conduct of Mahomet
towards such of his enemies as failed to tender a timely allegiance.
Over the bodies of the Coreish who fell at Badr he exulted with savage
satisfaction; and several prisoners, accused of no crime but that of
scepticism and political opposition, were deliberately executed at his
command. The prince of Kheibar, after being subjected to inhuman torture
for the purpose of discovering the treasures of his tribe, was, with his
cousin, put to death on the pretext of having treacherously concealed
them; and his wife was led away captive to the tent of the conqueror.
Sentence of exile was enforced by Mahomet with rigorous severity on two
whole Jewish tribes at Medina; and of a third like his neighbours, the
women and children were sold into distant captivity, while the men
amounting to several hundreds were butchered in cold blood before his
eyes.

"In his youth Mahomet earned among his fellows the honourable title of
'the Faithful.' But in later years, however much sincerity and good
faith may have guided his conduct in respect of his friends, craft and
deception were certainly not wanting towards his foes. The perfidious
attack at Nakhla, where the first blood in the internecine war with the
Coreish was shed, although at first disavowed by Mahomet, for its
scandalous breach of the sacred usages of Arabia, was eventually
justified by a pretended revelation. Abu Basir, the freebooter, was
countenanced by the Prophet in a manner scarcely consistent with the
letter, and certainly opposed to the spirit, of the truce of Hodeibia.
The surprise which secured the easy conquest of Mecca was designed with
craftiness, if not with duplicity. The pretext on which the Bani Nadhir
were besieged and expatriated (namely, that Gabriel had revealed their
design against the prophet's life), was feeble and unworthy of an honest
cause. When Medina was beleaguered by the confederate army, Mahomet
sought the services of Nueim, a traitor, and employed him to sow
distrust among the enemy by false and treacherous reports; 'for,' said
he, 'what else is war but a game at deception?' In his prophetical
career, political and personal ends were frequently compassed by the
flagrant pretence of _Divine_ revelations, which a candid examination
would have shewn him to be nothing more than the counterpart of his own
wishes. The Jewish and Christian systems, at first adopted honestly as
the basis of his own religion, had no sooner served the purpose of
establishing a firm authority, than they were ignored, if not disowned.
And what is perhaps worst of all, the dastardly assassination of
political and religious opponents, countenanced and frequently directed
as they were in all their cruel and perfidious details by Mahomet
himself leaves a dark and indelible blot upon his character."--Muir's
Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, pp. 307-9.

"The reader will observe that simultaneously with the anxious desire to
extinguish idolatry, and to promote religion and virtue in the world,
there was nurtured by the Prophet in his own heart a licentious
self-indulgence; till in the end, assuming to be the favourite of
Heaven, he justified himself by 'revelations' from God in the most
flagrant breaches of morality. He will remark that while Mahomet
cherished a kind and tender disposition, 'weeping with them that wept,'
and binding to his person the hearts of his followers by the ready and
self-denying offices of love and friendship, he could yet take pleasure
in cruel and perfidious assassination, could gloat over the massacre of
an entire tribe, and savagely consign the innocent babe to the fires of
hell."--Muir's Life of Mahomet, Vol. IV, pp. 322-3.]

[Footnote 140: "In domestic life the conduct of Mahomet with one grave
exception was exemplary. As a husband his fondness and devotion was
entire, bordering, however, at times upon jealousy. As a father he was
loving and tender. In his youth he is said to have lived a virtuous
life. At the age of twenty-five he married a widow forty years old; and
for five and twenty years he was a faithful husband to her alone. Yet it
is remarkable that during this period was composed most of those
passages of the Coran in which the black-eyed Houris, reserved for
believers in Paradise, are depicted in such glowing colours. Shortly
after the death of Khadija the Prophet married again; but it was not
till the mature age of fifty-four that he made the dangerous trial of
polygamy, by taking Ayesha, yet a child, as the rival of Sauda. Once the
natural limits of restraint were overpassed, Mahomet fell an easy prey
to his strong passion for the sex. In his fifty-sixth year he married
Haphsa; and the following year, in two succeeding months, Zeinab bint
Khozeima and Omm Salma. But his desires were not to be satisfied by the
range of a harem already greater than was permitted to any of his
followers; rather as age advanced, they were stimulated to seek for new
and varied indulgence. A few months after his nuptials with Zeinab and
Omm Salma, the charms of a second Zeinab were by accident discovered too
fully before the Prophet's admiring gaze. She was the wife of Zeid, his
adopted son and bosom friend; but he was unable to smother the flame she
kindled in his breast; and, by _divine_ command, she was taken to his
bed. In the same year he married a seventh wife, and also a concubine.
And at last, when he was full three score years of age, no fewer than
three new wives, besides Mary the Coptic slave, were within the space of
seven months added to his already well-filled harem."--Muir's Life of
Mahomet, Vol. IV, pp. 309-10.]

[Footnote 141: "_Vide_ Muhammad and Muhammadanism, by Mr. R. Bosworth
Smith, M.A., an Assistant Master of Harrow School."]

[Footnote 142: Notes on Muhammadanism, by the Rev. T.P. Hughes,
Missionary to the Afghans, Peshawar; Second Edition, page 4, London,
1877.]

[Footnote 143: Mohammed, Buddha and Christ, by Marcus Dods, D.D., pp. 24
& 25.]

[Footnote 144: _Vide_ pp. 48-61. This work is being printed at Education
Society's Press, Byculla, Bombay. It appears that Dr. Dods, in the first
instance, had in view Sura XXXIII, 51. This is by no means giving
Mohammad conjugal allowances which he himself had proscribed as
unlawful. As a preliminary measure to abolish polygamy and to accustom
the people to monogamy, Mohammad, when reducing the unlimited polygamy
practised in Arabia, had put a strong condition to treat their wives,
when more than one, equitably in every sense of the word,--_i.e._, in
the matter of social comfort, love and household establishment (Sura IV,
3). When the measure had given a monogamous tendency to the Arab
society, it was declared that it was impossible practically to treat
equitably in all respects the contemporary wives (Sura IV, 128), and
those who had already contracted contemporaneous marriage before the
measure referred to above was introduced were absolved from the
condition laid down in Sura IV, 3, but were advised, regarding their
then existing wives, not to yield wholly to disinclination. Similarly
Mohammad was also relieved from that condition in Sura XXXIII, 51,
without "giving him any conjugal allowance which he had himself
pronounced unlawful." The second instance is of Zeinab's case I suppose.
Zeinab was in no way, when divorced by Zeid, "a woman forbidden to him
by his own laws."]

[Footnote 145: "The Apostle becomes a creature so exalted that even the
easy drapery of Mohammadan morality becomes a garment too tight-fitting
for him. 'A peculiar privilege is granted to him above the rest of the
believers.' He may multiply his wives without stint; he may and he does
marry within the prohibited degrees."--_Islam under the Arabs_, by R.D.
Osborn, London 1876, p. 91.]

[Footnote 146: Studies in a Mosque, by S.L. Poole, pp. 77 and 80,
London, 1880.]


[Sidenote: Finality of the social reforms of Mohammad.]

[Sidenote: Positive precepts.]

[Sidenote: Ceremonial law.]

[Sidenote: Concrete morals of the Koran.]

[Sidenote: Want of adaptibility of the Koran to surrounding
circumstances.]

37. It has been said with much stress regarding the teachings of
Mohammad: (1) That although under the degraded condition of Arabia, they
were a gift of great value, and succeeded in banishing those fierce
vices which naturally accompany ignorance and barbarism, but an
imperfect code of ethics has been made a permanent standard of good and
evil, and a final and irrevocable law, which is an insuperable barrier
to the regeneration and progress of a nation. It has been also urged
that his reforms were good and useful for his own time and place, but
that by making them final he has prevented further progress and
consecrated half measures. What were restrictions to his Arabs would
have been license to other men.[147] (2) That Islam deals with positive
precepts rather than with principles,[148] and the danger of a precise
system of positive precepts regulating the minute detail, the ceremonial
worship, and the moral and social relations of life, is, that it should
retain too tight a grip upon men when the circumstances which justified
it have changed and vanished away, and therefore the imposition of a
system good for barbarians upon people already possessing higher sort of
civilization and the principles of a purer faith is not a blessing but a
curse. Nay more, even the system which was good for people when they
were in a barbarous state may become positively mischievous to those
same people when they begin to emerge from their barbarism under its
influence into a higher condition.[149] (3) That the exact ritual and
formal observations of Islam have carried with them their own Nemesis,
and thus we find that in the worship of the faithful formalism and
indifferences, pedantic scrupulosity and positive disbelief flourish
side by side. The minutest change of posture in prayer, the displacement
of a simple genuflexion, would call for much heavier censure than
outward profligacy or absolute neglect.[150] (4) That morality is viewed
not in the abstract, but in the concrete. That the Koran deals much more
with sin and virtue in fragmentary details than as a whole. It deals
with acts more than principles, with outward practice more than inward
motives, with precepts and commands more than exhortation. It does not
hold up before man the hatefulness and ugliness of _all_ sin _as a
whole_.[151] (5) "That Islam is stationary; swathed in the rigid bands
of the Coran, it is powerless, like the Christian dispensation,[152] to
adapt itself to the varying circumstances of time and place, and to keep
pace with, if not to lead and direct, the progress of society and the
elevation of the race. In the body politic the spiritual and secular are
hopelessly confounded, and we fail of perceiving any approach to free
institutions or any germ whatever of popular government."[153]

[Footnote 147: _Vide_ Islam and its Founder, by J.W.H. Stobart, B.A.,
page 229, London, 1878; and Mohammed, Buddha and Christ, by Marcus Dods,
D.D., pp. 122-23, London, 1878. Major Osborn writes, "But to the polity
erected on these rude lines was given the attribute of finality. In
order to enforce obedience and eliminate the spirit of opposition,
Mohammad asserted that it was, down to the minutest details, the work of
a Divine Legislature."--_Islam under the Arabs_, pp. 45 and 46.]

[Footnote 148: _Vide_ The Faith of Islam, by the Rev. Edward Sell, page
7, London, 1880.]

[Footnote 149: _Vide_ Christianity and Islam, the Bible, and the Koran,
by the Rev. W.R.W. Stephens, pp. 95 and 131, London, 1877.]

[Footnote 150: _Vide_ Islam and its Founder, by J.W.H. Stobart, B.A.,
page 237; and Stephens' Christianity and Islam, page 121. Major Osborn
writes: "From the hour of his birth the moslem becomes a member of a
system in which every act of his life is governed by a minute ritual. He
is beset on every side with a circle of inflexible formalities."--_Islam
under the Khalifs of Baghdad_, pp. 78-9. He further writes in a
footnote, p. 79: "Thus prayer is absolutely useless if any matter,
legally considered impure, adheres to the person of the worshipper, even
though he be unconscious of its presence. Prayer also is null and void
unless the men and women praying are attired in a certain prescribed
manner."]

[Footnote 151: _Vide_ Christianity and Islam, by W.R.W. Stephens, pp.
122-23. Major Osborn writes: "The Prophet knew of no religious life
where the external rite was not deemed of greater importance than the
inner state, and, in consequence, he gave that character to Islam also.
Hence there are no moral gradations in the Koran. All precepts proceed
from the will of God, and all are enforced with the same threatening
emphasis. A failure of performance in the meanest trivialities of civil
life involves the same tremendous penalties as apostacy and
idolatry."--_Islam under Khalifs_, p. 5. He further says: "In their
religious aspect, these traditions are remarkable for that strange
confusion of thought which caused the Prophet to place on one level of
wickedness serious moral crimes, breaches of sumptuary regulations, and
accidental omissions in ceremonial observations. Sin, throughout, is
regarded as an external pollution, which can, at once, be rectified by
the payment of a fine of some kind." _Ibid_, page 62.]

[Footnote 152: "Occasionally our author would seem to write what he
certainly does not mean; thus, in the middle of an excellent summary of
the causes of Islam's decadence, it is stated,--'Swathed in the rigid
bands of the Koran, _Islam is powerless like the Christian dispensation_
to adapt itself to the varying circumstances of time and place.'"--_The
Saturday Review_, June 23, 1883.]

[Footnote 153: _Vide_ Annals of the Early Caliphate, by Sir W. Muir,
K.C.S.I., LL.D., D.C.L., page 456, London, 1883.]


[Sidenote: The preceding objections not applicable to the Koran.]

38. All these objections more or less apply rather to the teachings of
the Mohammadan Common Law (canon and civil), called _Fiqah_ or _Shara_,
than to the Koran, the Mohammadan Revealed Law. Our Common Law, which
treats both ecclesiastical and the civil law, is by no means considered
to be a divine or unchangeable law. This subject has been treated by me
in a separate work[154] on the Legal, Political and Social Reforms to
which the reader is referred. The space allowed to me in this
Introduction, which has already exceeded its proper limit, does not
admit a full and lengthy discussion of the objections quoted above, but
I will review them here in as few words as possible.

[Footnote 154: Reforms, Political, Social and Legal, under the Moslem
Rule, Bombay Education Society's Press, 1883.]


[Sidenote: Finality of the social reforms of Mohammad.]

39. (1) Mohammad had to deal with barbarous nations around him, to be
gradually reformed, and besides this the subject of social reforms was a
secondary question. Yet it being necessary to transform the character of
the people and to reform the moral and social abuses prevailing among
them, he gradually introduced his social reforms which proved immense
blessings to the Arabs and other nations in the seventh century. Perhaps
some temporary but judicious, reasonable and helpful accommodations had
to be made to the weakness and immaturity of the people, as halting
stages in the march of reforms only to be set aside at their adult
strength, or to be abolished when they were to begin to emerge from
their barbarism under its influence to a higher civilization.
Consequently gradual amelioration of social evils had necessarily to
pass several trials during progress of reform. The intermediate stages
are not to be taken as final and irrevocable standard of morality and an
insuperable barrier to the regeneration of the Arabian nation. Our
adversaries stick indiscriminately to these temporary measures or
concessions only, and call them half measures and partial reforms made
into an unchangeable law which exclude the highest reforms, and form a
formidable obstacle to the dawn of a progressive and enlightened
civilization. I have in view here the precepts of Mohammad for
ameliorating the degraded condition of women for restricting the
unlimited polygamy and the facility of divorce, together with servile
concubinage and slavery.[155] Mohammad's injunctions and precepts,
intermediary and ultimate, temporary and permanent, intended for the
removal of these social evils, are interwoven with each other,
interspersed in different Suras and not chronologically arranged, in
consequence of which it is somewhat difficult for those who have no deep
insight into the promiscuous literature of the Koran to find out which
precept was only a halting stage, and which the latest. It was only from
some oversight on the part of the compilers of the Common Law that, in
the first place, the civil precepts of a transitory nature and as a
mediate step leading to a higher reform were taken as final; and in the
second place, the civil precepts adapted for the dwellers of the Arabian
desert were pressed upon the neck of all ages and countries. A social
system for barbarism ought not to be imposed on a people already
possessing higher forms of civilizations.

[Footnote 155: "The cankerworm of polygamy, divorce, servile concubinage
and veil lay at the root. They are bound up in the character of its
existence. A reformed Islam which should part with the divine ordinances
on which they rest, or attempt in the smallest degree to change them by
a rationalistic selection, abetment or variation would be Islam no
longer." Annals of the Early Caliphate by Sir W. Muir, page 458.]


[Sidenote: Positive precepts.]

[Sidenote: Ceremonial law.]

40. (2) In fact the Koran deals with positive precepts as well as with
principles, but it never teaches a precise system of precepts regulating
in minute details the social relations of life and the ceremonial of
worship. On the contrary, its aim has been to counteract the tendency to
narrowness, formality, and severity which is the consequence of a living
under a rigid system of positive precepts. Mohammad had to transform the
character of the Arab barbarians who had no religious or moral teacher
or a social reformer before his advent. It was therefore necessary to
give them a few positive precepts, moulding and regulating their moral
and social conduct, to make them 'new creatures' with new notions and
new purposes, and to remodel the national life. (3) But lest they should
confuse virtue as identical with obedience to the outward requirements
of the ceremonial law,--the formal ablutions, the sacrifices in
pilgrimages, the prescribed forms of prayers, the fixed amount of alms,
and the strict fasts, the voice of the Koran has ever and anon been
lifted up to declare that a rigid conformity to practical precepts,
whether of conduct or ceremonial, would not extenuate, but rather
increase in the eyes of God the guilt of an unprincipled heart and an
unholy life.

[Sidenote: Pilgrimage.]

Regarding the pilgrimage[156] or the sacrifices (its chief ceremony),
the Koran says:--

     "By no means can their flesh reach unto God, neither their blood,
     but piety on your part reacheth him. Thus hath he subjected them to
     you, that ye might magnify God for his guidance: and announce glad
     tidings to the doers of good."--Sura XXII, 38.

[Sidenote: Kibla.]

Regarding the _Kibla_ in prayers it is said in the Koran:--

     "The west and the east is God's: therefore whichever way ye turn
     there is the face of God."--Sura II, 109.

     "All have a quarter of the Heavens to which they turn them; but
     wherever ye be, hasten emulously after good."--_Ibid_, 143.

     "There is no piety in turning your faces toward the east or west,
     but he is pious who believeth in God and the last day, and the
     angels and the scripture, and the prophets; who for the love of God
     disburseth his wealth to his kindred; and to the orphans, and the
     needy, and the wayfarer, and those who ask, and for ransoming; who
     observeth the prayer, and payeth alms, and who is of those who are
     faithful to their engagements when they have engaged in them, and
     patient under ills and hardships, and in time of trouble, these are
     they who are just, and these are they who fear the Lord."--_Ibid_,
     172.

[Sidenote: Amount of alms.]

In the place of a fixed amount of alms the Koran only says to give what
ye can spare.

     "They will ask thee also what shall they bestow in alms:

     "Say: What ye can spare."--_Ibid_, 216, 217.

[Sidenote: Fasts.]

Instead of imposing a very strict fast, which in the middle of summer is
extremely mortifying, the Koran makes its observance optional.

     "And as for those who are able to keep it and yet observe it not,
     the expiation of this shall be the maintenance of a poor man. And
     he who of his own accord performeth a good work, shall derive good
     from it: and good shall it be for you to fast, if ye knew
     it."--_Ibid_, 180.

[Sidenote: No prescribed forms of prayer.]

The Koran does not teach any prescribed forms of worship and other
ritualistic prayers. No attitude is fixed, and no outward observance of
posture is required. There is no scrupulosity and punctiliousness,
neither the change of posture in prayer nor the displacement of a
single genuflexion calls any censure on the devotee in the Koran. Simply
reading the Koran (Suras LXXIII, 20; XXIX, 44), and bearing God in mind,
standing and sitting; reclining (III, 188; IV, 104) or bowing down or
prostrating (XXII, 76) is the only form and ritual, if it may be called
so, of prayer and worship taught in the Koran.

     "Recite then as much of the Koran as may be easy to you."--Sura
     LXXIII, 20.

     "Recite the portions of the Book which have been revealed to thee
     and discharge the duty of prayer; verily prayer restraineth from
     the filthy and the blameworthy. And assuredly the gravest duty is
     the remembrance of God; and God knoweth what ye do."--Sura XXIX,
     44.

     "And when the Koran is rehearsed, then listen ye to it and keep
     silence: haply ye may obtain mercy."

     "And think within thine ownself on God, with lowliness and with
     fear and without loud-spoken words, at even and at morn; and be not
     of the heedless."--Sura VII, 203, 204.

[Sidenote: Pretentious prayers and ostentatious almsgiving condemned.]

The Koran condemns pretentious prayers and ostentatious almsgiving.

     "Verily the hypocrites would deceive God; but he will deceive them!
     When they stand up for prayer, they stand carelessly to be seen of
     men, and they remember God but little"--Sura IV, 141.

     "Woe then to those who pray,"

     "Who in their prayer are careless;"

     "Who make a show of devotion,"

     "But refuse help _to the needy_."--Sura CVII, 4-7.

     "And they fall down on their faces weeping, and it increaseth the
     humility."--Sura XVII, 110.

     "O ye who believe! make not your alms void by reproaches and
     injury; like him who spendeth his substance to be seen of men, and
     believeth not in God and in the latter day. The likeness of such an
     one is that of a rock with a thin soil upon it, on which a heavy
     rain falleth, but leaveth it hard. No profit from their works shall
     they be able to gain; for God guideth not the unbelieving
     people."--Sura II, 266.

     "We have made ready a shameful chastisement for the unbelievers,
     and for those who bestow their substance in alms to be seen of men,
     and believe not in God and in the last day. Whoever hath satan for
     his companion, an evil companion hath he!"--Sura IV, 42.

[Sidenote: No indispensable hours or places for prayers.]

There are no indispensable hours or places to be observed for prayers.
In Suras XI, 116; and IV, 104, the time of prayer is set down in general
terms without specifying any fixed hour. There are some more times named
in Suras XVII, 81, 82; XX, 130; L, 38, 39; and LII, 48, 49, but they are
special cases for Mohammad himself, and "as an excess in the service."
