sickness. He passes thence to his own case, and, after humble confession
of his sin,--almost in the words of the fifty-first psalm,--he tells how
his sickbed had been surrounded by very different visitors. His disease
drew no pity, but only fierce impatience that he lingered in life so
long. "Mine enemies speak evil of me--when will he die, and his name
have perished?" One of them, in especial, who must have been a man in
high position to gain access to the sick chamber, has been conspicuous
by his lying words of condolence: "If he come to see me he speaketh
vanity." The sight of the sick king touched no chord of affection, but
only increased the traitor's animosity--"his heart gathereth evil to
itself"--and then, having watched his pale face for wished-for
unfavourable symptoms, the false friend hurries from the bedside to talk
of his hopeless illness--"he goeth abroad, he telleth it." The tidings
spread, and are stealthily passed from one conspirator to another. "All
that hate me whisper together against me." They exaggerate the gravity
of his condition, and are glad because, making the wish the father to
the thought, they believe him dying. "A thing of Belial" (_i.e._, a
destructive disease), "say they, is poured out upon him, and now that he
lieth, he shall rise up no more." And, sharpest pang of all, that among
these traitors, and probably the same person as he whose heartless
presence in the sick chamber was so hard to bear, should be Ahithophel,
whose counsel had been like an oracle from God. Even he, "the man of my
friendship, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my bread"--he, like an
ignoble, vicious mule--"has lifted high his heel" against the sick lion.

We should be disposed to refer the thirty-ninth psalm also to this
period. It, too, is the meditation of one in sickness, which he knows to
be a Divine judgment for his sin. There is little trace of enemies in
it; but his attitude is that of silent submission, while wicked men are
disquieted around him--which is precisely the characteristic peculiarity
of his conduct at this period. It consists of two parts (vers. 1-6 and
7-13), in both of which the subjects of his meditations are the same,
but the tone of them different. His own sickness and mortality, and
man's fleeting, shadowy life, are his themes. The former has led him to
think of the latter. The first effect of his sorrow was to close his
lips in a silence that was not altogether submission. "I held my peace,
even from good, and my sorrow was stirred." As in his sin, when he kept
silence, his "bones waxed old," so now in his sorrow and sickness the
pain that could not find expression raged the more violently. The
tearless eyes were hot and aching; but he conquered the dumb spirit, and
could carry his heavy thoughts to God. They are very heavy at first. He
only desires that the sad truth may be driven deeper into his soul. With
the engrossment so characteristic of melancholy, he asks, what might
have been thought the thing he needed least, "Make me to know mine end;"
and then he dilates on the gloomy reflections which he had been
cherishing in silence. Not only he himself, with his handbreadth of
days, that shrink into absolute nothingness when brought into contrast
with the life of God, but "every man," even when apparently "standing"
most "firm, is only a breath." As a shadow every man moves spectral
among shadows. The tumult that fills their lives is madness; "only for a
breath are they disquieted." So bitterly, with an anticipation of the
sad, clear-eyed pity and scorn of "The Preacher," does the sick and
wearied king speak, in tones very unlike the joyous music of his earlier
utterances.

But, true and wholesome as such thoughts are, they are not all the
truth. So the prayer changes in tone, even while its substance is the
same. He rises from the shows of earth to his true home, driven thither
by their hollowness. "My hope is in Thee." The conviction of earth's
vanity is all different when it has "tossed him to Thy breast." The
pardoned sinner, who never thereafter forgot his grievous fall, asks for
deliverance "from all his transgressions." The sullen silence has
changed into full acquiescence: "I opened not my mouth, because Thou
didst it,"--a silence differing from the other as the calm after the
storm, when all the winds sleep and the sun shines out on a freshened
world, differs from the boding stillness while the slow thunder-clouds
grow lurid on the horizon. He cries for healing, for he knows his
sickness to be the buffet and assault of God's hand; and its bitterness
is assuaged, even while its force continues, by the conviction that it
is God's fatherly chastisement for sin which gnaws away his manly vigour
as the moth frets his kingly robe. The very thought which had been so
bitter--that every man is vanity--reappears in a new connection as the
basis of the prayer that God would hear, and is modified so as to become
infinitely blessed and hopeful. "I am a stranger with Thee, and a
sojourner, as all my fathers were." A wanderer indeed, and a transient
guest on earth; but what of that, if he be God's guest? All that is
sorrowful is drawn off from the thought when we realise our connection
with God. We are in God's house; the host, not the guest, is responsible
for the housekeeping. We need not feel life lonely if He be with us, nor
its shortness sad. It is not a shadow, a dream, a breath, if it be
rooted in Him. And thus the sick man has conquered his gloomy thoughts,
even though he sees little before him but the end; and he is not cast
down even though his desires are all summed up in one for a little
respite and healing, ere the brief trouble of earth be done with: "O
spare me, that I may recover strength before I go hence, and be no
more."

It may be observed that this supposition of a protracted illness, which
is based upon these psalms, throws light upon the singular passiveness
of David during the maturing of Absalom's conspiracy, and may naturally
be supposed to have favoured his schemes, an essential part of which was
to ingratiate himself with suitors who came to the king for judgment by
affecting great regret that no man was deputed of the king to hear them.
The accumulation of untried causes, and the apparent disorganization of
the judicial machinery, are well accounted for by David's sickness.

The fifty-fifth psalm gives some very pathetic additional particulars.
It is in three parts--a plaintive prayer and portraiture of the
psalmist's mental distress (vers. 1-8); a vehement supplication against
his foes, and indignant recounting of their treachery (vers. 9-16); and,
finally, a prophecy of the retribution that is to fall upon them (vers.
17-23). In the first and second portions we have some points which help
to complete our picture of the man. For instance, his heart "writhes"
within him, the "terrors of death" are on him, "fear and trembling" are
come on him, and "horror" has covered him. All this points, like
subsequent verses, to his knowledge of the conspiracy before it came to
a head. The state of the city, which is practically in the hands of
Absalom and his tools, is described with bold imagery. Violence and
Strife in possession of it, spies prowling about the walls day and
night, Evil and Trouble in its midst, and Destruction, Oppression, and
Deceit--a goodly company--flaunting in its open spaces. And the spirit,
the brain of the whole, is the trusted friend whom he had made his own
equal, who had shared his secretest thoughts in private, who had walked
next him in solemn processions to the temple. Seeing all this, what does
the king do, who was once so fertile in resource, so decisive in
counsel, so prompt in action? Nothing. His only weapon is prayer. "As
for me, I will call upon God; and the Lord will save me. Evening, and
morning, and at noon, will I pray, and cry aloud: and He shall hear my
voice." He lets it all grow as it list, and only longs to be out of all
the weary coil of troubles. "Oh that I had wings like a dove, then would
I fly away and be at rest. Lo, I would flee far off, I would lodge in
the wilderness. I would swiftly fly to my refuge from the raging wind,
from the tempest." The langour of his disease, love for his worthless
son, consciousness of sin, and submission to the chastisement through
"one of his own house," which Nathan had foretold, kept him quiet,
though he saw the plot winding its meshes round him. And in this
submission patient confidence is not wanting, though subdued and
saddened, which finds expression in the last words of this psalm of the
heavy laden, "Cast thy burden upon Jehovah. He, He will sustain
thee.... I will trust in Thee."

When the blow at last fell, the same passive acquiescence in what he
felt to be God's chastisement is very noticeable. Absalom escapes to
Hebron, and sets up the standard of revolt. When the news comes to
Jerusalem the king's only thought is immediate flight. He is almost
cowardly in his eagerness to escape, and is prepared to give up
everything without a blow. It seems as if only a touch was needed to
overthrow his throne. He hurries on the preparations for flight with
nervous haste. He forms no plans beyond those of his earlier wish to fly
away and be at rest. He tries to denude himself of followers. When the
six hundred men of Gath--who had been with him ever since his early days
in Philistia, and had grown grey in his service--make themselves the van
of his little army, he urges the heroic Ittai, their leader, to leave
him a fugitive, and to worship the rising sun, "Return to thy place, and
abide with _the king_"--so thoroughly does he regard the crown as passed
already from his brows. The priests with the ark are sent back; he is
not worthy to have the symbol of the Divine presence identified with
his doubtful cause, and is prepared to submit without a murmur if God
"thus say, I have no delight in thee." With covered head and naked feet
he goes up the slope of Olivet, and turning perhaps at that same bend in
the rocky mountain path where the true King, coming to the city, wept as
he saw its shining walls and soaring pinnacles across the narrow valley,
the discrowned king and all his followers broke into passionate weeping
as they gazed their last on the lost capital, and then with choking sobs
rounded the shoulder of the hill and set their faces to their forlorn
flight. Passing through the territory of Saul's tribe--dangerous ground
for him to tread--the rank hatred of Shimei's heart blossoms into
speech. With Eastern vehemence, he curses and flings stones and dust in
the transports of his fury, stumbling along among the rocks high up on
the side of the glen, as he keeps abreast of the little band below. Did
David remember how the husband from whom he had torn Michal had followed
her to this very place, and there had turned back weeping to his lonely
home? The remembrance, at any rate, of later and more evil deeds
prompted his meek answer, "Let him curse, for the Lord hath bidden
him."

The first force of the disaster spent itself, and by the time he was
safe across Jordan, on the free uplands of Bashan, his spirit rises. He
makes a stand at Mahanaim, the place where his great ancestor, in
circumstances somewhat analogous to his own, had seen the vision of
"bright-harnessed angels" ranked in battle array for the defence of
himself and his own little band, and called the name of the place the
"two camps." Perhaps that old story helped to hearten him, as the
defection of Ahithophel from the conspiracy certainly would do. As the
time went on, too, it became increasingly obvious that the leaders of
the rebellion were "infirm of purpose," and that every day of respite
from actual fighting diminished their chances of success, as that
politic adviser saw so plainly. Whatever may have been the reason, it is
clear that by the time David had reached Mahanaim he had resolved not to
yield without a struggle. He girds on his sword once more with some of
the animation of early days, and the light of trustful valour blazes
again in his old eyes.




XV. THE SONGS OF THE FUGITIVE.


The psalms which probably belong to the period of Absalom's rebellion
correspond well with the impression of his spirit gathered from the
historical books. Confidence in God, submission to His will, are
strongly expressed in them, and we may almost discern a progress in the
former respect as the rebellion grows. They flame brighter and brighter
in the deepening darkness. From the lowest abyss the stars are seen most
clearly. He is far more buoyant when he is an exile once more in the
wilderness, and when the masks of plot and trickery are fallen, and the
danger stands clear before him. Like some good ship issuing from the
shelter of the pier heads, the first blow of the waves throws her over
on her side and makes her quiver like a living thing recoiling from a
terror, but she rises above the tossing surges and keeps her course. We
may allocate with a fair amount of likelihood the following psalms to
this period--iii.; iv.; xxv. (?); xxviii. (?); lviii. (?); lxi.; lxii.;
lxiii.; cix. (?); cxliii.

The first two of these form a pair; they are a morning and an evening
hymn. The little band are encamped on their road to Mahanaim, with no
roof but the stars, and no walls but the arm of God. In the former the
discrowned king sings, as he rises from his nightly bivouac. He pours
out first his plaint of the foes, who are described as "many," and as
saying that, "There is no help for him in God," words which fully
correspond to the formidable dimensions of the revolt, and to the belief
which actuated the conspirators, and had appeared as possible even to
himself, that his sin had turned away the aid of heaven from his cause.
To such utterances of malice and confident hatred he opposes the
conviction which had again filled his soul, that even in the midst of
real peril and the shock of battle Jehovah is his "shield." With bowed
and covered head he had fled from Jerusalem, but "Thou art the lifter up
of mine head." He was an exile from the tabernacle on Zion, and he had
sent back the ark to its rest; but though he has to cry to God from
beyond Jordan, He answers "from His holy hill." He and his men camped
amidst dangers, but one unslumbering Helper mounted guard over their
undefended slumbers. "I laid me down and slept" there among the echoes
of the hills. "I awaked, for Jehovah sustained me;" and another night
has passed without the sudden shout of the rebels breaking the silence,
or the gleam of their swords in the starlight. The experience of
protection thus far heartens him to front even the threatening circle of
his foes around him, whom it is his pain to think of as "the people" of
God, and yet as his foes. And then he betakes himself in renewed energy
of faith to his one weapon of prayer, and even before the battle sees
the victory, and the Divine power fracturing the jaws and breaking the
teeth of the wild beasts who hunt him. But his last thought is not of
retribution nor of fear; for himself he rises to the height of serene
trust, "Salvation is of the Lord;" and for his foes and for all the
nation that had risen against him his thoughts are worthy of a true
king, freed from all personal animosity, and his words are a prayer
conceived in the spirit of Him whose dying breath was intercession for
His rebellious subjects who crucified their King, "Thy blessing be upon
Thy people."

The fourth psalm is the companion evening hymn. Its former portion
(vers. 2-4) seems to be a remonstrance addressed as if to the leaders of
the revolt ("sons of men" being equivalent to "persons of rank and
dignity"). It is the expression in vivid form, most natural to such a
nature, of his painful feeling under their slanders; and also of his
hopes and desires for them, that calm thought in these still evening
hours which are falling on the world may lead them to purer service and
to reliance on God. So forgivingly, so lovingly does he think of them,
ere he lays himself down to rest, wishing that "on their beds," as on
his, the peace of meditative contemplation may rest, and the day of
war's alarms be shut in by holy "communion with their own hearts" and
with God.

The second portion turns to himself and his followers, among whom we may
suppose some faint hearts were beginning to despond; and to them, as to
the very enemy, David would fain be the bringer of a better mind. "Many
say, Who will show us good?" He will turn them from their vain search
round the horizon on a level with their own eyes for the appearance of
succour. They must look upwards, not round about. They must turn their
question, which only expects a negative answer, into a prayer, fashioned
like that triple priestly benediction of old (Numbers vi. 24-26). His
own experience bursts forth irrepressible. He had prayed in his hour of
penitence, "Make me to hear joy and gladness" (Psa. li.); and the prayer
had been answered, if not before, yet now when peril had brought him
nearer to God, and trust had drawn God nearer to him. In his calamity,
as is ever the case with devout souls, his joy increased, as Greek fire
burns more brightly under water. Therefore this pauper sovereign,
discrowned and fed by the charity of the Gileadite pastoral chief,
sings, "Thou hast put gladness in my heart, more than in the time that
their corn and wine increased." And how tranquilly the psalm closes, and
seems to lull itself to rest, "In peace I will at once lie down and
sleep, for Thou, O Jehovah, only makest me dwell safely." The growing
security which experience of God's care should ever bring, is
beautifully marked by the variation on the similar phrase in the
previous psalm. There he gratefully recorded that he had laid himself
down and slept; here he promises himself that he will lie down "in
peace;" and not only so, but that at once on his lying down he will
sleep--kept awake by no anxieties, by no bitter thoughts, but, homeless
and in danger as he is, will close his eyes, like a tired child, without
a care or a fear, and forthwith sleep, with the pressure and the
protection of his Father's arm about him.

This psalm sounds again the glad trustful strain which has slumbered in
his harp-strings ever since the happy old days of his early trials, and
is re-awakened as the rude blast of calamity sweeps through them once
more.

The sixty-third psalm is by the superscription referred to the time when
David was "in the wilderness of Judah," which has led many readers to
think of his long stay there during Saul's persecution. But the psalm
certainly belongs to the period of his reign, as is obvious from its
words, "_The king_ shall rejoice in God." It must therefore belong to
his brief sojourn in the same wilderness on his flight to Mahanaim,
when, as we read in 2 Sam., "The people were weary and hungry and
thirsty in the wilderness." There is a beautiful progress of thought in
it, which is very obvious if we notice the triple occurrence of the
words "my soul," and their various connections--"my soul thirsteth," "my
soul is satisfied," "my soul followeth hard after Thee;" or, in other
words, the psalm is a transcript of the passage of a believing soul from
longing through fruition to firm trust, in which it is sustained by the
right hand of God.

The first of these emotions, which is so natural to the fugitive in his
sorrows, is expressed with singular poetic beauty in language borrowed
from the ashen grey monotony of the waterless land in which he was. One
of our most accurate and least imaginative travellers describes it thus:
"There were no signs of vegetation, with the exception of a few reeds
and rushes, and here and there a tamarisk." This lonely land, cracked
with drought, as if gaping with chapped lips for the rain that comes
not, is the image of his painful yearning for the Fountain of living
waters. As his men plodded along over the burning marl, fainting for
thirst and finding nothing in the dry torrent beds, so he longed for the
refreshment of that gracious presence. Then he remembers how in happier
days he had had the same desires, and they had been satisfied in the
tabernacle. Probably the words should read, "Thus in the sanctuary have
I gazed upon Thee, to see Thy power and Thy glory." In the desert and in
the sanctuary his longing had been the same, but then he had been able
to behold the symbol which bore the name, "the glory,"--and now he
wanders far from it. How beautifully this regretful sense of absence
from and pining after the ark is illustrated by those inimitably
pathetic words of the fugitive's answer to the priests who desired to
share his exile. "And the king said unto Zadok, Carry back the ark of
God into the city. If I find favour in the eyes of the Lord, He will
bring me again, and show me both it and His habitation."

The fulfilment is cotemporaneous with the desire. The swiftness of the
answer is beautifully indicated in the quick turn with which the psalm
passes from plaintive longing to exuberant rapture of fruition. In the
one breath "my soul thirsteth;" in the next, "my soul is satisfied"--as
when in tropical lands the rain comes, and in a day or two what had been
baked earth is rich meadow, and the dry torrent-beds, where the white
stones glistered in the sunshine, foam with rushing waters and are edged
with budding willows. The fulness of satisfaction when God fills the
soul is vividly expressed in the familiar image of the feast of "marrow
and fatness," on which he banquets even while hungry in the desert. The
abundant delights of fellowship with God make him insensible to external
privations, are drink for him thirsty, food for his hunger, a home in
his wanderings, a source of joy and music in the midst of much that is
depressing: "My mouth shall praise Thee with joyful lips." The little
camp had to keep keen look-out for nightly attacks; and it is a slight
link of connection, very natural under the circumstances, between the
psalms of this period, that they all have some references to the
perilous hours of darkness. We have found him laying himself down to
sleep in peace; here he wakes, not to guard from hostile surprises, but
in the silence there below the stars to think of God and feel again the
fulness of His all-sufficiency. Happy thoughts, not fears, hold his eyes
waking. "I remember Thee upon my bed."

The fruition heartens for renewed exercise of confidence, in which
David feels himself upheld by God, and foresees his enemies' defeat and
his own triumph. "My soul cleaveth after Thee"--a remarkable phrase, in
which the two metaphors of tenacious adherence and eager following are
mingled to express the two "phases of faith," which are really one--of
union with and quest after God, the possession which pursues, the
pursuit which possesses Him who is at once grasped and felt after by the
finite creature whose straitest narrowness is not too narrow to be
blessed by some indwelling of God, but whose widest expansion of
capacity and desire can but contain a fragment of His fulness. From such
elevation of high communion he looks down and onward into the dim
future, his enemies sunken, like Korah and his rebels, into the gaping
earth, or scattered in fight, and the jackals that were snuffing
hungrily about his camp in the wilderness gorging themselves on corpses,
while he himself, once more "king," shall rejoice in God, and with his
faithful companions, whose lips and hearts were true to God and His
anointed, shall glory in the deliverance that by the arbitrament of
victory has flung back the slanders of the rebels in their teeth, and
choked them with their own lies.

Our space forbids more than a brief reference to psalm lxii., which
seems also to belong to this time. It has several points of contact with
those already considered, _e.g._, the phrase, "sons of men," in the
sense of "nobles" (ver. 9); "my soul," as equivalent to "myself," and
yet as a kind of quasi-separate personality which he can study and
exhort; the significant use of the term "people," and the double
exhortations to his own devout followers and to the arrogant enemy. The
whole tone is that of patient resignation, which we have found
characterising David now. The first words are the key-note of the whole,
"Truly unto God my soul is silence"--is all one great stillness of
submissive waiting upon Him. It was in the very crisis of his fate, in
the suspense of the uncertain issue of the rebellion, that these words,
the very sound of which has calmed many a heart since, welled to his
lips. The expression of unwavering faith and unbroken peace is much
heightened by the frequent recurrence of the word which is variously
translated "truly," "surely," and "only." It carries the force of
confident affirmation, like the "verily" of the New Testament, and is
here most significantly prefixed to the assertions of his patient
resignation (ver. 1); of God's defence (ver. 2); of the enemies'
whispered counsels (ver. 4); to his exhortation of his soul to the
resignation which it already exercises (ver. 5); and to the triumphant
reiteration of God's all-sufficient protection. How beautifully, too,
does that reiteration--almost verbal repetition--of the opening words
strengthen the impression of his habitual trust. His soul in its silence
murmurs to itself, as it were, the blessed thoughts over and over again.
Their echoes haunt his spirit "lingering and wandering on, as loth to
die;" and if for a moment the vision of his enemies disturbs their flow,
one indignant question flung at them suffices, "How long will ye rush
upon a man? (how long) will ye all of you thrust him down as (if he
were) a bowing wall, a tottering fence?" and with a rapid glance at
their plots and bitter words, he comes back again to his calm gaze on
God. Lovingly he accumulates happy names for Him, which, in their
imagery, as well as in their repetition, remind us of the former songs
of the fugitive. "My rock," in whom I hide; "He is my salvation," which
is even more than "from Him cometh my salvation;" my "fortress," my
"glory," "the rock of my strength," "my refuge." So many phases of his
need and of God's sufficiency thus gathered together, tell how familiar
to the thoughts and real to the experience of the aged fugitive was his
security in Jehovah. The thirty years since last he had wandered there
have confirmed the faith of his earlier songs; and though the ruddy
locks of the young chieftain are silvered with grey now, and sins and
sorrows have saddened him, yet he can take up again with deeper meaning
the tones of his old praise, and let the experience of age seal with its
"verily" the hopes of youth. Exhortations to his people to unite
themselves with him in his faith, and assurances that God is a refuge
for them too, with solemn warnings to the rebels, close this psalm of
glad submission. It is remarkable for the absence of all petitions. He
needs nothing beyond what he has. As the companion psalm says, his soul
"is satisfied." Communion with God has its moments of restful
blessedness, when desire is stilled, and expires in peaceful fruition.

The other psalms of this period must be left unnoticed. The same general
tone pervades them all. In many particulars they closely resemble those
of the Sauline period. But the resemblance fails very significantly at
one point. The emphatic assertion of his innocence is gone for ever.
Pardoned indeed he is, cleansed, conscious of God's favour, and able to
rejoice in it; but carrying to the end the remembrance of his sore fall,
and feeling it all the more penitently, the more he is sure of God's
forgiveness. Let us remember that there are sins which, once done, leave
their traces on memory and conscience, painting indelible forms on the
walls of our "chambers of imagery," and transmitting results which
remission and sanctifying do not, on earth at least, wholly obliterate.
Let David's youthful prayer be ours, "Keep back Thy servant from
presumptuous sins: then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent from
much transgression."

It does not fall within the scope of this volume to deal with the
suppression of Absalom's revolt, nor with the ten years of rule that
remained to David after his restoration. The psalter does not appear to
contain psalms which throw light upon the somewhat clouded closing
years of his reign. One psalm, indeed, there is attributed to him, which
is, at any rate, the work of an old man--a sweet song into which mellow
wisdom has condensed its final lessons--and a snatch of it may stand
instead of any summing-up of the life by us:

  "Trust in the Lord, and do good;
   Dwell in the land, and enjoy security;
   Delight thyself also in the Lord,
   And He shall give thee the desires of thy heart.
   Commit thy way unto the Lord.

   Rest in the Lord and wait patiently for Him.

   I have been young and now am old,
   Yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken.

   I have seen the wicked in great power,
   And spreading himself like a green tree....
   Yet he passed away, and, lo, he was not."

May we not apply the next words to the psalmist himself, and hear him
calling us to look on him as he lies on his dying bed--disturbed though
it were by ignoble intrigues of hungry heirs--after so many storms
nearing the port; after so many vicissitudes, close to the unchanging
home; after so many struggles, resting quietly on the breast of God:
"Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man
is peace?" Into this opal calmness, as of the liquid light of sunset,
all the flaming splendours of the hot day have melted. The music of his
songs die away into "peace;" as when some master holds our ears captive
with tones so faint that we scarce can tell sound from silence, until
the jar of common noises, which that low sweetness had deadened, rushes
in.

One strain of a higher mood is preserved for us in the historical books
that prophesy of the true King, whom his own failures and sins, no less
than his consecration and victories, had taught him to expect. The dying
eyes see on the horizon of the far-off future the form of Him who is to
be a just and perfect ruler; before the brightness of whose presence,
and the refreshing of whose influence, verdure and beauty shall clothe
the world. As the shades gather, that radiant glory to come brightens.
He departs in peace, having seen the salvation from afar. It was fitting
that this fullest of his prophecies should be the last of his strains,
as if the rapture which thrilled the trembling strings had snapped them
in twain.

And then, for earth, the richest voice which God ever tuned for His
praise was hushed, and the harp of Jesse's son hangs untouched above his
grave. But for him death was God's last, best answer to his prayer, "O
Lord, open Thou my lips;" and as that cold but most loving hand
unclothes him from the weakness of flesh, and leads him in among the
choirs of heaven, we can almost hear again his former thanksgiving
breaking from his immortal lips, "Thou hast put a new song into my
mouth," whose melodies, unsaddened by plaintive minors of penitence and
pain, are yet nobler and sweeter than the psalms which he sang here, and
left to be the solace and treasure of all generations!




INDEX.


PSALM                                                             PAGE

   iii.                                                            246

    iv.                                                            248

   vii.                                                            110

  viii.                                                             28

    xi.                                                            138

  xiii.                                                            138

    xv.                                                            177

  xvii.                                                            138

 xviii.                                                    153 and 157

   xix.                                                             24

    xx.                                                            203

  xxii.                                                            141

 xxiii.                                                             37

  xxiv.                                                            177

   xxv.                                                            138

 xxvii.                                                             89

  xxix.                                                             31

  xxxi.                                                            132

 xxxii.                                                            227

 xxxiv.                                                             86

  xxxv.                                                            139

xxxvii.                                                            259

 xxxix.                                                            236

   xli.                                                            234

    li.                                                            209

   lii.                                                             72
