another that beareth witness of me; and I know that the witness which he
witnesseth of me is true." He cites John the Baptist, and reminds them
that they had sent a delegation to him, and that John had answered them
by bearing testimony of the Messiah; and John had been a burning and a
shining light, in whose illuminating ministry many had temporarily
rejoiced. The hostile Jews were left to see that the witness of John was
valid under their strictest construction of the rules of evidence;
"But," He continued, "I receive not testimony from man ... But I have
greater witness than that of John: for the works which the Father hath
given me to finish, the same works that I do, bear witness of me, that
the Father hath sent me. And the Father himself, which hath sent me,
hath borne witness of me."

Then in terms of unqualified condemnation, He told them they were devoid
of the Father's word, for they refused to accept Himself whom the Father
had sent. With humiliating directness He admonished these learned men of
the law, these interpreters of the prophets, these professional
expounders of sacred writ, to betake themselves to reading and study.
"Search the scriptures," said He, "for in them ye think ye have eternal
life: and they are they which testify of me." Convictingly He
continued--that they who admitted and taught that in the scriptures lay
the way to eternal life, refused to come to Him, of whom those same
scriptures testified, though by coming they might obtain eternal life.
"I receive not honour from men," He added, "But I know you, that ye have
not the love of God in you." They knew that they sought for honor among
men, received honors from one another, were made rabbis and doctors,
scribes and teachers, by the bestowal of titles and degrees--all of men;
but they rejected Him who came in the name of One infinitely greater
than all their schools or societies--He had come in the supreme name of
the Father. The cause of their spiritual ignorance was pointed out--they
relied upon the honors of men, and sought not the honor of real service
in the cause of God.

He had spoken of the authority of judgment that had been committed to
Himself; now He explained that they should not think He would accuse
them before the Father; a lesser one than He would accuse, even Moses,
another of His witnesses in whom they professed such trust--Moses whom
they all were said to believe--and, driving home the full effect of His
powerful arraignment, the Lord continued: "For had ye believed Moses, ye
would have believed me: for he wrote of me. But if ye believe not his
writings, how shall ye believe my words?" Such was the illuminating
instruction combined with burning denunciation that these men had called
forth by their futile attempt to convict Jesus on the charge of Sabbath
desecration. This was but one of many evil machinations by which they so
determinedly plotted, and strove to attach the stigma and invoke the
penalty of Sabbath-breaking upon the very One who had ordained the
Sabbath and was in truth and verity the one and only Lord thereof.


THE DISCIPLES CHARGED WITH SABBATH-BREAKING.

We may profitably consider in this connection other instances of good
work done by our Lord on Sabbath days; and this we may do without undue
regard to the order of the events in time. We again find Jesus in
Galilee, whether prior to or after His visit to Jerusalem at the time of
the unidentified feast, on which occasion He wrought the miracle of
healing at the Bethesda pool, matters not. On a certain Sabbath, He and
the disciples walked through a field of grain,[449] and, being hungry,
the disciples began to pluck some of the ripening ears; rubbing out the
kernels between their hands, they ate. There was no element of theft in
what they did, for the Mosaic law provided that in passing through
another's vineyard or corn field one might pluck grapes or corn to
relieve hunger; but it was forbidden to use a sickle in the field, or to
carry away any of the grapes in a vessel.[450] The permission extended
only to the relief of present need. When the disciples of Jesus availed
themselves of this lawful privilege, there were Pharisees on the watch,
and these came at once to the Master, saying: "Behold, thy disciples do
that which is not lawful to do upon the sabbath day." The accusers
doubtless had in mind the rabbinical dictum that rubbing out an ear of
grain in the hands was a species of threshing; that blowing away the
chaff was winnowing; and that it was unlawful to thresh or winnow on the
Sabbath. Indeed, some learned rabbis had held it to be a sin to walk on
grass during the Sabbath, inasmuch as the grass might be in seed, and
the treading out of the seed would be as the threshing of grain.

Jesus defended the disciples by citing a precedent applicable to the
case, and of much greater import. The instance was that of David, who
with a small company of men had asked bread of the priest Ahimelech; for
they were hungry and in haste. The priest had none but consecrated
bread, the loaves of shewbread which were placed in the sanctuary at
intervals, and which none but the priests were allowed to eat. In view
of the condition of urgent need the priest had given the shewbread to
the hungry men.[451] Jesus also reminded the critical Pharisees that the
priests in the temple regularly did much work on the Sabbath in the
slaughtering of sacrificial victims and in altar service generally, yet
were held blameless because of the higher requirements of worship which
rendered such labor necessary; and added with solemn emphasis: "But I
say unto you, That in this place is one greater than the temple." He
cited the word of God spoken through Hosea, "I will have mercy, and not
sacrifice,"[452] and reproved at once their ignorance and their
unrighteous zeal by telling them that had they known what that scripture
meant they would not have condemned the guiltless. Be it remembered,
"The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath."[453]

His reproof was followed by the affirmation of His personal supremacy:
"_For the Son of man is Lord even of the sabbath day!_" What can we
gather from that declaration but that He, Jesus, there present in the
flesh, was the Being through whom the Sabbath had been ordained, that it
was He who had given and written in stone the decalog, including
"Remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy," and, "the seventh day is
the sabbath of the Lord thy God"?


A PHARISAICAL PLOT.

Again on a Sabbath, Jesus went into a synagog, and saw in the
congregation a man whose right hand was withered.[454] There were
Pharisees present, and they watched to see whether Jesus would heal the
man, their purpose being to accuse Him if He did so. The Pharisees
asked: "Is it lawful to heal on the sabbath days?" Our Lord countered
their poorly veiled purpose by asking: "Is it lawful to do good on the
sabbath days?" and extended the question, "or to do evil? to save life,
or to kill?" They held their peace, for the question was double-edged.
To reply in the affirmative would have been to justify the work of
healing; a negative answer would have stultified them. He put another
question: "What man shall there be among you, that shall have one sheep,
and if it fall into a pit on the sabbath day, will he not lay hold on
it, and lift it out? How much then is a man better than a sheep?"

As the Pharisees could not or would not reply, He summed up the whole
matter thus: "Wherefore it is lawful to do well on the sabbath days." He
called upon the man with the withered hand to stand forth before the
congregation. Grief and anger were mingled in His penetrating and
sweeping glance; but, turning with compassion toward the afflicted one,
He commanded him to stretch forth his hand; the man obeyed, and lo! the
hand "was restored whole, like as the other."

The discomfited Pharisees were furious, "filled with madness" Luke says;
and they went out to plot anew against the Lord. So bitter was their
hatred that they allied themselves with the Herodians, a political party
generally unpopular among the Jews.[455] The rulers of the people were
ready to enter into any intrigue or alliance to accomplish their avowed
purpose of bringing about the death of the Lord Jesus. Aware of the
wicked determination against Him, Jesus withdrew Himself from the
locality. Other accusations of Sabbath-breaking, brought against Christ
by Jewish casuists, will be considered later.[456]


NOTES TO CHAPTER 15.

1. Rabbinical Requirements Concerning Sabbath Observance.--"No feature
of the Jewish system was so marked as their extraordinary strictness in
the outward observance of the Sabbath, as a day of entire rest. The
Scribes had elaborated from the command of Moses, a vast array of
prohibitions and injunctions, covering the whole of social, individual,
and public life, and carried it to the extreme of ridiculous caricature.
Lengthened rules were prescribed as to the kinds of knots which might
legally be tied on the Sabbath. The camel-driver's knot and the sailor's
were unlawful, and it was equally illegal to tie or to loose them. A
knot which could be untied with one hand might be undone. A shoe or
sandal, a woman's cup, a wine or oil-skin, or a flesh-pot might be tied.
A pitcher at a spring might be tied to the body-sash, but not with a
cord.... To kindle or extinguish a fire on the Sabbath was a great
desecration of the day, nor was even sickness allowed to violate
Rabbinical rules. It was forbidden to give an emetic on the Sabbath--to
set a broken bone, or put back a dislocated joint, though some Rabbis,
more liberal, held that whatever endangered life made the Sabbath law
void, 'for the commands were given to Israel only that they might live
by them.' One who was buried under ruins on the Sabbath, might be dug
for and taken out, if alive, but, if dead, he was to be left where he
was, till the Sabbath was over."--Geikie, _Life and Words of Christ_,
chap. 38.

2. The Unnamed Feast.--There has been no little discussion as to the
particular festival referred to in John 5:1, at the time of which Jesus
healed the cripple at the pool of Bethesda. Many writers hold that it
was the Passover, others that it was the feast of Purim, or some other
Jewish celebration. The only semblance of importance attaching to the
question is the possibility of learning from the fact, if it could be
proved, something of the chronological order of events at this period of
our Lord's life. We are not told which feast this was, neither the year
nor the time of the year when it occurred. The miracle wrought on the
occasion, and the doctrinal discourse delivered as a result thereof,
depend for their value in no degree on the determination of date.

3. Shewbread.--The name means "bread of the presence," signifying that
it was placed in the presence of Jehovah. The bread so sanctified
consisted of twelve loaves, made without leaven. They were to be
deposited in the Holy Place in two columns of six loaves each. Zenos, in
_Stand. Bible Dict._ writes: "They were allowed to remain there for a
whole week, at the end of which period they were removed, and eaten by
the priest upon holy ground, i.e. within the precincts of the sanctuary.
For other persons than priests to eat of the loaves of the shewbread was
regarded as sacrilegious, for they were 'holy.'" See Exo. 25:30; Lev.
24:5-9; 1 Sam. 21:1-6.

4. The Sabbath Was Made for Man and Not Man for the Sabbath.--Edersheim
(vol. i, pp. 57, 58) says: "When on his flight from Saul, David had,
'when an hungered,' eaten of the shewbread and given it to his
followers, although, by the letter of the Levitical law, it was only to
be eaten by the priests. Jewish tradition vindicated his conduct on the
plea that 'danger to life superseded the Sabbath law,' and hence, all
laws connected with it.... In truth, the reason why David was blameless
in eating the shewbread was the same as that which made the Sabbath
labor of the priests lawful. The Sabbath law was not one merely of rest,
but of rest for worship. The service of the Lord was the object in view.
The priests worked on the Sabbath, because this service was the object
of the Sabbath; and David was allowed to eat of the shewbread, not
[solely] because there was danger to life from starvation, but because
he pleaded that he was on the service of the Lord, and needed this
provision. The disciples, when following the Lord, were similarly on the
service of the Lord; ministering to Him was more than ministering in the
temple, for He was greater than the temple. If the Pharisees had
believed this, they would not have questioned their conduct, nor in so
doing have themselves infringed that higher law which enjoined mercy,
not sacrifice."

FOOTNOTES:

[430] Gen. 2:3.

[431] Exo. 16:16-31.

[432] Exo. 20:8-11; 23:12; 31:13-15; 34:21; Lev. 19:3; 23:3; Deut.
5:12-14.

[433] Exo. 35:3; Numb. 15:32-36.

[434] Isa. 56:2; 58:13; Jer. 17:21-24.

[435] Neh. 8:9-12; 13:15-22.

[436] Ezek. 20:12-24.

[437] B. of M., Jarom 1:5; Mosiah 13:16-19; 18:23.

[438] Lev. 25:1-8; compare 26:34, 35.

[439] Lev. 25:10-55.

[440] Page 64.

[441] Note 1, end of chapter.

[442] John, chapter 5.

[443] Note 2, end of chapter.

[444] See another instance, pages 190-192.

[445] Pages 191 and 201. For further justification of this act of
healing on the Sabbath, see John 7:21-24.

[446] Page 142.

[447] Compare Doc. and Cov. 76:16, 17. See page 24 herein.

[448] Page 25.

[449] Matt. 12:1-8; compare Mark 2:23-28; Luke 6:1-5.

[450] Deut. 23:24, 25.

[451] Note 3, end of chapter.

[452] Hos. 6:6; compare Micah 6:6-9.

[453] Mark 2:27. Note 4, end of chapter.

[454] Matt. 12:10-13; Mark 3:1-6; Luke 6:6-8.

[455] Page 68.

[456] For instances, see Luke 13:14-16; 14:3-6; John 9:14-16.




CHAPTER 16.

THE CHOSEN TWELVE.


THEIR CALL AND ORDINATION.[457]

The night preceding the morn on which the Twelve Apostles were called
and ordained was spent by the Lord in solitary seclusion; He had
"continued all night in prayer to God."[458] Then, when day had come,
and while many people were gathering to hear more of the new and
wonderful gospel of the kingdom, He called to come closer some who had
theretofore been devotedly associated together as His disciples or
followers, and from among them He chose twelve, whom he ordained and
named apostles.[459] Prior to that time none of these had been
distinguished by any special delegation of authority or appointment;
they had been numbered with the disciples in general, though, as we have
seen, seven had received a preliminary call, and had promptly responded
thereto by abandoning wholly or in part their business affairs, and had
followed the Master. These were Andrew, John, Simon Peter, Philip,
Nathanael, James, and Levi Matthew. Prior to this eventful day, however,
none of the Twelve had been ordained or set apart to their sacred
office.

The three Gospel-writers who make record of the organization of the
Twelve place Simon Peter first and Judas Iscariot last in the category;
they agree also in the relative position of some but not of all the
others. Following the order given by Mark, and this may be the most
convenient since he names as the first three those who later became most
prominent, we have the following list: Simon Peter, James (son of
Zebedee), John (brother of the last-named), Andrew (brother of Simon
Peter), Philip, Bartholomew (or Nathanael), Matthew, Thomas, James (son
of Alpheus), Judas (also known as Lebbeus or Thaddeus), Simon
(distinguished by his surname Zelotes, also known as the Canaanite), and
Judas Iscariot.


TWELVE CONSIDERED INDIVIDUALLY.

_Simon_, named as the first apostle, is more commonly known as
_Peter_--the appellation given him by the Lord on the occasion of their
first meeting, and afterward confirmed.[460] He was the son of Jona, or
Jonas, and by vocation was a fisherman. He and his brother Andrew were
partners with James and John, the sons of Zebedee; and apparently the
fishing business was a prosperous one with them, for they owned their
boats and gave employment to other men.[461] Peter's early home had been
at the little fishery town of Bethsaida,[462] on the west shore of the
Sea of Galilee; but about the time of his first association with Jesus,
or soon thereafter, he, with others of his family, removed to Capernaum,
where he appears to have become an independent householder.[463] Simon
Peter was a married man before his call to the ministry. He was well to
do in a material way; and when he once spoke of having left all to
follow Jesus, the Lord did not deny that Peter's sacrifice of temporal
possessions was as great as had been implied. We are not justified in
regarding him as unlettered or ignorant. True, both he and John were
designated by the council of rulers as "unlearned and ignorant
men,"[464] but this was spoken of them as indicating their lack of
training in the schools of the rabbis; and it is worthy of note, that
the members of that same council were amazed at the wisdom and power
manifested by the two apostles, whom they professed to despize.

In temperament Peter was impulsive and stern, and, until trained by
severe experience, was lacking in firmness. He had many human
weaknesses, yet in spite of them all he eventually overcame the
temptations of Satan and the frailties of the flesh, and served his Lord
as the appointed and acknowledged leader of the Twelve. Of the time and
place of his death the scriptures do not speak; but the manner thereof
was prefigured by the resurrected Lord,[465] and in part was foreseen by
Peter himself.[466] Tradition, originating in the writings of the early
Christian historians other than the apostles, states that Peter met
death by crucifixion as a martyr during the persecution incident to the
reign of Nero, probably between A.D. 64 and 68. Origen states that the
apostle was crucified with his head downward. Peter, with James and
John, his associates in the presidency of the Twelve, has ministered as
a resurrected being in the present dispensation, in restoring to earth
the Melchizedek Priesthood, including the Holy Apostleship, which had
been taken away because of the apostasy and unbelief of men.[467]

_James_ and _John_, brothers by birth, partners in business as
fishermen, brethren in the ministry, were associated together and with
Peter in the apostolic calling. The Lord bestowed upon the pair a title
in common--Boanerges, or Sons of Thunder[468]--possibly with reference
to the zeal they developed in His service, which, indeed, at times had
to be restrained, as when they would have had fire called from heaven to
destroy the Samaritan villagers who had refused hospitality to the
Master.[469] They and their mother aspired to the highest honors of the
kingdom, and asked that the two be given places, one on the right the
other on the left of Christ in His glory. This ambition was gently
reproved by the Lord, and the request gave offense to the other
apostles.[470] With Peter these two brothers were witnesses of many of
the most important incidents in the life of Jesus; thus, the three were
the only apostles admitted to witness the raising of the daughter of
Jairus from death to life;[471] they were the only members of the Twelve
present at the transfiguration of Christ;[472] they were nearest the
Lord during the period of His mortal agony in Gethsemane;[473] and, as
heretofore told, they have ministered in these modern days in the
restoration of the Holy Apostleship with all its ancient authority and
power of blessing.[474] James is commonly designated in theological
literature as James I, to distinguish him from the other apostle bearing
the same name. James, the son of Zebedee, was the first of the apostles
to meet a martyr's violent death; he was beheaded by order of the king,
Herod Agrippa.[475] John had been a disciple of the Baptist, and had
demonstrated his confidence in the latter's testimony of Jesus by
promptly turning from the forerunner and following the Lord.[476] He
became a devoted servant, and repeatedly refers to himself as the
disciple "whom Jesus loved."[477] At the last supper John sat next to
Jesus leaning his head upon the Master's breast;[478] and next day as he
stood beneath the cross he received from the dying Christ the special
charge to care for the Lord's mother;[479] and to this he promptly
responded by conducting the weeping Mary to his own house. He was the
first to recognize the risen Lord on the shores of Galilee, and received
from His immortal lips encouragement of his hope that his life would be
continued in the body, in order that he might minister among men until
the Christ shall come in His glory.[480] The realization of that hope
has been attested by revelation in modern days.[481]

_Andrew_, son of Jona and brother of Simon Peter, is mentioned less
frequently than the three already considered. He had been one of the
Baptist's followers, and with John, the son of Zebedee, left the Baptist
to learn from Jesus; and having learned he went in search of Peter,
solemnly averred to him that the Messiah had been found, and brought his
brother to the Savior's feet.[482] He shared with Peter in the honor of
the call of the Lord on the sea shore, and in the promise "I will make
you fishers of men."[483] In one instance we read of Andrew as present
with Peter, James and John, in a private interview with the Lord;[484]
and he is mentioned in connection with the miraculous feeding of the
five thousand,[485] and as associated with Philip in arranging an
interview between certain inquiring Greeks and Jesus.[486] He is named
with others in connection with our Lord's ascension.[487] Tradition is
rife with stories about this man, but of the extent of his ministry, the
duration of his life, and the circumstances of his death, we have no
authentic record.

_Philip_ may have been the first to receive the authoritative call
"Follow me" from the lips of Jesus, and we find him immediately
testifying that Jesus was the long expected Messiah. His home was in
Bethsaida, the town of Peter, Andrew, James, and John. It is said that
Jesus found him,[488] whereas the others concerned in that early
affiliation seem to have come of themselves severally to Christ.
We find brief mention of him at the time the five thousand were
fed, on which occasion Jesus asked him "Whence shall we buy bread, that
these may eat?" This was done to test and prove him, for Jesus knew what
would be done. Philip's reply was based on a statement of the small
amount of money at hand, and showed no expectation of miraculous
intervention.[489] It was to him the Greeks applied when they sought a
meeting with Jesus as noted in connection with Andrew. He was mildly
reproved for his misunderstanding when he asked Jesus to show to him and
the others the Father--"Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast
thou not known me, Philip?"[490] Aside from incidental mention of his
presence as one of the Eleven after the ascension, the scriptures tell
us nothing more concerning him.

_Bartholomew_ is mentioned in scripture by this name only in connection
with his ordination to the apostleship, and as one of the Eleven after
the ascension. The name means son of Tolmai. It is practically certain,
however, that he is the man called Nathanael in John's Gospel--the one
whom Christ designated as "an Israelite indeed, in whom is no
guile."[491] He is named again as among those who went fishing with
Peter after the resurrection of Christ.[492] His home was in Cana of
Galilee. The reasons for assuming that Bartholomew and Nathanael are the
same persons are these: Bartholomew is named in each of the three
synoptic Gospels as an apostle, but Nathanael is not mentioned.
Nathanael is named twice in John's Gospel, and Bartholomew not at all;
Bartholomew and Philip, or Nathanael and Philip, are mentioned together.

_Matthew_, or _Levi_, son of Alpheus, was one of the seven who received
a call to follow Christ before the ordination of the Twelve. He it was
who gave a feast, for attending which Jesus and the disciples were
severely criticized by the Pharisees,[493] on the charge that it was
unseemly for Him to eat with publicans and sinners. Matthew was a
publican; he so designates himself in the Gospel he wrote;[494] but the
other evangelists omit the mention when including him with the Twelve.
His Hebrew name, Levi, is understood by many as an indication of
priestly lineage. Of his ministry we have no detailed account; though he
is the author of the first Gospel, he refrains from special mention of
himself except in connection with his call and ordination. He is spoken
of by other than scriptural writers as one of the most active of the
apostles after Christ's death, and as operating in lands far from
Palestine.

_Thomas_, also known as Didymus, the Greek equivalent of his Hebrew
name, meaning "a twin," is mentioned as a witness of the raising of
Lazarus. His devotion to Jesus is shown by his desire to accompany the
Lord to Bethany, though persecution in that region was almost certain.
To his fellow apostles Thomas said: "Let us also go, that we may die
with him."[495] Even as late in his experience as the night before the
crucifixion, Thomas had failed to comprehend the impending necessity of
the Savior's sacrifice; and when Jesus referred to going away and
leaving the others to follow, Thomas asked how they could know the way.
For his lack of understanding he stood reproved.[496] He was absent when
the resurrected Christ appeared to the assembled disciples in the
evening of the day of His rising; and on being informed by the others
that they had seen the Lord, he forcefully expressed his doubt, and
declared he would not believe unless he could see and feel for himself
the wounds in the crucified body. Eight days later the Lord visited the
apostles again, when, as on the earlier occasion, they were within
closed doors; and to Thomas the Lord said: "Reach hither thy finger, and
behold my hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side."
Then Thomas, no longer doubting but with love and reverence filling his
soul, exclaimed "My Lord and my God." The Lord said unto him: "Thomas,
because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they that
have not seen, and yet have believed."[497] Of Thomas no further record
appears in the New Testament aside from that of his presence with his
fellows after the ascension.

_James_, son of Alpheus, is mentioned in the Gospels only in the matter
of his ordination to the apostleship; and but once elsewhere in the New
Testament by the appellation "son of Alpheus."[498] In writings other
than scriptural he is sometimes designated as James II to avoid
confusing him with James the son of Zebedee. There is acknowledged
uncertainty concerning the identity of James the son of Alpheus as the
James or one of the James's referred to in the Acts and the
Epistles;[499] and a plenitude of controversial literature on the
subject is extant.[500]

_Judas_ is called _Lebbeus Thaddeus_ by Matthew, _Thaddeus_ by Mark, and
_Judas the brother of James_ by Luke.[501] The only other specific
reference to this apostle is made by John, and is incident to the last
long interview between Jesus and the apostles, when this Judas, "not
Iscariot," asked how or why Jesus would manifest Himself to His chosen
servants and not to the world at large. The man's question shows that
the really distinguishing character of the apostleship was not fully
comprehended by him at that time.

_Simon Zelotes_, so designated in Acts,[502] and as _Simon called
Zelotes_ in Luke's Gospel, is distinguished by both Matthew and Mark as
the _Canaanite_. The last designation has no reference to the town of
Cana, nor to the land of Canaan, neither is it in any sense of
geographical signification; it is the Syro-Chaldaic equivalent of the
Greek word which is rendered in the English translation "Zelotes." The
two names, therefore, have the same fundamental meaning, and each refers
to the Zealots, a Jewish sect or faction, known for its zeal in
maintaining the Mosaic ritual. Doubtless Simon had learned moderation
and toleration from the teachings of Christ; otherwise he would scarcely
have been suited to the apostolic ministry. His zealous earnestness,
properly directed, may have developed into a most serviceable trait of
character. This apostle is nowhere in the scriptures named apart from
his colleagues.

_Judas Iscariot_ is the only Judean named among the Twelve; all the
others were Galileans. He is generally understood to have been a
resident of Kerioth, a small town in the southerly part of Judea, but a
few miles west from the Dead Sea, though for this tradition, as also for
the signification of his surname, we lack direct authority. So too we
are uninformed as to his lineage, except that his father's name was
Simon.[503] He served as treasurer or agent of the apostolic company,
receiving and disbursing such offerings as were made by disciples and
friends, and purchasing supplies as required.[504] That he was
unprincipled and dishonest in the discharge of this trust is attested by
John. His avaricious and complaining nature revealed itself in his
murmuring against what he called a waste of costly spikenard, in the
anointing of the Lord by Mary but a few days before the crucifixion; he
hypocritically suggested that the precious ointment could have been sold
and the proceeds given to the poor.[505] The crowning deed of perfidy in
the career of Iscariot was his deliberate betrayal of his Master to
death; and this the infamous creature did for a price, and accomplished
the foul deed with a kiss. He brought his guilty life to a close by a
revolting suicide and his spirit went to the awful fate reserved for the
sons of perdition.[506]


GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE TWELVE.

A survey of the general characteristics and qualifications of this body
of twelve men reveals some interesting facts. Before their selection as
apostles they had all become close disciples of the Lord; they believed
in Him; several of them, possibly all, had openly confessed that He was
the Son of God; and yet it is doubtful that any one of them fully
understood the real significance of the Savior's work. It is evident by
the later remarks of many of them, and by the instructions and rebuke
they called forth from the Master, that the common Jewish expectation of
a Messiah who would reign in splendor as an earthly sovereign after He
had subdued all other nations, had a place even in the hearts of these
chosen ones. After long experience, Peter's concern was: "Behold, we
have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall we have
therefore?"[507] They were as children to be trained and taught; but
they were mostly willing pupils, receptive of soul, and imbued with a
sincere eagerness to serve. To Jesus they were His little ones, His
children, His servants, and His friends, as they merited.[508] They were
all of the common people, not rabbis, scholars, nor priestly officials.
Their inner natures, not their outward accomplishments, were taken into
prime account in the Lord's choosing. The Master chose them; they did
not choose themselves; by Him they were ordained,[509] and they could in
consequence rely the more implicitly upon His guidance and support. To
them much was given; much of them was required. With the one black
exception they all became shining lights in the kingdom of God, and
vindicated the Master's selection. He recognized in each the
characteristics of fitness developed in the primeval world of
spirits.[510]


DISCIPLES AND APOSTLES.

Discipleship is general; any follower of a man or devotee to a principle
may be called a disciple. The Holy Apostleship is an office and calling
belonging to the Higher or Melchizedek Priesthood, at once exalted and
specific, comprizing as a distinguishing function that of personal and
special witness to the divinity of Jesus Christ as the one and only
Redeemer and Savior of mankind.[511] The apostleship is an individual
bestowal, and as such is conferred only through ordination. That the
Twelve did constitute a council or "quorum" having authority in the
Church established by Jesus Christ, is shown by their ministrations
after the Lord's resurrection and ascension. Their first official act
was that of filling the vacancy in their organization occasioned by the
apostasy and death of Judas Iscariot; and in connection with this
procedure, the presiding apostle, Peter, set forth the essential
qualifications of the one who would be chosen and ordained, which
comprized such knowledge of Jesus, His life, death, and resurrection, as
would make the new apostle one with the Eleven as special witnesses of
the Lord's work.[512]

The ordination of the Twelve Apostles marked the inauguration of an
advanced epoch in the earthly ministry of Jesus, an epoch characterized
by the organization of a body of men invested with the authority of the
Holy Priesthood, upon whom would rest, more particularly after the
Lord's departure, the duty and responsibility of continuing the work He
had begun, and of building up the Church established by Him.

The word "apostle" is an Anglicized form derived from the Greek
_apostolos_, meaning literally "one who is sent," and connoting an envoy
or official messenger, who speaks and acts by the authority of one
superior to himself. In this sense Paul afterward applied the title to
Christ as one specially sent and commissioned of the Father.[513]

The Lord's purpose in choosing and ordaining the Twelve is thus
enunciated by Mark: "And he ordained twelve, that they should be with
him, and that he might send them forth to preach, and to have power to
heal sicknesses, and to cast out devils."[514] For a season following
their ordination the apostles remained with Jesus, being specially
trained and instructed by Him for the work then before them; afterward
they were specifically charged and sent forth to preach and to
administer in the authority of their priesthood, as shall be hereafter
considered.


NOTES TO CHAPTER 16.

1. Judas Lebbeus Thaddeus.--This Judas (not Iscariot) is designated in
the authorized version of Luke 6:16, and Acts 1:13, as "_the brother_ of
James." That the words "the brother" are an addition to the original
text is indicated by italics. The revised version of these passages
reads in each instance "_the son_ of James," with italics of
corresponding significance. The original reads "Judas of James." We are
uninformed as to which James is referred to, and as to whether the Judas
here mentioned was the son, the brother, or some other relative of the
unidentified James.

2. The Meaning of "Apostle."--"The title 'Apostle' is likewise one of
special significance and sanctity; it has been given of God, and belongs
only to those who have been called and ordained as 'special witnesses of
the name of Christ in all the world, thus differing from other officers
in the Church in the duties of their calling' (Doc. and Cov. 107:23). By
derivation the word 'apostle' is the English equivalent of the Greek
_apostolos_, indicating a messenger, an ambassador, or literally 'one
who is sent'. It signifies that he who is rightly so called, speaks and
acts not of himself, but as the representative of a higher power whence
his commission issued; and in this sense the title is that of a servant,
rather than that of a superior. Even the Christ, however, is called an
Apostle with reference to His ministry in the flesh (Hebrews 3:1), and
this appellation is justified by His repeated declaration that He came
to earth to do not His own will but that of the Father by whom _He was
sent_.

"Though an apostle is thus seen to be essentially an envoy, or
ambassador, his authority is great, as is also the responsibility
associated therewith, for he speaks in the name of a power greater than
his own--the name of Him whose special witness he is. When one of the
Twelve is sent to minister in any stake, mission or other division of
the Church, or to labor in regions where no Church organization has been
effected, he acts as the representative of the First Presidency, and has
the right to use his authority in doing whatever is requisite for the
furtherance of the work of God. His duty is to preach the Gospel,
administer the ordinances thereof, and set in order the affairs of the
Church, wherever he is sent. So great is the sanctity of this special
calling, that the title 'Apostle' should not be used lightly as the
common or ordinary form of address applied to living men called to this
office. The quorum or council of the Twelve Apostles as existent in the
Church to-day may better be spoken of as the 'Quorum of the Twelve,' the
'Council of the Twelve,' or simply as the 'Twelve,' than as the 'Twelve
Apostles,' except as particular occasion may warrant the use of the more
sacred term. It is advized that the title 'Apostle' be not applied as a
prefix to the name of any member of the Council of the Twelve; but that
such a one be addressed or spoken of as 'Brother ----,' or 'Elder ----,'
and when necessary or desirable, as in announcing his presence in a
public assembly, an explanatory clause may be added, thus, 'Elder ----,
one of the Council of the Twelve,'"--From "The Honor and Dignity of
Priesthood," by the author, _Improvement Era_, Vol. 17, No. 5, pp.
409-410.

3. "Of Alpheus;" or "Son of Alpheus."--In all Bible passages specifying
"James son of Alpheus" (Matt. 10:3; Mark 3:18; Luke 6:15; Acts 1:13) the
word _son_ has been supplied by the translators, and therefore properly
appears in _Italics_. The phrase in the Greek reads "James of Alpheus."
This fact must not be given undue weight in support of the thought that
the James spoken of was not the son of Alpheus; for the word _son_ has
been similarly added in the translation of other passages, in all of
which _Italics_ are used to indicate the words supplied, e.g. "James
_the son_ of Zebedee" (Matt. 10:2; see also Mark 3:17). Read in this
connection Note 1 on the opposite page.

FOOTNOTES:

[457] Matt. 10:1-4; Mark 3:13-19; Luke 6:12-16.

[458] Luke 6:12.

[459] Luke 3:13; compare John 15:16; see also Acts 1:22.

[460] John 1:42; compare Matt. 16:18.

[461] Mark 1:16-20; Luke 5:10.

[462] John 1:44; 12:21.

[463] Matt. 8:14; Mark 1:29; Luke 4:38.

[464] Acts 4:13.

[465] John 21:18, 19.

[466] 2 Peter 1:14.

[467] Doc. and Cov. 27:12. Page 768 herein.

[468] Mark 3:17.

[469] Luke 9:54. See also Mark 9:38, for instance of John's impulsive
zeal.

[470] Mark 10:35-41; compare Matt. 20:20-24.

[471] Mark 5:37; Luke 8:51.

[472] Matt. 17:1-2; Luke 9:28-29.

[473] Matt. 26:36, 37.

[474] Doc. and Cov. 27:12. Page 768 herein.

[475] Acts 12:1, 2.

[476] John 1:35-40; see page 140.

[477] John 13:23; 19:26; 20:2.

[478] John 13:23, 25.

[479] John 19:25-27.

[480] John 21:7, 21-23.

[481] Doc. and Cov. Sec. 7; compare B. of M., 3 Nephi 28:1-12.

[482] John 1:35-40.

[483] Matt. 4:18, 19.

[484] Mark 13:3.

[485] John 6:8.

[486] John 12:20-22.

[487] Acts 1:13.

[488] John 1:43-45.

[489] John 6:5-7.

[490] John 14:8, 9.

[491] John 1:45-51; see page 141.

[492] John 21:2, 3.

[493] Page 194.

[494] Matt. 10:3.

[495] John 11:16.

[496] John 14:1-7.

[497] John 20:24-29. Page 689 herein.

[498] Acts 1:13. Note 3, end of chapter.

[499] Acts 12:17; 15:13-21; 21:18; 1 Cor. 15:7; Gal. 1:19; 2:9, 12; and
the Epistle of James.

[500] Concerning the James's mentioned in the New Testament, the opinion
of Bible scholars is divided, the question being as to whether two or
three individuals are indicated. Those who hold that there were three
men of this name distinguish them as follows: (1) James the son of
Zebedee and brother of John the apostle; all scriptural references to
him are explicit; (2) James the son of Alpheus; and (3) James the
brother of the Lord (Matt. 13:55; Mark 6:3; Gal. 1:19). If we accept
this classification, the references given in the previous footnote on
this page apply to James the Lord's brother. Both the Oxford and Bagster
Bible "Helps" treat James the son of Alpheus and James the Lord's
brother as one person, the expression "son of" being understood in its
general sense only (see page 280). The Bagster designation is: "James
II, apostle, son of Alpheus, brother or cousin to Jesus." (See Note 3,
end of chapter.) The Nave "Student's Bible" states (page 1327) that the
question as to whether James the Lord's brother "is identical with James
the son of Alpheus is one of the most difficult questions in the
biographical history of the Gospels." Faussett (in his "Cyclopedia
Critical and Expository") supports the contention that but one James is
meant; and other acknowledged authorities treat the two as one. For
detailed consideration of the subject the reader is referred to special
works.

[501] Note 1, end of chapter.

[502] Acts 1:13; compare Luke 6:15.

[503] John 6:71; 12:4; 13:26.

[504] John 12:6; 13:29.

[505] John 12:1-7; compare Matt. 26:6-13; Mark 14:3-9.

[506] Matt. 27:5; compare Acts 1:18; see also John 17:12; Doc. and Cov.
76; 31-48; 132:27.

[507] Matt. 19:27.

[508] Matt. 10:42; John 21:5; 13:16. compare verse 13; 15:14, 15.

[509] John 15:16.

[510] Pages 8 and 17.

[511] Doc. and Cov. 18:27-33; 20:38-44; 107:1-9, 23, 24, 39.

[512] Acts 1:15-26.

[513] Heb. 3:1; see Note 2, end of chapter.

[514] Mark 3:14, 15.




CHAPTER 17.

THE SERMON ON THE MOUNT.


At some time very near that of the ordination of the Twelve, Jesus
delivered a remarkable discourse, which, in reference to the place where
it was given, has come to be known as the Sermon on the Mount. Matthew
presents an extended account occupying three chapters of the first
Gospel; Luke gives a briefer synopsis.[515] Circumstantial variations
appearing in the two records are of minor importance;[516] it is the
sermon itself to which we may profitably devote attention. Luke
introduces in different parts of his writings many of the precious
precepts given as parts of the sermon recorded as a continuous discourse
in the Gospel written by Matthew. In our present study we shall be
guided principally by Matthew's account. Some portions of this
comprehensive address were expressly directed to the disciples, who had
been or would be called to the apostleship and in consequence be
required to renounce all their worldly interests for the labors of the
ministry; other parts were and are of general application. Jesus had
ascended the mountain side, probably to escape the crowds that thronged
Him in or near the towns.[517] The disciples gathered about Him, and
there He sat and taught them.[518]


THE BEATITUDES.[519]

The opening sentences are rich in blessing, and the first section of the
discourse is devoted to an explanation of what constitutes genuine
blessedness; the lesson, moreover, was made simple and unambiguous by
specific application, each of the blessed being assured of recompense
and reward in the enjoyment of conditions directly opposite to those
under which he had suffered. The blessings particularized by the Lord on
this occasion have been designated in literature of later time as the
Beatitudes. The poor in spirit are to be made rich as rightful heirs to
the kingdom of heaven; the mourner shall be comforted for he shall see
the divine purpose in his grief, and shall again associate with the
beloved ones of whom he has been bereft; the meek, who suffer spoliation
rather than jeopardize their souls in contention, shall inherit the
earth; those that hunger and thirst for the truth shall be fed in rich
abundance; they that show mercy shall be judged mercifully; the pure in
heart shall be admitted to the very presence of God; the peacemakers,
who try to save themselves and their fellows from strife, shall be
numbered among the children of God; they that suffer persecution for the
sake of righteousness shall inherit the riches of the eternal kingdom.
To the disciples the Lord spake directly, saying: "Blessed are ye, when
men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of
evil against you falsely, for my sake. Rejoice, and be exceeding glad:
for great is your reward in heaven: for so persecuted they the prophets
which were before you."[520]

It is evident that the specified blessings and the happiness comprized
therein are to be realized in their fulness only beyond the grave;
though the joy that comes from the consciousness of right living brings,
even in this world, a rich return. An important element in this splendid
elucidation of the truly blessed state is the implied distinction
between pleasure and happiness.[521] Mere pleasure is at best but
fleeting; happiness is abiding, for in the recollection thereof is joy
renewed. Supreme happiness is not an earthly attainment; the promised
"fulness of joy" lies beyond death and the resurrection.[522] While man
exists in this mortal state he needs some of the things of the world; he
must have food and clothing and provision for shelter; and beside these
bare necessities he may righteously desire the facilities of education,
the incidentals of advancing civilization, and the things that are
conducive to refinement and culture; yet all of these are but aids to
achievement, not the end to attain which man was made mortal.

The Beatitudes are directed to the duties of mortal life as a
preparation for a greater existence yet future. In the kingdom of
heaven, twice named in this part of the Lord's discourse, are true
riches and unfailing happiness to be found. The kingdom of heaven was
the all-comprizing text of this wonderful sermon; the means of reaching
the kingdom and the glories of eternal citizenship therein are the main
divisions of the treatise.


DIGNITY AND RESPONSIBILITY IN THE MINISTRY.[523]

The Master next proceeded to instruct with particular directness those
upon whom would devolve the responsibility of the ministry as His
commissioned representatives. "Ye are the salt of the earth," said He.
Salt is the great preservative; as such it has had practical use since
very ancient times. Salt was prescribed as an essential addition to
every meat offering under the Mosaic law.[524] Long before the time of
Christ, the use of salt had been accorded a symbolism of fidelity,
hospitality, and covenant.[525] To be of use salt must be pure; to be of
any saving virtue as salt, it must be salt indeed, and not the product
of chemical alteration or of earthy admixture, whereby its saltiness or
"savor" would be lost;[526] and, as worthless stuff, it would be fit
only to be thrown away. Against such change of faith, against such
admixture with the sophistries, so-called philosophies, and heresies of
the times, the disciples were especially warned. Then, changing the
figure, Jesus likened them to the light of the world, and enjoined upon
them the duty of keeping their light before the people, as prominently
as stands a city built upon a hill, to be seen from all directions, a
city that cannot be hid. Of what service would a lighted candle be if
hidden under a tub or a box? "Let your light so shine before men," said
He, "that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is
in heaven."

That they should make no error as to the relationship of the ancient law
and the gospel of the kingdom which He was elucidating, Jesus assured
them that He had not come to destroy the law nor to nullify the
teachings and predictions of the prophets, but to fulfil such and to
establish that for which the developments of the centuries gone had been
but preparatory. The gospel may be said to have destroyed the Mosaic law
only as the seed is destroyed in the growth of the new plant, only as
the bud is destroyed by the bursting forth of the rich, full, and
fragrant flowers, only as infancy and youth pass forever as the maturity
of years develops. Not a jot or a tittle of the law was to be void. A
more effective analogy than the last could scarcely have been conceived;
the jot or yod, and the tittle, were small literary marks in the Hebrew
script; for present purposes we may regard them as equivalent to the dot
of an "i" or the cross of a "t"; with the first, the jot, our English
word "iota," signifying a trifle, is related. Not even the least
commandment could be violated without penalty; but the disciples were
admonished to take heed that their keeping of the commandments was not
after the manner of the scribes and Pharisees, whose observance was that
of ceremonial externalism, lacking the essentials of genuine devotion;
for they were assured that by such an insincere course they could "in no
case enter into the kingdom of heaven."


THE LAW SUPERSEDED BY THE GOSPEL.[527]

The next section of the sermon deals with the superiority of the gospel
of Christ over the law of Moses, and contrasts the requirements of the
two in particular instances. Whereas the law forbade murder, and
provided a just penalty for the crime, Christ taught that one's giving
way to anger, which might possibly lead to violence or even murder, was
of itself a sin. To maliciously use an offensive epithet such as "Raca"
laid one liable to punishment under the decree of the council, and to
call another a fool placed one "in danger of hell fire." These
objectionable designations were regarded at that time as especially
opprobrious and were therefore expressive of hateful intent. The
murderer's hand is impelled by the hatred in his heart. The law provided
penalty for the deed; the gospel rebuked the evil passion in its
incipiency. To emphasize this principle, the Master showed that hatred
was not to be atoned by a material sacrifice; and that if one came to
make an offering at the altar, and remembered that he was at enmity with
his brother, he should first go to that brother and be reconciled, even
though such a course involved the interruption of the ceremonial, which
was a particularly grievous incident according to the judgment of the
priests. Differences and contentions were to be adjusted without delay.

The law forbade the awful sin of adultery; Christ said that the sin
began in the lustful glance, the sensual thought; and He added that it
was better to become blind than to look with evil eye; better to lose a
hand than to work iniquity therewith. Touching the matter of
divorcement, in which great laxity prevailed in that day, Jesus declared
that except for the most serious offense of infidelity to marriage vows,
no man could divorce his wife without becoming himself an offender, in
that she, marrying again while still a wife not righteously divorced,
would be guilty of sin, and so would be the man to whom she was so
married.

Of old it had been forbidden to swear or take oaths except in solemn
covenant before the Lord; but in the gospel dispensation the Lord
forbade that men swear at all; and the heinousness of wanton oaths was
expounded. Grievously sinful indeed it was and is to swear by heaven,
which is the abode of God; or by earth, which is His creation and by Him
called His footstool; or by Jerusalem, which was regarded by those who
swore as the city of the great King; or by one's own head, which is part
of the body God has created. Moderation in speech, decision and
simplicity were enjoined, to the exclusion of expletives, profanity and
oaths.

Of old the principle of retaliation had been tolerated, by which one who
had suffered injury could exact or inflict a penalty of the same nature
as the offense. Thus an eye was demanded for the loss of an eye, a tooth
for a tooth, a life for a life.[528] In contrast, Christ taught that men
should rather suffer than do evil, even to the extent of submission
without resistance under certain implied conditions. His forceful
illustrations--that if one were smitten on one cheek he should turn the
other to the smiter; that if a man took another's coat by process of
law, the loser should allow his cloak to be taken also; that if one was
pressed into service to carry another's burden a mile, he should
willingly go two miles; that one should readily give or lend as
asked--are not to be construed as commanding abject subserviency to
unjust demands, nor as an abrogation of the principle of
self-protection. These instructions were directed primarily to the
apostles, who would be professedly devoted to the work of the kingdom to
the exclusion of all other interests. In their ministry it would be
better to suffer material loss or personal indignity and imposition at
the hands of wicked oppressors, than to bring about an impairment of
efficiency and a hindrance in work through resistance and contention. To
such as these the Beatitudes were particularly applicable--Blessed are
the meek, the peace-makers, and they that are persecuted for
righteousness' sake.

Of old it had been said: "Love thy neighbour, and hate thine
enemy";[529] but the Lord now taught: "Love your enemies, bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you, and persecute you." This was a new doctrine. Never
before had Israel been required to love their foes. Friendship for
enemies had found no place in the Mosaic code: indeed the people had
grown to look upon Israel's enemies as God's enemies; and now Jesus
required that tolerance, mercy, and even love be meted out to such! He
supplemented the requirement by an explanation--through the course
indicated by Him men may become children of God, like unto their
Heavenly Father to the extent of their obedience; for the Father is
kind, long-suffering and tolerant, causing His sun to shine on the evil
and on the good, and sending rain for the sustenance of both just and
unjust.[530] And further, what excellence has the man who gives only as
he receives, acknowledges only those who salute him with respect, loves
only as he is loved? Even the publicans[531] did that much. Of the
disciples of Christ much more was expected. The admonition closing this
division of the discourse is an effective and comprehensive summary of
all that had preceded: "_Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father
which is in heaven is perfect._"[532]


SINCERITY OF PURPOSE.[533]

In the matter of alms-giving the Master warned against, and
inferentially denounced, ostentation and hypocritical display. To give
to the needy is praiseworthy; but to give for the purpose of winning the
praise of men is rank hypocrisy. The tossing of alms to a beggar, the
pouring of offerings into the temple treasure chests, to be seen of
men,[534] and similar displays of affected liberality, were fashionable
among certain classes in the time of Christ; and the same spirit is
manifest today. Some there be now who cause a trumpet to be sounded,
through the columns of the press perchance, or by other means of
publicity, to call attention to their giving, that they may have glory
of men--to win political favor, to increase their trade or influence, to
get what in their estimation is worth more than that from which they
part. With logical incisiveness the Master demonstrated that such givers
have their reward. They have received what they bid for; what more can
such men demand or consistently expect? _"But" said the Lord, "when thou
doest alms, let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth: That
thine alms may be in secret: and thy Father which seeth in secret
himself shall reward thee openly!"_

In the same spirit did the Preacher denounce hypocritical prayers--the
saying of prayers in place of praying. There were many who sought places
of public resort, in the synagogs, and even on the street-corners, that
they might be seen and heard of men when saying their prayers. They
secured the publicity they sought; what more could they ask? "Verily I
say unto you, They have their reward," He who would really pray--pray as
nearly as possible as Christ prayed, pray in actual communion with God
to whom the prayer is addressed--will seek privacy, seclusion,
isolation; if opportunity permits he will retire to his chamber, and
will shut the door, that none may intrude; there he may pray indeed, if
the spirit of prayer be in his heart; and this course was commended by
the Lord. Wordy supplications, made up largely of iterations and
repetitions such as the heathen use, thinking that their idol deities
will be pleased with their much speaking, were forbidden.

It is well to know that prayer is not compounded of words, words that
may fail to express what one desires to say, words that so often cloak
inconsistencies, words that may have no deeper source than the physical
organs of speech, words that may be spoken to impress mortal ears. The
dumb may pray, and that too with the eloquence that prevails in heaven.
Prayer is made up of heart throbs and the righteous yearnings of the
soul, of supplication based on the realization of need, of contrition
and pure desire. If there lives a man who has never really prayed, that
man is a being apart from the order of the divine in human nature, a
stranger in the family of God's children. Prayer is for the uplifting of
the suppliant. God without our prayers would be God; but we without
prayer cannot be admitted to the kingdom of God. So did Christ instruct:
"your Father knoweth what things ye have need of, before ye ask him."

Then gave He unto those who sought wisdom at His feet, a model prayer,
saying: "After this manner therefore pray ye:

_"Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed by thy name."_ In this we
acknowledge the relation we bear to our Heavenly Father, and while
reverencing His great and holy Name, we avail ourselves of the
inestimable privilege of approaching Him, less with the thought of His
infinite glory as the Creator of all that is, the Supreme Being above
all creation, than with the loving realization that He is Father, and
that we are His children. This is the earliest Biblical scripture giving
instruction, permission, or warrant, for addressing God directly as "Our
Father". Therein is expressed the reconciliation which the human family,
estranged through sin, may attain by the means provided through the well
beloved Son. This instruction is equally definite in demonstrating the
brotherhood between Christ and humanity. As He prayed so pray we to the
same Father, we as brethren and Christ as our Elder Brother.

_"Thy kingdom come. Thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven."_ The
kingdom of God is to be a kingdom of order, in which toleration and the
