thought it was some beautiful water=spirit living in the
fountain.  He stood gazing with admiration at those bright eyes,
those locks curled like the locks of Bacchus or Apollo, the
rounded cheeks, the ivory neck, the parted lips, and the glow of
health and exercise over all.  He fell in love with himself.  He
brought his lips near to take a kiss; he plunged his arms in to
embrace the beloved object.  It fled at the touch, but returned
again after a moment and renewed the fascination.  He could not
tear himself away; he lost all thought of food or rest, while he
hovered over the brink of the fountain gazing upon his own image.
He talked with the supposed spirit: "Why, beautiful being, do you
shun me?  Surely my face is not one to repel you.  The nymphs
love me, and you yourself look not indifferent upon me.  When I
stretch forth my arms you do the same; and you smile upon me and
answer my beckonings with the like."  His tears fell into the
water and disturbed the image.  As he saw it depart, he
exclaimed, "Stay, I entreat you! Let me at least gaze upon you,
if I may not touch you."   With this, and much more of the same
kind, he cherished the flame that consumed him, so that by
degrees he lost his color, his vigor, and the beauty which
formerly had so charmed the nymph Echo.  She kept near him,
however, and when he exclaimed, "Alas!  Alas!" she answered him
with the same words.  He pined away and died; and when his shade
passed the Stygian river, it leaned over the boat to catch a look
of itself in the waters.  The nymphs mourned for him, especially
the water-nymphs; and when they smote their breasts, Echo smote
hers also.  They prepared a funeral pile, and would have burned
the body, but it was nowhere to be found; but in its place a
flower, purple within, and surrounded with white leaves, which
bears the name and preserves the memory of Narcissus.

Milton alludes to the story of Echo and Narcissus in the Lady's
song in Comus.  She is seeking her brothers in the forest, and
sings to attract their attention.

  "Sweet Echo, sweetest nymph, that liv'st unseen
  Within thy aery shell
  By slow Meander's margent green.
  And in the violet-embroidered vale,
  Where the love-lorn nightingale
  Nightly to thee her sad song mourneth well;
  Canst thou not tell me of a gentle pair
  That likes thy Narcissus are?
  Oh, if thou have
  Hid them in some flowery cave,
  Tell me but where,
  Sweet queen of parly, daughter of the sphere,
  So may'st thou be translated to the skies,
  And give resounding grace to all heaven's harmonies."

Milton has imitated the story of Narcissus in the account which
he makes Eve give of the first sight of herself reflected in the
fountain:

  "That day I oft remember when from sleep
  I first awaked, and found myself reposed
  Under a shade on flowers, much wondering where
  And what I was, whence thither brought, and how
  Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound
  Of waters issued from a cave, and spread
  Into a liquid plain, then stood unmoved
  Pure as the expanse of heaven; I thither went
  With unexperienced thought, and laid me down
  On the green bank, to look into the clear
  Smooth lake that to me seemed another sky.
  As I bent down to look, just opposite
  A shape within the watery gleam appeared,
  Bending to look on me.  I started back;
  It started back; but pleased I soon returned,
  Pleased it returned as soon with answering looks
  Of sympathy and love.  There had I fixed
  Mine eyes till now, and pined with vain desire,
  Had not a voice thus warned me: 'What thou seest,
  What there thou seest, fair creature, is thyself.'"
  Paradise Lost, Book IV

The fable of Narcissus is often alluded to by the poets.  Here
are two epigrams which treat it in different ways.  The first is
by Goldsmith:

  "ON A BEAUTIFUL YOUTH STRUCK BLIND BY LIGHTNING:

  "Sure 'twas by Providence designed,
  Rather in pity than in hate,
  That he should be like Cupid blind,
  To save him from Narcissus' fate"

The other is by Cowper:

  "ON AN UGLY FELLOW

  "Beware, my friend, of crystal brook
  Or fountain, lest that hideous hook.
  Thy nose, thou chance to see;
  Narcissus' fate would then be thine,
  And self-detested thou would'st pine,
  As self-enamored he."


CLYTIE

Clytie was a water-nymph and in love with Apollo, who made her no
return.  So she pined away, sitting all day long upon the cold
ground, with her unbound tresses streaming over her shoulders.
Nine days she sat and tasted neither food nor drink, her own
tears and the chilly dew her only food.  She gazed on the sun
when he rose, and as he passed through his daily course to his
setting; she saw no other object, her face turned constantly on
him.  At last, they say, her limbs rooted in the ground, her face
became a sunflower, which turns on its stem so as always to face
the sun throughout its daily course; for it retains to that
extent the feeling of the nymph from whom it sprang.

One of the best known of the marble busts discovered in our own
time, generally bears the name of Clytie.  It has been very
frequently copied in plaster.  It represents the head of a young
girl looking down,   the neck and shoulders being supported in
the cup of a large flower,   which by a little effort of
imagination can be made into a giant sunflower.  The latest
supposition, however, is that this bust represented not Clytie,
but Isis.

Hood in his Flowers thus alludes to Clytie:

  "I will not have the mad Clytie,
  Whose head is turned by the sun;
  The tulip is a courtly quean,
  Whom therefore I will shun;
  The cowslip is a country wench,
  The violet is a nun;
  But I will woo the dainty rose,
  The queen of every one."

The sunflower is a favorite emblem of constancy.  Thus Moore uses
it:

  "The heart that has truly loved never forgets,
  But as truly loves on to the close;
  As the sunflower turns on her god when he sets
  The same look that she turned when he rose."

It is only for convenience that the modern poets translate the
Latin word HELIOTROPIUM, by the English sunflower.  The
sunflower, which was known to the ancients, was called in Greek,
helianthos, from HELIOS, the sun; and ANTHOS a flower, and in
Latin, helianthus.  It derives its name from its resemblance to
the sun; but, as any one may see, at sunset, it does not "turn to
the God when he sets the same look that it turned when he rose."

The Heliotrope of the fable of Clytie is called Turn-sole in old
English books, and such a plant is known in England.  It is not
the sweet heliotrope of modern gardens, which is a South American
plant.  The true classical heliotrope is probably to be found in
the heliotrope of southern France,   a weed not known in America.
The reader who is curious may examine the careful account of it
in Larousse's large dictionary.


HERO AND LEANDER

Leander was a youth of Abydos, a town of the Asian side of the
strait which separates Asia and Europe.  On the opposite shore in
the town of Sestos lived the maiden Hero, a priestess of Venus.
Leander loved her, and used to swim the strait nightly to enjoy
the company of his mistress, guided by a torch which she reared
upon the tower, for the purpose.  But one night a tempest arose
and the sea was rough; his strength failed, and he was drowned.
The waves bore his body to the European shore, where Hero became
aware of his death, and in her despair cast herself down from the
tower into the sea and perished.

The following sonnet is by Keats:

  "ON A PICTURE OF LEANDER

  "Come hither, all sweet maidens, soberly,
  Down looking aye, and with a chasten'd light,
  Hid in the fringes of your eyelids white,
  And meekly let your fair hands joined be,
  As if so gentle that ye could not see,
  Untouch'd, a victim of your beauty bright,
  Sinking away to his young spirit's night,
  Sinking bewilder'd 'mid the dreary sea.
  'Tis young Leander toiling to his death.
  Nigh swooning, he doth purse his weary lips
  For Hero's cheek, and smiles against her smile.
  Oh, horrid dream!  See how his body dips
  Dead-heavy; arms and shoulders gleam awhile;
  He's gone; up bubbles all his amorous breath!"

The story of Leander's swimming the Hellespont was looked upon as
fabulous, and the feat considered impossible, till Lord Byron
proved its possibility by performing it himself.  In the Bride of
Abydos he says,

  "These limbs that buoyant wave hath borne."

The distance in the narrowest part is almost a mile, and there is
a constant current setting out from the Sea of Marmora into the
Archipelago.  Since Byron's time the feat has been achieved by
others; but it yet remains a test of strength and skill in the
art of swimming sufficient to give a wide and lasting celebrity
to any one of our readers who may dare to make the attempt and
succeed in accomplishing it.

In the beginning of the second canto of the same poem, Byron
alludes to this story:

  "The winds are high on Helle's wave,
  As on that night of stormiest water,
  When Love, who sent, forgot to save
  The young, the beautiful, the brave,
  The lonely hope of Sestos' daughter.
  Oh, when alone along the sky
  The turret-torch was blazing high,
  Though rising gale and breaking foam,
  And shrieking sea-birds warned him home;
  And clouds aloft and tides below,
  With signs and sounds forbade to go,
  He could not see, he would not hear
  Or sound or sight foreboding fear.
  His eye but saw that light of love,
  The only star it hailed above;
  His ear but rang with Hero's song,
  'Ye waves, divide not lovers long.'
  That tale is old, but love anew
  May nerve young hearts to prove as true."

The subject has been a favorite one with sculptors.

Schiller has made one of his finest ballads from the tragic fate
of the two lovers.  The following verses are a translation from
the latter part of the ballad:

  "Upon Hellespont's broad currents
  Night broods black, and rain in torrents
  From the cloud's full bosom pours;
  Lightnings in the sky are flashing,
  All the storms below are dashing
  On the crag-piled shores.
  Awful chasms gaping widely,
  Separate the mountain waves;
  Ocean yawning as to open
  Downward e'en to Pluto's caves."

After the storm has arisen, Hero sees the danger, and cries,

  "Woe, ah!  Woe; great Jove have pity,
  Listen to my sad entreaty,
  Yet for what can Hero pray?
  Should the gods in pity listen,
  He, e'en now the false abyss in,
  Struggles with the tempest's spray.
  All the birds that skim the wave
  In hasty flight are hieing home;
  T the lee of safer haven
  All the storm-tossed vessels come.

  "Ah!  I know he laughs at danger,
  Dares again the frequent venture,
  Lured by an almighty power;
  For he swore it when we parted,
  With the vow which binds true-hearted
  Lovers to the latest hour.
  Yes!  Even as this moment hastens
  Battles he the wave-crests rude,
  And to their unfathomed chasms
  Dags him down the angry flood.

  "Pontus false!  Thy sunny smile
  Was the lying traitor's guile,
  Like a mirror flashing there:
  All thy ripples gently playing
  Til they triumphed in betraying
  Him into thy lying snare.
  Now in thy mid-current yonder,
  Onward still his course he urges,
  Thou the false, on him the fated
  Pouring loose thy terror-surges.
  Waxes high the tempest's danger,
  Waves to mountains rise in anger,
  Oceans swell, and breakers dash,
  Foaming, over cliffs of rock
  Where even navies, stiff with oak,
  Could not bear the crash.
  In the gale her torch is blasted,
  Beacon of the hoped-for strand;
  Horror broods above the waters,
  Horror broods above the land.

  Prays she Venus to assuage
  The hurricane's increasing rage,
  And to sooth the billows' scorn.
  And as gale on gale arises,
  Vows to each as sacrifices
  Spotless steer with gilded horn.
  To all the goddesses below,
  To "all the gods in heaven that be,"
  She prays that oil of peace may flow
  Softly on the storm-tossed sea.

  Blest Leucothea, befriend me!
  From cerulean halls attend me;
  Hear my prayer of agony.
  In the ocean desert's raving,
  Storm-tossed seamen, succor craving,
  Find in thee their helper nigh.
  Wrap him in thy charmed veil,
  Secret spun and secret wove,
  Certain from the deepest wave
  To lift him to its crests above."

  Now the tempests wild are sleeping,
  And from the horizon creeping
  Rays of morning streak the skies,
  Peaceful as it lay before
  The placid sea reflects the shore,
  Skies kiss waves and waves the skies.
  Little ripples, lightly plashing,
  Break upon the rock-bound strand,
  And they trickle, lightly playing
  O'er a corpse upon the sand.

  Yes, 'tis he!  Although he perished,
  Still his sacred troth he cherished,
  An instant's glance tells all to her;
  Not a tear her eye lets slip
  Not a murmur leaves her lip;
  Down she looks in cold despair;
  Gazes round the desert sea,
  Trustless gazes round the sky,
  Flashes then of noble fire
  Through her pallid visage fly!

  "Yes, I know, ye mighty powers,
  Ye have drawn the fated hours
  Pitiless and cruel on.
  Early full my course is over.
  Such a course with such a lover;
  Such a share of joy I've known.
  Venus, queen, within thy temple,
  Thou hast known me vowed as thine,
  Now accept thy willing priestess
  As an offering at thy shrine."

  Downward then, while all in vain her
  Fluttering robes would still sustain her,
  Springs she into Pontus' wave;
  Grasping him and her, the god
  Whirls them in his deepest flood,
  And, himself, becomes their grave.
  With his prizes then contented,
  Peaceful bids his waters glide,
  From the unexhausted vessels,
  Whence there streams an endless tide.



Chapter IX

Minerva and Arachne.  Niobe.  The Story of Perseus

Minerva, the goddess of wisdom, was the daughter of Jupiter.
She, they say, sprang forth from his brain full grown and clad in
complete armor.  She presided over the useful and ornamental
arts, both those of men,   such as agriculture and navigation,
and those of women,   spinning, weaving, and needle-work.  She
was also a warlike divinity; but a lover of defensive war only.
She had no sympathy with Mars's savage love of violence and
bloodshed.  Athens was her chosen seat, her own city, awarded to
her as the prize of a contest with Neptune, who also aspired to
it.  The tale ran that in the reign of Cecrops, the first king of
Athens, the two deities contended for the possession of the city.
The gods decreed that it should be awarded to that one who
produced the gift most useful to mortals.  Neptune gave the
horse; Minerva produced the olive.  The gods gave judgment that
the olive was the more useful of the two, and awarded the city to
the goddess; and it was named after her, Athens, her name in
Greek being Athene.

In another contest, a mortal dared to come in competition with
Minerva.  That mortal was Arachne, a maiden who had attained such
skill in the arts of weaving and embroidery that the nymphs
themselves would leave their groves and fountains to come and
gaze upon her work.  It was not only beautiful when it was done,
but beautiful also in the doing. To watch her, as she took the
wool in its rude state and formed it into rolls, or separated it
with her fingers and carded it till it looked as light and soft
as a cloud, or twirled the spindle with skilful touch, or wove
the web, or, when woven, adorned it with her needle, one would
have said that Minerva herself had taught her.  But this she
denied, and could not bear to be thought a pupil even of a
goddess.  "Let Minerva try her skill with mine," said she; "if
beaten, I will pay the penalty."  Minerva heard this and was
displeased.  Assuming the form of an old woman, she went and gave
Arachne some friendly advice.  "I have had much experience,: said
she, "and I hope you will not despise my counsel.  Challenge your
fellow-mortals as you will, but do not compete with a goddess.
On the contrary, I advise you to ask her forgiveness for what you
have said, and, as she is merciful, perhaps she will pardon you."
Arachne stopped her spinning, and looked at the old dame with
anger in her countenance.  "Keep your counsel," said she, "for
your daughters or handmaids; for my part, I know what I say, and
I stand to it.  I am not afraid of the goddess; let her try her
skill, if she dare venture."  "She comes," said Minerva; and
dropping her disguise, stood confessed.  The nymphs bent low in
homage, and all the bystanders paid reverence.  Arachne alone was
unterrified.  She blushed, indeed; a sudden color dyed her cheek,
and then she grew pale.  But she stood to her resolve, and with a
foolish conceit of her own skill rushed on her fate.  Minerva
forbore no longer, nor interposed any further advice.  They
proceed to the contest.  Each takes her station and attaches the
web to the beam.  Then the slender shuttle is passed in and out
among the threads.  The reed with its fine teeth strikes up the
woof into its place and compacts the web.  Both work with speed;
their skilful hands move rapidly, and the excitement of the
contest makes the labor light.  Wool of Tyrian dye is contrasted
with that of other colors, shaded off into one another so
adroitly that the joining deceives the eye.  Like the bow, whose
long arch tinges the heavens, formed by sunbeams reflected from
the shower (this description of the rainbow is literally
translated rom Ovid), in which, where the colors meet they seem
as one, but at a little distance from the point of contact are
wholly different.

Minerva wrought on her web the scene of her contest with Neptune.
Twelve of the heavenly powers are represented, Jupiter, with
August gravity, sitting in the midst.  Neptune, the ruler of the
sea, holds his trident, and appears to have just smitten the
earth, from which a horse has leaped forth.  Minerva depicted
herself with helmed head, her AEgis covering her breast.  Such
was the central circle; and in the four corners were represented
incidents illustrating the displeasure of the gods at such
presumptuous mortals as had dared to contend with them.  These
were meant as warnings to her rival to give up the contest before
it was too late.

Arachne filled her web with subjects designedly chosen to exhibit
the failings and errors of the gods.  One scene represented Leda
caressing the swan, under which form Jupiter had disguised
himself; and another, Danae, in the brazen tower in which her
father had imprisoned her, but where the god effected his
entrance in the form of a shower of gold.  Still another depicted
Europa deceived by Jupiter under the disguise of a bull.
Encouraged by the tameness of the animal, Europa ventured to
mount his back, whereupon Jupiter advanced into the sea, and swam
with her to Crete.  You would have thought it was a real bull so
naturally was it wrought, and so natural was the water in which
it swam.  She seemed to look with longing eyes back upon the
shore she was leaving, and to call to her companions for help.
She appeared to shudder with terror at the sight of the heaving
waves, and to draw back her feet from the water.

Arachne filled her canvas with these and like subjects,
wonderfully well done, but strongly marking her presumption and
impiety.  Minerva could not forbear to admire, yet felt indignant
at the insult.  She struck the web with her shuttle, and rent it
in pieces; she then touched the forehead of Arachne, and made her
feel her guilt and shame.  She could not endure it, and went and
hanged herself.  Minerva pitied her as she saw her hanging by a
rope.  "Live, guilty woman," said she; " and that you may
preserve the memory of this lesson, continue to hang, you and
your descendants, to all future times."  She sprinkled her with
the juices of aconite, and immediately her hair came off, and her
nose and ears likewise.  Her form shrank up, and her head grew
smaller yet; her fingers grew to her side, and served for legs.
All the rest of her is body, out of which she spins her thread,
often hanging suspended by it, in the same attitude as when
Minerva touched her and transformed her into a spider.

Spenser tells the story of Arachne in his Muiopotmos, adhering
very closely to his master Ovid, but improving upon him in the
conclusion of the story.  The two stanzas which follow tell what
was done after the goddess had depicted her creation of the olive
tree:

  "Amongst these leaves she made a Butterfly,
  With excellent device and wondrous slight,
  Fluttering among the olives wantonly,
  That seemed to live, so like it was in sight;
  The velvet nap which on his wings doth lie,
  The silken down with which his back is dight,
  His broad outstretched horns, his hairy thighs,
  His glorious colors, and his glistening eyes."

  "Which when Arachne saw, as overlaid
  And mastered with workmanship so rare.
  She stood astonished long, ne aught gainsaid;
  And with fast-fixed eyes on her did stare,
  And by her silence, sign of one dismayed,
  The victory did yield her as her share;
  Yet did she inly fret and felly burn,
  And all her blood to poisonous rancor turn."

And so the metamorphosis is caused by Arachne's own mortification
and vexation, and not by any direct act of the goddess.

The following specimen of old-fashioned gallantry is by Garrick:


  UPON A LADY'S EMBROIDERY

  "Arachne once, as poets tell,
  A goddess at her art defied,
  And soon the daring mortal fell
  The hapless victim of her pride.

  "Oh, then, beware Arachne's fate;
  Be prudent, Chloe, and submit,
  For you'll most surely meet her hate,
  Who rival both her art and wit."

Tennyson, in his Palace of Art, describing the works of art with
which the palace was adorned, thus alludes to Europa:

  "---- sweet Europa's mantle blew unclasped
  From off her shoulder, backward borne,
  From one hand drooped a crocus, one hand grasped
  The mild bull's golden horn."

In his Princess there is this allusion to Danae:

  "Now lies the earth all Danae to the stars,
  And all thy heart lies open unto me."


NIOBE

The fate of Arachne was noised abroad through all the country,
and served as a warning to all presumptuous mortals not to
compare themselves with the divinities.  But one, and she a
matron too, failed to learn the lesson of humility.  It was
Niobe, the queen of Thebes.  She had indeed much to be proud of;
but it was not her husband's fame, nor her own beauty, nor their
great descent, nor the power of their kingdom that elated her.
It was her children; and truly the happiest of mothers would
Niobe have been, if only she had not claimed to be so.  It was on
occasion of the annual celebration in honor of Latona and her
offspring,   Apollo and Diana,   when the people of Thebes were
assembled, their brows crowned with laurel, bearing frankincense
to the altars and paying their vows,   that Niobe appeared among
the crowd.  Her attire was splendid with gold and gems, and her
face as beautiful as the face of an angry woman can be.  She
stood and surveyed the people with haughty looks.  "What folly,"
said she, "is this!   to prefer beings whom you never saw to
those who stand before your eyes!  Why should Latona be honored
with worship rather than I?  My father was Tantalus, who was
received as a guest at the table of the gods; my mother was a
goddess.  My husband built and rules this city, Thebes; and
Phrygia is my paternal inheritance.  Wherever I turn my eyes I
survey the elements of my power; nor is my form and presence
unworthy of a goddess.  To all this let me add, I have seven sons
and seven daughters, and look for sons-in-law and daughters-in-
law of pretensions worthy of my alliance.  Have I not cause for
pride?  Will you prefer to me this Latona, the Titan's daughter,
with her two children?  I have seven times as many.  Fortunate
indeed am I, and fortunate I shall remain!  Will any one deny
this?  My abundance is my security.  I feel myself too strong for
Fortune to subdue.  She may take from me much; I shall still have
much left.  Were I to lose some of my children, I should hardly
