        Homer's Cyclops around his cave."

164:3   Sir John Forbes, M.D., F.R.S., Fellow of the Royal
        College of Physicians, London, said:

        "No systematic or theoretical classification of diseases
164:6   or of therapeutic agents, ever yet promulgated, is true, or
        anything like the truth, and none can be adopted as a safe
        guidance in practice."

164:9   It is just to say that generally the cultured class of medi-
        cal practitioners are grand men and women, therefore
        they are more scientific than are false claimants to Chris-
164:12  tian Science. But all human systems based on material
        premises are minus the unction of divine Science. Much
        yet remains to be said and done before all mankind is
164:15  saved and all the mental microbes of sin and all diseased
        thought-germs are exterminated.

        If you or I should appear to die, we should not be
164:18  dead. The seeming decease, caused by a majority of
        human beliefs that man must die, or produced by mental
        assassins, does not in the least disprove Christian Science;
164:21  rather does it evidence the truth of its basic proposition
        that mortal thoughts in belief rule the materiality mis-
        called life in the body or in matter. But the forever fact
164:24  remains paramount that Life, Truth, and Love save from
        sin, disease, and death. "When this corruptible shall have
        put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on
164:27  immortality [divine Science], then shall be brought to pass
        the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in
        victory" (St. Paul).




        CHAPTER VII - PHYSIOLOGY

        Therefore I say unto you, Take no thought for your life, what
        ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink; nor yet for your body,
        what ye shall put on.
        Is not the life more than meat, and the body than raiment? - JESUS.

        He sent His word, and healed them, and delivered them from their
        destructions. - PSALMS.

165:1   PHYSIOLOGY is one of the apples from "the tree
        of knowledge." Evil declared that eating this fruit
165:3   would open man's eyes and make him as a god. Instead
        of so doing, it closed the eyes of mortals to man's God-
        given dominion over the earth.

                           Man not structural

165:6   To measure intellectual capacity by the size of the
        brain and strength by the exercise of muscle, is to
        subjugate intelligence, to make mind mor-
165:9   tal, and to place this so-called mind at the
        mercy of material organization and non-intelligent
        matter.

165:12  Obedience to the so-called physical laws of health has
        not checked sickness. Diseases have multiplied, since
        man-made material theories took the place of spiritual
165:15  truth.

                           Causes of sickness

        You say that indigestion, fatigue, sleeplessness, cause
        distressed stomachs and aching heads. Then
165:18  you consult your brain in order to remember
        what has hurt you, when your remedy lies in forgetting
166:1   the whole thing; for matter has no sensation of its own,
        and the human mind is all that can produce pain.

166:3   As a man thinketh, so is he. Mind is all that feels,
        acts, or impedes action. Ignorant of this, or shrinking
        from its implied responsibility, the healing effort is made
166:6   on the wrong side, and thus the conscious control over the
        body is lost.

                       Delusions pagan and medical

        The Mohammedan believes in a pilgrimage to Mecca
166:9   for the salvation of his soul. The popular doctor believes
        in his prescription, and the pharmacist believes
        in the power of his drugs to save a man's
166:12  life. The Mohammedan's belief is a religious
        delusion; the doctor's and pharmacist's is a medical
        mistake.

                  Health from reliance on spirituality

166:15  The erring human mind is inharmonious in itself.
        From it arises the inharmonious body. To ignore
        God as of little use in sickness is a mistake.
166:18  Instead of thrusting Him aside in times of
        bodily trouble, and waiting for the hour of
        strength in which to acknowledge Him, we should learn
166:21  that He can do all things for us in sickness as in
        health.

        Failing to recover health through adherence to physi-
166:24  ology and hygiene, the despairing invalid often drops
        them, and in his extremity and only as a last resort, turns
        to God. The invalid's faith in the divine Mind is less
166:27  than in drugs, air, and exercise, or he would have resorted
        to Mind first. The balance of power is conceded to be
        with matter by most of the medical systems; but when
166:30  Mind at last asserts its mastery over sin, disease, and
        death, then is man found to be harmonious and
        immortal.

167:1   Should we implore a corporeal God to heal the sick
        out of His personal volition, or should we understand the
167:3   infinite divine Principle which heals? If we rise no higher
        than blind faith, the Science of healing is not attained, and
        Soul-existence, in the place of sense-existence, is not com-
167:6   prehended. We apprehend Life in divine Science only
        as we live above corporeal sense and correct it. Our pro-
        portionate admission of the claims of good or of evil de-
167:9   termines the harmony of our existence, - our health, our
        longevity, and our Christianity.

                             The two masters

        We cannot serve two masters nor perceive divine Sci-
167:12  ence with the material senses. Drugs and hygiene cannot
        successfully usurp the place and power of the
        divine source of all health and perfection. If
167:15  God made man both good and evil, man must remain
        thus. What can improve God's work? Again, an error
        in the premise must appear in the conclusion. To have
167:18  one God and avail yourself of the power of Spirit, you
        must love God supremely.

                            Half-way success

        The "flesh lusteth against the Spirit." The flesh and
167:21  Spirit can no more unite in action, than good can coin-
        cide with evil. It is not wise to take a halt-
        ing and half-way position or to expect to work
167:24  equally with Spirit and matter, Truth and error. There,
        is but one way - namely, God and His idea - which
        leads to spiritual being. The scientific government of the
167:27  body must be attained through the divine Mind. It is im-
        possible to gain control over the body in any other way.
        On this fundamental point, timid conservatism is abso-
167:30  lutely inadmissible. Only through radical reliance on
        Truth can scientific healing power be realized.

        Substituting good words for a good life, fair seeming
168:1   for straightforward character, is a poor shift for the weak
        and worldly, who think the standard of Christian Science
168:3   too high for them.

                        Belief on the wrong side

        If the scales are evenly adjusted, the removal of a single
        weight from either scale gives preponderance to the oppo-
168:6   site. Whatever influence you cast on the side
        of matter, you take away from Mind, which
        would otherwise outweigh all else. Your belief militates
168:9   against your health, when it ought to be enlisted on the
        side of health. When sick (according to belief) you rush
        after drugs, search out the material so-called laws of
168:12  health, and depend upon them to heal you, though you
        have already brought yourself into the slough of disease
        through just this false belief.

                          The divine authority

168:15  Because man-made systems insist that man becomes
        sick and useless, suffers and dies, all in consonance with
        the laws of God, are we to believe it? Are
168:18  we to believe an authority which denies God's
        spiritual command relating to perfection, - an authority
        which Jesus proved to be false? He did the will of the
168:21  Father. He healed sickness in defiance of what is called
        material law, but in accordance with God's law, the law
        of Mind.

                            Disease foreseen

168:24  I have discerned disease in the human mind, and rec-
        ognized the patient's fear of it, months before the so-called
        disease made its appearance in the body. Dis-
168:27  ease being a belief, a latent illusion of mortal
        mind, the sensation would not appear if the error of belief
        was met and destroyed by truth.

                            Changed mentality

168:30  Here let a word be noticed which will be
        better understood hereafter, - /chemicalization/.
        By chemicalization I mean the process which mortal
169:1   mind and body undergo in the change of belief from a
        material to a spiritual basis.

                          Scientific foresight

169:3   Whenever an aggravation of symptoms has occurred
        through mental chemicalization, I have seen the mental
        signs, assuring me that danger was over, before
169:6   the patient felt the change; and I have said
        to the patient, "You are healed," - sometimes to his dis-
        comfiture, when he was incredulous. But it always came
169:9   about as I had foretold.

        I name these facts to show that disease has a mental,
        mortal origin, - that faith in rules of health or in drugs
169:12  begets and fosters disease by attracting the mind to the
        subject of sickness, by exciting fear of disease, and by dos-
        ing the body in order to avoid it. The faith reposed in
169:15  these things should find stronger supports and a higher
        home. If we understood the control of Mind over body,
        we should put no faith in material means.

                          Mind the only healer

169:18  Science not only reveals the origin of all disease as
        mental, but it also declares that all disease is cured by
        divine Mind. There can be no healing ex-
169:21  cept by this Mind, however much we trust
        a drug or any other means towards which human faith
        or endeavor is directed. It is mortal mind, not mat-
169:24  ter, which brings to the sick whatever good they may
        seem to receive from materiality. But the sick are never
        really healed except by means of the divine power.
169:27  Only the action of Truth, Life, and Love can give
        harmony.

                             Modes of matter

        Whatever teaches man to have other laws and to
169:30  acknowledge other powers than the divine
        Mind, is anti-Christian. The good that a
        poisonous drug seems to do is evil, for it robs man of
170:1   reliance on God, omnipotent Mind, and according to be-
        lief, poisons the human system. Truth is not the basis of
170:3   theogony. Modes of matter form neither a moral nor a
        spiritual system. The discord which calls for material
        methods is the result of the exercise of faith in material
170:6   modes, - faith in matter instead of in Spirit.

                         Physiology unscientific

        Did Jesus understand the economy of man less than
        Graham or Cutter? Christian ideas certainly present
170:9   what human theories exclude - the Principle
        of man's harmony. The text, "Whosoever
        liveth and believeth in me shall never die," not only con-
170:12  tradicts human systems, but points to the self-sustaining
        and eternal Truth.

        The demands of Truth are spiritual, and reach the
170:15  body through Mind. The best interpreter of man's needs
        said: "Take no thought for your life, what ye shall eat,
        or what ye shall drink."

170:18  If there are material laws which prevent disease, what
        then causes it? Not divine law, for Jesus healed the
        sick and cast out error, always in opposition, never in
170:21  obedience, to physics.

                          Causation considered

        Spiritual causation is the one question to be considered,
        for more than all others spiritual causation relates to
170:24  human progress. The age seems ready to
        approach this subject, to ponder somewhat
        the supremacy of Spirit, and at least to touch the hem
170:27  of Truth's garment.

        The description of man as purely physical, or as both
        material and spiritual, - but in either case dependent
170:30  upon his physical organization, - is the Pandora box,
        from which all ills have gone forth, especially despair.
        Matter, which takes divine power into its own hands and
171:1   claims to be a creator, is a fiction, in which paganism and
        lust are so sanctioned by society that mankind has caught
171:3   their moral contagion.

                            Paradise regained

        Through discernment of the spiritual opposite of ma-
        teriality, even the way through Christ, Truth, man will
171:6   reopen with the key of divine Science the gates
        of Paradise which human beliefs have closed,
        and will find himself unfallen, upright, pure, and free,
171:9   not needing to consult almanacs for the probabilities either
        of his life or of the weather, not needing to study brain-
        ology to learn how much of a man he is.

                            A closed question

171:12  Mind's control over the universe, including man, is
        no longer an open question, but is demonstrable Science.
        Jesus illustrated the divine Principle and the
171:15  power of immortal Mind by healing sickness
        and sin and destroying the foundations of death.

                         Matter /versus/ Spirit

        Mistaking his origin and nature, man believes himself to
171:18  be combined matter and Spirit. He believes that Spirit
        is sifted through matter, carried on a nerve, ex-
        posed to ejection by the operation of matter.
171:21  The intellectual, the moral, the spiritual, - yea, the image
        of infinite Mind, - subject to non-intelligence!

        No more sympathy exists between the flesh and Spirit
171:24  than between Belial and Christ.

        The so-called laws of matter are nothing but false be-
        liefs that intelligence and life are present where Mind
171:27  is not. These false beliefs are the procuring cause of all
        sin and disease. The opposite truth, that intelligence and
        life are spiritual, never material, destroys sin, sickness,
171:30  and death.

        The fundamental error lies in the supposition that man
        is a material outgrowth and that the cognizance of good
172:1   or evil, which he has through the bodily senses, con-
        stitutes his happiness or misery.

                            Godless Evolution

172:3   Theorizing about man's development from mushrooms
        to monkeys and from monkeys into men
        amounts to nothing in the right direction and
172:6   very much in the wrong.

        Materialism grades the human species as rising from
        matter upward. How then is the material species main-
172:9   tained, if man passes through what we call death and
        death is the Rubicon of spirituality? Spirit can form
        no real link in this supposed chain of material being.
172:12  But divine Science reveals the eternal chain of existence
        as uninterrupted and wholly spiritual; yet this can be
        realized only as the false sense of being disappears.

                         Degrees of development

172:15  If man was first a material being, he must have passed
        through all the forms of matter in order to become man.
        If the material body is man, he is a portion of
172:18  matter, or dust. On the contrary, man is the
        image and likeness of Spirit; and the belief that there is
        Soul in sense or Life in matter obtains in mortals, /alias/
172:21  mortal mind, to which the apostle refers when he says
        that we must "put off the old man."

                            Identity not lost

        What is man? Brain, heart, blood, bones, etc., the
172:24  material structure? If the real man is in the material
        body, you take away a portion of the man when
        you amputate a limb; the surgeon destroys
172:27  manhood, and worms annihilate it. But the loss of a limb
        or injury to a tissue is sometimes the quickener of manli-
        ness; and the unfortunate cripple may present more no-
172:30  bility than the statuesque athlete, - teaching us by his
        very deprivations, that "a man's a man, for a' that."

                             When man is man

        When we admit that matter (heart, blood, brain, acting
173:1   through the five physical senses) constitutes man, we fail
        to see how anatomy can distinguish between
173:3   humanity and the brute, or determine when
        man is really /man/ and has progressed farther than his
        animal progenitors.

                            Individualization

173:6   When the supposition, that Spirit is within what it
        creates and the potter is subject to the clay,
        is individualized, Truth is reduced to the level
173:9   of error, and the sensible is required to be made manifest
        through the insensible.

        What is termed matter manifests nothing but a material
173:12  mentality. Neither the substance nor the manifestation
        of Spirit is obtainable through matter. Spirit is positive.
        Matter is Spirit's contrary, the absence of Spirit. For
173:15  positive Spirit to pass through a negative condition
        would be Spirit's destruction.

                           Man not structural

        Anatomy declares man to be structural. Physiology
173:18  continues this explanation, measuring human
        strength by bones and sinews, and human life
        by material law. Man is spiritual, individual, and eter-
173:21  nal; material structure is mortal.
        Phrenology makes man knavish or honest according to
        the development of the cranium; but anatomy, physiology,
173:24  phrenology, do not define the image of God, the real im-
        mortal man.

        Human reason and religion come slowly to the recogni-
173:27  tion of spiritual facts, and so continue to call upon
        matter to remove the error which the human mind alone
        has created.

173:30  The idols of civilization are far more fatal to health
        and longevity than are the idols of barbarism. The idols
        of civilization call into action less faith than Buddhism
174:1   in a supreme governing intelligence. The Esquimaux
        restore health by incantations as consciously as do civi-
174:3   lized practitioners by their more studied methods.

        Is civilization only a higher form of idolatry, that
        man should bow down to a flesh-brush, to flannels, to
174:6   baths, diet, exercise, and air? Nothing save divine
        power is capable of doing so much for man as he can
        do for himself.

                             Rise of thought

174:9   The footsteps of thought, rising above material stand-
        points, are slow, and portend a long night to the traveller;
        but the angels of His presence - the spiritual
174:12  intuitions that tell us when "the night is far
        spent, the day is at hand" - are our guardians in the
        gloom. Whoever opens the way in Christian Science is
174:15  a pilgrim and stranger, marking out the path for gen-
        erations yet unborn.

        The thunder of Sinai and the Sermon on the Mount
174:18  are pursuing and will overtake the ages, rebuking in
        their course all error and proclaiming the kingdom of
        heaven on earth. Truth is revealed. It needs only to
174:21  be practised.

                             Medical errors

        Mortal belief is all that enables a drug to cure mortal
        ailments. Anatomy admits that mind is somewhere in
174:24  man, though out of sight. Then, if an indi-
        vidual is sick, why treat the body alone and
        administer a dose of despair to the mind? Why declare
174:27  that the body is diseased, and picture this disease to the
        mind, rolling it under the tongue as a sweet morsel and
        holding it before the thought of both physician and pa-
174:30  tient? We should understand that the cause of disease
        obtains in the mortal human mind, and its cure comes
        from the immortal divine Mind. We should prevent the
175:1   images of disease from taking form in thought, and we
        should efface the outlines of disease already formulated in
175:3   the minds of mortals.

                             Novel Diseases

        When there are fewer prescriptions, and less thought is
        given to sanitary subjects, there will be better
175:6   constitutions and less disease. In old times
        who ever heard of dyspepsia, cerebro-spinal meningitis,
        hay-fever, and rose-cold?

175:9   What an abuse of natural beauty to say that a rose,
        the smile of God, can produce suffering! The joy of its
        presence, its beauty and fragrance, should uplift the
175:12  thought, and dissuade any sense of fear or fever. It is
        profane to fancy that the perfume of clover and the breath
        of new-mown hay can cause glandular inflammation,
175:15  sneezing, and nasal pangs.

                         No ancestral dyspepsia

        If a random thought, calling itself dyspepsia, had
        tried to tyrannize over our forefathers, it would have
175:18  been routed by their independence and in-
        dustry. Then people had less time for self-
        ishness, coddling, and sickly after-dinner talk. The ex-
175:21  act amount of food the stomach could digest was not
        discussed according to Cutter nor referred to sanitary
        laws. A man's belief in those days was not so severe
175:24  upon the gastric juices. Beaumont's "Medical Experi-
        ments" did not govern the digestion.

                          Pulmonary misbeliefs

        Damp atmosphere and freezing snow empurpled the
175:27  plump cheeks of our ancestors, but they never indulged
        in the refinement of inflamed bronchial tubes.
        They were as innocent as Adam, before he ate
175:30  the fruit of false knowledge, of the existence of tubercles
        and troches, lungs and lozenges.

                             Our modern Eves

        "Where ignorance is bliss, 'tis folly to be wise," says
176:1   the English poet, and there is truth in his sentiment. The
        action of mortal mind on the body was not so injurious
176:3   before inquisitive modern Eves took up the
        study of medical works and unmanly Adams
        attributed their own downfall and the fate of their off-
176:6   spring to the weakness of their wives.

        The primitive custom of taking no thought about
        food left the stomach and bowels free to act in obedi-
176:9   ence to nature, and gave the gospel a chance to be seen
        in its glorious effects upon the body. A ghastly array of
        diseases was not paraded before the imagination. There
176:12  were fewer books on digestion and more "sermons in
        stones, and good in everything." When the mechanism
        of the human mind gives place to the divine Mind, self-
176:15  ishness and sin, disease and death, will lose their
        foothold.

        Human fear of miasma would load with disease the
176:18  air of Eden, and weigh down mankind with superimposed
        and conjectural evils. Mortal mind is the worst foe of
        the body, while divine Mind is its best friend.

                      Diseases not to be classified

176:21  Should all cases of organic disease be treated by a
        regular practitioner, and the Christian Scientist try
        truth only in cases of hysteria, hypochon-
176:24  dria, and hallucination? One disease is no
        more real than another. All disease is the
        result of education, and disease can carry its ill-effects
176:27  no farther than mortal mind maps out the way. The
        human mind, not matter, is supposed to feel, suffer, en-
        joy. Hence decided types of acute disease are quite as
176:30  ready to yield to Truth as the less distinct type and chronic
        form of disease. Truth handles the most malignant con-
        tagion with perfect assurance.

                       One basis for all sickness

177:1   Human mind produces what is termed organic dis-
        ease as certainly as it produces hysteria, and it must re-
177:3   linquish all its errors, sicknesses, and sins.
        I have demonstrated this beyond all cavil.
        The evidence of divine Mind's healing power and abso-
177:6   lute control is to me as certain as the evidence of my own
        existence.

                       Mental and physical oneness

        Mortal mind and body are one. Neither exists without
177:9   the other, and both must be destroyed by immortal Mind.
        Matter, or body, is but a false concept of mor-
        tal mind. This so-called mind builds its own
177:12  superstructure, of which the material body is
        the grosser portion; but from first to last, the body is a
        sensuous, human concept.

                           The effect of names

177:15  In the Scriptural allegory of the material creation,
        Adam or error, which represents the erroneous theory
        of life and intelligence in matter, had the
177:18  naming of all that was material. These names
        indicated matter's properties, qualities, and forms. But
        a lie, the opposite of Truth, cannot name the qualities and
177:21  effects of what is termed matter, and create the so-called
        laws of the flesh, nor can a lie hold the preponderance
        of power in any direction against God, Spirit and
177:24  Truth.

                         Poison defined mentally

        If a dose of poison is swallowed through mistake, and
        the patient dies even though physician and
177:27  patient are expecting favorable results, does
        human belief, you ask, cause this death? Even
        so, and as directly as if the poison had been intentionally
177:30  taken.

        In such cases a few persons believe the potion swal-
        lowed by the patient to be harmless, but the vast ma-
178:1   jority of mankind, though they know nothing of this par-
        ticular case and this special person, believe the arsenic,
178:3   the strychnine, or whatever the drug used, to be poi-
        sonous, for it is set down as a poison by mortal mind.
        Consequently, the result is controlled by the majority of
178:6   opinions, not by the infinitesimal minority of opinions in
        the sick-chamber.

        Heredity is not a law. The remote cause or belief
178:9   of disease is not dangerous because of its priority and
        the connection of past mortal thoughts with present.
        The predisposing cause and the exciting cause are
178:12  mental.

        Perhaps an adult has a deformity produced prior to his
        birth by the fright of his mother. When wrested from
178:15  human belief and based on Science or the divine Mind, to
        which all things are possible, that chronic case is not
        difficult to cure.

                       Animal magnetism destroyed

178:18  Mortal mind, acting from the basis of sensation in
        matter, is animal magnetism; but this so-called mind,
        from which comes all evil, contradicts itself,
178:21  and must finally yield to the eternal Truth, or
        the divine Mind, expressed in Science. In pro-
        portion to our understanding of Christian Science, we are
178:24  freed from the belief of heredity, of mind in matter or ani-
        mal magnetism; and we disarm sin of its imaginary power
        in proportion to our spiritual understanding of the status
178:27  of immortal being.

        Ignorant of the methods and the basis of metaphysical
        healing, you may attempt to unite with it hypnotism,
178:30  spiritualism, electricity; but none of these methods can
        be mingled with metaphysical healing.

        Whoever reaches the understanding of Christian Science
179:1   in its proper signification will perform the sudden cures
        of which it is capable; but this can be done only by
179:3   taking up the cross and following Christ in the daily
        life.

                             Absent patients

        Science can heal the sick, who are absent from their
179:6   healers, as well as those present, since space is no ob-
        stacle to Mind. Immortal Mind heals what eye
        hath not seen; but the spiritual capacity to ap-
179:9   prehend thought and to heal by the Truth-power, is won
        only as man is found, not in self-righteousness, but re-
        flecting the divine nature.

                            Horses mistaught

179:12  Every medical method has its advocates. The prefer-
        ence of mortal mind for a certain method creates a demand
        for that method, and the body then seems to re-
179:15  quire such treatment. You can even educate a
        healthy horse so far in physiology that he will take cold
        without his blanket, whereas the wild animal, left to his
179:18  instincts, sniffs the wind with delight. The epizootic is
        a humanly evolved ailment, which a wild horse might
        never have.

                       Medical works objectionable

179:21  Treatises on anatomy, physiology, and health, sustained
        by what is termed material law, are the pro-
        moters of sickness and disease. It should not
179:24  be proverbial, that so long as you read medical works you
        will be sick.

        The sedulous matron - studying her Jahr with homoe-
179:27  opathic pellet and powder in hand, ready to put you
        into a sweat, to move the bowels, or to produce sleep -
        is unwittingly sowing the seeds of reliance on matter,
179:30  and her household may erelong reap the effect of this
        mistake.

        Descriptions of disease given by physicians and adver-
180:1   tisements of quackery are both prolific sources of sickness.
        As mortal mind is the husbandman of error, it should be
180:3   taught to do the body no harm and to uproot its false
        sowing.

                          The invalid's outlook

        The patient sufferer tries to be satisfied when he sees
180:6   his would-be healers busy, and his faith in their efforts is
        somewhat helpful to them and to himself; but
        in Science one must understand the resusci-
180:9   tating law of Life. This is the seed within itself bearing
        fruit after its kind, spoken of in Genesis.

        Physicians should not deport themselves as if Mind
180:12  were non-existent, nor take the ground that all causation
        is matter, instead of Mind. Ignorant that the human
        mind governs the body, its phenomenon, the invalid may
180:15  unwittingly add more fear to the mental reservoir already
        overflowing with that emotion.

                           Wrong and right way

        Doctors should not implant disease in the thoughts of
180:18  their patients, as they so frequently do, by declaring dis-
        ease to be a fixed fact, even before they go to
        work to eradicate the disease through the ma-
180:21  terial faith which they inspire. Instead of furnishing
        thought with fear, they should try to correct this turbulent
        element of mortal mind by the influence of divine Love
180:24  which casteth out fear.

        When man is governed by God, the ever-present
        Mind who understands all things, man knows that with
180:27  God all things are possible. The only way to this
        living Truth, which heals the sick, is found in the Science
        of divine Mind as taught and demonstrated by Christ
180:30  Jesus.
                         The important decision

        To reduce inflammation, dissolve a tumor, or cure or-
        ganic disease, I have found divine Truth more potent than
181:1   all lower remedies. And why not, since Mind, God, is
        the source and condition of all existence? Before decid-
181:3   ing that the body, matter, is disordered, one
        should ask, "Who art thou that repliest to
        Spirit? Can matter speak for itself, or does
181:6   it hold the issues of life?" Matter, which can neither
        suffer nor enjoy, has no partnership with pain and pleas-
        ure, but mortal belief has such a partnership.

                        Manipulation unscientific

181:9   When you manipulate patients, you trust in electricity
        and magnetism more than in Truth; and for
        that reason, you employ matter rather than
181:12  Mind. You weaken or destroy your power when you re-
        sort to any except spiritual means.

        It is foolish to declare that you manipulate patients but
181:15  that you lay no stress on manipulation. If this be so, why
        manipulate? In reality you manipulate because you are
        ignorant of the baneful effects of magnetism, or are not
181:18  sufficiently spiritual to depend on Spirit. In either case
        you must improve your mental condition till you finally
        attain the understanding of Christian Science.

                           Not words but deeds

181:21  If you are too material to love the Science of Mind and
        are satisfied with good words instead of effects, if you
        adhere to error and are afraid to trust Truth,
181:24  the question then recurs, "Adam, where art
        thou?" It is unnecessary to resort to aught besides
        Mind in order to satisfy the sick that you are doing some-
181:27  thing for them, for if they are cured, they generally know
        it and are satisfied.

        "Where your treasure is, there will your heart be also."
181:30  If you have more faith in drugs than in Truth, this faith
        will incline you to the side of matter and error. Any
        hypnotic power you may exercise will diminish your
182:1   ability to become a Scientist, and /vice versa./ The act
        of healing the sick through divine Mind alone, of casting
182:3   out error with Truth, shows your position as a Christian
        Scientist.

                          Physiology or Spirit

        The demands of God appeal to thought only; but the
182:6   claims of mortality, and what are termed laws of nature,
        appertain to matter. Which, then, are we to
        accept as legitimate and capable of producing
182:9   the highest human good? We cannot obey both physi-
        ology and Spirit, for one absolutely destroys the other,
        and one or the other must be supreme in the affections.
182:12  It is impossible to work from two standpoints. If we
        attempt it, we shall presently "hold to the one,
        and despise the other."

182:15  The hypotheses of mortals are antagonistic to Science
        and cannot mix with it. This is clear to those, who heal
        the sick on the basis of Science.

                             No material law

182:18  Mind's government of the body must supersede the so-
        called laws of matter. Obedience to material law pre-
        vents full obedience to spiritual law, - the law
182:21  which overcomes material conditions and puts
        matter under the feet of Mind. Mortals entreat the di-
        vine Mind to heal the sick, and forthwith shut out the aid
182:24  of Mind by using material means, thus working against
        themselves and their prayers and denying man's God-
        given ability to demonstrate Mind's sacred power. Pleas
182:27  for drugs and laws of health come from some sad incident,
        or else from ignorance of Christian Science and its tran-
        scendent power.

182:30  To admit that sickness is a condition over which God
        has no control, is to presuppose that omnipotent power
        is powerless on some occasions. The law of Christ, or
183:1   Truth, makes all things possible to Spirit; but the so-
        called laws of matter would render Spirit of no avail, and
183:3   demand obedience to materialistic codes, thus departing
        from the basis of one God, one lawmaker. To suppose
        that God constitutes laws of inharmony is a mistake; dis-
183:6   cords have no support from nature or divine law, however
        much is said to the contrary.

        Can the agriculturist, according to belief, produce a
183:9   crop without sowing the seed and awaiting its germina-
        tion according to the laws of nature? The answer is no,
        and yet the Scriptures inform us that sin, or error, first
183:12  caused the condemnation of man to till the ground, and
        indicate that obedience to God will remove this necessity.
        Truth never made error necessary, nor devised a law to
183:15  perpetuate error.

                        Laws of nature spiritual

        The supposed laws which result in weariness and dis-
        ease are not His laws, for the legitimate and only possible
183:18  action of Truth is the production of harmony.
        Laws of nature are laws of Spirit; but mortals
        commonly recognize as law that which hides the power of
183:21  Spirit. Divine Mind rightly demands man's entire obe-
        dience, affection, and strength. No reservation is made
        for any lesser loyalty. Obedience to Truth gives man
183:24  power and strength. Submission to error superinduces
        loss of power.

                        Belief and understanding

        Truth casts out all evils and materialistic methods
183:27  with the actual spiritual law, - the law which gives
        sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, voice
        to the dumb, feet to the lame. If Christian
183:30  Science dishonors human belief, it honors spir-
        itual understanding; and the one Mind only is entitled to
        honor.

184:1   The so-called laws of health are simply laws of mortal
        belief. The premises being erroneous, the conclusions
184:3   are wrong. Truth makes no laws to regulate sickness,
        sin, and death, for these are unknown to Truth and should
        not be recognized as reality.

184:6   Belief produces the results of belief, and the penal-
        ties it affixes last so long as the belief and are insepara-
        ble from it. The remedy consists in probing the trouble
184:9   to the bottom, in finding and casting out by denial the
        error of belief which produces a mortal disorder, never
        honoring erroneous belief with the title of law nor yield-
184:12  ing obedience to it. Truth, Life, and Love are the only
        legitimate and eternal demands on man, and they are
        spiritual lawgivers, enforcing obedience through divine
184:15  statutes.

                          Laws of human belief

        Controlled by the divine intelligence, man is harmoni-
        ous and eternal. Whatever is governed by a false belief
184:18  is discordant and mortal. We say man suffers
        from the effects of cold, heat, fatigue. This
        is human belief, not the truth of being, for matter cannot
184:21  suffer. Mortal mind alone suffers, - not because a law
        of matter has been transgressed, but because a law of this
        so-called mind has been disobeyed. I have demonstrated
184:24  this as a rule of divine Science by destroying the delusion
        of suffering from what is termed a fatally broken physical
        law.

184:27  A woman, whom I cured of consumption, always
        breathed with great difficulty when the wind was from
        the east. I sat silently by her side a few moments. Her
184:30  breath came gently. The inspirations were deep and nat-
        ural. I then requested her to look at the weather-vane.
        She looked and saw that it pointed due east. The wind
185:1   had not changed, but her thought of it had and so her diffi-
        culty in breathing had gone. The wind had not produced
185:3   the difficulty. My metaphysical treatment changed the
        action of her belief on the lungs, and she never suffered
        again from east winds, but was restored to health.

                          A so-called mind-cure

185:6   No system of hygiene but Christian Science is purely
        mental. Before this book was published, other books
        were in circulation, which discussed "mental
185:9   medicine" and "mind-cure," operating through
        the power of the earth's magnetic currents to regulate life
        and health. Such theories and such systems of so-called
185:12  mind-cure, which have sprung up, are as material as the
        prevailing systems of medicine. They have their birth
        in mortal mind, which puts forth a human conception
185:15  in the name of Science to match the divine Science of im-
        mortal Mind, even as the necromancers of Egypt strove
        to emulate the wonders wrought by Moses. Such theories
185:18  have no relationship to Christian Science, which rests on
        the conception of God as the only Life, substance, and
        intelligence, and excludes the human mind as a spiritual
185:21  factor in the healing work.

                           Jesus and hypnotism

        Jesus cast out evil and healed the sick, not only with-
        out drugs, but without hypnotism, which is
185:24  the reverse of ethical and pathological Truth-
        power.

        Erroneous mental practice may seem for a time to bene-
185:27  fit the sick, but the recovery is not permanent. This is
        because erroneous methods act on and through the ma-
        terial stratum of the human mind, called brain, which is
185:30  but a mortal consolidation of material mentality and its
        suppositional activities.

                             False stimulus

        A patient under the influence of mortal mind is healed
186:1   only by removing the influence on him of this mind, by
        emptying his thought of the false stimulus
186:3   and reaction of will-power and filling it with
        the divine energies of Truth.

        Christian Science destroys material beliefs through the
186:6   understanding of Spirit, and the thoroughness of this work
        determines health. Erring human mind-forces can work
        only evil under whatever name or pretence they are em-
186:9   ployed; for Spirit and matter, good and evil, light and
        darkness, cannot mingle.
