the first to be referred to is in Gen. xii.: "Now Jehovah had said unto
Abram, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and from thy
father's house, unto a land that I will show thee; and I will make of
thee a great nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great, and
thou shalt be a blessing, and in thee"--thy SEED, which is Christ, Gal.
iii. 16--"shall all the families of the earth be blessed. So Abram
departed, as Jehovah had spoken unto him. And Abram was seventy and five
years old when he departed out of Haran ... to go into the land of
Canaan." He had, some time before this, migrated with Terah his father
from Ur of the Chaldees to Haran, as is related chap. xi. 31. That
removal, by which probably he was separated from idolatrous neighbors,
is thus referred to, chap. xv. 7: "And Jehovah said unto him, I am
Jehovah that brought thee out of Ur of the Chaldees, to give thee this
land to inherit it." And again, Nehemiah ix. 7: "Thou art Jehovah (the)
Elohim, who didst choose Abram, and broughtest him forth out of Ur of
the Chaldees." From those references it is apparent that he was chosen,
called, and received immediate personal communications from Jehovah,
whom he afterwards saw in the form of man, and knew as El-Shadai,
Jehovah, Adonai Jehovah, and Melach Jehovah.

Having arrived at the plain of Moreh, in the land of Canaan, "Jehovah
_appeared_ unto Abram and said, Unto thy SEED will I give this land: and
there builded he an altar unto Jehovah who _appeared_ unto him."
Considering the reiterated statement in this brief passage that Jehovah
_appeared_ to Abram; that the occasion was that of the first formal
announcement of the great promise of that dispensation to which all
subsequent revelations, covenants and promises to Abraham relate; that
on the most explicit renewal of this promise, chap. xxii. 18, Melach
Jehovah is the speaker; and that Abram signalized the occasion of this
first announcement by erecting an altar to Jehovah, and doubtless
offering burnt offerings thereon, there seems sufficient ground to
conclude that this was an instance of local visible presence.

Abram next removed to a mount east of Beth-El, "and there he builded an
altar unto Jehovah, and called upon the name of Jehovah." Chap. xii. 8.
On the occurrence of a famine he went down to Egypt, whence he returned
to Beth-El, "unto the place of the altar which he had made there at the
first, and there Abram called on the name of Jehovah." xiii. 4. These
passages indicate his custom of offering typical sacrifices, and calling
on the name of Jehovah at the place set apart, for the time being, to
that purpose; and from the nature of the case, and its analogy to other
recorded instances (as Gen. xxxii. 13) of such offerings to Melach
Jehovah, there is no ground to suppose that the same official Person was
not the immediate object of homage in the present instance.

So of the ensuing narrative, Gen. xiii. 14-18: "And Jehovah said unto
Abram, after that Lot was separated from him, Lift up now thine eyes,
and look from the place where thou art, northward and southward and
eastward and westward; for all the land which thou seest, to thee will I
give it, and to thy seed for ever." "Then Abram removed his tent, and
came and dwelt in the plain of Mamre, and built there an altar unto
Jehovah."

In chapter xv. we read that "The _Word_ of (rather _who is_) Jehovah
_came_ unto Abram in a vision, saying, Fear not, Abram; I am thy shield
and thy exceeding great reward. And Abram said, Adonai Jehovah, what
wilt thou give me, &c. And behold, the _Word_ (who is) Jehovah _came_
unto him, saying, This shall not be thine heir; ... and _He_ brought him
forth abroad and said, Look now toward heaven and tell the stars, if
thou be able to number them; and He said unto him, So shall thy seed be.
And he believed in Jehovah, and He counted it to him for righteousness.
And he said unto Him, Adonai Jehovah, whereby shall I know that I shall
inherit it?" In this narrative the Personal Word appears to be
designated by a term equivalent to Logos, as applied in the first
chapter of John, namely, _Dabar_, importing the same as the Chaldee term
_Memra_, frequently inserted with the same personal reference by the
Chaldee paraphrasts. The Dabar (who is) Jehovah _came_ unto Abram,
saying, ... He brought him forth abroad, and said, &c. These are
personal acts, not to be affirmed of an audible voice. They imply the
local presence of the speaker, whom Abram addresses as Adonai Jehovah.
Throughout the chapter he is the speaker. Abram's faith in him as
Jehovah is unto righteousness. In this, as in some instances hereafter
to be noticed, the sense and construction of the passage seem to require
that the term translated _Word_ should be considered a personal
designation, having the same relation to the term Jehovah as Adon,
Adonai, and Melach.

On the occasion of changing the patriarch's name to Abraham, and that of
his wife to Sarah, chap. xvii., "Jehovah _appeared_ to Abram, and said
unto him, I am El-Shadai; walk before me, and be thou perfect.... And
Abram fell on his face, and Elohim talked with him." vs. 1, 3; and vs.
19, 22: "Elohim said, Sarah thy wife shall bear thee a son indeed....
And Elohim went up from Abraham." Here the phraseology in each of the
clauses quoted implies a local personal presence of Jehovah. That it was
a visible appearance is further implied in the next chapter, where, in
the narrative of his appearance in the likeness of man, he refers to
this promise of a son as having been made by him, vs. 10; and to remove
the doubts of both Abraham and Sarah, he adds: "Is any thing too hard
for Jehovah? At the time appointed _I will return_ unto thee, according
to the time of life, and Sarah shall have a son."

Of the appearance last referred to, chap. xviii., when, in the form of a
wayfaring man, he partook of the repast prepared by Abraham, spoke
concerning Sarah, walked towards Sodom, disclosed his purpose of
destroying that place, and heard Abraham's request on behalf of the
righteous, there can be no question of its having been local and
visible. It is noticeable that the narrative of this manifestation is
introduced by the same formula as others which include no express
indications of his visibility. Thus, vs. 1: "And Jehovah _appeared_
unto Abraham in the plains of Mamre." In the progress of the narrative,
the Divine visitant is called a man, Jehovah, and Adonai, and at its
close it is said that "Jehovah went his way"--literally, "walked
away"--as "soon as he had left communing with Abraham, and Abraham
returned to his place." In the next chapter, which relates the
destruction of Sodom, the same Person is called Jehovah and Elohim.
"Abraham gat up early in the morning to the place where he stood before
_Jehovah_"--that is, before the visible Person in the likeness of man,
to whom he addressed his prayers for the righteous. "And it came to pass
when _Elohim_ destroyed the cities of the plain, that _Elohim_
remembered Abraham."

When the time had arrived for Jacob to withdraw from Laban, "Jehovah
said unto him, Return unto the land of thy fathers." Gen. xxxi. 3.
Referring to this, vs. 7, he says: "The Elohe of my father hath been
with me." After relating to his family something of the treatment he had
received from Laban, and of the special favor of Elohim to him, he
recurs to the command above quoted, vs. 11-13: "And Melach (the) Elohim
spake unto me in a dream and said, I am the El of Beth-El, where thou
anointedst the pillar, and where thou vowedst a vow unto me. Now arise,
get thee out from this land, and return unto the land of thy kindred....
And Rachel and Leah answered, ... Now, whatsoever Elohim hath said unto
thee, do." The statements in the two clauses first above cited evidently
refer to the same occasion as those which follow; and therefore the
Elohe of his father, who had been with him, was Melach, the Messenger
Elohim who spoke to him, vs. 11, and who doubtless appeared to him to be
present, in a form with which he was familiar. This is further implied
in the words at the close of his remonstrance with Laban, vs. 42:
"Except the Elohe of my father, the Elohe of Abraham, and the Fear of
Isaac had been with me, surely thou hadst sent me away now empty. Elohim
hath seen my affliction, and the labor of my hands, and rebuked thee
yesternight."

The familiarity of Jacob with the visible presence of Jehovah is
indicated by his expression when, to his surprise and joy, Esau met him
with a kindness and cordiality which showed that he no longer harbored
any ill-will towards him. Jacob urged him to receive his present, and
said: "I have seen thy _face_, as though it had been the _face_ of
Elohim, and thou wast pleased with me," chap. xxxiii. 10; implying that
this personal interview and manifestation of favor produced an effect
upon his feelings resembling that of visible Divine manifestations, to
which he was accustomed; a signal instance of which had just occurred,
chap. xxxii., when "he saw Elohim face to face."

Doubtless there was a degree of mysteriousness inseparable from those
appearances of the Divine Person, arising, however, not from their
infrequency, for they seldom seem to have occasioned surprise, but
rather from the different forms of manifestation, the different degrees
of visibility; a consciousness that He who was sometimes visibly present
was, when unseen, not absent; not less cognizant of their thoughts and
actions, nor less their preserver and defender. They knew that he could,
at pleasure, render himself visible in the simple form of man, in a
vision, in a dense or a luminous cloud, in the colors of the precious
gems and minerals, and in the insupportable splendors of the solar and
electric fires. They knew that he was of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity with any allowance, and were conscious of their defilement and
ill-desert. Their faith reposed on him, unseen as well as manifest; and
when he was locally present to their senses, it was necessary to exclude
or modify their accustomed discrimination between spiritual and
physical, invisible and visible conditions and modes of being.

There must have been, besides a familiarity with the fact of his visible
appearances, a well-established association of authorized and
intelligent convictions in their minds respecting his official person
and character, the nature of his Agency, his mediatorial relations,
which assumed a covenant or stipulated relationship of man with the
Deity in his Person, and harmonized the Divine in his manifestations
with the human in his visible form, all which necessarily involved more
or less of the mysterious and unknown. Yet they well understood the
tokens which identified him, and, if not exhibited in the first moments
of his appearance, recognized them as soon as given, and promptly
rendered him the homage, addressed him by the titles, and ascribed to
him the prerogatives and works of the Creator, Proprietor, Ruler and
Redeemer of the world.

But he was not at all times visible. The patriarchs lived by faith as well
for the most part of their days and years, perhaps, with respect to him
personally, as with respect to the future issues of his interpositions and
administration. They could not see him at their pleasure, even when his
words or acts indicated that he was locally near them. "Lo, he goeth by
me," saith Job, "and I see him not: he passeth on, also, but I perceive
him not. Behold, I go forward, but he is not there; and backward, but I
cannot perceive him: on the left hand, where he doth work, but I cannot
behold him; he hideth himself on the right hand, that I cannot see him;
but he knoweth the way that I take: when he hath tried me, I shall come
forth as gold."

It would seem to have been by an effect wrought in them, both when awake
and when asleep, that he, and also that created spiritual beings, when
locally present, became visible or manifest to their consciousness. In
several instances the eyes of the beholders are said to be opened, not
to behold objects ordinarily visible, but objects which, though present,
it was not, without that operation, their privilege to see. Thus, in the
narrative of Balaam, "the Messenger Jehovah stood in the way as an
adversary against him," and repeatedly checked his progress, while to
him invisible. At length, "Jehovah opened the eyes of Balaam, and he saw
the Messenger Jehovah standing in the way, and his sword drawn in his
hand," &c. So in the case of the servant of Elisha: "Jehovah opened the
eyes of the young man, and he saw, and behold, the mountain was full of
horses and chariots of fire, round about Elisha." And of the disciples
on the way to Emmaus in company with the risen Saviour, it is said,
"their eyes were holden that they should not know him;" and at length
"their eyes were opened, and they knew him, and he vanished out of their
sight."

Considering that in all ages and countries the minds of men have been
startled and thrown off their balance by the supposed apparition of
spirits, real or imaginary, angelic or human, from the invisible world,
whether in material or in impalpable forms, and have regarded them as
inscrutably mysterious and appalling, the fact that such impressions of
surprise and dread were not commonly occasioned, or are so slightly
indicated, when the Messenger Jehovah was unexpectedly and visibly
recognized, strongly implies that the beholders were familiar not only
with the reality and the modes of his appearance, but with his official
Person, character and relations.

The statements and intimations contained in the Holy Scriptures
concerning the celestial beings comprehensively called angels, warrant
the conclusion, that the faculties by which they perceive external
objects are analogous to those of man. They see and hear, and are seen
and heard, in a way similar to that of the bodied human race. They have
the faculty of becoming visible to men, and when visible, they have, in
all recorded instances, the human form. It is obvious that, in order to
be discernible by the human eye, they must have a specific form; and
accordingly, both with reference to the Messenger who is Jehovah, and to
the created angels, such is the case in each and every instance of
visibility. Thus in the case of the three who, in the form of men,
appeared to Abraham, prior to the destruction of Sodom. In form, the
three appeared alike, and the two were distinguished from the ONE only
by the circumstances which ensued.

To created angels appearing visibly in this manner, it is clear that the
same laws of optics and acoustics are available as to men, only in a far
higher degree. That they saw objects which are naturally visible to men
as clearly as men see them, and heard sounds and voices audible to them
as distinctly as they, is evident from every narrative in which such
things are mentioned or implied. But their power of visual and auricular
perception is not restricted as in the human race. From the nature of
the organism in which the spirit of man resides, his natural power in
these relations is very limited. In the instance of vision, however, his
natural power may, in conformity with the ordinary laws of vision, be,
by the appliances of art, immeasurably increased. Telescopes and
microscopes are but additions to the natural organ. In angels that organ
may naturally as far transcend the optical power of human skill and
science, as the latter exceeds the unaided power of vision in man.
Moreover, to spirits inhabiting angelic organisms, things which
circumscribe human vision probably constitute no obstructions. Material
bodies which to the human eye are opaque, may to them be as transparent
as crystal or the atmosphere to man. The degree of light necessary to
their vision of objects may be as nothing compared with that required by
the human eye; and distance, so wonderfully obviated by the effect of
optical instruments, may be, and undoubtedly is, proportionally, as
nothing to them.

Now, since those beings have a distinct, personal, visible form--visible
to the unaided human eye on the occasion of their appearance in the
earlier and at the opening of the present dispensation, as at the
annunciation and the resurrection--and since their visual perceptions
correspond to our law of optics, it is to be inferred that they see each
other and all external objects in the same way as they saw men; and
doubtless the like, both with respect to the mode and the degree or
extent of perception, may be safely inferred in relation to their
hearing and feeling.

Whatever else may be true of the organisms in which they dwell, enough
is revealed to justify the conclusion, that, being in their attributes
as spirits like the spirits of men, they exercise their faculties
through the instrumentality of those organisms in the same way as men
through theirs. Thus it is certain that by means of those visible forms
they exercise physical power. The two angels who came in the form of men
to Lot in Sodom, "_put forth their hands and pulled Lot into the house
to them_, and shut to the door. And _the men_ said unto Lot, Hast thou
here any besides?... And while he lingered, the _men_ laid hold upon his
hand, ... and they brought him forth and set him without the city." Gen.
xix.

The established form, then, in which, from the beginning, spiritual
beings have visibly appeared, was conformable to that assigned to the
human race; insomuch that such beings were never otherwise discernible
to the human eye. That form was assumed, with man's nature, by the
Messiah when he became incarnate; and there is therefore nothing
incongruous or inherently improbable in the supposition of his having
appeared visibly in the likeness of that form at earlier periods, as the
Scriptures clearly teach. It is not more unlikely that in those earlier
appearances, on occasions when no Divine effulgence was exhibited, his
visible appearance should be like that of angelic messengers, than that
theirs should be like that of man, or that his should be so when
literally incarnate. And if the Deity has ever appeared visibly to man,
it was indubitably to the patriarchs and prophets as the Messiah, under
the designations and on the occasions heretofore referred to, and
publicly in Judea at the period of his literal incarnation.

Consistently with these views, the Scriptures, in speaking of him in the
various aspects and relations in which he appeared, employ terms which
are appropriate to one with attributes and modes of visible action like
those of man; of his head, face, eyes, hands, feet; of his sitting down,
rising up, standing, walking, working, resting, hearing, speaking, and
the like. As leader and defender of his people, "Jehovah is _a man_ [is
like a man] of war, Jehovah is his name." Exod. xv. 3. "And Jehovah
_went_ [walked] his way, as soon as he had left communing with Abraham."
Gen. xviii. 33. "Jehovah _looked_ unto the host of the Egyptians through
the pillar of fire and of the cloud." Exod. xiv. Moses and the elders
ascended mount Sinai, "and they saw the Elohe of Israel; and there was
under _his feet_ as it were a paved work of sapphire; ... and upon the
nobles (Moses and the elders) he laid not his _hand:_ ... they saw _the_
Elohim, and did eat and drink." Exod. xxiv. "And Jehovah _descended_ in
the cloud and _stood_ with Moses, and proclaimed the name of Jehovah.
And Jehovah _passed_ by _before him_, and proclaimed, Jehovah, El,
merciful and gracious. And Moses said, If now I have found grace in thy
sight, O Adonai, let Adonai, I pray thee, _go_ amongst us, and pardon
our iniquity and our sin." Exod. xxxiv. "Melach Jehovah _stood_ in the
way for an adversary against Balaam.... Jehovah opened the eyes of
Balaam, and he saw Melach Jehovah _standing_ in the way, and his sword
drawn in his hand." Numb. xxiii. "And Joshua looked, and behold, there
_stood_ a _man_ over against him with his sword drawn in his _hand_....
And he said, As captain of the host of Jehovah am I now come.... And the
captain of the host of Jehovah _said_ unto Joshua, Loose thy shoe from
off thy foot, for the place whereon thou standest is holy." Josh. v.
"Melach Jehovah _came_ up from Gilgal [the place where the ark, the ark
of the Adon of all the earth, then rested] to Bochim, and said, _I_ made
you to go up out of Egypt, and have brought you into the land which _I_
