be enrolled in the list of such martyrs as were slain for the sake of
Christ and the Gospel; when in truth they seek not Christ, but themselves,
and rise not to defend _his_ honor, but their own erroneous opinions. This
is called by St. Paul, a strong _delusion_, and a _working of Satan_. 2
Thess. 2:9, 11. It is not the punishment, but the cause, which makes a
martyr.

8. Such martyrs as these the devil has had even amongst the heathens
themselves; many of whom were so far blinded in their understandings, as
contentedly to die for the defence of their idols, and false, heathenish
religion. And is not the same done at this day amongst those who call
themselves Christians? Even as the heathens, to gain an immortal name,
persuaded themselves that they did well in what they endured, so self-love
and vainglory have so far besotted some monks, and other persons even in
our age, as that they have murdered kings and princes, to support the
better their church, or the _Catholic cause_, as they call it, which they
supposed to be in danger. If such men are made to suffer again, it is
manifest that they do not suffer for the sake of Christ, nor are they to
be accounted _his_ martyrs. They are martyrs to the pope of Rome, to their
own conceit, and to a thirst after vainglory, with which they are carried
away. Thus much concerning false love, to which man is seduced by a false
and deceitful light.

9. It remains, therefore, that without a sincere love to God and our
neighbor, and a holy and Christian life attending it, all arts and
sciences, gifts and attainments, profit nothing. Wisdom, how great soever
it may be, yea, though it be as great, or greater than that of Solomon, is
nothing; and the knowledge of the whole Scripture, if it be without love,
must necessarily degenerate into a poor, empty speculation. All works
whatsoever, and martyrdom itself (if so it be called), are to no purpose
without this essential character of love. For to know the will of God and
his word, and not to live up to them as a rule, only increases our
condemnation, as the Lord plainly affirms: "If I had not come and spoken
unto them, they had not had sin; but now they have no cloak for their
sin." John 15:22.




Chapter XXXVI.


He Who Does Not Live In Christ, But Gives His Heart To The World, Has Only
  The Outward Letter Of The Scriptures, But He Does Not Experience Their
                    Power, Or Eat Of The Hidden Manna.


    _To him that overcometh, will I give to eat of the hidden manna,
    and will give him a white stone, and in the stone a new name
    written, which no man knoweth saving he that receiveth it._--REV.
    2:17.


By this Scripture we are taught, that no man can taste the inward
sweetness of heavenly joy and comfort hidden in the Word, who does not
first vanquish his own flesh and the world, with all the pomps and lusts
thereof, and the devil himself. But those that crucify their flesh daily,
with all its desires and lusts, by serious contrition and repentance, who
die daily to themselves and to the world, and to whom this life is a cross
and affliction; these are divinely fed with the heavenly manna, and drink
the wine of the joy of paradise. Those, on the other hand, that love the
pleasures of this world rather than those of heaven, render themselves
altogether unfit to taste the hidden manna, preserved for him alone that
overcometh. The reason is, because _like things_ (according to the
proverb) rejoice _in their like_; and things of a contrary nature do not
unite one with another. Since, therefore, the word of God is spiritual, it
is no wonder that worldly minds take no pleasure in it. For as the body
receives no strength from the food which the stomach does not digest; so
the soul receives no strength from the divine word, unless it be entirely
converted into itself, that is, into its own life and nature.

2. Yea, as a man that is sick of a fever acquires a distempered appetite,
and deems the coarsest trash more pleasant than wholesome food; so those
that are sick of a spiritual fever, that is, of the love of the world, of
pride and covetousness, loathe the good word of God as bitter and insipid
food. Those, on the other hand, that have the Spirit of God, find in it a
hidden manna, and a secret sweetness, which transcends all other delights;
but then it is not to be tasted by such as are carried away with the
pleasures of a profane world.

3. Many hear the glad tidings of the Gospel repeatedly, and yet are but
little affected with what they hear. They do not feel any fervency of
spirit, any sense of spiritual joy. The cause is plain; they are not led
by the good Spirit of God, but by the corrupt spirit of the world; nor
have they heavenly, but earthly minds, which cannot receive the things of
God. Whoever, therefore, wishes to obtain a sound understanding in
spiritual matters, to feel the power of the word of God, and to eat of the
hidden manna, ought by all means to conform his life to the word which he
reads, and to the life of Christ which is set before him. It is then that
the Lord feeds the humble with grace (1 Pet. 5:5), satisfies the meek with
his love, and supports the patient with his comfort; rendering his yoke
pleasant, and his burden light unto them. For the sweetness of this
heavenly manna cannot be tasted except under the yoke of Christ, according
to the promise of the Lord: "He hath filled the hungry with good things,
and the rich he hath sent empty away." Luke 1:53.

4. "The words that I speak unto you," saith the Lord, "they are spirit and
they are life." John 6:63. Whence it follows, that a carnal and voluptuous
man, who has no spiritual understanding or taste, cannot possibly perceive
or relish the words of Christ. These must be apprehended in spirit, and in
an inward tranquillity of mind, attended with great humility and fervent
desires after God. In this order, the Word of God must be received and
digested, if ever it is to afford a vital nourishment to the soul; which,
if it be neglected, then truly the Word is no more than an empty sound,
and an external letter. As a man that hears the sound of a harp, and
understands not its melody, receives no pleasure from it; so no man can
perceive the virtue hidden in the Word, unless he endeavor to express it
in his life, and thoroughly to conform himself to it in his spirit.

5. For this reason, the Lord says: "I will give him a white stone, and in
the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth, saving he that
receiveth it."

6. This is the testimony of the hidden Spirit, who witnesses to the divine
Word: and in like manner, the Spirit of the Word gives testimony to our
spirit (Rom. 8:16), whence both unite, and so become one spirit. 1 Cor.
6:17. This is that new name, which no man knoweth but he that hath it. As
no man perceives the sweetness of honey, but he that tastes it; so the
name of this divine testimony, written in the hearts of good souls, no man
knoweth but he that possesses it. He only understands the nature of
heavenly comfort, and of divine visitations, who really tastes them. This
name and testimony are called _new_, because they are the blessed effect
of the _new birth_, and come _from above_.

7. Blessed is the man to whom God thus gives himself to be tasted! Thus
were the prophets of old fed with this heavenly bread, and sustained by
the eternal Word proceeding from God, and communicating itself unto them.
This made their tongues so free and so ready in the delivery of the divine
oracles. And from this inward sense, with which they were so powerfully
affected, the Holy Scripture has been derived, and handed down to us for
our edification.

8. Even at this day, God does not cease still to speak unto all men, and
inwardly to feed them with his Word: but alas! most men have shut their
ears against his voice, and will rather hear the world than God, and
follow their own lusts, than the motions of the good Spirit of God. They
cannot eat of the hidden manna, because they greedily adhere to their
carnal propensities, and contemn the tree of life, with the fruit thereof.

9. But surely such men are awfully blinded, since they will not understand
that God can afford infinitely greater pleasures than this world is
capable of imparting. He that has once tasted the goodness of God, will
esteem the whole world, together with its most exquisite pleasures, to be
nothing but gall and bitterness. Our first parents were beguiled by the
world; and by eating of the forbidden tree, they brought no less an evil
upon themselves than death itself: and yet we are so much besotted with
the pleasures of this world, as to follow freely their steps, and to obey
the forbidden lusts of the flesh, which cause our death. Rom. 8:13.

10. Christ says: "If any shall eat of me," the true tree, and the true
bread of life, "he shall live for ever." John 6:51. And what is it to _eat
of him_, but to believe in him, to rejoice in him, to delight in him, and
to rest and to take pleasure in nothing but him alone? The world bestows
poor and inconsiderable wages, and yet it is served with great labor and
earnestness; whereas God grants an eternal and never-fading reward; and
yet with what sluggishness, coldness, and backwardness is his service
performed! How few there are, who adhere to God with as much care and
faith, devotion and obedience, as profane worldlings do to mammon, and the
world! We see them often take long and tedious journeys for a little
money; but for the sake of heaven, it grieves them to move even a foot.

11. In all classes men seek and love the world more than they regard God.
Many a scholar studies day and night to attain preferment and honor, who
will hardly take time to say the _Lord's Prayer_ for the good of his soul.
The men who avoid no labor to get the bread that perishes, will undergo
none to procure that which is incorruptible. There are many who fear no
difficulty, flee from no danger, and, in an earthly warfare, stare even
death in the face; influenced by no other motive than to gain a little
fleeting fame, or at best, to be ranked among nobles and heroes: whereas
there is hardly one to be found that will enter into a combat with the
corrupt propensities of his flesh, although this is the way to obtain a
kingdom in heaven. We see the victors of many nations, and the subduers of
vast kingdoms, who little care to overcome themselves. There are large
numbers who do not regard the loss of their immortal souls, if they can
but gain the perishing goods of this world. All these, certainly, have not
tasted the hidden manna of the divine Word; for they do not overcome the
world, but are themselves overcome by it. Whosoever will taste the
sweetness of this heavenly manna, must, for the sake of the love of God,
despise the world, and overcome it. When he complies with these terms, he
is refreshed again with that comfort of the Holy Ghost, which no man knows
save he that receives it.

12. This, therefore, must be done. The tree of life must first be planted
in us, before we can eat of its fruit: and the heart that wishes to be
quickened with heavenly comforts, ought first to be truly converted from
the world to God. But we, being intoxicated with worldly pleasures, do not
see that the joys of heaven are far more excellent than all that this
world affords. That which God gives, is infinitely more true and more
substantial than all which the creature can bestow. And that teaching
which comes from above, through the inspiration of the divine Spirit, is
far more noble and solid than that which is conveyed to us by man's
understanding, and imprinted on the mind with much toil and labor. The
flowers and fruits which are the productions of nature are nobler and
better than those which are fashioned of the finest gold by the hand of
art; even so, one drop of divine consolation is more satisfactory, and
incomparably better, than a whole ocean of worldly lust and pleasure.

13. Whenever, therefore, thou desirest to taste any heavenly comfort,
withdraw thy heart from the joys of this world. As if the Lord were to
say, "If any will understand me, let him seriously attend to what I say;
if any will see me, it surely behooves him to fix his eye upon me alone."
Who can doubt but that our heart and senses, and all the faculties of our
souls ought to be converted to God, and fixed on him alone, if ever we
desire to see, hear, and understand God; nay, to taste him and his
goodness? For thus he expresses himself in the Prophet: "When ye shall
search for me with your whole heart, ye shall find me." Jer. 29:13.

14. Many at this day are held in great admiration on a very light account.
Oh! a learned man! (they say), a rich man! a great man! a wise man! But
scarcely any regard how meek, how humble, how patient, or how devout any
man is. Of this perverse judgment, there is no other cause, than that the
people of this world only admire the _exterior_ of a man, and pass by what
is _within_ the mind, which alone is worthy to be esteemed and valued. Let
him that praises a man because he is a great traveller, and has seen many
cities and countries, consider whether it be not far better to have seen
God. Let him that admires another, because he has served several monarchs,
and attended on emperors, kings, and princes, tell us whether it be not
far more excellent to be the servant of God, to wait on the King of
Heaven, to hear Him speak in the heart, and to serve Him faithfully? Many
who enjoy nothing but the things of this world, will say, "We have
abundance of learned men and great scholars in this age; arts and sciences
are greatly advanced among us." But such men as these, do not know the art
of arts, the science of sciences, which is divine Love; a benefit
preferable to all other knowledge and learning, but which seems to be
almost wholly extinct in this degenerate age, together with faith itself,
that produces it. The number of those that are in truth divinely "taught
of God," is apparently but small (Isa. 54:13); and so of those that care
to be instructed in the humble and meek life of Christ. Matt. 11:29. Yea,
to speak plainly, there are among the most learned at this day, some who
are, perhaps, the most alienated from the life of God, and know but little
of that truth which is in Jesus. They are those who confine knowledge to
words and terms artfully contrived; when indeed solid erudition and
learning consist not in _words_, but in _things_, and in a real and
eternal wisdom. Upon the whole, whoever calls this world a wicked world,
is not mistaken in his judgment.

15. Others will praise a man, because he keeps a rich and plentiful table,
and fares sumptuously every day; but they do not consider that the very
crumbs dropping from God's table, are transcendently better than the
choicest dishes of the wealthy and greedy; and that the hidden manna, and
the incorruptible bread, descending from heaven, and prepared by the Lord
himself, afford the most savory and most delicious food for nourishing the
soul. Ps. 23:5.

16. Whoever enjoys God and his Word, is disgusted at nothing, and nothing
can displease him; for he enjoys God in all. But what can delight him, who
does not taste the sweetness of God, and the goodness of his Word? GOD
alone is the joy of the soul. He infinitely surpasses all earthly joy and
transient mirth. He is the eternal Light, which incomparably exceeds all
created lights. May he be pleased to influence our hearts with his hidden
pleasure! May he purify our spirits, and all the faculties of our souls!
May he enlighten and quicken, correct and revive all that is within us!
And, O! when shall that glorious hour appear, in which the Lord will
satiate us with his presence, and replenish us with all that he himself
is! Isa. 55:12.

17. But as we are not yet prepared for so transcendent a joy, so we cannot
partake of it, while we are confined to this state of imperfection. Let
us, therefore, be content with the crumbs of comfort which fall from the
Lord's table, and patiently wait for that time, wherein we shall be
refreshed with his joy for evermore!

18. Hear the words of our blessed Saviour: "Behold, I stand at the door,
and knock; if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in to
him, and will sup with him, and he with me." Rev. 3:20. Is it not, then, a
foolish thing to slight so great a favor, and to treat contemptuously the
King of kings, who, like a heavenly guest, comes to see thee? Is it not
disgraceful to let a friend stand knocking without, and refuse to admit a
man to thy presence, who has nothing at heart but thy welfare? How
unaccountable then must it be to debar the great God from thy heart, who
stands in no need of thy presents; but, after the manner of princes,
brings his own royal dainties with him when he approaches the house of a
poor subject! He will feed thee with heavenly bread, and with that hidden
manna which is preserved for those that overcome.

19. When the Lord says, "Hear my voice, and open the door," he compares,
as it were, the heart of a man to a house full of noise and clamor, where
music, though ever so sweet and melodious, cannot be heard. So the voice
of the divine Visitor cannot enter a profane heart, whilst it is hurried
about with the cares and desires of this world. Such a heart closes the
door against this Visitor, and consequently cannot taste the sweetness of
the celestial manna. But when this noise and tumult cease, it is then that
these secret whispers are best perceived in men. And O! that thou, with
Samuel, couldest answer: "Speak Lord, for thy servant heareth." 1 Sam.
3:10.

20. The truth of this internal, spiritual, and heavenly supper is also
attested elsewhere. The apostle speaks of some, that "have been once
enlightened, and tasted of the heavenly gift, and have been made partakers
of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted the good word of God, and the powers of
the world to come." Heb. 6:4. By this we are taught, that in whomsoever
the Holy Ghost freely resides, there the virtues and powers of the world
to come are also tasted. It is then that the soul feeds on that manna,
which is hid in the gracious Word proceeding out of the mouth of God, and
by which all the saints live.

21. The efficacy of this living Word was also tasted by the royal prophet,
through the Holy Ghost, when he burst forth into these words: "In thy
presence is fulness of joy; at thy right hand there are pleasures for
evermore." Ps. 16:11. From this lively sense, he also invited others to an
enjoyment of the same sweetness, saying, "O taste and see that the Lord is
good. There is no want to them that fear him." Ps. 34:8, 9. Of the plenty
and dignity of this heavenly banquet, he hath thus expressed himself:
"Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou
anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over." Ps. 23:5. "Thy loving
kindness is better than life." Ps. 63:3. "They shall be abundantly
satisfied with the fatness of thy house; and thou shalt make them drink of
the river of thy pleasures." Ps. 36:8. And lastly, "Let all those that
seek thee, rejoice and be glad in thee; and let such as love thy
salvation, say continually, Let God be magnified. But I am poor and needy;
make haste unto me, O God: thou art my help and my deliverer; O Lord, make
no tarrying." Ps. 70:4, 5.

22. From all these, and many other places besides, it may abundantly be
known who those are that are inwardly fed with the good Word of God, and
with the hidden manna of the world to come; even those that are poor in
spirit, who entirely rely on divine comfort. These only are worthy to
taste of this heavenly manna, and of the divine gift, of which David
speaks at large: "How amiable," says he, "are thy tabernacles, O Lord of
hosts! My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord; my
heart and my flesh crieth out for the living God." Ps. 84:1, 2. By this
Scripture we may understand, that the least pleasure of the world to come,
infinitely exceeds all the joys of this world; and that one day passed
there, is far more excellent than a thousand years here. Whoever has
tasted these exquisite pleasures, will discard the things of this life, as
empty and insipid. The whole world becomes a burden, a trouble and
vexation of spirit, to such a person. He is like one that is accustomed to
delicious fare, and consequently cannot partake of what is coarse.

23. This is so sacred a hunger and thirst, that none but God alone can
satisfy it, and he only, by his love. This is that spiritual fulness with
which the saints are satiated, according to the words: "Eat, O friends,
drink, yea, drink abundantly, O beloved." Song of Sol. 5:1. These
spiritual enjoyments the Lord bestows on his friends, in order to unite
them the more closely to himself, and to make them the sooner forget the
perishing things of this world. A few crumbs of this bread, a few drops
pressed from this heavenly vine, ought to excite our desires after that
plentiful and abounding fountain, which shall flow for us hereafter.

24. In order that the Lord might excite in us so sacred a thirst, and that
he might make us long the more earnestly after such heavenly objects as
these, it was expedient that he should first himself thirst upon the cross
for our sakes. John 19:28. As he himself satisfies and quenches our hunger
and thirst, so ought we again to satiate his thirst and ardent desire of
loving. He more fervently thirsts after us, than we do after him;
according to that which he hath himself declared: "My meat is to do the
will of him that sent me, and to finish his work" (John 4:34): and the
will of God was, to save men from everlasting destruction. If we but
thirsted after him as he thirsts after us, we should then drink so
plentifully of his Spirit, that even "rivers of living water would flow
from our bodies" (John 7:38): that is, nothing should be seen in us, but
what is spiritual, lovely, and consolatory. Nay, he would make us
overflow, as it were, with a torrent of divine goodness and consolation,
so that soul and body, and all that is within us, should triumphantly
rejoice in the living God. For nothing is of so great and so divine an
amplitude as a man's soul, after it has gained true freedom and liberty.
Such a soul comprehends God, heaven, and earth. And again, nothing is less
than a man's soul in its nothingness and humiliation, when it humbles
itself under God and all his creatures.




Chapter XXXVII.


     He Who Does Not Follow Christ In Faith, Holiness, And Continued
Repentance, Cannot Be Delivered From The Blindness Of His Heart, But Must
Abide In Eternal Darkness; And He Cannot Have A True Knowledge Of Christ,
                         Or Fellowship With Him.


    _God is light, and in him is no darkness at all: if we say we have
    fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the
    truth: but if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have
    fellowship one with another._--1 JOHN 1:5-7.


That we may the better understand the nature of light and darkness, it is
necessary first to give heed to the description of the light, as it is
originally.

2. "God is light," saith St. John. But what is God? God is a spiritual,
eternal, and infinite Being; God is almighty, merciful, gracious,
righteous, holy, true, and the only wise God. God the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, is unspeakable love and faithfulness; He is one in three
Persons; He is the Sovereign Good, and good essentially. And this is the
true and everlasting light. Whence every one that departs from God, from
his love, his mercy, his righteousness, and his truth, departs also from
light itself, and must consequently fall into darkness; for without God
there is nothing but everlasting darkness. O how dark, therefore, is that
soul in which God doth not dwell! Now if God be light, then the devil must
certainly be darkness; and if God be love, then the devil must be nothing
but hatred and wrath, enmity and envy, malice and uncharitableness, sin
and wickedness. Whoever, therefore, turns himself to sin, turns himself to
darkness and to the devil. Neither can he be delivered, till he turn back
again, from darkness to light, from sin to righteousness, from vice to
virtue, from the devil to God. Acts 26:18. And this is the work of a true
and living faith which purifies the heart. Acts 15:9. For he who believes
in Christ, daily repents and turns from sin and the devil to Christ Jesus.
For even as Adam by sin turned himself from God to the devil, so we ought
to withdraw again, by true repentance and faith, from the devil to God.

3. Hence it follows that man, without being converted from sin to God, can
never be truly enlightened. "For what communion hath light with darkness?"
2 Cor. 6:14. Impiety and impenitence are wholly darkness, and,
consequently, can have no fellowship with the light of the knowledge of
Christ. So that it is absolutely impossible that those should be
enlightened by the Spirit, and the light of eternal truth, who live in
darkness and impenitence. To this purpose, St. Paul says concerning the
Jews: "When they shall turn to the Lord, the vail shall be taken away" (2
Cor. 3:16); that is, their darkness, blindness, and ignorance shall be
removed, and Christ shall give them light.

4. The greatest blindness, or thickest darkness that covers the minds of
men, is the sin of unbelief, with the fruits resulting from it; such as
pride, avarice, wrath, and the whole train of sensual lusts and pleasures.
Wherever these take possession of a man, it is impossible that he should
know Christ, the true Light of the world; much less can he savingly
believe in him, trust in him, and obtain by him everlasting life.

5. For how should that man know the humility of the heart of Christ, whose
own heart abounds with pride and high-mindedness? How should he be
acquainted with the meekness of the heart of Christ, who is full of bitter
wrath and envy? How should he understand his marvellous patience, who
delights in revenge, and is hurried about with a multitude of unruly
passions? But he who does not understand the humility, meekness, and
patience of Christ, does not know Christ himself, nor believe in his holy
name. For truly, if ever thou desirest to attain a sound knowledge of
Christ, thou must obtain, by faith, the same heart which is in Christ;
thou must experimentally perceive in thy heart, his meekness, his
patience, and his humility. It is then that thy knowledge becomes solid
and substantial. As a fruit is known by the taste, so Christ, the tree of
life, is known by tasting. Whenever thou tastest by faith the humility of
Christ, his meekness and his patience, thou then eatest of his fruit, and
shalt find rest for thy soul. Thou enjoyest in Christ the favor and
consolation of God. This is the only way to true rest and tranquillity of
mind. For the grace and comfort of God cannot enter into a heart that is
void of faith, and destitute of the meekness and humility of Christ. It is
to the _humble_ that God gives grace. 1 Pet. 5:5.

6. But how is it possible that Christ should profit a man who does not
desire to have the least fellowship with him? For, in truth, all those
that live in the darkness of sin, have no fellowship with Christ, be their
pretences what they will. For thus says St. John: "If we say that we have
fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do not the truth.
But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one
with another." 1 John 1:6, 7. And in the following chapter he explains it
more fully: "The darkness is past, and the true light now shineth. He that
saith he is in the light, and hateth his brother, is in darkness even
until now. He that loveth his brother, abideth in the light, and there is
no occasion of stumbling in him. But he that hateth his brother, is in
darkness, and walketh in darkness, and knoweth not whither he goeth,
because that darkness hath blinded his eyes." 1 John 2:8-11.

7. As long, then, as a man continues in that dark and terrible cloud of
sin, it is impossible that he should be enlightened by Christ, the true
Light of the world, and be thereby brought to a saving knowledge of God.
Whoever will attain to a true knowledge of God and Christ, must firmly
believe that God is nothing but grace and love. Now, no man can know what
love is, but he that has, and practises it, the knowledge of a thing being
the result of a man's experience, of his feelings, and of the works of
truth which he performs. Whoever, therefore, does not exercise love
(whatever words he may use about it), continues an utter stranger to the
nature of love; and what he is pleased to call love, is nothing but show
and pretence. And as Christ himself is nothing but love and humility,
meekness and patience, and every true virtue, so a man that is not
frequent in the performance of these and the like virtues, is altogether
ignorant of Christ and of the truth. He is but a superficial pretender to,
and a vain usurper of, His holy name, let his boasts be what they may. The
Word of God is nothing but spirit. Whoever, therefore, does not live and
walk in the Spirit, in no wise understands what the Word of God is, though
he may dispute and argue copiously about it. How shall a man tell us what
love is, who never performed any act of love? How shall a man give an
account of the nature of light, who, having been constantly confined to a
dark dungeon, has never seen the light himself? Now, the light in man is
faith and charity, according to the saying of Christ: "Let your light so
shine before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in heaven." Matt. 5:16.

8. In a word, the holy life of Christ is nothing but love and charity. No
sooner do we, by faith, learn from him true love and humility, meekness
and patience, as he himself has engaged us to do, than we are transformed
into his image, and enlightened with that true and eternal light, which he
himself is; according to that exhortation of St. Paul: "Awake thou that
sleepest (namely, in sins and the lust of the flesh), and arise from the
dead, and Christ shall give thee light." Eph. 5:14.

9. From all this it follows, that in the case of as many as do not awake
from their spiritual lethargy, that is, from the lust of the eyes, the
lust of the flesh, the pride of life, and other pleasures that attend
them, their souls cannot be enlightened by Christ, since they love
darkness rather than light, and thereby unfit themselves for a reception
of the divine light.

10. It also hence appears that those, on the other hand, who truly embrace
the life of Christ, and follow him in faith, are by him graciously
enlightened, according to his promise: "I am the light of the world: he
that followeth me (in faith and love, hope and patience, meekness and
humility, fear of God, and in prayer, etc.) shall not walk in darkness,
but shall have the light of life." John 8:12. Therefore, the true
followers of Christ, and these only, freely enjoy the light of life, and
are alone endued with true illumination and sound knowledge of Christ. And
it is on account of this Christian faith and life, that true believers are
called by the Apostle, _a light in the Lord_. "Ye were," saith he,
"sometime darkness, but now are ye light in the Lord" (Eph. 5:8): here he
means the principle of faith, and those Christian virtues that attend it.
And again, "Ye are all the children of light, and the children of the day:
we are not of the night, nor of darkness,"--"putting on the breast-plate of
faith and love, and for a helmet, the hope of salvation." 1 Thess. 5:5, 8.
Christ denies that the world (that is, carnal and unregenerate minds), can
ever "receive the Spirit of Truth." John 14:17.

11. That there might be a perfect and absolute example given to men, and a
complete idea of virtue and goodness, the Son of God became also Man, and
by his unspotted and holy life was made the public Light of the world,
that so all men might follow him, believe in him, and receive light from
him. Since, however, false Christians own with their lips that Christ is
the safe and great exemplar of virtue, and yet do not follow him in their
life and actions, it is manifest, that the heathens who esteemed virtue,
put the Christians to shame. The most eminent of them, such as Plato,
Aristotle, Cicero, Seneca, have highly recommended the study of virtue,
and freely confessed, that "if virtue could be seen with bodily eyes, it
would appear fairer, and with a more glorious lustre than even the morning
star." But, truly, none have had a fuller view of the beauty of virtue,
than those who by faith have seen JESUS CHRIST, that unerring pattern of
righteousness. These are those that have "handled the Word of life" (1
John 1:1), as St. John tells us. And, surely, if heathens have been so
much absorbed by the love of virtue, how much more should a Christian love
the transcendent beauty of Jesus Christ, who is virtue itself, and
composed of nothing but pure love, and unspotted meekness; nay, who is GOD
himself?

12. It was not without cause, therefore, that St. Paul preferred the love
of Christ to all other knowledge or science: and with him we ought to pray
that we may experimentally "know this love of Christ which passeth
knowledge" (Eph. 3:19), that so we may thereby be "filled with all the
fulness of God." Now there is no man that has the love of Christ in him,
but he must necessarily also love the humility and meekness of Christ, and
from sincere love to him readily embrace them. By this means he is still
more and more enlightened, and day by day transformed into the image of
Christ, "as from glory to glory." 2 Cor. 3:18. And the reason of this is
evident; for God delights to give grace to the humble (1 Peter 5:5), as
the Scripture tells us: agreeably to what St. Bernard says, "The rivers of
grace flow downwards, not upwards." They visit and refresh the valley, but
will not rest upon mountains, or upon anything that is high and lifted up.
How should then the grace of the light and knowledge of God come to a man
that walks not in the humble and holy light of Christ, but in the way of
Lucifer? For if there be any faith in us, and if this be attended with
suitable fruits and practice, it will not leave us "barren and unfruitful
in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ." 2 Peter 1:8. In an humble soul
Christ lives, and then also his Spirit rests upon it (the spirit of wisdom
and of understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of
knowledge and of the fear of the Lord), as truly as it rested upon Christ
himself. For in whomsoever the light and the life of Christ dwell, in him
is also Christ himself, who is the very light and life of a Christian. And
this also is the reason that the gifts and graces of the divine Spirit
rest upon a true Christian, as well as upon Christ himself, according to
the prophecy of Isaiah. Ch. 11:1-3.

13. Hence St. Peter, speaking to the Jews, exhorts them to repent (or to
be renewed in their minds): "and ye shall," says he, "receive the gift of
the Holy Ghost." Acts 2:38. Whence it plainly appears, that those who are
in a state of faith and repentance, are the only men duly prepared for
receiving the divine Spirit, the true enlightener of hearts.

14. Whoever, therefore, desires to be delivered from the blindness of his
heart, and from eternal darkness, yea, from the devil himself, let him
faithfully follow Christ in true faith, in unfeigned conversion, and in a
thorough newness of life. The nearer we are to Christ, the nearer we are
to the eternal light; the more closely we adhere to unbelief, the more we
adhere to darkness and to the devil himself. For even as Christ, faith,
and all the virtues, are nearly allied and belong together, so in like
manner, are the devil, unbelief, and all the vices, and works of darkness,
so nearly combined, as to render it impossible to conceive of one without
the other.

15. Consider the apostles of the Lord. They followed their Master in
faith, in contempt of the world, denying themselves, in renouncing their
possessions, and in living together in unity of the Spirit. By this means
they were enlightened from above, and filled with the Holy Ghost. Acts
2:1, etc. With these terms the rich young man in the Gospel being
unwilling to comply, he continued shut up in the darkness of the world,
and was not enlightened unto eternal life. Luke 18:23. For "if any man
love the world, the love of the Father is not in him." 1 John 2:15. And
"he that hateth his brother is in darkness, and knoweth not whither he
goeth: because that darkness hath blinded his eyes." 1 John 2:11.

16. All the sermons of Tauler refer to this subject. He makes it appear,
that without the sincere exercise of faith, without a serious course of
mortification, without self-denial, without a narrow search into one's own
heart, and without the inward, calm sabbath of the soul, no man can obtain
or enjoy the divine light.

17. In short, in proportion as the works of darkness are destroyed in a
man by the Spirit of God, in that proportion is he illuminated; and again,
in the same degree as the corrupt nature, the flesh, and the world, pride,
and the lust of the eyes, domineer in a man, in that degree darkness is
left in him, and the less of grace, of light, of the Spirit of God and of
Christ, is he possessed of. Therefore it remains, that without unfeigned
repentance, and a _daily_ repentance, no man can be truly enlightened from
above.

18. Whoever yields too much to one sin, undoubtedly opens a door to many
others. Sin never comes alone, but, like a noxious weed, spreads itself on
every side, and gains more ground every day. And as the darkness becomes
greater accordingly as the sun retires, so as the holy life of Christ
departs from us, the darkness and sin increase, till at length the man is
swallowed up in eternal darkness. On the contrary, if a man devote himself
to the practice of one virtue, he gains thereby an opportunity of
practising all the rest in time, and cannot but daily proceed from one to
another. This admirable connection is represented by St. Peter as a chain,
in which all the rings are linked together, and none is suffered to
separate from another. "Add," he says, "to your faith, virtue; and to
virtue, knowledge; and to knowledge, temperance; and to temperance,
patience; and to patience, godliness; and to godliness, brotherly
kindness; and to brotherly kindness, charity;" superadding one virtue
continually to another, and crowning all at last with this promise: "If
these things be in you and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be
barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ." 2 Peter
1:5-8. To sum up all in a few words: Whoever is not earnestly bent on the
exercise of such heavenly virtues as these, certainly knows not Christ,
and is void of all saving knowledge: whereas, if a man by faith grow in
virtue, he also grows in Christ himself. On the contrary, the wrathful,
the covetous, the proud, the impatient, do not grow in Christ, but in the
devil.

19. It is the apostle's command, that we should grow up "unto a perfect
man." Eph. 4:13. As a child gradually grows up to the stature of a perfect
man, so a Christian ought daily to grow in the practice of faith and
virtue, till he become a perfect man in Christ. But "he that lacketh these
things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and hath forgotten that he was
purged from his old sins." 2 Pet. 1:9. As if the apostle had said: Christ
by his death has indeed taken away our sins, and blotted them out; not
that we should continue in the service of sin, but that, dying to sin, and
living to Christ, we should show forth the fructifying power of the death
of Christ. Without this order practically applied to the mind, it is
manifest, that the purging away of our old sins, and the atonement made
for them, can profit us nothing. Our sin is never forgiven until we
entirely quit it, repent of it, and embrace Christ with an unfeigned
belief. If we preserve but one sin alive, the mortifying of all the rest,
if that were possible, would avail nothing; but we should be condemned to
eternal death, without any hope of expiation or forgiveness. Thus, a man
may be damned for the sin of wrath alone; whereas, if he had seriously
corrected and quitted it, he would have obtained pardon not only for that,
but even for other sins of which he stood guilty. But neglecting to do
this, he is one of those that are "blind," and "he forgets that he was
purged from his old sins!" 2 Pet. 1:9.

20. By this we are given to understand the necessity of repentance, and a
thorough change of life: for although Christ died for our sins, and
abolished them with the price of his blood, yet can we never partake of
that merit, unless we _repent_. Without repentance this precious blood
profits nothing. And though every man has a promise of pardon for his sin
through the merit of Christ, yet that promise belongs not to the
unbeliever, nor to the impenitent, but to those only who truly repent and
reform their lives. Those sins shall not be remitted, which a man will not
leave; but those only which he is willing to quit, and for which he
heartily grieves. And here the word of the Lord is verified, "The poor
have the Gospel preached to them;" that is, remission of sin, and life
everlasting consequent upon it. Matt. 11:5. Let us suppose a man, who, for
many years, has been the servant of covetousness, after the example of
Zaccheus; or of lust, as Mary Magdalene; or of wrath and revenge, as Esau.
Let us also suppose that this man, as soon as he heard that either these
sins were to be entirely left, or that the death and blood of Christ would
else profit him nothing, becomes a true suppliant to God, and cries out to
him: "Oh God! how am I grieved for this! O Lord, be merciful, be
merciful!" and then forms a new resolution, desists from his sin, craves
pardon and grace, and believes in Christ. Then all his former offences
are, of grace, freely remitted to him. No merit of his own is regarded,
but solely the death and the blood of Christ shed for him. This is the
only way in which a returning sinner is to obtain mercy. Whereas, he that
does not fully resolve to abandon his former sins, his covetousness,
wrath, usury, pride, lust, etc., will hope forever in vain for a remission
of sin, being condemned to everlasting confusion and anguish. He shall be
obliged to satisfy for himself the justice of God, and yet will never be
able to perform it. On earth he was destitute of that faith which purifies
the heart (Acts 15:9); and so his sin and lust, which have not been
mortified here, shall forever torment him there. It is for this reason,
that St. Paul so earnestly inculcates, "that they which do such things,
shall not inherit the kingdom of God." Gal. 5:21. And therefore either the
loss of this heavenly kingdom must certainly follow, or the narrow way of
_self-denial_ must be heartily chosen.

21. Wherever this unfeigned conversion to, and faith in, God, are wrought
in the soul, there pardon and divine grace are freely bestowed. And where
these are, there is Christ also; without whom no grace can be obtained.
Where Christ is, there are likewise his precious merit, and the full
ransom which he has paid for our sins, and which is appropriated to the
penitent soul. Again, where these are, there is righteousness; and with
righteousness, is peace; and with peace, sweet serenity of conscience. It
is then, that righteousness and peace kiss each other in the soul. Ps.
85:10. This clearness of conscience is attended with the Spirit of God
himself; who being a Spirit of joy, will surely pour forth the "oil of
gladness" (Heb. 1:9), and quicken the soul with a foretaste of life
eternal itself, which shall be joy and glory without end.

22. This is that light of eternal life, that eternally triumphant joy,
with which those only are crowned that live in Christ, and exercise daily
repentance. This is the beginning of a spiritual life, as the death of
Christ is the basis and foundation on which it is raised. On the contrary,
where there is no repentance, there is no pardon of sin; where there is no
inward remorse or spiritual sorrow, there grace cannot have a place. Where
these are wanting, there Christ himself is wanting, together with the
whole extent of his merits and satisfaction, be the pretences of the
_false_ Christian ever so fair and specious. Where this satisfaction is
not thoroughly applied to the soul, there is no righteousness, and
consequently no peace, no good conscience, no comfort. Where there is no
comfort of heart, there is no Holy Ghost, no joy, no calmness of mind, and
no life eternal; but death, hell, condemnation, and everlasting darkness.

23. Behold, O man! how true it is, that none of those who refuse to follow
Christ in their lives, by an unfeigned repentance, can ever get rid of the
blindness of their hearts, and of everlasting darkness.




Chapter XXXVIII.


  Showing That An Unchristian Life Leads To False Doctrine, Hardness Of
  Heart, And Blindness; Also, Treating Of The Eternal Election Of Grace.


    _Yet a little while is the light with you. Walk while ye have the
    light, lest darkness come upon you: for he that walketh in
    darkness knoweth not whither he goeth_.--JOHN 12:35.


Since Christ, and faith in him are denied, and almost wholly extirpated by
an ungodly life, what shall his doctrine profit us? For his doctrine, with
the Word and Sacraments, is delivered to us for no other end, than that it
be inwardly digested, and converted, as it were, into our very life and
spirit. As from a good seed springs up good fruit, so from the Word and
Sacraments should spring up within us the noble life of regeneration, or
the new birth; the new, holy, and spiritual man; or, to speak all in one
word, a true and real Christian. For he that is a Christian, must needs be
born again of the Spirit, the Word, and the Sacraments, and believe and
live in Christ, as in the primary principle of the life of grace. As
certainly as a child is begotten by his father, so truly must the
Christian be begotten of God and of Christ, through faith. James 1:18; 1
Peter 1:23; John 3:3, 5; Titus 3:5.

2. When, therefore, we do not resolve to strive against the depraved bent
of our flesh, and to digest the doctrine of Christ into our life and
nature; nay, when we contradict the _Christian_ doctrine by an
_anti-Christian_ life, by irreligion and profaneness; is it not plain that
we are not begotten of God, nor born of Christ? What will Christ's
_doctrine_ profit us, when we are sure that our _life_ does not correspond
with it at all? Will our vain boasts of the light of the Gospel do any
good, when we evidently walk in darkness? It is on this account that the
light deservedly retires from us, and the world begins to be overspread
with darkness and false doctrines, with errors and with seducing spirits.
And that we might beware of these, our blessed Saviour hath left us this
warning: "While ye have the light, walk in the light, lest darkness come
upon you" (John 12:35); that is, lest ye be led away into all kinds of
errors and delusions, into blindness and hardness of heart, into darkness
and prejudices, which indispose the mind for the very reception of the
light of the Gospel. This was the case with Pharaoh, the Jews, and also of
Julian the Apostate; who, being in the end convicted by the reproaches of
his own conscience, exclaimed openly, and to his own confusion, that
Christ both lived and reigned, and was both Lord and God; saying, "Thou
hast overcome, O Galilean; thou hast overcome." It would have been better
for him to have said, "Lord, have mercy upon me!" But, alas! this was
entirely out of his reach, in consequence of the hardness of his heart,
contracted by an uninterrupted course of sinning, and by having rejected
and despised the mercy of Christ.

3. This hardness of heart, is that terrible darkness which, in the end,
overtakes all such as refuse to walk in the light whilst they have it. It
is the just punishment inflicted on those that blaspheme the truth, as
Pharaoh did, when he asked: "Who is the Lord, that I should obey his
voice, to let Israel go? I know not the Lord." Exodus 5:2. Therefore it
was but just that he should the more grievously feel the overruling power
of God, by being made an example to the whole world, and a lasting
monument of the indignation of the Lord, and of the weakness of men who
vainly presume to oppose him.

4. In like manner were the Jews of old struck with blindness and hardness
of heart, when they refused to hearken to the voice of the Lord, having
been warned by Moses long before, that this would certainly come to pass.
"The Lord," says he, "shall smite thee with madness, and blindness, and
astonishment of heart." Deut. 28:28. This actually did befall them, as may
be seen, Isaiah, chap. 6:9-12. Whereby it is manifest, that such hardness
of heart is the most righteous punishment of unbelief, of contempt of God,
and the heavenly truth declared by him; according to the words of St.
Paul: "With all deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish;
because they received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.
And for this cause, God shall send them strong delusion, that they should
believe a lie." 2 Thess. 2:10, 11. Whence it plainly appears, why God is
used to strike men with such terrible blindness and hardness of heart;
namely, because they "receive not the love of the truth."

5. And, indeed, the man from whom God takes away his offered grace, is
surely most wretched and miserable; neither can he of himself at any time
return into the right way. As a proof of this, we have the examples of
Pharaoh and Julian. He from whom the Lord removes his light, must of
necessity live in darkness. God removes it, however, from those only who
refuse to walk in it; _neither does he take his grace from any, but from
those that boldly reject it_.

6. It is in this sense that the words of St. Paul are to be taken: " 'I
will have mercy (saith he) on whom I will have mercy.' Therefore hath he
mercy on whom he will have mercy; and whom he will he hardeneth." Rom.
9:15, 18. But truly the Lord hath pity on all them who freely receive his
mercy; as, on the contrary, he hardeneth those that reject and blaspheme
the offer of his grace. And it is this wilful resistance for which St.
Paul reproves the Jews: "It was necessary," says he, "that the word of God
should first have been spoken to you; but seeing ye put it from you, and
judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the
Gentiles." "And when the Gentiles heard this, they were glad, and
glorified the word of the Lord: and as many as were ordained to eternal
life, believed" (Acts 13:46, 48): that is, as many as did not resist and
obstinately cast away the word of grace, as the means of faith. It was
because the Jews were guilty of this, that they could not believe: for the
Lord hath not ordained any one to eternal salvation, who disdainfully
rejects his word, and proves disobedient to the offer of his grace.

7. The ordination to life eternal, or the election of grace (Rom. 11:5),
is fully brought to pass in Jesus Christ, with this promise annexed, that
God offers his grace to all by the Gospel; those who receive it are
ordained to eternal life; and whosoever reject it thereby "judge
themselves unworthy of eternal life," as St. Paul expresses it. That is,
by their own fault they make themselves unworthy of that blessing, and
debar themselves from that universal grace which is displayed in the
Gospel; and so putting their own names out of the book of life, which is
Christ, they resist the good work of God by their own contumacy, and,
consequently, cannot obtain that true saving faith, which the Word begets.

8. And here let us not deceive ourselves, by vainly supposing that they
only reject the word of God, who do not outwardly embrace the faith and
doctrine of Christ (such as Mahometans and Jews); and that those who
profess the Christian faith, and adhere to the doctrine of the Gospel,
cannot possibly be deemed wilful despisers of the offer of mercy. Certain
it is, that all who will not follow the footsteps of Christ, nor take his
life upon them, nor walk in the light, fall under this heavy charge. And
for this cause God is moved to take from them the light of his word, and
of pure doctrine. "I," saith Christ, "am the light of the world: he that
followeth me, shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of
life." John 8:12.

9. Hence we learn that whoever follows the example of Christ, and lives
his life, shall be in no danger of being misled by any delusion and error.
He shall also escape that blindness and hardness of heart, which an empty
confessor of the Christian faith draws upon himself. Consider here, on the
one hand, the many proud, noble, learned, ingenious, and mighty men of
this world; and, on the other, the errors, blindness, and delusions, into
which they are plunged. Truly, those delusions arise from no other source,
than because men do not live in Christ, but are averse to the imitation of
his holy life; and therefore cannot have the light of life.

10. From the same source also proceed those "workings of Satan," and those
"strong delusions," together with all the "lying wonders" mentioned by St.
Paul (2 Thess. 2:9-11), and which more and more increase upon us, because
the world is not willing to follow Christ, and by this means, to be
preserved from delusion and error. "For what communion hath light with
darkness? and what concord (therefore) hath Christ with Belial?" 2 Cor.
6:14, 15. That is to say, Purity of doctrine, and divine knowledge, cannot
remain with those that live in the devil, in darkness, in pride, in
covetousness, and filthy pleasure. How should the pure doctrine dwell with
those who exhibit impurity of life and manners? Nothing, certainly, can be
more irreconcilable, than purity of doctrine and an impure life.

11. If, therefore, we would preserve pure doctrine, we must be wholly
changed in our minds, and have no part with the world, and with
unchristian actions. We must "awake" (Eph. 5:14) from the lethargy of sin,
and shake off the works of darkness, that so Christ may enlighten us again
with the light of true faith. Whence it is plain, that whosoever does not
follow the footsteps of Christ, nor imitate him in his love, humility,
meekness, patience, and obedience, he must necessarily be deceived, and
stray from the knowledge of God; since he does not walk in the way which
leads to truth.

12. On the contrary, if we but lived in Christ, if we walked in his love
and humility, and directed all our endeavors and studies purely to this
_one object_, that the flesh be mortified, and the life of Christ raised
within us; that through him we might overcome ourselves, and triumph over
the flesh, the world, and the devil; if this were but once effected, there
would then remain very little contention and strife about the doctrine,
and heresies would of themselves fall to the ground.

13. We have an example of most strange delusion in Ahab, who, on account
of his wicked and tyrannical life, was seduced by four hundred false
prophets. 1 Kings 22. It was by their encouragement that he undertook that
fatal expedition against the Syrians, in contempt of the true prophet
Micaiah, who positively foretold his death in that battle. But being led
by a false light, he rejected the truth, and gave credit to lying
prophets, who prophesied nothing but peace and prosperity to him. Hence
the justice of God met him, according to the word of the true prophet, and
by due desert the dogs licked his blood.

14. In this is verified the word of St. Paul: "The god of this world hath
blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the
glorious gospel of Christ should shine unto them." 2 Cor. 4:4. And is not
the same judgment threatened against all hypocrites, who boast of Christ
and his doctrine, but deny him in their life and actions? For thus saith
the Lord through the prophet: "Forasmuch as this people draw near me with
their mouth, and with their lips do honor me, but have removed their heart
far from me; therefore the wisdom of their wise men shall perish, and the
understanding of their prudent men shall be hid." Isa. 29:13, 14.
Concerning the prophets in particular, the Lord has plainly declared, that
he has "covered the prophets, the rulers, and seers." Hence the vision
shall become as a "sealed book," etc. Verse 10, 11. And as for the Jews
themselves, the apostle has told us, that there is a "vail upon their
heart," preventing their eyes from beholding the true Messiah; which,
however, shall be "taken away when they turn to the Lord." 2 Cor. 3:15,
16.




Chapter XXXIX.


 Showing That The Purity Of The Doctrine Of The Divine Word Is Maintained
Not Only By Discussions And Publications, But Also By True Repentance And
                            Holiness Of Life.


    _Hold fast the form of sound words, which thou hast heard of me,
    in faith and love which is in Christ Jesus. That good thing which
    was committed unto thee, keep by the Holy Ghost which dwelleth in
    us._--2 TIM. 1:13, 14.


It is very necessary, that the purity of doctrine, and the truth of the
holy Christian faith, should be maintained and defended against all false
teachers. For this we have the example of the holy prophets, who, with
great zeal, preached against false and idolatrous prophets under the old
law; of the Son of God, who sharply disputed against the Pharisees and
scribes at Jerusalem; of St. John, the Evangelist, who wrote his Gospel
against the heretical Ebionites and Cerinthus, and the Revelation (chap.
2:6, 15), against the false church of the Nicolaitans and others.

2. Thus, too, St. Paul vigorously defended the doctrine of justification
by faith (Rom. 3:20, etc.), of good works (2 Cor. 9:8, etc.), of the
resurrection of the dead (1 Cor. 15:1, etc.), of Christian liberty (1 Cor.
9; 10--Gal. 5:1, etc.), etc., against certain false apostles who had
intruded into the Church. We have, further, the example of the holy
bishops and fathers of the primitive church, who, following the example
set them by the apostles, strenuously opposed in their public
controversial writings, the Pagan superstitions, and the heresies of those
times. Nay, for the same purpose General Councils were gathered by the
Christian emperors, who condemned the chief heretics that infested the
church at that time; such as the Arians, Macedonians, Nestorians, and
Eutychians; not to mention the example of Martin Luther, by whose
polemical books and writings, the papacy, and other sects, have in these
latter days been successfully assailed.

3. It remains, therefore, that preaching, writing, and disputation against
heretics, must be continued, to the preserving of the purity of doctrine,
and of true religion. For this reason, the apostle will also have "a
bishop to be able both to exhort and convince the gainsayers." Titus 1:9.
Though this in itself is both lawful and commendable, yet it has so fallen
out by the abuse of it, that disputations and controversies are increased
to such an extent in these days, that the Christian life, true repentance,
love, and godliness, are, as it were forgotten; as if the sum and
substance of the Christian religion consisted in arguing, and writing
books of controversy, rather than in that unfeigned holiness of life, and
purity of manners, which the Gospel requires.

4. For consider the examples of the holy Prophets and Apostles, as also of
the Son of God himself. They did not barely dispute against false prophets
and apostles, and the superstitions maintained by them; but also with
great zeal and vigor exhorted to true repentance, and a holy life. Their
sermons were accompanied with power and energy; and they made it appear,
