are concerned with it:--

_Fairies and Spirits._--'Spirits and fairies exist all round us,
invisible. Fairies have no solid bodily substance. Their forms are of
matter like ghostly bodies, and on this account they cannot be caught.
In the twilight they are often seen, and on moonlight nights in summer.
Only certain people can see fairies, and such people hold communication
with them and have dealings with them, but it is difficult to get them
to talk about fairies. I think the spirits about us are the fallen
angels, for when old Doctor Harris died his books on witchcraft had to
be burned in order to free the place where he lived from evil spirits.
The fairies, too, are sometimes called the fallen angels. They will do
good to those who befriend them, and harm to others. I think there must
be an intermediate state between life on earth and heavenly life, and it
may be in this that spirits and fairies live. There are two distinct
types of spirits: one is good and the other is bad. I have heard of
people going to the fairies and finding that years passed as days, but I
do not believe in changelings, though there are stories enough about
them. That there are fairies and other spirits like them, both good and
bad, I firmly believe. My mother used to tell about seeing the
"fair-folk" dancing in the fields near Cardigan; and other people have
seen them round the cromlech up there on the hill (the Pentre Evan
Cromlech). They appeared as little children in clothes like soldiers'
clothes, and with red caps, according to some accounts.'

_Death-Candles Described._--'I have seen more than one death-candle. I
saw one death-candle right here in this room where we are sitting and
talking.' I was told by the nephew and niece of our present witness that
this particular death-candle took an untrodden course from the house
across the fields to the grave-yard, and that when the death of one of
the family occurred soon afterwards, their aunt insisted that the corpse
should be carried by exactly the same route; so the road was abandoned
and the funeral went through the ploughed fields. Here is the
description of the death-candle as the aunt gave it in response to our
request:--'The death-candle appears like a patch of bright light; and no
matter how dark the room or place is, everything in it is as clear as
day. The candle is not a flame, but a luminous mass, lightish blue in
colour, which dances as though borne by an invisible agency, and
sometimes it rolls over and over. If you go up to the light it is
nothing, for it is a spirit. Near here a light as big as a pot was seen,
and rays shot out from it in all directions. The man you saw here in the
house to-day, one night as he was going along the road near Nevern, saw
the death-light of old Dr. Harris, and says it was lightish green.'

_Gors Goch Fairies._--Now we began to hear more about fairies:--'One
night there came a strange rapping at the door of the ancient manor on
the Gors Goch farm over in Cardiganshire, and the father of the family
asked what was wanted. Thin, silvery voices said they wanted a warm
place in which to dress their children and to tidy them up. The door
opened then, and in came a dozen or more little beings, who at once set
themselves to hunting for a basin and water, and to cleaning themselves.
At daybreak they departed, leaving a pretty gift in return for the
kindness. In this same house at another time, whether by the same party
of little beings or by another could not be told, a healthy child of the
family was _changed_ because he was unbaptized, and a frightful-looking
child left in his place. The mother finally died of grief, and the other
children died because of the loss of their mother, and the father was
left alone. Then some time after this, the same little folks who came
the first time returned to clean up, and when they departed, in place of
their former gifts of silver, left a gift of gold. It was not long
before the father became heir to a rich farm in North Wales, and going
to live on it became a magician, for the little people, still
befriending him, revealed themselves in their true nature and taught him
all their secrets.'

_Levi Salmon's Control of Spirits._--'Levi Salmon, who lived about
thirty years ago, between here and Newport, was a magician, and could
call up good and bad spirits; but was afraid to call up the bad ones
unless another person was with him, for it was a dangerous and terrible
ordeal. After consulting certain books which he had, he would draw a
circle on the floor, and in a little while spirits like bulls and
serpents and other animals would appear in it, and all sorts of spirits
would speak. It was not safe to go near them; and to control them Levi
held a whip in his hand. He would never let them cross the circle. And
when he wanted them to go away he always had to throw something to the
chief spirit.'

_The Haunted Manor and the Golden Image._--I offer now, in my own
language, the following remarkable story:--The ancient manor-house on
the Trewern Farm (less than a mile from the Pentre Evan Cromlech) had
been haunted as long as anybody could remember. Strange noises were
often heard in it, dishes would dance about of their own accord, and
sometimes a lady dressed in silk appeared. Many attempts were made to
lay the ghosts, but none succeeded. Finally things got so bad that
nobody wanted to live there. About eighty years ago the sole occupants
of the haunted house were Mr. ---- and his two servants. At the time, it
was well known in the neighbourhood that all at once Mr. ---- became
very wealthy, and his servants seemed able to buy whatever they wanted.
Everybody wondered, but no one could tell where the money came from; for
at first he was a poor man, and he couldn't have made much off the farm.
The secret only leaked out through one of the servants after Mr. ----
was dead. The servant declared to certain friends that one of the
ghosts, or, as he thought, the Devil, appeared to Mr. ---- and told him
there was an image of great value walled up in the room over the main
entrance to the manor. A search was made, and, sure enough, a large
image of solid gold was found in the very place indicated, built into a
recess in the wall. Mr. ---- bound the servants to secrecy, and began to
turn the image into money. He would cut off small pieces of the image,
one at a time, and take them to London and sell them. In this way he
sold the whole image, and nobody was the wiser. After the image was
found and disposed of, ghosts were no longer seen in the house, nor were
unusual noises heard in it at night. The one thing which beyond all
doubt is true is that when Mr. ---- died he left his son an estate worth
about L50,000 (an amount probably greatly in excess of the true one);
and people have always wondered ever since where it came from, if not in
part from the golden image.[59]

Hundreds of parallel stories in which, instead of ghosts, fairies and
demons are said to have revealed hidden treasure could be cited.


IN THE GOWER PENINSULA, GLAMORGANSHIRE

Our investigations in Glamorganshire cover the most interesting part,
the peninsula of Gower, where there are peculiar folk-lore conditions,
due to its present population being by ancestry English and Flemish as
well as Cornish and Welsh. Despite this race admixture, Brythonic
beliefs have generally survived in Gower even among the non-Celts; and
because of the Cornish element there are pixies, as shown by the
following story related to me in Swansea by Mr. ----, a well-known
mining engineer:--

_Pixies._--'At Newton, near the Mumbles (in Gower), an old woman, some
twenty years ago, assured me that she had seen the pixies. Her father's
grey mare was standing in the trap before the house ready to take some
produce to the Swansea market, and when the time for departure arrived
the pixies had come, but no one save the old woman could see them. She
described them to me as like tiny men dancing on the mare's back and
climbing up along the mare's mane. She thought the pixies some kind of
spirits who made their appearance in early morning; and all mishaps to
cows she attributed to them.'


TESTIMONY FROM AN ARCHAEOLOGIST

The Rev. John David Davis, rector of Llanmadoc and Cheriton parishes,
and a member of the Cambrian Archaeological Society, has passed many
years in studying the antiquities and folk-lore of Gower, being the
author of various antiquarian works; and he is without doubt the oldest
and best living authority to aid us. The Rector very willingly offers
this testimony:--

_Pixies and 'Verry Volk'._--'In this part of Gower, the name _Tylwyth
Teg_ is never used to describe fairies; _Verry Volk_ is used instead.
Some sixty years ago, as I can remember, there was belief in such
fairies here in Gower, but now there is almost none. Belief in
apparitions still exists to some extent. One may also hear of a person
being pixy-led; the pixies may cause a traveller to lose his way at
night if he crosses a field where they happen to be. To take your coat
off and turn it inside out will break the pixy spell.[60] The _Verry
Volk_ were always little people dressed in scarlet and green; and they
generally showed themselves dancing on moonlight nights. I never heard
of their making changelings, though they had the power of doing good or
evil acts, and it was a very risky thing to offend them. By nature they
were benevolent.'

_A 'Verry Volk' Feast._--'I heard the following story many years
ago:--The tenant on the Eynonsford Farm here in Gower had a dream one
night, and in it thought he heard soft sweet music and the patter of
dancing feet. Waking up, he beheld his cow-shed, which opened off his
bedroom, filled with a multitude of little beings, about one foot high,
swarming all over his fat ox, and they were preparing to slaughter the
ox. He was so surprised that he could not move. In a short time the
_Verry Volk_ had killed, dressed, and eaten the animal. The feast being
over, they collected the hide and bones, except one very small leg-bone
which they could not find, placed them in position, then stretched the
hide over them; and, as the farmer looked, the ox appeared as sound and
fat as ever, but when he let it out to pasture in the morning he
observed that it had a slight lameness in the leg lacking the missing
bone.'[61]


FAIRIES AMONG GOWER ENGLISH FOLK

The population of the Llanmadoc region of Gower are generally English by
ancestry and speech; and not until reaching Llanmorlais, beyond
Llanridian, did I find anything like an original Celtic and
Welsh-speaking people, and these may have come into that part within
comparatively recent times; and yet, as the above place-names tend to
prove, in early days all these regions must have been Welsh. It may be
argued, however, that this English-speaking population may be more
Celtic than Saxon, even though emigrants from England. In any case, we
can see with interest how this so-called English population now echo
Brythonic beliefs which they appear to have adopted in Gower, possibly
sympathetically through race kinship; and the following testimony
offered by Miss Sarah Jenkins, postmistress of Llanmadoc, will enable us
to do so:--

_Dancing with Fairies._--'A man, whose Christian name was William, was
enticed by the fairy folk to enter their dance, as he was on his way to
the Swansea market in the early morning. They kept him dancing some
time, and then said to him before they let him go, "Will dance well; the
last going to market and the first that shall sell." And though he
arrived at the market very late, he was the first to sell anything.'

_Fairy Money._--'An old woman, whom I knew, used to find money left by
the fairies every time they visited her house. For a long time she
observed their request, and told no one about the money; but at last she
told, and so never found money afterwards.'

_Nature of Fairies._--'The fairies (_verry volk_) were believed to have
plenty of music and dancing. Sometimes they appeared dressed in bright
red. They could appear and disappear suddenly, and no one could tell how
or where.'


CONCLUSION

Much more might easily be said about Welsh goblins, about Welsh fairies
who live in caves, or about Welsh fairy women who come out of lakes and
rivers, or who are the presiding spirits of sacred wells and
fountains,[62] but these will have some consideration later, in Section
III. For the purposes of the present inquiry enough evidence has been
offered to show the fundamental character of Brythonic fairy-folk as we
have found them. And we can very appropriately close this inquiry by
allowing our Welsh-speaking witness from the Pentre Evan country,
Pembrokeshire, to tell us one of the prettiest and most interesting
fairy-tales in all Wales. The name of Taliessin appearing in it leads us
to suspect that it may be the remnant of an ancient bardic tale which
has been handed down orally for centuries. It will serve to illustrate
the marked difference between the short conversational stories of the
living Fairy-Faith and the longer, more polished ones of the traditional
Fairy-Faith; and we shall see in it how a literary effect is gained at
the expense of the real character of the fairies themselves, for it
transforms them into mortals:--

_Einion and Olwen._--'My mother told the story as she used to sit by the
fire in the twilight knitting stockings:--"One day when it was cloudy
and misty, a shepherd boy going to the mountains lost his way and walked
about for hours. At last he came to a hollow place surrounded by rushes
where he saw a number of round rings. He recognized the place as one he
had often heard of as dangerous for shepherds, because of the rings. He
tried to get away from there, but he could not. Then an old, merry,
blue-eyed man appeared. The boy, thinking to find his way home, followed
the old man, and the old man said to him, 'Do not speak a word till I
tell you.' In a little while they came to a _menhir_ (long stone). The
old man tapped it three times, and then lifted it up. A narrow path with
steps descending was revealed, and from it emerged a bluish-white light.
'Follow me,' said the old man, 'no harm will come to you.' The boy did
so, and it was not long before he saw a fine, wooded, fertile country
with a beautiful palace, and rivers and mountains. He reached the palace
and was enchanted by the singing of birds. Music of all sorts was in
the palace, but he saw no people. At meals dishes came and disappeared
of their own accord. He could hear voices all about him, but saw no
person except the old man--who said that now he could speak. When he
tried to speak he found that he could not move his tongue. Soon an old
lady with smiles came to him leading three beautiful maidens, and when
the maidens saw the shepherd boy they smiled and spoke, but he could not
reply. Then one of the girls kissed him; and all at once he began to
converse freely and most wittily. In the full enjoyment of the
marvellous country he lived with the maidens in the palace a day and a
year, not thinking it more than a day, for there was no reckoning of
time in that land. When the day and the year were up, a longing to see
his old acquaintances came on him; and thanking the old man for his
kindness, he asked if he could return home. The old man said to him,
'Wait a little while'; and so he waited. The maiden who had kissed him
was unwilling to have him go; but when he promised her to return, she
sent him off loaded with riches.

'"At home not one of his people or old friends knew him. Everybody
believed that he had been killed by another shepherd. And this shepherd
had been accused of the murder and had fled to America.

'"On the first day of the new moon the boy remembered his promise, and
returned to the other country; and there was great rejoicing in the
beautiful palace when he arrived. Einion, for that was the boy's name,
and Olwen, for that was the girl's name, now wanted to marry; but they
had to go about it quietly and half secretly, for the _fair-folk_
dislike ceremony and noise. When the marriage was over, Einion wished to
go back with Olwen to the upper world. So two snow-white ponies were
given them, and they were allowed to depart.

'"They reached the upper world safely; and, being possessed of unlimited
wealth, lived most handsomely on a great estate which came into their
possession. A son was born to them, and he was called Taliessin. People
soon began to ask for Olwen's pedigree, and as none was given it was
taken for granted that she was one of the _fair-folk_. 'Yes, indeed,'
said Einion, 'there is no doubt that she is one of the _fair-folk_,
there is no doubt that she is one of the very _fair-folk_, for she has
two sisters as pretty as she is, and if you saw them all together you
would admit that the name is a suitable one.' And this is the origin of
the term _fair-folk_ (_Tylwyth Teg_)."'

From Wales we go to the nearest Brythonic country, Cornwall, to study
the fairy-folk there.


VI. IN CORNWALL

     Introduction by HENRY JENNER, Member of the Gorsedd of the Bards of
     Brittany; Fellow and Local Secretary for Cornwall of the Society of
     Antiquaries; author of _A Handbook of the Cornish Language_, &c.

In Cornwall the legends of giants, of saints, or of Arthur and his
knights, the observances and superstitions connected with the
prehistoric stone monuments, holy wells, mines, and the like, the
stories of submerged or buried cities, and the fragments of what would
seem to be pre-Christian faiths, have no doubt occasional points of
contact with Cornish fairy legends, but they do not help to explain the
fairies very much. Yet certain it is that not only in Cornwall and other
Celtic lands, but throughout most of the world, a belief in fairies
exists or has existed, and so widespread a belief must have a reason for
it, though not necessarily a good one. That which with unconscious
humour men generally call 'education' has in these days caused those
lower classes, to whom the deposit of this faith was entrusted, to be
ashamed of it, and to despise and endeavour to forget it. And so now in
Cornwall, as elsewhere at that earlier outbreak of Philistinism, the
Reformation,

  From haunted spring and grassy ring
    Troop goblin, elf and fairy,
  And the kelpie must flit from the black bog-pit,
    And the brownie must not tarry.

But, in spite of Protestantism, school-boards, and education committees,
'pisky-pows' are still placed on the ridge-tiles of West Cornish
cottages, to propitiate the piskies and give them a dancing-place, lest
they should turn the milk sour, and St. Just and Morvah folk are still
'pisky-led' on the Gump (_an Un Gumpas_, the Level Down, between Chun
Castle and Carn Kenidjack), and more rarely St. Columb and Roche folk on
Goss Moor. It will not do to say that it is only another form of
'whisky-led'. That is an evidently modern explanation, invented since
the substitution of strange Scottish and Irish drinks for the good
'Nantes' and wholesome 'Plymouth' of old time, and it does not fit in
with the phenomena. It was only last winter, in a cottage not a hundred
yards from where I am writing, that milk was set at night for piskies,
who had been knocking on walls and generally making nuisances of
themselves. Apparently the piskies only drank the 'astral' part of the
milk (whatever that may be) and then the neighbouring cats drank what
was left, and it disagreed with them. I cannot vouch for the truth of
the part about the piskies and the 'astral' milk--I give it as it was
told to me by the occupant of the cottage, who was not unacquainted with
'occult' terminology--but I do know that the milk was consumed, and that
the cats, one of which was my own, were with one accord unwell all over
the place. But for the present purpose it does not matter whether these
things really happened or not. The point is that people thought they
happened.

Robert Hunt, in his _Popular Romances of the West of England_, divided
the fairies of Cornish folk-lore into five classes: (1) the Small
People; (2) the Spriggans; (3) the Piskies; (4) the Buccas, Bockles, or
Knockers; (5) the Brownies. This is an incorrect classification. The
_Pobel Vean_ or Small People, the Spriggans, and the Piskies are not
really distinguishable from one another. Bucca, who properly is but one,
is a deity not a fairy, and it is said that at Newlyn, the great seat of
his worship, offerings of fish are still left on the beach for him. His
name is the Welsh _pwca_, which is probably 'Puck', though Shakespeare's
Puck was just a pisky, and it may be connected with the general
Slavonic word _Bog_, God; so that if, as some say, _buccaboo_ is really
meant for _Bucca-du_, Black Bucca, this may be an equivalent of
_Czernobog_, the Black God, who was the Ahriman of Slavonic dualism, and
_Bucca-widn_ (White Bucca), which is rarer, though the expression does
come into a St. Levan story, may be the corresponding _Bielobog_.
_Bockle_, which personally I have never heard used, suggests the
Scottish _bogle_, and both may be diminutives of _bucca_, _bog_,
_bogie_, or _bug_, the last in the sense in which one English version
translates the _timor nocturnus_ of Psalm XC. 5, not in that of _cimex
lectularius_. But _bockle_ and _brownie_ are probably both foreign
importations borrowed from books, though a 'brownie' _eo nomine_ has
been reported from Sennen within the last twenty years.

The Knockers or Knackers are mine-spirits, quite unconnected with Bucca
or bogles. The story, as I have always heard it, is that they are the
spirits of Jews who were sent by the Romans to work in the tin mines,
some say for being concerned in the Crucifixion of our Lord, which
sounds improbable. They are benevolent spirits, and warn miners of
danger.

But the only true Cornish fairy is the Pisky, of the race which is the
_Pobel Vean_ or Little People, and the Spriggan is only one of his
aspects. The Pisky would seem to be the 'Brownie' of the Lowland Scot,
the _Duine Sith_ of the Highlander, and, if we may judge from an
interesting note in Scott's _The Pirate_, the 'Peght' of the Orkneys. If
_Daoine Sith_ really means 'The Folk of the Mounds' (barrows), not 'The
People of Peace', it is possible that there is something in the theory
that Brownie, _Duine Sith_, and 'Peght', which is Pict, are only in
their origin ways of expressing the little dark-complexioned aboriginal
folk who were supposed to inhabit the barrows, cromlechs, and _allees
couvertes_, and whose cunning, their only effective weapon against the
mere strength of the Aryan invader, earned them a reputation for magical
powers. Now _Pisky_ or _Pisgy_ is really _Pixy_. Though as a patriotic
Cornishman I ought not to admit it, I cannot deny, especially as it
suits my argument better, that the Devon form is the correct one. But
after all there has been always a strong Cornish element in Devon, even
since the time when Athelstan drove the Britons out of Exeter and set
the Tamar for their boundary, and I think the original word is really
Cornish. The transposition of consonants, especially when _s_ is one of
them, is not uncommon in modern Cornish English. _Hosged_ for
_hogshead_, and _haps_ for _hasp_ are well-known instances. If we take
the root of _Pixy_, _Pix_, and divide the double letter _x_ into its
component parts, we get _Piks_ or _Pics_, and if we remember that a
final _s_ or _z_ in Cornish almost always represents a _t_ or _d_ of
Welsh and Breton (cf. _tas_ for _tad_, _nans_ for _nant_, _bos_ for
_bod_), we may not unreasonably, though without absolute certainty,
conjecture that _Pixy_ is _Picty_ in a Cornish form.[63]

Without begging any question concerning the origin, ethnology, or
homogeneity of those who are called 'Picts' in history, from the times
of Ammianus Marcellinus and Claudian until Kenneth MacAlpine united the
Pictish kingdom with the Scottish, we can nevertheless accept the fact
that the name 'Pict' has been popularly applied to some pre-Celtic race
or races, to whom certain ancient structures, such as 'vitrified forts'
and 'Picts' houses' have been attributed. In Cornwall there are
instances of prehistoric structures being called 'Piskies' Halls' (there
is an _allee couverte_ so called at Bosahan in Constantine), and
'Piskies' Crows' (_Crow_ or _Craw_, Breton _Krao_, is a shed or hovel;
'pegs' craw' is still used for 'pig-sty'); and there are three genuine
examples of what would in Scotland be called 'Picts' Houses' just
outside St. Ives in the direction of Zennor, though only modern
antiquaries have applied that name to them. In the district in which
they are, the fringe of coast from St. Ives round by Zennor, Morvah,
Pendeen, and St. Just nearly to Sennen, are found to this day a strange
and separate people of Mongol type, like the Bigaudens of Pont l'Abbe
and Penmarc'h in the Breton Cornouailles, one of those 'fragments of
forgotten peoples' of the 'sunset bound of Lyonesse' of whom Tennyson
tells. They are a little 'stuggy' dark folk, and until comparatively
modern times were recognized as different from their Celtic neighbours,
and were commonly believed to be largely wizards and witches. One of Mr.
Wentz's informants seems to attribute to Zennor a particularly virulent
brand of pisky, and Zennor is the most primitive part of that district.
Possibly the more completely unmixed ancestors of this race were 'more
so' than the present representatives; but, be this as it may, if _Pixy_
is really _Picty_, it would seem that, like the inhabitants of the
extreme north of the British Isles, the south-western Britons eventually
applied the fairly general popular name of the mysterious, half dreaded,
half despised aboriginal to a race of preternatural beings in whose
existence they believed, and, with the name, transferred some of the
qualities, attributes, and legends, thus producing a mixed mental
conception now known as 'pisky' or 'pixy'.

There seems to have been always and everywhere (or nearly so) a belief
in a race, neither divine nor human, but very like to human beings, who
existed on a 'plane' different from that of humans, though occupying the
same space. This has been called the 'astral' or the 'fourth-dimensional'
plane. Why 'astral'? why 'fourth-dimensional'? why 'plane'? are
questions the answers to which do not matter, and I do not attempt to
defend the terms, but you must call it something. This is the belief to
which Scott refers in the introduction to _The Monastery_, as the
'beautiful but almost forgotten theory of astral spirits or creatures of
the elements, surpassing human beings in knowledge and power, but
inferior to them as being subject, after a certain space of years, to a
death which is to them annihilation'. The subdivisions and elaborations
of the subject by Paracelsus, the Rosicrucians, and the modern
theosophists are no doubt amplifications of that popular belief, which,
though rather undefined, resembles the theory of these mystics in its
main outlines, and was probably what suggested it to them.

These beings are held to be normally imperceptible to human senses, but
conditions may arise in which the 'astral plane' of the elementals and
that part of the 'physical plane' in which, if one may so express it,
some human being happens to be, may be in such a relation to one another
that these and other spirits may be seen and heard. Some such condition
is perhaps described in the story of Balaam the soothsayer, in that
incident when 'the Lord opened the eyes of the young man and he saw, and
behold, the mountain was full of horses and chariots of fire round about
Elisha', and possibly also in the mysterious 'sound of a going in the
tops of the mulberry trees' which David heard; but no doubt in these
cases it was angels and not elementals. It may also be allowable to
suggest, without irreverence, that the Gospel stories of the
Transfiguration and Ascension are connected with the same idea, though
the latter is expressed in the form of the geocentric theory of the
universe.

The Cornish pisky stories are largely made up of instances of contact
between the two 'planes', sometimes accidental, sometimes deliberately
induced by incantations or magic eye-salve, yet with these stories are
often mingled incidents that are not preternatural at all. How, when,
and why this belief arose, I do not pretend even to conjecture; but
there it is, and though of course the holders of it do not talk about
'planes', that is very much the notion which they appear to have.

I do not think that the piskies were ever definitely held to be the
spirits of the dead, and while a certain confusion has arisen, as some
of Mr. Wentz's informants show, I think it belongs to the confused
eschatology of modern Protestants. To a pre-Reformation Cornishman, or
indeed to any other Catholic, the idea was unthinkable. 'Justorum animae
in manu Dei sunt, et non tanget illos tormentum malitiae: visi sunt
oculis insipientium mori: illi autem sunt in pace,' and the
transmigration of the souls of the faithful departed into another order
of beings, not disembodied because never embodied, was to them
impossible. Such a notion is on a par with the quaint but very usual
hope of the modern 'Evangelical' Christian, so beautifully expressed in
one of Hans Andersen's stories, that his departed friends are promoted
to be 'angels'. There may be, perhaps, an idea, as there certainly is in
the Breton Death-Faith, that the spirits of the faithful dead are all
round us, and are not rapt away into a _distant_ Paradise or Purgatory.
This may be of pre-Christian origin, but does not contradict any article
of the Christian faith. The warnings, apparitions, and hauntings, the
'calling of the dead' at sea, and other details of Cornish
Death-Legends, seem to point to a conception of a 'plane' of the dead,
similar to but not necessarily identical with that of the elementals.
Under some quite undefined conditions contact may occur with the
'physical plane', whence the alleged incidents; but this Cornish
Death-Faith, though sometimes, as commonly in Brittany, presenting
similar phenomena, has in itself nothing to do with piskies, and as for
the unfaithful departed, their destination was also well understood, and
it was not Fairyland. There are possible connecting links in the not
very common idea that piskies are the souls of unbaptized children, and
in the more common notion that the _Pobel Vean_ are, not the disembodied
spirits, but the living souls and bodies of the old Pagans, who,
refusing Christianity, are miraculously preserved alive, but are
condemned to decrease in size until they vanish altogether. Some
authorities hold that it is the race and not the individual which
dwindles from generation to generation.

This last idea, as well as the name 'pixy', gives some probability to
the conclusion that, as applied to Cornwall, Mr. MacRitchie's theory
represents a part of the truth, and that on to an already existing
belief in elementals have been grafted exaggerated traditions of a dark
pre-Celtic people. These were not necessarily pygmies, but smaller than
Celts, and may have survived for a long time in forests and hill
countries, sometimes friendly to the taller race, whence come the
stories of piskies working for farmers, sometimes hostile, which may
account for the legends of changelings and other mischievous tricks.
This is how it appears to one who knows his Cornwall in all its aspects
fairly well, but does not profess to be an expert in folk-lore.

  BOSPOWES, HAYLE, CORNWALL,
    _July_ 1910.


Our investigation of the Fairy-Faith in Cornwall covers the region
between Falmouth and the Land's End, which is now the most Celtic; and
the Tintagel country on the north coast. It is generally believed that
ancient Cornish legends, like the Cornish language, are things of the
past only, but I am now no longer of that opinion. Undoubtedly Cornwall
is the most anglicized of all Celtic lands we are studying, and its
folk-lore is therefore far from being as virile as the Irish folk-lore;
nevertheless, through its people, racially mixed though they are, there
still flows the blood and the inspiration of a prehistoric native
ancestry, and among the oldest Cornish men and women of many an isolated
village, or farm, there yet remains some belief in fairies and pixies.
Moreover, throughout all of Old Cornwall there is a very living faith in
the Legend of the Dead; and that this Cornish Legend of the Dead, with
its peculiar Brythonic character, should be parallel as it is to the
Breton Legend of the Dead, has heretofore, so far as I am aware, not
been pointed out. I am giving, however, only a very few of the Cornish
death-legends collected, because in essence most of them are alike.


A CORNISH HISTORIAN'S TESTIMONY

I was privileged to make my first call in rural Cornwall at the pretty
country home of Miss Susan E. Gay, of Crill, about three miles from
Falmouth; and Miss Gay, who has written a well-known history of Falmouth
(_Old Falmouth_, London, 1903), very willingly accorded me an interview
on the subject of my inquiry, and finally dictated for my use the
following matter:--

_Pixies as 'Astral Plane' Beings._--'The pixies and fairies are little
beings in the human form existing on the 'astral plane', who may be in
the process of evolution; and, as such, I believe people have seen them.
The 'astral plane' is not known to us now because our psychic faculty of
perception has faded out by non-use, and this condition has been brought
about by an almost exclusive development of the physical brain; but it
is likely that the psychic faculty will develop again in its turn.'

_Psychical Interpretation of Folk-Lore._--'It is my point of view that
there is a basis of truth in the folk-lore. With its remnants of occult
learning, magic, charms, and the like, folk-lore seems to be the remains
of forgotten psychical facts, rather than history, as it is often
called.'


PEASANT EVIDENCE FROM THE CRILL COUNTRY

Miss Gay kindly gave me the names of certain peasants in the Crill
region, and from one of them, Mrs. Harriett Christopher, I gleaned the
following material:--

_A Pisky Changeling._--'A woman who lived near Breage Church had a fine
girl baby, and she thought the piskies came and took it and put a
withered child in its place. The withered child lived to be twenty years
old, and was no larger when it died than when the piskies brought it. It
was fretful and peevish and frightfully shrivelled. The parents believed
that the piskies often used to come and look over a certain wall by the
house to see the child. And I heard my grandmother say that the family
once put the child out of doors at night to see if the piskies would
take it back again.'

_Nature of Piskies._--'The piskies are said to be very small. You could
never see them by day. I used to hear my grandmother, who has been dead
fifty years, say that the piskies used to hold a fair in the fields near
Breage, and that people saw them there dancing. I also remember her
saying that it was customary to set out food for the piskies at night.
My grandmother's great belief was in piskies and in spirits; and she
considered piskies spirits. She used to tell so many stories about
spirits [of the dead] coming back and such things that I would be afraid
to go to bed.'


EVIDENCE FROM CONSTANTINE

Our witnesses from the ancient and picturesque village of Constantine
are John Wilmet, seventy-eight years old, and his good wife, two most
excellent and well-preserved types of the passing generation of true
Cornish stock. John began by telling me the following tale about an
_allee couverte_--a tale which in one version or another is apt to be
told of most Cornish megaliths:--

_A Pisky-House._--'William Murphy, who married my sister, once went to
the pisky-house at Bosahan with a surveyor, and the two of them heard
such unearthly noises in it that they came running home in great
excitement, saying they had heard the piskies.'

_The Pisky Thrasher._--'On a farm near here, a pisky used to come at
night to thrash the farmer's corn. The farmer in payment once put down a
new suit for him. When the pisky came and saw it, he put it on, and
said:--

  Pisky fine and pisky gay,
  Pisky now will fly away.

And they say he never returned.'

_Nature of Piskies._--'I always understood the piskies to be little
people. A great deal was said about ghosts in this place. Whether or not
piskies are the same as ghosts I cannot tell, but I fancy the old folks
thought they were.'

_Exorcism._--'A farmer who lived two miles from here, near the Gweek
River, called Parson Jago to his house to have him quiet the ghosts or
spirits regularly haunting it, for Parson Jago could always put such
things to rest. The clergyman went to the farmer's house, and with his
whip formed a circle on the floor and then commanded the spirit, which
made its appearance on the table, to come down into the circle. While on
the table the spirit had been visible to all the family, but as soon as
it got into the ring it disappeared; and the house was never haunted
afterwards.'


AT ST. MICHAEL'S MOUNT, MARAZION

Our next place for an investigation of the surviving Cornish Fairy-Faith
is Marazion, the very ancient British town opposite the isle called St.
Michael's Mount. (From Constantine I walked through the country to this
point, talking with as many old people as possible, but none of them
knew very much about ancient Cornish beliefs.) It is believed, though
the matter is very doubtful, that Marazion was the chief mart for the
tin trade of Celtic Britain, and that the Mount--sacred to the Sun and
to the Pagan Mysteries long before Caesar crossed the Channel from
Gaul--sheltered the brilliantly-coloured sailing-ships of the
Phoenicians.[64] In such a romantic town, where Oriental merchants and
Celtic pilgrims probably once mingled together, one might expect some
survival of olden beliefs and customs.

_Piskies._--To Mr. Thomas G. Jago, of Marazion, with a memory extending
backwards more than seventy years, he being eighty years old, I am
indebted for this statement about the pisky creed in that locality:--'I
imagine that one hundred and fifty years ago the belief in piskies and
spirits was general. In my boyhood days, piskies were often called "the
mites" (little people): they were regarded as little spirits. The word
_piskies_ is the old Cornish brogue for pixies. In certain grass fields,
mushrooms growing in a circle might be seen of a morning, and the old
folks pointing to the mushrooms would say to the children, "Oh, the
piskies have been dancing there last night."'

Two more of the oldest natives of Marazion, among others with whom I
talked, are William Rowe, eighty-two years old, and his married sister
seventy-eight years old. About the piskies Mr. Rowe said this:--'People
would go out at night and lose their way and then declare that they had
been pisky-led. I think they meant by this that they fell under some
spiritual influence--that some spirit led them astray. The piskies were
said to be small, and they were thought of as spirits.'[65] Mr. Rowe's
sister added:--'If we as children did anything wrong, the old folks
would say to us, "The piskies will carry you away if you do that
again."'

_Witch-Doctors._--I heard the following witch-story from a lawyer, a
native of the district, who lives in the country just beyond
Marazion:--'Jimmy Thomas, of Wendron parish, who died within the last
twenty-five years, was the last witch-doctor I know about in West
Cornwall. He was supposed to have great power over evil spirits. His
immediate predecessor was a woman, called the "Witch of Wendron", and
she did a big business. My father once visited her in company with a
friend whose father had lost some horses. This was about seventy to
eighty years ago. The witch when consulted on this occasion turned her
back to my father's companion, and began talking to herself in Cornish.
Then she gave him some herbs. His father used the herbs, and no more
horses died: the herbs were supposed to have driven all evil spirits out
of the stable.'


IN PENZANCE: AN ARCHITECT'S TESTIMONY

Penzance from earliest times has undoubtedly been, as it is now, the
capital of the Land's End district, the Sacred Land of Britain. And in
Penzance I had the good fortune to meet those among its leading citizens
who still cherish and keep alive the poetry and the mystic lore of Old
Cornwall; and to no one of them am I more indebted than to Mr. Henry
Maddern, F.I.A.S. Mr. Maddern tells me that he was initiated into the
mysteries of the Cornish folk-lore of this region when a boy in Newlyn,
where he was born, by his old nurse Betty Grancan, a native Zennor
woman, of stock probably the most primitive and pure in the British
Islands. At his home in Penzance, Mr. Maddern dictated to me the very
valuable evidence which follows:--

_Two Kinds of Pixies._--'In this region there are two kinds of pixies,
one purely a land-dwelling pixy and the other a pixy which dwells on the
sea-strand between high and low water mark.[66] The land-dwelling pixy
was usually thought to be full of mischievous fun, but it did no harm.
There was a very prevalent belief, when I was a boy, that this
sea-strand pixy, called _Bucca_,[67] had to be propitiated by a _cast_
(three) of fish, to ensure the fishermen having a good _shot_ (catch) of
fish. The land pixy was supposed to be able to render its devotees
invisible, if they only anointed their eyes with a certain green salve
made of secret herbs gathered from Kerris-moor.[68] In the invisible
condition thus induced, people were able to join the pixy revels, during
which, according to the old tradition, time slipped away very, very
rapidly, though people returned from the pixies no older than when they
went with them.'

_The Nurse and the Ointment._--'I used to hear about a Zennor girl who
came to Newlyn as nurse to the child of a gentleman living at
Zimmerman-Cot. The gentleman warned her never to touch a box of ointment
which he guarded in a special room, nor even to enter that room; but one
day in his absence she entered the room and took some of the ointment.
Suspecting the qualities of the ointment, she put it on her eyes with
the wish that she might see where her master was. She immediately found
herself in the higher part of the orchard amongst the pixies, where they
were having much _junketing_ (festivity and dancing); and there saw the
gentleman whose child she had nursed. For a time she managed to evade
him, but before the _junketing_ was at an end he discovered her and
requested her to go home; and then, to her intense astonishment, she
learned that she had been away twenty years, though she was unchanged.
The gentleman scolded her for having touched the ointment, paid her
wages in full, and sent her back to her people. She always had the one
regret, that she had not gone into the forbidden room at first.'

_The Tolcarne Troll._--'The fairy of the Newlyn Tolcarne[69] was in some
ways like the Puck of the English Midlands. But this fairy, or troll,
was supposed to date back to the time of the Phoenicians. He was
described as a little old pleasant-faced man dressed in a tight-fitting
leathern jerkin, with a hood on his head, who lived invisible in the
rock. Whenever he chose to do so he could make himself visible. When I
was a boy it was said that he spent his time voyaging from here to Tyre
on the galleys which carried the tin; and, also, that he assisted in the
building of Solomon's Temple. Sometimes he was called "the Wandering
One", or "Odin the Wanderer". My old nurse, Betty Grancan, used to say
that you could call up the troll at the Tolcarne if while there you held
in your hand three dried leaves, one of the ash, one of the oak, and one
of the thorn, and pronounced an incantation or charm. Betty would never
tell me the words of the charm, because she said I was too much of a
sceptic. The words of such a Cornish charm had to pass from one believer
to another, through a woman to a man, and from a man to a woman, and
thus alternately.'[70]

_Nature of Pixies._--'Pixies were often supposed to be the souls of the
prehistoric dwellers of this country. As such, pixies were supposed to
be getting smaller and smaller, until finally they are to vanish
entirely. The country pixies inhabiting the highlands from above Newlyn
on to St. Just were considered a wicked sort. Their great ambition was
to change their own offspring for human children; and the true child
could only be got back by laying a four-leaf clover on the changeling. A
_winickey_ child--one which was weak, frail, and peevish--was of the
nature of a changeling. Miner pixies, called "knockers", would accept a
portion of a miner's _croust_ (lunch) on good faith, and by knocking
lead him to a rich mother-lode, or warn him by knocking if there was
danger ahead or a cavern full of water; but if the miner begrudged them
