This they say limits the number of quorums to seven, and therefore no
more than seven ought to be chosen. The prophet Joseph, however, when
the first quorums of seventy were being organized said:

    If the first Seventy are all employed, and there is a call for
    more laborers, it will be the duty of the seven Presidents of the
    first Seventy to call and ordain other seventy and send them forth
    to labor in the vineyard, until if needs be, they set apart seven
    times seventy, and even until there are one hundred and forty and
    four thousand thus set apart for the ministry.[A]

[Footnote A: Hist. Joseph Smith, under date of May 2nd, 1835. _Mill.
Star_, Vol. XV, p. 261.]

Not only have the quorums designed to form the foreign ministry of the
church been greatly increased, but they have been employed. Since the
death of the prophet Joseph, in addition to maintaining the missions
in those countries where proclamation of the gospel had been made
during his lifetime, missions have been established in the following
countries, and tens of thousands of the honest in heart gathered out
of them:

_France, Germany, Holland, Belgium, Denmark, Sweden, Norway, Iceland,
Italy, Switzerland, Jersey Islands, Hindostan, Malta, Cape of Good
Hope, Mexico, among a number of Indian tribes in the Western States
and Territories in the United States, Sandwich Islands, Samoa,
Friendly Islands, New Zealand, Turkey_, and the mission has lately
been reopened in _Palestine_.

In a number of these countries periodicals have been published. This
is the case in France, Germany, Switzerland and Denmark.

The Book of Mormon since the death of the prophet Joseph has been
translated and published in the following languages:

_French, German, Danish, Italian, Dutch, Welsh, Swedish, Spanish,
Hawaiian and Maori_.

It has also been translated but not yet published in Hindostanee and
modern Hebrew. And thus the testimony of the Nephites to the great
truths that the Lord is God, that Jesus is the Christ, and the gospel
the power of God unto salvation to all those who believe and obey it,
is being sent to all the world in well-nigh all the languages thereof
by the church of Christ; and the saints are ridding their garments of
the blood of this generation both by preaching the gospel by word of
mouth and also by sending forth the written word.

The phase of the great Latter-day work which seemed most to occupy the
attention of the prophet Joseph Smith in the last year of his life,
was that which relates to the salvation for the dead. Of this he
preached most frequently; often was it the subject of his
correspondence, his whole mind seemed given to it. Elijah had visited
him in Kirtland Temple and had restored the keys of the priesthood
which "turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the
children to the fathers, lest the whole earth be smitten with a
curse." "Therefore," said Elijah, "the keys of this dispensation are
committed into your hands, and by this ye may know that the great and
dreadful day of the Lord is near, even at the doors."[A] No wonder
then that this matter occupied his mind when the keys for the
salvation of the dead were placed in his hands attended with all the
responsibility that attaches thereto. Following are his views upon the
greatness, importance and future prospects of this work for the dead:

[Footnote A: Doc. and Cov. Sec. cx.]

    The earth will be smitten with a curse, unless there is a welding
    link of some kind or other, between the fathers and the children,
    upon some subject or other, and behold what is that subject? It is
    the baptism for the dead. For we without them cannot be made
    perfect; neither can they without us be made perfect. Neither can
    they nor we be made perfect, without those who have died in the
    gospel also; for it is necessary in the ushering in of the
    dispensation of the fullness of times, which dispensation is now
    beginning to usher in, that a whole and complete and perfect
    union, and welding together of dispensations, and keys, and
    powers, and glories should take place, and be revealed from the
    days of Adam even to the present time; and not only this, but
    those things which never have been revealed from the foundation of
    the world, but have been kept hid from the wise and the prudent,
    shall be revealed unto babes and sucklings, in this dispensation
    of the fullness of times.[A]

[Footnote A: Doc. and Cov., Sec. cxxviii.]

And this is the work the prophet of God had in mind to do for all the
generations of men from Adam to the present dispensation! No wonder it
was the controling theme of both his tongue and pen; his meditation by
night, his thought by day. And as a proof to the world that the keys
of the priesthood which administer in these holy ordinances for the
dead were committed to the Twelve and have been with the Presidency of
the church from the days of the prophet until now, I point to the four
magnificent temples reared by the saints in Utah to the name of the
most high God--erected for the express purpose of performing this work
which so burdened the mind of the prophet Joseph in the last year of
his life.


Josephites of course profess a belief in this great feature of the
work of God--in baptism for the dead and the sealing powers linking
together all the dispensations that have been given to man, and all
the families and kindred of the earth; but where are their temples in
which this work is going on? Show me thy faith by thy works! Mr. Smith
claims to have been ordained by his father to be President of the
church, to have inherited his father's priesthood and office, but
where, I ask, is the evidence that he has inherited his father's
interest, anxiety, and activity in respect to his greater part of the
work of the dispensation of the fulness of times--the work that
touches the interests of the generations of men that are past as well
as those that are now alive, or shall live in the generations to come?
When Elijah's cloak fell from his receding form to the shoulders of
Elisha, not only the material garment fell upon him, but also the
spirit and the power of Elijah was upon Elisha, and he did the works
of the departed prophet. So has it been with those who have succeeded
to the Presidency of the church since the death of the prophet Joseph.
Great as the work for the living has been since then, still greater
has been the work for the dead; in proof of which I give the following
information respecting the work done in the temples of God. The report
from each temple dates from the commencement of work therein up to
December 31st, 1893.[A]

[Footnote A: I am indebted to the Presidents and Recorders of the
respective temples for the information here given.]

_St. George Temple:_

    Baptisms for the dead..........................264,158
    Ordinations to the priesthood for the dead......43,753
    Endowments for the dead........................112,350

_Logan Temple:_

    Baptisms for the dead..........................239,480
    Ordinations to the priesthood for the dead......43,433
    Endowments for the dead........................107,456
    Sealings (husbands and wives) for the dead......30,072
    Sealings (children to parents) for the dead......6,735

_Manti Temple:_

    Baptisms for the dead..........................157,989
    Ordination to the priesthood for the dead.......28,076
    Endowments for the dead.........................67,062
    Sealings (husbands and wives) for the dead......23,800
    Sealings (children to parents) for the dead......4,449

_Salt Lake Temple:_[A]

    Baptisms for the dead,..........................21,750
    Ordinations to the priesthood for the dead,......4,980
    Endowments for the dead,.........................3,643
    Sealings (husbands and wives) for the dead,......3,700
    Sealings (children to parents) for the dead,.......973

[Footnote A: Dedicated April, 1893, the report is for 8 months.]

The total number of baptisms for the dead,.........683,377
Of ordinations to the priesthood,..................120,232
Of Endowments,.....................................300,511
Of sealings (including wives and husbands and
children to the parents--3 Temples only reported,)..69,749

Let us consider another proof that the church led to the mountains of
Israel under the Presidency of the Apostles is indeed the very church
of Christ, and that it has never been disorganized, or lost the favor
of God.

During his personal ministry on earth, Jesus said:

    If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated
    you. If ye were of the world, the world would love his own, but
    because ye are not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the
    world therefore the world hateth you.[A]

[Footnote A: St. John, xv.]

Again he said:

    Blessed are ye when men shall hate you, and when they shall
    separate you from their company, and shall reproach you, and cast
    out your name as evil, for the Son of Man's sake. Rejoice ye in
    that day, and leap for joy; for, behold, your reward is great in
    heaven; for in like manner did their fathers unto the prophets . .
    . . . Woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you? for so
    did their fathers to the false prophets.[A]

[Footnote A: St. Luke vi.]

During the lifetime of the prophet Joseph from the first time he
called upon the Lord when a mere lad, to the day he fell by the old
well-curb at Carthage jail, pierced by the bullets of assassins, the
adversary was ever upon the alert for his destruction. The hearts of
the wicked were stirred against him, false priests combined both
against him and the work which under God, he founded; officers of the
law with false charges and unlawful warrants dogged his footsteps,
mobs rose in acts of violence against him and his people; he was made
acquainted with the tyranny of unjust judges, corrupt courts, and the
gloom of the prison cell. He was made to feel that the world did not
love him, that he was not of the world, that the Powers of Darkness
hated the church of Christ. Since the death of the prophet Joseph, the
same Powers which pursued him and the work he established have
continued their hostilities against the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints. It is the elders of that church, not the elders of
the Reorganized church, who have been hunted by mobs, and beaten for
no other crime than calling men to repentance. It is the blood of the
elders of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, not of the
"Reorganized church," which today unavenged crimsons the soil of the
states of Georgia, Tennessee and Mississippi.

It is the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, not the
"Reorganized church" which has been constantly assailed, despoiled of
its property, its members driven into exile, hundreds thrust into
prison, whole communities terrorized--and all this through the
administrators of the government acting under a mistaken zeal created
by the persistent misrepresentations of sectarian priests and
religious bigots--some of our "friends" of high standing in the
"Reorganization" joining in the hue and cry against the saints of God
and aiding in the work of misrepresentation.

Yet all this has not retarded the work of God. It has gone steadily
forward. The injustice that has been done the church is beginning to
be recognized. Already the government has restored the personal
property it confiscated. And as for the fines, imprisonment, and exile
inflicted on so many of the saints during the past ten years, these
things have only contributed to spreading abroad knowledge respecting
the gospel and its restoration. The Lord has his own way of
accomplishing his purposes. To the peasant shepherds on the hills of
Judea, he sent the angels of heaven to testify of the birth of the
Messiah; and doubtless the testimony of these men was sufficient to
found faith in the minds of the people among whom they moved that the
great hope of Israel was fulfilled--the Messiah was born. But the king
as well as the peasant must have a testimony that the Son of God had
come into the world; and hence from the far east wise men skilled in
the knowledge of the heavenly bodies and their movements and their
signs are brought to the court of proud King Herod, to testify that
Messiah, the promised King and Redeemer of Israel is born.

Preaching without purse or scrip by the Twelve Apostles, and other
servants of God, might answer all the purposes for spreading abroad a
knowledge of the gospel among the common people. The gospel, however,
was not designed for the poor and the lowly only; it is meant also for
the rich and the proud among men. And when God would have it
proclaimed to magistrates, rulers, governors, kings and emperors, he
called his servant Paul and led him through such experiences,
including mobbings, whippings, exile and imprisonment, as brought him
in contact with the great and high ones of the earth. Not only before
the judges and governors of Judea and the petty kings who visited them
was the gospel preached, but, as there is good reason to believe, it
was declared before the purple-robed Emperor of Rome. Through this
means the kings of the earth learned the Christian story and the plan
of salvation included in it. It was preached not only in the humble
homes of the poor, but also in the marble palaces of the Caesars.

So in this dispensation of the fulness of times, the Lord has led his
servants and his church through such experiences as will best make
known the great work of the last days--the opening of the heavens and
the committing of a dispensation of the gospel to the children of men.

Preaching the gospel without purse and scrip by the elders of the
church has been a very successful method of making known the truth
among men. There is something in it which goes right home to the
hearts of the honest. It is a method, too, which has, in the main,
built up the church so far. There are classes, however, as in the
dispensation opened by the personal ministry of Messiah, that would
never be reached by such a method. These are the rich and great, the
proud and high, the judges, legislators, presidents and kings of the
earth. How long, for example, would it be under the method of
preaching the gospel without purse and scrip before the humble elders
of the church working in that way would get a hearing before the
president and his cabinet, not once but repeatedly? Or how long would
it be under the aforesaid method of preaching before the House of
Representatives, or the more aristocratic Senate of the United States
would devote day after day to the consideration of Mormonism? How long
would the elders be preaching without purse and scrip, though zealous
as angels, before they could arrest the attention of the Supreme Court
of the United States sufficiently to have the judges sit in solemn
session, clad in all the vestments of their high office to listen to
an explanation of "Mormonism?" I risk the assertion that such things
could never have been attained by the elders preaching without purse
or scrip. Yet such a remarkable hearing as hinted at above has been
given to "Mormonism" in all these great divisions of the general
government of the United States. And by becoming for many years a
national question, it has been kept prominently before the world; and
not only the masses have been aroused by the proclamation of its
principles, but the attention of statesmen and rulers has been
attracted to it, and to them, in a manner, the gospel has been
preached. What though it hath been preached by some through envy and
strife, to paraphrase the words of Paul? What then? Notwithstanding
every way, whether in pretense or in truth, Christ is preached and
therein do the saints rejoice, yea, and they will rejoice; for they
know that this shall turn to their salvation.[A] God hath not left
himself without witnesses among the great ones of the earth; but ever
and anon as they have heard about the truth and of the truth, in
cabinet council, Senate chamber, legislative hall, the courts of kings
and the palaces of princes--the spirit of God hath testified to their
hearts that the gospel they heard preached, whether preached of strife
or of good-will, was the truth of heaven, and for that testimony
statesmen, judges, governors and kings shall give an account in the
day of judgment to the God who gave it to them.

[Footnote A: The passage paraphrased will be found in Paul to the
Philippians i, 15-20.]

But what of all this? Why, where the lambs are the vultures are
gathered together. The very violence towards the church of Christ on
the part of hate-inspired men, moved upon by the spirit of him who in
heaven rebelled against the truth of God and the priesthood, bears
witness that the keys of the priesthood are still with the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and hence Lucifer, through wicked
men and in diverse ways, seeks its destruction. "Marvel not if the
world hate you, it hated me before it hated you, if you were of the
world the world would love its own!" And in the evidences of the
hatred of the wicked for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints may be read the negative proof of their acceptance with God as
his church.

My task is ended. I have taken two great prophecies of Brigham Young,
prophet, seer, and President of the church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints in his day, and traced out their fulfillment. The
first prophecy--

_All that want to draw away a party from the church after them, let
them do it if they can, but they will not prosper_--was proven to be
true by a brief consideration of the rise and fall of the principal
factions called into existence under the leadership of ambitious,
wicked men. We have seen go to pieces upon the rock of President
Young's inspired prediction Sidney Rigdon's church, William Smith's,
James J. Strang's, and the organization, such as it was, founded by
George Miller and Lyman Wight--none of them prospered. We have
considered the claims of the Reorganized or Josephite church, built
from the ruins of these other churches just enumerated. Its
pretentions have been viewed from every standpoint, and are found
lacking in every element of consistency and truth. Misconceptions of
the work and laws of God constituted its foundation; and the folly,
sophistry, ignorance and vain ambition of--to be charitable--mistaken
men, comprise its superstructure!

We have taken the second part of President Brigham Young's inspired
prophecy--_If any man thinks he has influence among this people to
lead away a party, let him try it, and he will find out that there is
power with the Apostles which will carry them off victorious through
all the world, and build up and defend the church and kingdom of
God_--and have found the truth of it demonstrated in the history of
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. The favor, blessing,
power and glory of God have indeed attended the labors of the Apostles
who led the Saints from Nauvoo, and the Presidencies of the church
which succeeded them; of a truth there has been with those Apostles
and their successors a power which has carried them off victorious
through all the world, and built up and defended the church and
kingdom of God.




APPENDIX.

TESTIMONY OF PREST. WILFORD WOODRUFF.

    _Remarks following a lecture delivered by Elder B. H. Roberts, in
    the Assembly Hall, Salt Lake City, February 23rd, 1892, under the
    auspices of the Y. M. M. I. Associations of the Salt Lake Stake,
    on "Priesthood and the Right of Succession."_


I realize it is somewhat late, but I want to beg the indulgence of
this assembly a few moments. I felt that as I was a member of these
Mutual Improvement Associations I wanted to attend this meeting and
hear this lecture. I did not wish to interfere with the time of
Brother Roberts. He has given us an excellent discourse, and has told
us the truth. There are a few things pertaining to this subject about
which I wish to bear my testimony to the young men of Israel.

First, I wish to say a few words regarding Priesthood. There is no
mistake about the Priesthood of God Almighty. The God of heaven
himself has created and redeemed this world by the power of that
Priesthood; and no being that ever dwelt on this earth ever has been
or ever will be able to do or perform any work pertaining to salvation
unless it is by that eternal and everlasting Priesthood. And where
that Priesthood of Almighty God is manifest, the power of that
Priesthood is with the people, no matter what age or generation they
have lived in. And I wish to say that there has been no generation, no
dispensation, any greater than the one in which Joseph Smith was
raised up. He laid the foundation of this great work, under God, and
He established the Church upon the face of the whole earth, in
fulfillment of revelation and prophecy, from Father Adam down to our
day; and the Lord has made, and will make no mistake in regard to
calling a people or giving them the Priesthood.

As I have said, Joseph Smith organized the Church. He lived but a
short time with us--though longer than the Savior did after He entered
the ministry. The Savior lived about three and a half years from the
time He commenced His ministrations among the people until He was
crucified. Joseph Smith lived some fourteen years, if I mistake not,
after he organized this Church. He also was slain. But before he died,
he organized the Church with Apostles, Patriarchs, Pastors, Teachers,
and the whole government of the Church of God; and that Priesthood he
organized or laid the foundations of remained with the people after
his death, as Brother Roberts has said tonight. The Twelve Apostles
stood next to the First Presidency of the Church; and I am a living
witness myself to this work. I am a living witness to the testimony
that he gave to the Twelve Apostles when all of us received our
endowments under his hands. I remember the last speech that he ever
gave us before his death. It was before we started upon our mission to
the East. He stood upon his feet some three hours. The room was filled
as with consuming fire, his face was as clear as amber, and he was
clothed upon by the power of God. He laid before us our duty. He laid
before us the fullness of this great work of God; and in his remarks
to us he said: "I have had sealed upon my head every key, every power,
every principle of life and salvation that God has ever given to any
man who ever lived upon the face of the earth. And these principles
and this Priesthood and power belong to this great and last
dispensation which the God of Heaven has set His hand to establish in
the earth." "Now," said he addressing the Twelve, "I have sealed upon
your heads every key, every power, and every principle which the Lord
has sealed upon my head." Continuing, he said, "I have lived so
long--up to the present time--I have been in the midst of this people,
and in the great work and labor of redemption. I have desired to live
to see this Temple [at Nauvoo] built. But I shall never live to see it
completed; but you will." Now, we didn't suppose but what he would
live. We didn't comprehend what he meant. Neither did the Twelve in
the days of the Savior comprehend what He meant when He said, "I am
going away from you; if I go not the Comforter will not come unto
you." And so we did not understand Joseph when he said he would not
live to see that Temple completed; it was not given us to realize it
at that time.

After addressing us in this manner he said: "I tell you the burden of
this kingdom now rests upon your shoulders; you have got to bear it
off in all the world, and if you don't do it you will be damned." That
was pretty strong language, but it was full of meaning, it was full of
significance. Joseph was trained in the Priesthood before he came to
this planet. He understood the Priesthood perfectly before he came
here. He understood its work and its lineage, so far as lineage
applies to offices in the priesthood. He also understood that he was
going away from this earth; but we did not know it until after he was
put to death. I was in Boston with President Young the very hour he
and his brother Hyrum were slain. And at that moment there was a power
of darkness surrounded us, a feeling of heaviness that I never felt
before. I had never seen President Young feel so bad in my life before
as he did that hour.

Nearly all the quorum of the Twelve were on missions in the eastern
States when the terrible tragedy at Carthage took place; and we did
not hear of it for some time afterwards. We returned to Nauvoo. It has
been repeated to you here tonight what was done in the conference in
Nauvoo. I do not know whether there is anyone present here tonight but
myself who was at that conference--there are but few living who were
present on that occasion. Brigham stepped forth as a leader of Israel,
as has been said here tonight by Brother Roberts, and Sidney Rigdon
also tried to get the presidency; but when his name was put to a vote
before the conference of the Latter-day Saints, and they were asked if
they wanted him as their guardian, to guide them in the Celestial
Kingdom, Brigham said: "All who do, raise your right hand," and I did
not see a hand raised in his favor in that congregation.

Brigham then asked if they wanted the Twelve Apostles to step forth
and magnify their calling and build up the Church and establish the
Kingdom of God in all the earth. "All who do, raise your right hand,"
and almost every soul in that congregation voted; and when Brigham
Young arose and commenced speaking, if I had not seen him with my own
eyes, there is no one that could have convinced me that it was not
Joseph Smith speaking. It was as the voice and face of Joseph Smith;
as anyone can testify who was there and acquainted with these two men.

Several men have claimed authority to lead the Church, but the Prophet
Joseph never conferred any such authority upon any of them. The keys
of the Presidency after his death were held by the Twelve Apostles,
and by them only, until the Council of the First Presidency was
reorganized.

I name these things to show that the Lord has put his mark of approval
upon the acts of the Apostles who followed the Prophet Joseph Smith in
the establishment of this great work upon the earth; and the
Priesthood will continue here and the work increase until Jesus Christ
shall come in the clouds of heaven.

I wish here to ask a question. How has every man who has gone on his
own authority and left the Church, and undertaken to build up a Church
to himself, succeeded? How has he prospered? What has he done? Why,
just as they did who tried to establish "Strangism," and "Rigdonism"
and every other "ism" that has ever arisen? They have gone overboard.
The power and influence of God have not been with them; the Priesthood
has not been with them; the Lord has not called them to do the work
they tried to do, and the result has been a failure--a complete
