We are required to seek peace:  of whom then can we seek it with
expectation to find it, but of him who is a God of peace, and hath
promised to bless his people with peace?  It is God that hath
promised to give his people one heart, and one way; yet for all
these things he will be sought unto:  O then let us seek peace, and
pray for peace, because God shall prosper them that love it.

The peace of churches is that which the apostle prays for in all his
epistles; in which his desire is, that grace and peace may be
multiplied and increased among them.

2.  They that would endeavour the peace of the churches, must be
careful who they commit the care and oversight of the churches to;
as (1.)--Over and besides those qualifications that should be in all
Christians, they that rule the church of God should be men of
counsel and understanding.  Where there is an ignorant ministry,
there is commonly an ignorant people, according as it was of old--
Like priest like people.

How sad is it to see the church of God committed to the care of such
that pretend to be teachers of others, that understand not what they
say, or whereof they affirm.  No marvel the peace of churches is
broken, when their watchmen want skill to preserve their unity,
which of all other things is as the church's walls; when they are
divided, no wonder they crumble to atoms, if there is no skilful
physician to heal them.  It is sad when there is no balm in Gilead,
and when there is no physician there.  Hence it is, that the wounds
of churches become incurable, like the wounds of God's people of
old, either not healed at all, or else slightly healed, and to no
purpose.  May it not be said of many churches this day, as God said
of the church of Israel, That he sought for a man among them that
should stand in the gap, and make up the breach; but he found none?

Remember what was said of old, Mal. ii. 7, The priest's lips
preserve knowledge:  and the people should seek the law at his
mouth.  But when this is wanting, the people will be stumbling, and
departing from God and one another; therefore God complains, Hos.
iv. 6, That his people were destroyed for want of knowledge; that
is, for want of knowing guides; for if the light that is in them
that teach be darkness, how great is that darkness! and if the blind
lead the blind, no marvel both fall into the ditch.

How many are there that take upon them to teach others, that had
need be taught in the beginning of religion; that instead of
multiplying knowledge, multiply words without knowledge; and instead
of making known God's counsel, darken counsel by words without
knowledge?  The apostle speaks of some that did more than darken
counsel; for they wrested the counsel of God; 2 Pet. iii. 16.  In
Paul's epistles, saith he, "are some things hard to be understood,
which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also
the other scriptures, to their own destruction."  Some things in the
Scriptures are hard to be known, and they are made harder by such
unlearned teachers as utter their own notions by words without
knowledge.

None are more bold and adventurous to take upon them to expound the
dark mysteries and sayings of the prophets and Revelations, and the
9th of the Romans, which I believe contains some of those many
things which, in Paul's epistles, Peter saith, were "hard to be
understood;" I say none are more forward to dig in these mines than
those that can hardly give a sound reason for the first principles
of religion; and such as are ignorant of many more weighty things
that are easily to be seen in the face and superficies of the
Scripture; nothing will serve these but swimming in the deeps, when
they have not yet learned to wade through the shallows of the
Scriptures:  like the Gnosticks of old, who thought they knew all
things, though they knew nothing as they ought to know.  And as
those Gnosticks did of old, so do such teachers of late break the
unity and peace of churches.

How needful then is it, that if we desire the peace of churches,
that we choose out men of knowledge, who may be able to keep them
from being shattered and scattered with every wind of doctrine:  and
who may be able to convince and stop the mouths of gainsayers.

(2.)  You must not only choose men of counsel, but if you would
design the unity and peace of the churches, you must choose men of
courage to govern them; for as there must be wisdom to hear with
some, so there must be courage to correct others:  as some must be
instructed meekly, so others must be rebuked sharply, that they may
be sound in the faith; there must be wisdom to rebuke some within
long-suffering, and there must be courage to suppress and stop the
mouths of others.  The apostle tells Titus of some whose mouths must
be stopped, or else they would subvert whole houses, Titus i. 11.
Where this courage hath been wanting, not only whole houses, but
whole churches have been subverted.  And Paul tells the Galatians,
that when he saw some endeavour to bring the churches into bondage,
that he did not give place to them, no not for an hour, &c, Gal. ii.
5.  If this course had been taken by the rulers of churches, their
peace had not been so often invaded by unruly and vain talkers.

3.  In choosing men to rule (if you would endeavour to keep the
unity of the Spirit, and the bond of peace thereby), be careful you
choose men of peaceable dispositions.  That which hath much annoyed
the peace of churches hath been the froward and perverse spirits of
the rulers thereof.  Solomon therefore adviseth, That with a furious
man we should not go, lest we learn his ways, and get a snare to our
souls, Prov. xxii. 24, 25, and with the froward we learn
frowardness.  How do some men's words eat like a canker; who instead
of lifting up their voices like a trumpet to sound a parley for
peace, have rather sounded an alarm to war and contention.  If ever
we would live in peace, let us reverence the feet of them that bring
the glad tidings of it.

O how have some men made it their business to preach contentions,
and upon their entertainment of every novel opinion to preach
separation!  How hath God's word been stretched and torn to furnish
these men with arguments to tear churches!  Have not our ears heard
those texts that say, "Come out from among them, and be separate,"
&c., and "Withdraw from every brother that walks disorderly?"  I
say, have we not heard these texts that were written to prevent
disorder brought to countenance the greatest disorder that ever was
in the church of God, even schism and division? whereas one of these
exhortations was written to the church of Corinth to separate
themselves from the idol's temple, and the idol's table, in which
many of them lived in the participation of, notwithstanding their
profession of the true God; as appears, 2 Cor. vi. 1.6, 17, compared
with 1 Cor. viii. 7, and as 1 Cor. x. 14, 20, 22, recites; and not
for some few or more members, who shall make themselves both judges
and parties to make separation, when and as often as they please,
from the whole congregation and church of God, where they stood
related; for by the same rule, and upon the same ground, may others
start some new question among these new separatists, and become
their own judges of the communicableness of them, and thereupon make
another separation from these, till at last two be not left to walk
together.  And for that other text mentioned, 2 Thess. iii. 6, where
Paul exhorts the church of Thessalonica to withdraw themselves from
every brother that walks disorderly; I cannot but wonder that any
should bring this to justify their separation or withdrawal from the
communion of a true (though a disorderly) church.  For,

(1.)  Consider, that this was not writ for a few members to withdraw
from the church, but for the church to withdraw from disorderly
members.

(2.)  Consider, that if any offended members, upon pretence of
error, either in doctrine or practice, should by this text become
judges (as well as parties) of the grounds and lawfulness of their
separation; then it will follow, that half a score notorious
heretics, or scandalous livers (when they have walked so as they
forsee the church are ready to deal with them, and withdraw from
them), shall anticipate the church, and pretend somewhat against
them, of which themselves must be judges, and so withdraw from the
church, pretending either heresy or disorder; and so condemn the
church, to prevent the disgrace of being condemned by the church.
How needful then is it, that men of peaceable dispositions, and not
of froward and fractious and dividing spirits, be chosen to rule the
church of God, for fear lest the whole church be leavened and soured
by them!

