to be the direct teachings of Shakya Muni himself, because all the
instructions are put in the mouth of the Master or sanctioned by him.
 The Mahayanists, however, compare the Hinayana doctrine with a
resting-place on the road for a traveller, while the Mahayana
doctrine with his destination.  All the denominations of Buddhism,
with a single exception of Zen, are based on the authority of some
particular sacred writings.  The Ten Dai Sect, for instance, is based
on Saddharma-pundarika-sutra; the Jo Do Sect on Larger
Sukhavati-vyuha, Smaller Sukhavati-vyuha, and Amitayus-dhyana-sutra;
the Ke Gon Sect on Avatamsaka-sutra; the Hosso Sect on
Samdhi-nirmocana-sutra.


Zen is based on the highest spiritual plane attained by Shakya Muni
himself.  It can only be realized by one who has attained the same
plane.  To describe it in full by means of words is beyond the power
even of Gotama himself.  It is for this reason that the author of
Lankavatara-sutra insists that Shakya Muni spoke no word through his
long career of forty-nine years as a religious teacher, and that of
Mahaprajnyaparamita-sutra[FN#108] also express the same opinion.  The
Scripture is no more nor less than the finger pointing to the moon of
Buddhahood.  When we recognize the moon and enjoy its benign beauty,
the finger is of no use.  As the finger has no brightness whatever,
so the Scripture has no holiness whatever.  The Scripture is
religious currency representing spiritual wealth.  It does not matter
whether money be gold, or sea-shells, or cows.  It is a mere
substitute.  What it stands for is of paramount importance.  Away
with your stone-knife!  Do not watch the stake against which a
running hare once struck its head and died.  Do not wait for another
hare.  Another may not come for ever.  Do not cut the side of the
boat out of which you dropped your sword to mark where it sunk.  The
boat is ever moving on.  The Canon is the window through which we
observe the grand scenery of spiritual nature.  To hold communion
directly with it we must get out of the window.  It is a mere stray
fly that is always buzzing within it, struggling to get out.  Those
who spend most of their lives in the study of the Scriptures, arguing
and explaining with hair-splitting reasonings, and attain no higher
plane in spirituality, are religious flies good for nothing but their
buzzing about the nonsensical technicalities.  It is on this account
that Rin-zai declared:[FN#109] 'The twelve divisions of the Buddhist
Canon are nothing better than waste paper.'


[FN#108]  Mahaprajnyaparamita-sutra, vol. 425.

[FN#109]  Rin-zai-roku.



2. No Need of the Scriptural Authority for Zen.

Some Occidental scholars erroneously identify Buddhism with the
primitive faith of Hinayanism, and are inclined to call Mahayanism, a
later developed faith, a degenerated one.  If the primitive faith be
called the genuine, as these scholars think, and the later developed
faith be the degenerated one, then the child should be called the
genuine man and the grown-up people be the degenerated ones;
similarly, the primitive society must be the genuine and the modern
civilization be the degenerated one.  So also the earliest writings
of the Old Testament should be genuine and the four Gospels be
degenerated.  Beyond all doubt Zen belongs to Mahayanism, yet this
does not imply that it depends on the scriptural authority of that
school, because it does not trouble itself about the Canon whether it
be Hinayana or Mahayana, or whether it was directly spoken by Shakya
Muni or written by some later Buddhists.  Zen is completely free from
the fetters of old dogmas, dead creeds, and conventions of
stereotyped past, that check the development of a religious faith and
prevent the discovery of a new truth.  Zen needs no Inquisition.  It
never compelled nor will compel the compromise of a Galileo or a
Descartes.  No excommunication of a Spinoza or the burning of a Bruno
is possible for Zen.

On a certain occasion Yoh Shan (Yaku-san) did not preach the doctrine
for a long while, and was requested to give a sermon by his assistant
teacher, saying: "Would your reverence preach the Dharma to your
pupils, who long thirst after your merciful instruction?"  "Then ring
the bell," replied Yoh Shan.  The bell rang, and all the monks
assembled in the Hall eager to bear the sermon.  Yoh Shan went up to
the pulpit and descended immediately without saying a word.  "You,
reverend sir," asked the assistant, "promised to deliver a sermon a
little while ago.  Why do you not preach?"  "Sutras are taught by the
Sutra teachers," said the master; "Castras are taught by the Castra
teachers.  No wonder that I say nothing."[FN#110]  This little
episode will show you that Zen is no fixed doctrine embodied in a
Sutra or a Castra, but a conviction or realization within us.


[FN#110]  Zen-rin-rui-shu and E-gen.


To quote another example, an officer offered to Tung Shan (To-zan)
plenty of alms, and requested him to recite the sacred Canon.  Tung
Shan, rising from his chair, made a bow respectfully to the officer,
who did the same to the teacher.  Then Tung Shan went round the
chair, taking the officer with him, and making a bow again to the
officer, asked: "Do you see what I mean?"  "No, sir," replied the
other. "I have been reciting the sacred Canon, why do you not
see?"[FN#111]  Thus Zen does not regard Scriptures in black and white
as its Canon, for it takes to-days and tomorrows of this actual life
as its inspired pages.


[FN#111]  Zen-rin-rui-sha and To-zan-roku.



3. The Usual Explanation of the Canon.

An eminent Chinese Buddhist scholar, well known as Ten Dai Dai Shi
(A.D. 538-597), arranged the whole preachings of Shakya Muni in a
chronological order in accordance with his own religious theory, and
observed that there were the Five Periods in the career of the Buddha
as a religious teacher.  He tried to explain away all the
discrepancies and contradictions, with which the Sacred Books are
encumbered, by arranging the Sutras in a line of development.  His
elucidation was so minute and clear, and his metaphysical reasonings
so acute and captivating, that his opinion was universally accepted
as an historical truth, not merely by the Chinese, but also by the
Japanese Mahayanists.  We shall briefly state here the so-called Five
Periods.

Shakya Muni attained to Buddhaship in his thirtieth year, and sat
motionless for seven days under the Bodhi tree, absorbed in deep
meditation, enjoying the first bliss of his Enlightenment.  In the
second week he preached his Dharma to the innumerable multitude of
Bodhisattvas,[FN#112] celestial beings, and deities in the nine
assemblies held at seven different places.  This is the origin of a
famous Mahayana book entitled Buddhavatamsaka-mahavaipulya-sutra.  In
this book the Buddha set forth his profound Law just as it was
discovered by his highly Enlightened mind, without considering the
mental states of his hearers.  Consequently the ordinary hearers (or
the Buddha's immediate disciples) could not understand the doctrine,
and sat stupefied as if they were 'deaf and dumb,' while the great
Bodhisattvas fully understood and realized the doctrine.  This is
called the first period, which lasted only two or three[FN#113] weeks.


[FN#112]  Bodhisattva is an imaginary personage, or ideal saint,
superior to Arhat, or the highest saint of Hinayanism.  The term
'Bodhisattva' was first applied to the Buddha before his
Enlightenment, and afterwards was adopted by Mahayanists to mean the
adherent of Mahayanism in contradistinction with the Cravaka or
hearers of Hinayanism.

[FN#113]  Bodhiruci says to the effect that the preachings in the
first five assemblies were made in the first week, and the rest were
delivered in the second week.  Nagarjuna says that the Buddha spoke
no word for fifty-seven days after his Enlightenment.  It is said in
Saddharma-pundarika-sutra that after three weeks the Buddha preached
at Varanasi, and it says nothing respecting Avatamsaka-sutra.  Though
there are divers opinions about the Buddha's first sermon and its
date, all traditions agree in this that he spent some time in
meditation, and then delivered the first sermon to the five ascetics
at Varanasi.


Thereupon Shakya Muni, having discovered that ordinary bearers were
too ignorant to believe in the Mahayana doctrine and appreciate the
greatness of Buddhahood, thought it necessary to modify his teaching
so as to adjust it to the capacity of ordinary people.  So he went to
Varanasi (or Benares) and preached his modified doctrine--that is,
Hinayanism.  The instruction given at that time has been handed down
to us as the four Agamas,[FN#114] or the four Nikayas.  This is
called the second period, which lasted about twelve years.  It was at
the beginning of this period that the Buddha converted the five
ascetics,[FN#115] who became his disciples.  Most of the Çravakas or
the adherents of Hinayanism were converted during this period.  They
trained their hearts in accordance with the modified Law, learned the
four noble truths,[FN#116] and worked out their own salvation.


[FN#114]  (1) Anguttara, (2) Majjhima, (3) Digha, (4) Samyutta.

[FN#115]  Kondanynya, Vappa, Baddiya, Mahanana, Assaji.

[FN#116]  The first is the sacred truth of suffering; the second the
truth of the origin of suffering--that is, lust and desire; the third
the sacred truth of the extinction of suffering; the fourth the
sacred truth of the path that leads to the extinction of suffering.
There are eight noble paths that lead to the extinction of
suffering--that is, Right faith, Right resolve, Right speech, Right
action, Right living, Right effort, Right thought, and Right
meditation.


The Buddha then having found his disciples firmly adhering to
Hinayanism without knowing that it was a modified and imperfect
doctrine, he had to lead them up to a higher and perfect doctrine
that he might lead them up to Buddhahood.  With this object in view
Shakya Muni preached Vimalakirtti-nirdeca-sutra[FN#117],
Lankavatara-sutra, and other sutras, in which he compared Hinayanism
with Mahayanism, and described the latter in glowing terms as a deep
and perfect Law, whilst he set forth the former at naught as a
superficial and imperfect one.  Thus he showed his disciples the
inferiority of Hinayanism, and caused them to desire for Mahayanism.
This is said to be the third period, which lasted some eight years.


[FN#117]  This is one of the most noted Mahayana books, and is said
to be the best specimen of the sutras belonging to this period.  It
is in this sutra that most of Shakya's eminent disciples, known as
the adherents of Hinayanism, are astonished with the profound wisdom,
the eloquent speech, and the supernatural power of Vimalakirtti, a
Bodhisattva, and confess the inferiority of their faith.  The author
frequently introduces episodes in order to condemn Hinayanism, making
use of miracles of his own invention.


The disciples of the Buddha now understood that Mahayanism was far
superior to Hinayanism, but they thought the higher doctrine was only
for Bodhisattvas and beyond their understanding.  Therefore they
still adhered to the modified doctrine, though they did no longer
decry Mahayanism, which they had no mind to practise.  Upon this
Shakya Muni preached Prajnyaparamita-sutras[FN#118] in the sixteen
assemblies held at four different places, and taught them Mahayanism
in detail in order to cause them to believe it and practise it.  Thus
they became aware that there was no definite demarcation between
Mahayanism and Hinayanism, and that they might become Mahayanists.
This is the fourth period, which lasted about twenty-two years.
Now, the Buddha, aged seventy-two, thought it was high time to preach
his long-cherished doctrine that all sentient beings can attain to
Supreme Enlightenment; so he preached Saddharma-pundarika-sutra, in
which he prophesied when and where his disciples should become
Buddhas.  It was his greatest object to cause all sentient beings to
be Enlightened and enable them to enjoy the bliss of Nirvana.  It was
for this that he had endured great pain and hardships through his
previous existences.  It was for this that he had left his heavenly
abode to appear on earth.  It was for this that he had preached from
time to time through his long career of forty-seven years.  Having
thus realized his great aim, Shakya Muni had now to prepare for his
final departure, and preached Mahaparinirvana-sutra in order to show
that all the animated and inanimate things were endowed with the same
nature as his.  After this last instruction he passed to eternity.
This is called the fifth period, which lasted some eight years.


[FN#118]  Nagarjuna's doctrine depends mainly on these sutras.


These five periods above mentioned can scarcely be called historical
in the proper sense of the term, yet they are ingeniously invented by
Ten Dai Dai Shi to set the Buddhist Scriptures in the order of
doctrinal development, and place Saddharma-pundarika in the highest
rank among the Mahayana books.  His argument, however dogmatic and
anti-historical in no small degree, would be not a little valuable
for our reader, who wants to know the general phase of the Buddhist
Canon, consisting of thousands of fascicles.



4. Sutras used by Zen Masters.

Ten Dai failed to explain away the discrepancies and contradictions
of which the Canon is full, and often contradicted himself by the
ignoring of historical[FN#119] facts.


[FN#119]  Let us state our own opinion on the subject in question.
The foundation of Hinayanism consists in the four Nikayas, or four
Agamas, the most important books of that school.  Besides the four
Agamas, there exist in the Chinese Tripitaka numerous books
translated by various authors, some of which are extracts from
Agamas, and some the lives of the Buddha, while others are entirely
different sutras, apparently of later date.  Judging from these
sources, it seems to us that most of Shakya Muni's original teachings
are embodied into the four Agamas.  But it is still a matter of
uncertainty that whether they are stated in Agamas now extant just as
they were, for the Buddha's preachings were rehearsed immediately
after the Buddha's death in the first council held at Rajagrha, yet
not consigned to writing.  They were handed down by memory about one
hundred years.  Then the monks at Vaisali committed the so-called Ten
Indulgences, infringing the rules of the Order, and maintained that
Shakya Muni had not condemned them in his preachings.  As there were,
however, no written sutras to disprove their assertion, the elders,
such as Yaca, Revata, and others, who opposed the Indulgences, had to
convoke the second council of 700 monks, in which they succeeded in
getting the Indulgences condemned, and rehearsed the Buddha's
instruction for the second time.  Even in this council of Vaisali we
cannot find the fact that the Master's preachings were reduced to
writing.  The decisions of the 700 elders were not accepted by the
party of opposition, who held a separate council, and settled their
own rules and doctrine.  Thus the same doctrine of the Teacher began
to be differently stated and believed.

This being the first open schism, one disruption after another took
place among the Buddhistic Order.  There were many different schools
of the Buddhists at the time when King Acoka ascended the throne
(about 269 B.C.), and the patronage of the King drew a great number
of pagan ascetics into the Order, who, though they dressed themselves
in the yellow robes, yet still preserved their religious views in
their original colour.  This naturally led the Church into continual
disturbances and moral corruption.  In the eighteenth year of Acoka's
reign the King summoned the council of 1,000 monks at Pataliputra
(Patna), and settled the orthodox doctrine in order to keep the
Dharma pure from heretical beliefs.  We believe that about this time
some of the Buddha's preachings were reduced to writing, for the
missionaries despatched by the King in the year following the council
seem to have set out with written sutras.  In addition to this, some
of the names of the passages of the Dharma are given in the Bharbra
edict of the King, which was addressed to the monks in Magadha.  We
do not suppose, however, that all the sutras were written at once in
these days, but that they were copied down from memory one after
another at different times, because some of the sutras were put down
in Ceylon 160 years after the Council of Patna.

In the introductory book of Ekottaragama (Anguttara Nikaya), now
extant in the Chinese Tripitaka, we notice the following points: (1)
It is written in a style quite different from that of the original
Agama, but similar to that of the supplementary books of the Mahayana
sutras; (2) it states Ananda's compilation of the Tripitaka after the
death of the Master; (3) it refers to the past Buddhas, the future
Buddha Maitreya, and innumerable Bodhisattvas; (4) it praises the
profound doctrine of Mahayanism.  From this we infer that the Agama
was put in the present form after the rise of the Mahayana School,
and handed down through the hand of Mahasanghika scholars, who were
much in sympathy with Mahayanism.

Again, the first book of Dirghagama, (Digha Nikaya), that describes
the line of Buddhas who appeared before Shakya Muni, adopts the whole
legend of Gotama's life as a common mode of all Buddhas appearing on
earth; while the second book narrates the death of Gotama and the
distribution of his relies, and refers to Pataliputra, the new
capital of Acoka.  This shows us that the present Agama is not of an
earlier date than the third century B.C. Samyuktagama (Samyutta
Nikaya) also gives a detailed account of Acoka's conversion, and of
his father Bindusara.  From these evidences we may safely infer that
the Hinayana sutras were put in the present shape at different times
between the third century B.C. and the first century A.D.
With regard to the Mahayana sutras we have little doubt about their
being the writings of the later Buddhist reformers, even if they are
put in the mouth of Shakya Muni.  They are entirely different from
the sutras of Hinayanism, and cannot be taken as the preachings of
one and the same person.  The reader should notice the following
points:

(1) Four councils were held for the rehearsal of the Tripitaka
namely, the first at Rajagrha, in the year of Shakya Muni's death;
the second at Vaisali, some 100 years after the Buddha; the third at
the time of King Acoka, about 235 years after the Master; the fourth
at the time of King Kanishka, the first century A.D.  But all these
councils were held to compile the Hinayana sutras, and nothing is
known of the rehearsal of the Mahayana books.  Some are of opinion
that the first council was held within the Sattapanni cave, near
Rajagrha, where the Hinayana Tripitaka was rehearsed by 500 monks,
while outside the cave there assembled a greater number of monks, who
were not admitted into the cave, and rehearsed the Mahayana
Tripitaka.  This opinion, however, is based on no reliable source.
