their own fancy so glorious a character as that of Jesus, and that it
would be more miraculous to suppose that the unique sayings of Jesus
and his incomparably perfect life were invented by a few plain people
than to believe in his actual existence. But it is not honest to throw
the question into that form. We do not know who were the authors of
the gospels. It is pure assumption that they were written by plain
fishermen. The authors of the gospels do not disclose their identity.
The words, _according_ to Matthew, Mark, etc., represent only the
guesses or opinions of translators and copyists.

Both in the gospels and in Christian history the apostles are
represented as illiterate men. But if they spoke Greek, and could also
write in Greek, they could not have been just plain fishermen. That
they were Greeks, not Jews, and more or less educated, may be safely
inferred from the fact that they all write in Greek, and one of them
at least seems to be acquainted with the Alexandrian school of
philosophy. Jesus was supposedly a Jew, his twelve apostles all
Jews--how is it, then, that the only biographies of him extant are all
in Greek? If his fishermen disciples were capable of composition in
Greek, they could not have been illiterate men, if they could not have
written in Greek--which was a rare accomplishment for a Jew, according
to what Josephus says--then the gospels were not written by the
apostles of Jesus. But the fact that though these documents are in a
language alien both to Jesus and his disciples, they are unsigned and
undated, goes to prove, we think, that their editors or authors wished
to conceal their identity that they may be taken for the apostles
themselves.

In the next place it is equally an assumption that the portrait of
Jesus is incomparable. It is now proven beyond a doubt that there is
not a single saying of Jesus, I say this deliberately, which had not
already been known both among the Jews and Pagans. [Footnote:
Sometimes it is urged by pettifogging clergymen that, while it is true
that Confucius gave the Golden Rule six hundred years before Jesus, it
was in a negative form. Confucius said, "Do not unto another what you
would not another to do unto you." Jesus said, "Do unto others," etc.
But every negative has its corresponding affirmation. Moreover, are
not the Ten Commandments in the negative? But the Greek sages gave the
Golden Rule in as positive a form as we find it in the Gospels. "And
may I do to others as I would that others should do to me," said
Plato.--Jowett Trans., V.--483. P.

Besides, if the only difference between Jesus and Confucius, the one a
God, the other a mere man, was that they both said the same thing, the
one in the negative, the other in the positive, it is not enough to
prove Jesus infinitely superior to Confucius. Many of Jesus' own
commandments are in the negative: "Resist not evil," for instance.]
And as to his life; it is in no sense superior or even as large and as
many sided as that of Socrates. I know some consider it blasphemy to
compare Jesus with Socrates, but that must be attributed to prejudice
rather than to reason.

And to the question that if Jesus be mythical, we cannot account for
the rise and progress of the Christian church, we answer that the
Pagan gods who occupied Mount Olympus were all mythical beings--mere
shadows, and yet Paganism was the religion of the most advanced and
cultured nations of antiquity. How could an imaginary Zeus, or
Jupiter, draw to his temple the elite of Greece and Rome? And if there
is nothing strange in the rise and spread of the Pagan church; in the
rapid progress of the worship of Osiris, who never existed; in the
wonderful success of the religion of Mithra, who is but a name; if the
worship of Adonis, of Attis, of Isis, and the legends of Heracles,
Prometheus, Hercules, and the Hindoo trinity,--Brahma, Shiva,
Chrishna,--with their rock-hewn temples, can be explained without
believing in the actual existence of these gods--why not Christianity?
Religions, like everything else, are born, they grow old and die. They
show the handiwork of whole races, and of different epochs, rather
than of one man or of one age. Time gives them birth, and changing
environments determine their career. Just as the portrait of Jesus we
see in shops and churches is an invention, so is his character. The
artist gave him his features, the theologian his attributes.

What are the elements out of which the Jesus story was evolved? The
Jewish people were in constant expectation of a Messiah. The belief
prevailed that his name would be Joshua, which in English is Jesus.
The meaning of the word is _savior_. In ancient Syrian mythology,
Joshua was a Sun God. The Old-Testament Joshua, who "stopped the Sun,"
was in all probability this same Syrian divinity. According to
tradition this Joshua, or Jesus, was the son of Mary, a name which
with slight variations is found in nearly all the old mythologies.
Greek and Hindoo divinities were mothered by either a Mary, Meriam,
Myrrah, or Merri. Maria or Mares is the oldest word for sea--the
earliest source of life. The ancients looked upon the sea-water as the
mother of every living thing. "Joshua (or Jesus), son of Mary," was
already a part of the religious outfit of the Asiatic world when Paul
began his missionary tours. His Jesus, or anointed one, crucified or
slain, did in no sense represent a new or original message. It is no
more strange that Paul's mythological "savior" should loom into
prominence and cast a spell over all the world, than that a mythical
Apollo or Jupiter should rule for thousands of years over the fairest
portions of the earth.

It is also well known that there is in the Talmud the story of a
Jesus, Ben, or son, of Pandira, who lived about a hundred years before
the Gospel Jesus, and who was hanged from a tree. I believe this Jesus
is quite as legendary as the Syrian Hesous, or Joshua. But may it not
be that such a legend accepted as true--to the ancients all legends
were true--contributed its share toward marking the outlines of the
later Jesus, hanged on a cross? My idea has been to show that the
materials for a Jesus myth were at hand, and that, therefore, to
account for the rise and progress of the Christian cult is no more
difficult than to explain the widely spread religion of the Indian
Chrishna, or of the Persian Mithra. [Footnote: For a fuller discussion
of the various "christs" in mythology read Robertson's Christianity
and Mythology and his Pagan Christs.]

Now, why have I given these conclusions to the world? Would I not have
made more friends--provoked a warmer response from the public at
large--had I repeated in pleasant accents the familiar phrases about
the glory and beauty and sweetness of the Savior God, the Virgin-born
Christ? Instead of that, I have run the risk of alienating the
sympathies of my fellows by intimating that this Jesus whom
Christendom worships today as a god, this Jesus at whose altar the
Christian world bends its knees and bows its head, is as much of an
idol as was Apollo of the Greeks; and that we--we Americans of the
twentieth century--are an idolatrous people, inasmuch as we worship a
name, or at most, a man of whom we know nothing provable.




[Illustration: Italian Sculpture of the X Century.]

IS CHRISTIANITY REAL?



It is assumed, without foundation, as I hope to show, that the
religion of Jesus alone can save the world. We are not surprised at
the claim, because there has never been a religion which has been too
modest to make a similar claim. No religion has ever been satisfied to
be _one_ of the saviors of man. Each religion wants to be the _only_
savior of man. There is no monopoly like religious monopoly. The
industrial corporations with all their greed are less exacting than
the Catholic church, for instance, which keeps heaven itself under
lock and key.

But what is meant by salvation? Let us consider its religious meaning
first. An unbiased investigation of the dogmas and their supposed
historical foundations will prove that the salvation which
Christianity offers, and the means by which it proposes to effect the
world's salvation, are extremely fanciful in nature. If this point
could be made clear, there will be less reluctance on the part of the
public to listen to the evidence on the un-historicity of the founder
of Christianity.

We are told that God, who is perfect, created this world about half a
hundred centuries ago. Of course, being perfect himself the world
which he created was perfect, too. But the world did not stay perfect
very long. Nay, from the heights it fell, not slowly, but suddenly,
into the lowest depths of degradation. How a world which God had
created perfect, could in the twinkling of an eye become so vile as to
be cursed by the same being who a moment before had pronounced it
"good," and besides be handed over to the devil as fuel for eternal
burnings, only credulity can explain. I am giving the story of what is
called the "plan of salvation," in order to show its mythical nature.
In the preceding pages we have discussed the question, Is Jesus a
Myth, but I believe that when we have reflected upon the story of
man's fall and his supposed subsequent salvation by the blood of
Jesus, we shall conclude that the function, or the office, which Jesus
is said to perform, is as mythical as his person.

The story of Eden possesses all the marks of an allegory. Adam and
Eve, and a perfect world _suddenly_ plunged from a snowy whiteness
into the blackness of hell, are the thoughts of a child who
exaggerates because of an as yet undisciplined fancy. Yet, if Adam and
Eve are unreal, theologically speaking, Jesus is unreal. If they are
allegory and myth, so is Jesus. It is claimed that it was the fall of
Adam which necessitated the death of Jesus, but if Adam's fall be a
fiction, as we know it is, Jesus' death as an atonement must also be a
fiction.

In the fall of Adam, we are told, humanity itself fell. Could anything
be more fanciful than that? And what was Adam's sin? He coveted
knowledge. He wished to improve his mind. He experimented with
forbidden things. He dared to take the initiative. And for that
imaginary crime, even the generations not yet born are to be forever
blighted. Even the animals, the flowers and vegetables were cursed for
it. Can you conceive of anything more mythical than that? One of the
English divines of the age of Calvin declared that original sin,--Adam's
sin imputed to us,--was so awful, that "if a man had never been born
he would yet have been damned for it." It is from this mythical sin
that a mythical Savior saves us. And how does he do it? In a very
mythical way, as we shall see.

When the world fell, it fell into the devil's hands. To redeem a part
of it, at least, the deity concludes to give up his only son for a
ransom. This is interesting. God is represented as being greatly
offended, because the world which he had created perfect was all in a
heap before him. To placate himself he sacrificed his son--not
himself.

But, as intimated above, he does not intend to restore the whole world
to its pristine purity, but only a part of it. This is alarming. He
creates the whole world perfect, but now he is satisfied to have only
a portion of it redeemed from the devil. If he can save at all, pray,
why not save all? This is not an irrelevant question when it is
remembered that the whole world was created perfect in the first
place.

The refusal of the deity to save all of his world from the devil would
lead one to believe that even when God created the world perfect he
did not mean to keep all of it to himself, but meant that some of it,
the greater part of it, as some theologians contend, should go to the
devil! Surely this is nothing but myth. Let us hope for the sake of
our ideals that all this is no more than the childish prattle of
primitive man.

But let us return to the story of the fall of man; God decides to save
a part of his ruined perfect world by the sacrifice of his son. The
latter is supposed to have said to his father: "Punish me, kill me,
accept my blood, and let it pay for the sins of man." He thus
interceded for the _elect_, and the deity was mollified. As Jesus
is also God, it follows that one God tried to pacify another, which is
pure myth. Some theologians have another theory--there is room here
for many theories. According to these, God gave up his son as a
ransom, not to himself, but to the devil, who now claimed the world as
his own. I heard a distinguished minister explain this in the
following manner: A poor man whose house is mortgaged hears that some
philanthropist has redeemed the property by paying off the mortgage.
The soul of man was by the fall of Adam mortgaged to the devil. God
has raised the mortgage by abandoning his son to be killed to satisfy
the devil who held the mortgage. The debt which we owed has been paid
by Jesus. By this arrangement the devil loses his legal right to our
souls and we are saved. All we need to do is to believe in this story
and we'll be sure to go to heaven. And to think that intelligent
Americans not only accept all this as inspired, but denounce the man
who ventures to intimate modestly that it might be a myth, as a
blasphemer! "O, judgment!" cries Shakespeare, "thou hast fled to
brutish beasts, and men have lost their reason."

The morality which the Christian church teaches is of as mythical a
nature as the story of the fall, and the blood-atonement. It is not
natural morality, but something quite unintelligible and fictitious.
For instance, we are told that we cannot of ourselves be righteous. We
must first have the grace of God. Then we are told that we cannot have
the grace of God unless he gives it to us. And he will not give it to
us unless we ask for it. But we cannot ask for it, unless he moves us
to ask for it. And there we are. We shall be damned if we do not come
to God, and we cannot come to God unless he calls us. Besides, could
anything be more mythical than a righteousness which can only be
imputed to us,--any righteousness of our own being but "filthy rags?"

The Christian religion has the appearance of being one great myth,
constructed out of many minor myths. It is the same with
Mohammedanism, or Judaism, which latter is the mischievous parent of
both the Mohammedan and the Christian faiths. It is the same with all
supernatural creeds. Myth is the dominating element in them all.
Compared with these Asiatic religions how glorious is science! How
wholesome, helpful, and luminous, are her commandments!

If I were to command you to believe that Mount Olympus was once
tenanted by blue-eyed gods and their consorts,--sipping nectar and
ambrosia the live-long day,--you will answer, "Oh, that is only
mythology." If I were to tell you that you cannot be saved unless you
believe that Minerva was born full-fledged from the brain of Jupiter,
you will laugh at me. If I were to tell you that you must punish your
innocent sons for the guilt of their brothers and sisters, you will
answer that I insult your moral sense. And yet, every Sunday, the
preacher repeats the myth of Adam and Eve, and how God killed his
innocent son to please himself, or to satisfy the devil, and with
bated breath, and on your knees, you whisper, _Amen._

How is it that when you read the literature of the Greeks, the
literature of the Persians, the literature of Hindoostan, or of the
Mohammedan world, you discriminate between fact and fiction, between
history and myth, but when it comes to the literature of the Jews, you
stammer, you stutter, you bite your lips, you turn pale, and fall upon
your face before it as the savage before his fetish? You would
consider it unreasonable to believe that everything a Greek, or a
Roman, or an Arab ever said was inspired. And yet, men have been
hounded to death for not believing that everything that a Jew ever
said in olden times was inspired.

I do not have to use arguments, I hope, to prove to an intelligent
public that an infallible book is as much a myth as the Garden of
Eden, or the Star of Bethlehem.

A mythical Savior, a mythical Bible, a mythical plan of salvation!

When we subject what are called religious truths to the same tests by
which we determine scientific or historical truths, we discover that
they are not truths at all; they are only opinions. Any statement
which snaps under the strain of reason is unworthy of credence. But it
is claimed that religious truth is discovered by intuition and not by
investigation. The believer, it is claimed, feels in his own soul--he
has the witness of the spirit, that the Bible is infallible, and that
Jesus is the Savior of man. The Christian does not have to look into
the arguments for or against his religion, it is said, before he makes
up his mind; he knows by an inward assurance; he has proved it to his
own deepermost being that Jesus is real and that he is the only
Savior. But what is that but another kind of argument? The argument is
quite inadequate to inspire assurance, as you will presently see, but
it is an argument nevertheless. To say that we must believe and not
reason is a kind of reasoning, This device of reasoning against
reasoning is resorted to by people who have been compelled by modern
thought to give up, one after another, the strongholds of their
position. They run under shelter of what they call faith, or the
"inward witness of the spirit," or the intuitive argument, hoping
thereby to escape the enemy's fire, if I may use so objectionable a
phrase.

What is called faith, then, or an intuitive spiritual assurance, is a
species of reasoning; let its worth be tested honestly.

In the first place, faith or the intuitive argument would prove too
much. If Jesus is real, notwithstanding that there is no reliable
historical data to warrant the belief, because the believer feels in
his own soul that He is real and divine, I answer that, the same mode
of reasoning--and let us not forget, it is a kind of _reasoning_--would
prove Mohammed a divine savior, and the wooden idol of the savage a god.
The African Bushman trembles before an image, because he feels in his
own soul that the thing is real. Does that make it real? The Moslem
cries unto Mohammed, because he believes in his innermost heart that
