resisted them, if, by some unaccountable egotism, the soul has become
concentrated in herself; and instead of giving our confidence and
love to those who have so generously given their life and means to
secure to us the happiness we enjoy, we rest satisfied with living on
the fruits of their labors without making them any return; we will
carry with us later on into the family of our choice only a withered
heart, dead to every noble and generous sentiment.

You should respect and honor your parents with the filial love of a
Christian daughter. Such is the precise meaning of the precept given
you by God in their regard: _Honor thy father and thy mother!_
Relative to you they hold God's place, who is the source of all
paternity in heaven and upon earth. Nothing can dispense you from
this respect which God requires for them, and which nature ought to
render easy to you; for, even when your parents would suffer by a
criminal negligence the image of God to be deteriorated in their
souls; they always remain His representatives for you, because they
are always, no matter what they may do, the instruments that God
employed to give you existence.

The faults of your parents should never diminish in your heart the
respect and honor that you owe them; and in certain painful and
delicate circumstances, you should imitate the example of the two
sons of Noah in order to escape the malediction that fell upon Cham
for his impudent strictures of his father's faults. You should
carefully draw the mantle of charity over any fault of your parents
that might tend to weaken your respect for them. Silence should seal
your lips forever on all their shortcomings, even before those who
know them, unless that it be to ask advice in some critical
conjuncture, or bring them to receive some useful and charitable
counsel. God alone should be the depository of your sorrowful
confidence in this matter. To Him alone you should confide your
sorrows and alarms, because He alone should hold the first place in
your mind and heart, for He will be your judge as well as theirs.

If you see that a salutary effect may be obtained by a prudent and
respectful observation, be slow in making it, and never act before
having consulted some virtuous and enlightened persons; should they
advise you in the affirmative, let your observation assume the tone
of a remonstration rather than a warning. Your language, actions or
gestures should never savor of anything that betrayed a disregard for
that profound veneration with which you should honor in them the
title of God's representatives in your regard. An unfortunate custom,
the fruit of a bad education, or of an excessive tenderness on the
part of parents, has sadly vitiated the nature and form of the
relations that should exist between child and parent.


During the present century in many places a fatal familiarity seems
to have sapped the very foundation from that profound respect which
was the honor and glory of the Christian family, and the salt that
preserves nations from corruption; that respect which children, who
truly feared God, paid to their parents. To that beautiful order that
reigned in the Christian family, and which preserved inviolable the
father's authority in Christian times, has succeeded a spirit of
equality as hostile to the natural order as to the order of Divine
Providence, since it destroys both rank and duty. It gives birth to
that false independence which may justly be called the seed of
revolution and anarchy; no consequence is more natural, for what can
be expected of a citizen who imbibed in his childhood, under the
paternal roof, the spirit of disobedience and insubordination, who
was taught to regard superiority with a jealous eye, and treat with
contempt those who are beneath him.

After paying due respect to your parents, they should be, after God,
the depositories of your confidence, and since a daughter's wants are
more easily communicated to her mother, it is in her mother's heart
that a Christian daughter will deposit the secrets of her own. This
filial confidence supposes, also, in a young lady a sincere
diffidence in her self, a consciousness of her own weakness which, so
far from being a fault, is the result of true humility. Those young
ladies who are wanting in confidence in their own mothers are indeed
great objects of compassion. For this confidence is not only an
essential condition to their advancement in virtue, but also one of
their principal safeguards against deception and intrigue.

The heart of woman, especially at your age, feels an imperative need
of making a confidant of some one, and if that one is not her mother,
it will be some friend who, perhaps, will not possess greater
experience nor more wisdom or force than herself, and consequently,
instead of giving the proper counsel, will add evil to evil by the
fatal help of encouragement in a course that should be abandoned.
Rest assured that you can never find any one able to fill the
mother's place in this regard. This unreserved abandonment to a
mother's confiding heart is not always possible, since death often
interferes. When such is the case it is a great misfortune for a
young lady--a misfortune that can scarcely be retrieved in her
lifetime. It is easy to recognise a woman whose soul has been
fostered in that of her mother. Such women ordinarily possess a
milder disposition, a more amiable ingenuousness, with a certain
simplicity of heart which, without being prejudicial in the least to
her mind, adds a new charm to the noble and generous virtues which
become the mother of a family. Those habits of confidence and
abandonment contracted from childhood have made frankness and
sincerity second nature. Their love for truth and sincerity is
revealed in their conversation, the sanctity of which is the echo of
their souls. Their whole demeanor sheds such a halo of delight around
them that they become, unpretentiously, the centre of attraction for
all those whose enviable pleasure it is to be honored by their company.

If up to this hour you have concealed nothing from your mother; if
you have given her the key to your soul; if your heart is for her an
open book; if she can at all times read in your looks your very
thoughts; on bended knees thank God from the depths of your soul for
having given you such a mother, and the grace of giving her your
confidence. If you remain a child to your mother you will preserve
your youth through the toilsome days of life to a ripe old age, an
advantage so precious that nothing should be left undone to secure it.

Woman is pleasing to others only in as much as she possesses this
adornment, which exhales a sweet odor like the perfume of youth.
Alas! how many women there are who have never been children even with
their mothers. Women from their youth, they have treated their mother
with a kind of diffidence, dissembling at an age when the only danger
to be feared should be an excessive confidence.

As for the gratitude and love that you owe your parents, I would
regard it as an injury offered to the candor of your age and the
sincerity of your heart to undertake to prove that these are
obligations which you are in duty bound to discharge. God who has
commanded us to honor our parents, left us no precept obliging us to
love them; but while He engraved other commandments upon stone this
one He has written in the very essence of our being. Hence I appeal
only to your heart in this matter, leaving you entirely to its
instincts to point out to you your duty, which to assert by any other
proof, I fear would lead you to suspect that there are children
unnatural enough to forget and neglect their parents.

Bear in mind, however, that your love and gratitude for them must by
no means be restricted to a sentiment of the heart or an instinct of
nature. Those virtues must find an echo both in your words and
actions. Love founded on sensibility has no signification, if you can
make no sacrifice to obey or please them. Love in man is effective,
and this is why our Lord tells us with regard to the love we owe Him:
_He who loves me keeps my commandments._

To love consists in pleasing him who is loved; it is prefering his
will to our own, his interests to ours; in a word, it is to seek him
rather than attract him; it is to become his property rather than to
appropriate him; it is to forget ourself to think of him. Love lives
upon sacrifices; as the pious author of the Following of Christ says:
_where love is, there is also pain: but love converts that pain
into pleasure._ If this be true of all the affections of the human
heart; what shall we think of the one that we have first felt, and
which in some way forms a part of our very nature?




CHAPTER XX.


MELANCHOLY.

It will perhaps seem strange to you to be warned in the bloom of
youth against a sentiment that seems to be reserved for that period
of life when delinquents, through the infinite goodness of God, are
brought to enter into themselves; when the illusions of the heart
have been replaced by a cold and sad reality; when hope seems to
recoil under the weight of sad recollections. Still, because this
mental canker preys on the most vital interests of the soul, and
because a predisposition to it is found to prevail even among the
youthful portion of your sex, a certain knowledge of it is necessary
in order to resist it effectually.

It is most delightful and consoling to find in persons of your age
and sex that pure joy, so frank and candid, springing out of the
innocence and simplicity of the heart; a good conscience and a lively
faith, with unbounded confidence in Divine Providence; all of which
combine to produce that sweet and saintly cheerfulness which dilates
the heart and lights up the soul with its amiable reflections. But,
alas! we confess with deep regret, that many young ladies have been
ruthlessly robbed of all those charms by a precocious development
received under the world's tutorship, by which they have been made to
cross with a bound the smiling season of hope and joy, to a premature
old age before having tasted the charms of youth.

In order that joy may reign in the heart, the heart must first
repose in the bosom of Divine Providence--free from the pressure of
doleful souvenirs, and from the pestering desires stirred up by
vanity; in a word, exempt from every obstacle, whether intrinsic or
extrinsic, that might in any way oppose the designs of God. But,
alas! by some unaccountable inconsistency, we are in contradiction
with ourselves; for, notwithstanding our great desire to live, and
our horror of death, still we seem to be in a hurry with the time to
pass, as though we advanced too slowly to the grave.

Now, we are well aware that of this lifetime the present is all that
we can claim, the past and future being in the hands of God; still,
true to the same principle of inconsistency we make little or no use
of the present, it is something annoying that we wish, to get over,
as quickly as possible, while we are absorbed by a countless
multitude of useless but importunate desires relative to the past,
which we can never recall, and the future, which perhaps we shall
never see.

Hence, as we journey onward in this way, we must naturally find
ourselves a prey to fears and doubts, sometimes suspended between
hope and despondency, while the heart is harassed by corroding
desires that succeed each other like waves on a tempest-driven sea.
We wish to be our own providence, to dispose of our own future of our
lifetime according to those desires, instead of leaving that work to
Him from whom we have received all that we possess.

When we are assailed by regrets in the evening, and filled with
anxieties for the morrow, how can our heart rebound with joy, or our
lips wear the smile of confidence and tranquility? Behold some of the
many sources from which the fatal fiend of melancholy is fed and
strengthened. But this vile destroyer of peaceful joy springs from
another source not less fatal than those just mentioned. That is a
certain vagueness of mind and heart, which is sometimes the result of
some physical or bodily indisposition, but more frequently the
consequence of an imperfect education, or indifference in the service
of God.

That which gives to the mind its needed assurance and strength, and
to the heart its consistency and solidity, is a lively faith,
nourished and sustained by a sincere piety. Of this you are
thoroughly convinced, as you know full well that faith alone can give
a solid basis to our thoughts, a true direction to our desires, and
an eternal destiny to our hopes. Without faith the mind is without
ballast--unsettled as to what it ought to believe or reject; the
heart ignores what it should fear or hope for; in a word, the soul is
lost in the midst of her vacillating desires.

In order that faith may impart its vivifying influence it must
penetrate the soul's substance, and become to her the principle of a
new life, directing all her movements, animating all her thoughts,
desires and hopes. A superficial and inactive faith that is purely
exterior, satisfied with believing what God reveals, without
quickening the spiritual pulsations of the soul, will not preserve
her from that vagueness and uncertainty which deprive all objects of
their natural colors, and lend them a sombre shade which saddens the
heart.

If you would escape falling a victim to melancholy, preserve your
faith with precious care, enliven it constantly by fervent prayer, by
meditation and the abundant graces received through the Sacraments.
Let its pure light be the rule of your thoughts and actions, accustom
your mind to dwell upon things that are practical, and consequently
useful, sedulously avoiding all speculative or doubtful topics, that
have no other result than to keep the mind in a state of suspense and
indecision. You will fare better in having a clear knowledge of
practical things, even at the cost of appearing less learned than
others.

A third source of melancholy is a species of mental idleness,
concerning which women are exposed to labor under a false impression.
As they are naturally given to manual occupation habit begets with
them an antipathy to mental labor; their judgment is readily but
erroneously convinced by their feelings, which easily lead them to
believe that they are sufficiently occupied when their fingers are
engaged in fixing an embroidery or something similar. To reason the
matter, they will readily admit that labor exclusively manual having
no share in the exercise of the mental faculties, cannot be
considered to give sufficient occupation to an intelligent being;
since the imagination would be left to the mercy of its caprices and
the heart to the whims of its desires, which is not worthy of a being
created to the image and likeness of God, who commands us to labor as
He labored, namely: with mind and heart constantly supplying useful
thoughts to the one and noble sentiments to the other.

Such is the heavenly duty enjoined by those consoling words of our
Saviour: _pray always_. At first sight it would seem that such
an obligation is impossible and contrary to human nature. We cannot,
however, even suppose that He who has made man what he is,
misunderstood his nature so far as to command him to do
impossibilities.

Every thought that raises the mind towards God, every sentiment that
brings the heart near to Him, is a prayer. Hence there is no
occupation that may not become a prayer, since there is none that may
not be referred to God. The duties and obligations of woman, far from
being an obstacle to the practical exercise of the above principle,
on the contrary favor its execution most admirably; for her duties,
though of the manual order for the most part, are not of a nature to
distract the mind or absorb the heart; she can easily and constantly
concentrate the thoughts of the one and the affections of the other
upon God.

That you should make God the object of all your actions is your
first and most imperative duty, and the moment that you discharge
your duties for any other end that moment they shall lose the dignity
of deeds worthy of a Christian or even of a rational being; moreover,
your mind, as you are fully aware, is endowed with perpetual
activity, it is never idle,--you need only chose the objects to which
you wish to apply it. But if you fail to apply it to things worthy of
your sublime calling it will soon escape from your control, and,
flitting from one trifle to another, it will meddle with objects that
might become dangerous to the peace of your soul. It will soon become
preoccupied by puerile fears, unfounded apprehensions, vague sadness,
which, when constantly indulged in, will deliver your soul over to
melancholy which never fails to tarnish the purity of the heart and
enervate the energy of the will.

The pain that many suffer from their imaginary ills robs them of the
noble and generous love of compassionating the real and painful
griefs of others. Egotism is nurtured and fortified in those ravings
which attach the soul's energies to the consideration of our own ills
or sorrows; the heart grows cold and hardened in a deplorable
insensibility which estranges it to every sentiment of pity and
compassion for others.

There is, I am aware, a sorrow that is salutary to the soul, and
conformable to the spirit of Christianity, as also to man's condition
in this vale of tears. I know that it is very difficult to be always
joyful, when we take into account the dangers by which we are
surrounded, the countless calamities to which we are exposed since
the day that sin had entered the world. We very often see the objects
of our warmest affections disappear from around us; and every day
some new misfortune or some new loss adds some new tears to our cup
of sorrow, from whose bitterness every one is doomed to drink during
life.

Far from me be the thought of engaging you to fly this holy sorrow
imposed by our condition and recommended by our Lord Himself.
_"There is,"_ says St. Paul, _"a sorrow according_ to God"
which, far from plunging the heart into a state of despondency,
enables the soul to avoid the dangers which constantly expose her to
lose God by sin. But this sorrow does not trouble the peace of either
the heart or the mind, for it is that sorrow which our divine Saviour
called blessed, and for which He has promised consolation.

Far be from me, also, the thought of advising that foolish and
boisterous joy which carries away the soul, absorbing all her
energies filling her with void and disgust. This joy, far from being
a remedy or a protection against melancholy, is, on the contrary,
both its cause and effect. The result of those intemperate paroxysms
of joy, so little in conformity with our nature is that which
invariably results from any forced or undue influence.

When shackled nature recovers her liberty she revenges the violence
that she was made to endure. But, seizing her rights with too great
avidity, she suffers more from the reaction than from the force that
infringed upon them. This explains the reason of those fitful
outbursts of joy and grief that pass in quick succession. Those
puerile fears, followed by hopes, without rule or aim, that vain
confidence giving place to sad discouragement. Those despondent
feelings after moments of zealous fever, during which we seem to be
able to do and attempt everything. Here we find the solution of those
sudden and varied shades of temperament which will instantaneously
cheer or prostrate the energies of the soul.

If you would preserve your soul from melancholy, conserve your heart
in a calm composure, your mind in a just equanimity keeping both
equally distant from all extremes able to taste joy with discretion,
and sorrow without becoming discouraged. This will be putting in
practice the advice of the wise man: Give not up thy soul to sadness
and afflict not thyself in thy own counsel. The joyfulness of the
heart is the life of man and a never-failing treasure of holiness,
and the joy of man is length of life. Have pity on thy own soul,
pleasing God and contain thyself; gather up thy heart in his holiness
and drive away sadness far from thee. For sadness hath killed many
and there is no profit in it. Envy and anger shorten a man's days,
and pensiveness will bring old age before the time. A cheerful and
good heart is always feasting, for his banquets are prepared with
diligence. Eccl. xxx. 22-27.




CHAPTER XXI.


ON READING.

If the wisdom of nations, which loves to find expression in the
proverbs, teaches us that a man may be known by knowing the company
that he frequents; we can say with the same assurance that his
character and dispositions may be known from the books which he
constantly reads. Of all friends, the most intimate are the books
that we constantly read, hence there is nothing more important for a
young person, as there is nothing that entails such grave
consequences for the moral culture, than the selection of proper and
suitable books. Because it is a noted fact that such readings
exercise the deepest influence over the mind and heart, so much that
all the resources which the ingeniousness of maternal love can employ
against it avail nothing. God's minister in the pulpit of truth has
no weight with those souls fascinated by the deceitful charms of a
bad book, which addresses itself to their prejudices and passions.
The charitable advice of the confessor in the tribunal of penance is
futile against the intoxicating seductions of those romances whose
only merit consists in flattering the most depraved inclinations of
the human heart.

Indeed it is a subject both of surprise and sorrow to see an author
of the most menial abilities lauded to the skies for a book still
more abject than himself, a book teeming with error and immorality;
while, very often, a discourse, a sermon or an instruction, whatever
may be the authority that they receive either from the character of
the person who pronounces them, or from the gravity of the
circumstances in which he speaks, are heard with indifference. Good
and evil, truth and error, are never so rapidly propagated, never so
powerful in their action, never so certain in their effects as when
they are communicated to us under the form of a book authorized by
fashion or party spirit. Hence there is no greater responsibility
before God than that which man assumes when he wields the pen in the
name of humanity, whether for noble or selfish ends.

A book is a teacher whose doctrine is listened to with a willingness
equal to its degree of conformity to the inclinations of our heart.
It is a friend that gains our confidence, inasmuch as it flatters our
prejudices and passions, and in which we find a reflection of our own
thoughts, the echo of our most secret sentiments. You would not like
to receive a stranger into your house without his being properly
recommended, but you will readily receive a book on the strength of
reports that are often deceitful.

The country is flooded with productions that sap the foundations of
morality, and which bear that _imprimatur_ given by a poisoned
public opinion to such authors as pander to its craven spirit. The
world judges with a depraved indulgence the book in which it finds
its maxims approved and sanctioned, portraying the exact seducing
picture of its vanities. The purest souls and, not unfrequently,
serious minds are too often imposed upon by those popular prejudices,
and, despite their good reason, yield to their influence by reading
the flimsy productions of depraved minds, which, besides all the
other injuries they cause, rob them of a most precious time. A book
must be very bad before the world condemns it, so bad, in fact, that
its own intrinsic filth disgusts the reader and seals its fate. But,
there is another kind of literature favorably received by that
portion of mankind called respectable, honest, and sometimes even
severe, and whose authority is capable of making a grave impression
on your mind.

It is, therefore, very important for you to know not only the signs
by which to recognize a bad book, but also whom you should consult as
judges in the matter. There can be no question here of those books
professedly immoral, in which vice is eulogized and corrupt maxims
sustained. Those books are not dangerous for you, because they will
not fall under your hands, and even when they would you could not
open one of them without flinging it away with horror;--in this case
the evil--contains in itself its own remedy.

But there are books, less dangerous in appearance, in which the most
delicate situations are represented, clothed in all the charms of
style, well calculated, under their moral guise and serious bearing,
to captivate the heart and imagination. Indeed to represent in lively
colors the terrible effects of the passions, and the fatal
consequences that a momentary excitement might entail is not of a
nature to inspire a young lady with horror for vice and love for
virtue. How is it possible that she will guard against the evil
inclinations of the heart, when she is conscious of the danger in
giving them free scope, and that a momentary forgetfulness is
sometimes punished by a life-time of sorrow and bitterness? Such a
culpable negligence might be accounted for, if there existed a
necessary relation between the will and the imagination, by which the
determinations of the former are necessarily dependant upon the
impressions of the latter.

But such is not the case, for the imagination has a sphere of action
very different from that of the intelligence or the will. It is an
interior mirror which reflects back upon the soul images of things
beheld by the senses and conceived by the intelligence, without
regard to time or place. Positively no, would be the answer of a
young lady of self-respect, whom we would ask if she would like to
see with her own eyes all that is spoken of in the novel which she
reads with so little caution! Your answer would be given in the same
terms, should we ask you if she might read without impunity to virtue
those intrigues, those scenes so engaging to curiosity, and which
incite the reader to follow up the details of ineffectual struggles
against passion. Could she, without blushing, listen to the
passionate conversations of those who had lead each other to
destruction, after having exhausted all the resources of heart and
mind to render vice amiable, even when their fall would seem to be
less the effect of a criminal will than the result of a kind of
fatality? Your answer to all this would be emphatically, no!

But while young ladies will neither listen to nor look at scenes of
this nature, many, alas! do not scruple to look at them in books,
where they are much more dangerous, for being adorned with all the
charms of style, and because the persons represented are made to
speak and act in a much more luring manner than they do in reality.
They devour with avidity those dangerous, and sometimes scurrilous
pages; but while they chain their attention to the matter they are
reading, their imagination gains the ascendancy over all the senses,
and under their united action images are formed which leave a lasting
impression on the mind--images of misfortune that has befallen
persons either through their own fault or the fault of others, and
which, through sympathy, the human heart, whether wrong or right, is
always ready to find a pretext to justify.

In reading of those misfortunes she may perhaps recognize the hand
of divine vengeance pursuing the criminal culprit, which is of a
nature to inspire her with a sentiment of fear that deters from the
commission of crime; but such sentiments have been felt by the heroes
