he had asked his assistant to come in his place; but as he neared the
house, the crowd filled him with wonder; progress was hindered, and as
perforce he paused for a moment, his eye fell on a crippled lad crying
bitterly as he sat on a low door-step.

"Did you know Winnie Lewis, my lad?" he asked.

"Know her, is it sir? Never a week passed but what she came twice or
thrice with a picture or book, mayhaps an apple for me, an' it's owing
to her an' no clargy at all that I'll ever follow her blessed footsteps
to heaven. She'd read me from her own Bible whenever she came, an' now
she's gone there'll be none at all to help me, for mother's dead an'
dad's drunk, an' the sunshine's gone from Mike's sky intirely with Winnie,
sir."

A burst of sobs choked the boy; Brother Gordon passed on, after promising
him a visit very soon, and made his way through the crowd of tear-stained,
sorrowful faces. The Brother came to a stop on the narrow passageway of
the little house. A woman stood beside him drying her fast falling tears
while a wee child hid his face in her skirts and wept.

"Was Winnie a relative of yours?" the brother asked.

"No, sir; but the blessed child was at our house constantly, and when
Bob here was sick she nursed and tended him and her hymns quieted him
when nothing else seemed to do it. It was just the same with all the
neighbors. She took tracts to them all and has prayed with them ever
since she was converted, which was three years ago, when she was but six
years of age, sir. What she's been to us all no one but the Lord will
ever know and now she lies there."

Recognized at last, Brother Gordon was led to the room where the child
lay at rest, looking almost younger than when he had seen her in his
study six months before. An old bent woman was crying aloud by the coffin.

"I never thought she'd go afore I did. She used regular to read an' sing
to me every evening, an' it was her talk an' prayers that made a Christian
of me: you could a'most go to heaven on one of her prayers."

"Mother, mother come away," said a young man putting his arm around her
to lead her back. "You'll see her again."

"I know, I know: she said she'd wait for me at the gate," she sobbed as
she followed him; "but I miss her sore now."

"It's the old lady as Mrs. Lewis lived with sir," said a young lad
standing next to Brother Gordon, as one and another still pressed up
towards the little casket for a last look at the beloved face. "She was
a Unitarian, and she could not hold out against Winnie's prayers and
pleadings to love Jesus, and she's been trusting in Him now for quite
awhile. A mighty good thing it is, too."

"You are right, my lad," replied the minister. "Do you trust Him, too?"

"Winnie taught me, sir," the lad made answer, and sudden tears filled
his eyes.

[Illustration: "Mother, mother, come away." said a young man, putting
his arm around her to lead her back. "You'll see her again."]

A silence fell on those assembled, and, marveling at such testimony,
Brother Gordon proceeded with the service feeling as if there was little
more he could say of one whose deeds thus spoke for her. Loving hands
had laid flowers all around the child who had led them. One tiny lassie
placed a dandelion in the small waxen fingers and now stood, abandoned
to grief beside the still form that bore the impress of absolute purity.
The service over, again and again was the coffin lid waved back by some
one longing for another look, and they seemed as if they could not let
her go.

The next day a good-looking man came to Brother Gordon's house and was
admitted into his study.

"I am Winnie's uncle, sir," he said simply. "She never rested till she
made me promise to get saved, and I've come."

"Will you tell me about it, my friend?" said Brother Gordon.

"Well, you see, sir, it was this way. Winnie always had been uncommonly
fond of me; and so was I of her,"--his voice broke a little--"and I'd
never been saved, never felt, as I believed, quite right. Yet I knew her
religion was true enough, and a half hour before she died she had the
whole family with her, telling them she was going to Jesus, and she took
my hand between her little ones and said, 'Uncle John, you will love
Jesus and meet me in Heaven, won't you?' What could I do? It broke me
all up, and I've come to ask you, sir; what to do so's to keep my promise
to Winnie, for she was an angel if there ever was one. Why, sir, we were
all sitting with her in the dark, and there was a light about that child
as though it shone from Heaven. We all noticed it, every one of us, and
when she drew her last breath and left us, the radiance went, too; it was
gone, quite gone."

The man wept like a child, and for a minute Brother Gordon did not speak.
Within a month the uncle was thoroughly converted, baptized, and a sincere
follower of Christ. In the evening after this baptism, Brother Gordon
sat reading in his study, thinking of his little child. "It is truly a
wonderful record! Would we had more like her. Why do we not help the
children to get saved, letting them feel that they are really one with
us? We need their help fully as much as they need ours. 'Take heed that
ye despise not one of these little ones; for I say unto you, That in
heaven their angels do always behold the face of my Father which is in
Heaven.'"

--L. C. W. _Copyright by B. Wood_, 1895.



A CHILD'S FAITH

Johnny Hall was a poor boy. His mother worked hard for their daily bread.
"Please give me something to eat, for I am very hungry," he said to her
one evening.

His mother let the work that she was sewing fall upon her knees, and
drew Johnny toward her. As she kissed him the tears fell fast on his
face, while she said, "Johnny, my dear, I have not a penny in the world.
There is not a morsel of bread in the house, and I cannot give you any
tonight."

Johnny did not cry when he heard this. He was only a little fellow but
he had learned the lesson of trusting in God's promises. He had great
faith in the sweet words of Jesus when he said, "Whatsoever ye shall ask
the Father in my name he will give it you."

"Never mind, mama; I shall soon be asleep, and then I shall not feel
hungry. But you must sit here and sew, hungry and cold. Poor mama!" he
said, as he threw his arms around her neck and kissed her many times to
comfort her.

Then he knelt down at his mother's knee to say his prayers after her.
They said "Our Father," till they came to the petition, "Give us this
day our daily bread." The way in which his mother said these words made
Johnny's heart ache. He stopped and looked at her, and repeated with his
eyes full of tears. "Give us this day our daily bread."

[Illustration.]

When they got through he looked at his mother and said, "Now mother, do
not be afraid. We shall never be hungry any more. God is our Father. He
has promised to hear us, and I am sure he will."

Then he went to bed. Before midnight he woke up, while his mother was
still at work, and asked if the bread had come yet. She said "No; but I
am sure it will come."

In the morning, before Johnny was awake, a gentleman called who wanted
his mother to come to his house and take charge of his two motherless
children. She agreed to go. He left some money with her. She went out
at once to buy some things for breakfast; and when Johnny awoke, the
bread was there, and all that he needed!

Johnny is now a man, but he has never wanted bread from that day; and
whenever he was afraid since then, he has remembered God's promises, and
trusted in him.

--_Lutheran Herald_



TRIUMPHANT DEATH OF A LITTLE CHILD

Some years ago we knew a Brother and Sister G----, who told of the
remarkable experience of their little girl, only seven years old, who
had a short time ago gone home to heaven. The parents were devoted
Christians who had taught their children to love and honor God. During
little Ella's illness she manifested wonderful patience and told of her
love for Jesus. The morning she died she called her papa and mama to her
side and said: "I have been in heaven all night. My room is full of
angels and Jesus is here. I'm going to heaven." Then she asked them to
promise to meet her there. As soon as they could control their feelings
they made her the promise. Then she kissed them and called for her little
brother and sister and other friends. She talked with each one in turn,
telling them in substance, the same she had told her papa and mama,
asking each one to make her the same promise, and kissing each one
good-bye. That was a touching scene. Those who were there said it seemed
more like heaven than earth to be in her presence. In the midst of many
tears all promised her they would surely meet her in that bright and
beautiful home to which she was going. Just before she died she asked
her mama to dress her in white and also to dress her doll in white and
put it by her side in her coffin. Then she folded her own little hands
and closed her eyes and said, "Jesus is calling me and I must go now.
Good-bye," and she was gone.

Little Ella's death was glorious and she is not the only one that has
left us such bright, joyous testimony. We have ourselves known of many
children and older ones who had quite similar experiences. And though
we may not all see, before we die, all that Ella saw, if we love Jesus
and do what he asks us to, he will surely fulfill to each of us his
promise: "I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a
place for you, I will come again, and receive you unto myself; that where
I am, there you may be also."

--Editor

[Illustration: "I have been in heaven all night. My room is full of
angels and Jesus is here."]



THE CHILD'S PRAYER

  [Illustration.]

  Into her chamber went
  A little girl one day,
  And by a chair she knelt,
  And thus began to pray:--

  "Jesus, my eyes I close,
  Thy form I cannot see;
  If Thou art near me, Lord,
  I pray Thee to speak to me."

  A still, small voice she heard within her soul--
  "What is it child? I hear thee; tell the whole."

  "I pray thee, Lord," she said,
  "That Thou wilt condescend
  To tarry in my heart
  And ever be my Friend.

  "The path of life is dark,
  I would not go astray;
  Oh, let me have Thy hand
  To lead me in the way."

  "Fear not; I will not leave thee, child, alone."
  She thought she felt a soft hand press her own.

  "They tell me, Lord, that all
  The living pass away;
  The aged soon must die,
  And even children may.

  "Oh, let my parents live
  Till I a woman grow;
  For if they die, what can
  A little orphan do?"

  "Fear not, my child; whatever ill may come
  I'll not forsake thee till I bring thee home."

  Her little prayer was said,
  And from her chamber now
  She passed forth with the light
  Of heaven upon her brow.

  "Mother, I've seen the Lord,
  His hand in mine I felt,
  And, oh, I heard Him say,
  As by my chair I knelt--

  "'Fear not, my child; whatever ill may come
  I'll not forsake thee till I bring thee home.'"



THE CAT CAME BACK

Jimmy was lying on an old cot out in the orchard, getting some of the
nice spring sunshine on his thin body. There was an anxious frown on his
face now, and every little while he would turn on his side, look through
the orchard, and call "Kittv kitty! kitty! Annette, Come, Ann-ette."

But Annette did not come. His mother came and reminded him that Annette
was very old indeed, and it might be that she would never come again.

"She was here yesterday, Mother," he answered her, and the big tears
came to his eyes "She felt perfectly fine then."

"I know, but she's an old cat. She never strays away of her own accord,
and certainlv no one would steal an old blind cat."

Later on during the day a man came walking up to their house. He introduced
himself as the new neighbor who just moved across the little creek. He
made inquiries as to where he could buy fresh vegetables and milk. And
just as he was about to leave he remarked, "I did a strange thing early
this morning. There was an old cat came over to my place. One ear was
almost gone and it was blind. I'm not much of a hand to make way with
things, but I felt so sorry for that poor old animal that I killed it."


"Oh!" With a strangled sob Jimmy quickly left the room.

His mother explained to the man it had been their old pet. He was very
sorry, but of course that did not bring the cat back.

"When I saw it, I just banged it over the head with a stick and then
buried it. You will never know how badly I feel about it."

When he was gone, mother went out to find Jimmy and comfort him. He was
out in the orchard on his knees. Quietly she went up and knelt beside
him, slipping her arm about his shoulder.

He turned to her at once. "Mother, there's something funny about Annette.
I've been praying and I feel all happy inside. It's just as if she wasn't
dead at all!"

"What would we ever do without our Comforter, son?" she said. "He does
help us bear our burdens in a wonderful way."

"I'll say he does. This morning I felt so bad I didn't know what to do,
and then when that man said--he had killed Annette--I thought I just
could not stand it. And here I am happy as anything again. And just
because I took it all to Jesus. I think Annette is all right now."

"She was very old, son. It wouldn't have been much longer anyway.
Why--why--Jimmy!"

But Jimmy was running swiftly across the field toward an old blind cat
that was staggering in his direction.

Apparently the new neighbor had only stunned the cat and she had dug her
way out of the shallow hole and come home again.

It was years before she really died, and long before she presented Jimmy
with a very tiny kitten with two whole ears and two very bright eyes.

This story may sound strange to you, so perhaps I had better add that
it is really true.

--Mary M. Naylor.



HOW GOD ANSWERED DONALD'S PRAYER

God often uses children to win grown folks for Christ. Little children
not only have a deep faith but a childlike trust in believing that God
answers their prayers. "All that ye ask in my name, _believing, that
ye shall receive_."

As a young girl, I went to Sunday School and learned about Jesus. Although
I knew about my Savior and what He had done to save me, yet I never
accepted Him as _my own Redeemer_ and Friend.

As years went by, I went into sin and shared in the common sins of worldly
people. I knew better than to do the things I did, but sin is a miry
clay pulling its victims down deeper and deeper. For ten years I never
entered a church house except to attend my father's funeral. I saw him
go into eternity without being able to point him to the "Lamb of God
which taketh away the sin of the world."

During these years I had married and God had given us a dear little boy.
Donald began to attend Sunday School early in years. Often on Sunday
mornings he would get ready for Sunday School after a sleepless night.
Wild parties were a part of the ungodly life we lived in our home.
