rather than with the soil. It has been suggested by some
commentators that this expression is to be regarded as conveying the
truth that the seed sown in the heart and growing up there becomes
the life-spring of the individual, and that therefore we may speak
of him or of it as bearing the fruit. But this explanation will not
avail for the case where there is no entrance of the word into the
heart, and so no new birth by the word. More probably we are to
regard the expression simply as a conversational shorthand form of
speech, not strictly accurate, but quite intelligible.

II. The next variety of soil differs from the preceding in having its
hindrance deep seated. Many a hillside in Galilee--as in Scotland or
New England--would show a thin surface of soil over rock, like skin
stretched tightly on a bone. No roots could get through the rock nor
find nourishment in it; while the very shallowness of earth and the
heat of the underlying stone would accelerate growth. Such premature
and feeble shoots perish as quickly as they spring up; the fierce
Eastern sun makes a speedy end of them, and a few days sees their
springing and withering. It is a case of 'lightly come, lightly go.'
Quick-sprouting herbs are soon-dying herbs. A shallow pond is up in
waves under a breeze which raises no sea on the Atlantic, and it is
calm again in a few minutes. Readily stirred emotion is transient.
Brushwood catches fire easily, and burns itself out quickly. Coal
takes longer to kindle, and is harder to put out.

The persons meant are those of excitable temperament, whose feelings lie
on the surface, and can be got at without first passing through the
understanding or the conscience. Such people are easily played on by
the epidemic influence of any prevalent enthusiasm or emotion, as every
revival of religion shows. Their very 'joy' in hearing the word is
suspicious; for a true reception of it seldom begins with joy, but
rather with 'the sorrow which worketh repentance not to be repented of.'
Their immediate reception of it is suspicious, for it suggests that
there has been no time to consult the understanding or to form a
deliberate purpose; stable resolutions are slowly formed. It is the
sunny side of religion which, has attracted them. They know nothing of
its difficulties and depths. Hence, as soon as they find out the
realities of the course which they have embraced so lightly, they
desert, like John Mark running away as soon as home comforts at Cyprus
were left behind. The Christian life means self-denial, toil, hard
resistance to many fascinations. It means sweat and blood, or it means
nothing. Whether there be 'persecution' or no, there will be affliction,
'because of the word,' and all the joyful emotion will ooze out at the
man's finger-ends. The same superficial excitability which determined
his swift reception of the word will determine his hasty casting of it
aside, and immediately he stumbles. All his acts will be done in a
hurry, and none of his moods will last. Feeling is in its place down
in the engine-room, but it makes a poor pilot. Very significant is
that phrase, 'No root in himself.' His roots are in the accidents of
the moment. His religion has never really struck root in him, but only
in the superficial layer of him. His conscience, will, understanding,
are unpenetrated by its fibres. So it is easily pulled up, as well as
soon withered.

There is another profound truth in this picture. The hard,
impenetrable rock lies right under the thin skin of soil. The nature
which is over-emotional on its surface is utterly hard at its core.
The most heartless people are those whose feelings are always ready
to gush; the most unimpressible are those who are most easily
brought to a certain degree of emotion by the sound of the word.
This class is an advance on the former, in that there has been a
real contact with the word, which has lain longer in their hearts,
and has had some growth. We may regard it as either better or worse
than the former, according as we consider that it is better to
accept and feel than not to accept at all, or that it is worse to
have in some measure possessed and felt than not to have received
the word of the kingdom.

III. In one part of the field was a patch where the soil was neither
rammed solid, as on the footpath, nor thin, as where the rock
cropped out, but where there had been a tangle of thorns, which grow
luxuriantly in Palestine. These had been cut down, but not stubbed
up, as is plain from the very fact that the seed reached the ground,
as also from the description of them as 'springing up.' The two
growths advance together. In this case, the seed has a longer life
than in the former. It roots and grows, and even, according to the
other evangelist's version, fruits, though it does not mature its
fruit. There is no question of 'falling away' here. Only the
hardier growth, which had the advantage of previous possession, and
which pushes up its shoots above ground all round the more tender
plant, gets the start of it, and smothers its green blades,
overtopping it, and keeping it from sun and air, as well as drawing
to itself the nourishment from the soil. The main point here is
simultaneousness of the two growths. This man is, as James calls
him, a 'double-minded man.' He is trying to grow both corn and thorn
on the same soil. He has some religion, but not enough to make
thorough work of it. He is endeavouring to ride on two horses at
once. Religion says 'either--or'; he is trying 'both--and.' The
human heart has only a limited amount of love and trust to give, and
Christ must have it all. It has enough for one--that is, for Him;
but not enough for two,--that is, for Him and the world. This man's
religion has not been powerful enough to grub up the roots of the
thorns. They were cut down when the seed was sown, for a little
while, at the beginning of his course; the new life in him seemed to
conquer, but the roots of the old lay hid, and, in due time, showed
again above ground. 'Ill weeds grow apace'; and these, as is their
nature, grow faster than the good seed. So the only thing to do is
to get them out of the ground to the last fibre.

Christ specifies what He deems thorns. We can all understand care
being so called; but riches? Yes, they too have sharp prickles, as
anybody will find who stuffs a pillow with them. But our Lord
chooses His words to point the lesson that not outward things, but
our attitude to them, make the barrenness of this soil. It is not
'this world,' but 'the care of this world,' not 'riches,' but 'the
deceitfulness of riches,' that choke the word. These two seem
opposites, but they are really the same thing on two opposite sides.
The man who is burdened with the cares of poverty, and the man who
is deceived by the false promises of wealth, are really the same
man. The one is the other turned inside out. We make the world our
god, whether we worship it by saying, 'I am desolate without thee,'
or by fancying that we are secure with it. Note that the issue in
this case is--unfruitfulness. The man may, and I suppose usually
does, keep up a profession of Christianity all his life. He very
likely does not know that the seed is choked, and that he has become
unfruitful. But he is a stunted, useless Christian, with all the sap
and nourishment of his soul given to his worldly position, and his
religion is a poor pining growth, with blanched leaves and abortive
fruit. How much of Christ's field is filled with plants of that
sort!

IV. The parable tells us nothing about the comparative acreage of
the path and the rocky and thorny soils on the one hand, and of the
fertile soil on the other. It is not meant to teach the proportion
of success to failure, but to exhibit the fact that the reception of
the word depends on men's dispositions. The good soil has none of
the faults of the rest of the field. It is loose, and thus unlike
the path; deep, and thus unlike the rocky bit; clean, and thus
unlike the thorn brake. The interpretation given of it by our Lord
seems at first sight incomplete. It is all summed up in one word,
'understandeth.' Then, did not the second and third classes, at all
events, understand? They received the word, and it had some growth
in them. The distinction between them and the good-soil hearer is
surely of a moral nature, rather than of so purely intellectual a
kind as 'understanding' suggests. Hence, Luke's keep fast 'in an
honest and good heart' may seem a more adequate statement. But
Biblical usage does not regard 'understanding' as a purely
intellectual process, but rather as the action of the whole moral
and spiritual nature. It knows nothing of dividing a man up into
water-tight compartments, one of which may be full of evil, and the
other clean and receptive of good. According to it, we 'understand'
religious truth by our hearts and moral nature in conjunction with
the dry light of intellect. So the word here is used in a pregnant
sense, and includes the grasp of the truth with the whole being, the
complete reception of the word of the kingdom not merely into the
intellect, but into the central self which is the undivided fountain
from which flow the issues of life, whether these be called
intellect, or affection, or conscience, or will. Only he who has
thus become one with the word, and housed it deep in his inmost
soul, 'understands' it, in the sense in which our Lord here uses
that expression. 'Thy word have I hid in mine heart' exactly
corresponds to the 'understanding' which is here given as the
distinctive mark of the good soil.

The result of that reception into the depths of the spirit is that
he 'verily beareth fruit.' The man who receives the word is
identified with the plant that springs from the seed which he
receives. The life of a Christian is the result of the growth in him
of a supernatural seed. He bears fruit, yet the fruit comes not from
him, but from the seed sown. 'I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth
in me.' Fruitfulness is the aim of the sower, and the test of the
reception of the seed. If there is not fruit, manifestly there has
been no real understanding of the word. A touchstone, that, which
will produce surprising results in detecting spurious Christianity,
if it be honestly applied!

There is variety in the degree of fruitfulness, according to the
goodness of the soil; that is to say, according to the thoroughness
and depth of the reception of the word. The great Husbandman does
not demand uniform fertility. He is glad when He gets an
hundredfold, but He accepts sixty, and does not refuse thirty, only
He arranges them in descending order, as if He would fain have the
highest rate from all the plants, and, not without disappointment,
gradually stretches His merciful allowance to take in even the
lowest. He will accept the scantiest fruitage, and will lovingly
'purge' the branch 'that it may bring forth more fruit.'

No parable teaches everything. Paths, rocks, and thorns cannot
change. But men can plough up the trodden ways, and blast away the
rock, and root out the thorns, and, with God's help, can open the
door of their hearts, that the Sower and His seed may enter in. We
are responsible for the nature of the soil, else His warning were
vain, 'Take heed, therefore, how ye hear.'




EARS AND NO EARS


    'Who hath ears to hear, let him hear.--MATT. xiii. 8.

This saying was frequently on our Lord's lips, and that in very
various connections. He sometimes, as in the instance before us,
appended it to teaching which, from its parabolic form, required
attention to disentangle the spiritual truth implied. He sometimes
used it to commend some strange, new revolutionary teaching to men's
investigation--as, for instance, after that great declaration of the
nullity of ceremonial worship, how that nothing could defile a man
except what came from his heart. In other connections, which I need
not now enumerate, we find it. Like printing a sentence in italics,
or underscoring it, this saying calls special attention to the thing
uttered. It is interesting to notice that our Lord, like the rest of
us, had to use such means of riveting and sharpening the attention
of His hearers. There is also a striking reappearance of the
expression in the last book of Scripture. The Christ who speaks to
the seven churches, from the heavens, repeats His old word spoken on
earth, and at the end of each of the letters says once more, as if
even the Voice that spoke from heaven might be listened to
listlessly, 'He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith
to the churches.'

I. We all have ears.

Now, it is a very singular instance of the superficial, indolent way
in which people are led away by sound rather than by sense, that
this saying of my text has often been taken to mean that there is a
certain class that can listen, and that it is their business to
listen, and there is another class that cannot, and so they are
absorbed from all responsibility. The opposite conclusion is the
correct one. Everybody has ears, therefore everybody is bound to
hear. Which being translated, is that there is not a man or woman
among us that has not the capacity of hearing in the sense of
understanding, and of hearing in the sense of obeying the word that
Jesus Christ speaks to us all. Every one of us, whatever may be our
diversities of education, temperament, natural capacity in regard to
other subjects of study and apprehension, has the ears that are
capable of receiving the message that comes to us all in Jesus
Christ.

For what is it that He addresses? Universal human nature, the
universal human wants, and mainly and primarily, as I believe, the
sense of sin which lies dormant indeed, but capable of being
awakened, in all men, because the fact of sin attaches to all men.
There is no man but has the needs to which Christ addresses Himself,
and no man but has the power of apprehending, of accepting, and of
living by, the great Incarnate Word and His message to the world. So
that instead of there being a restriction implied in the words
before us, there is the broadest implication of the universality of
Christ's message. And just as every man comes into the world with a
pair of ears on his head, so every man comes into the world with the
capacity of listening to, and accepting, that gracious Lord. That is
the first thing that our Master distinctly declares here, that we
all have ears.

II. If we have ears we are bound to use them.

'Let him hear.' In all regions, as I need not remind you, capacity
and responsibility go together; and the power that we possess is the
measure of the obligation under which we come. All our natural
faculties, for instance, are given to us with the implied command,
'See that you make the best use of them.' So that even these bodily
organs of ours, much more the higher faculties and capacities of the
spirit of which the body is partly the symbol and partly the
instrument, are intrusted to us on terms of stewardship. And just as
it is criminal for a man to go through life with a pair of ears on
his head, and a pair of eyes in his forehead, neither of which he
educates and cultivates, so is it criminal for a man having the
capacity of grasping the great Revelation of God, who 'at sundry
times and in divers manners hath spoken unto the Fathers by the
prophets, but in these last days hath spoken unto us by the Son,' to
turn away from that Voice, and pay no heed to it.

It is universally true that obligation goes with capacity. It is
especially true with regard to our relation to Jesus Christ. We are
all bound to 'hear Him,' as the great Voice said on the Mount of
Transfiguration. The upshot of all that manifestation of the divine
glory welling up from the depths of Christ's nature, and
transfiguring His countenance, the upshot of all that solemn and
mysterious communion with the mighty dead, Moses and Elias, the end
of all that encompassing glory that wrapped Him, was the Voice from
Heaven which proclaimed, 'This is My beloved Son; hear ye Him.'
Moses with his Law, Elijah with his Prophecy, faded away and were
lost. But there stood forth singly the one Figure, relieved against
the background of the glory-cloud, the Christ to whom we are all
bound to turn with the vision of longing eyes, with the listening of
docile ears, with the aspiration of yearning affection, with the
submission of absolute obedience.

'Hear ye Him.' For just as truly as light is meant for the eye, so
truly are the words of the Incarnate Word, and the life which is
speech and revelation, meant to be the supreme objects of our
attention, of our contemplative regard, and of our practical
submission. We are bound to hear because we have ears; and of all
the voices that are candidates for our attention, and of all the
music that sounds through the universe, no voice is so sweet and
weighty, no words so fundamental and all-powerful, no music so
melodious, so deep and thunderous, so thrilling and gracious, as are
the words of that Word who was made flesh and dwelt among us. We are
bound to hear, and we hear to most profit when it is Him that we
hear.

III. We shall not hear without an effort.

Christ says in my text, 'Let him hear,' as if the possession of the
ear did not necessarily involve that there should be hearing. And so
it is; 'Having ears, they hear not,' is a description verified in a
great many other walks of life than in regard to religious matters.
But it is verified there in the most conspicuous and in the most
tragic fashion. I wonder how many of us there are who, though we
have heard with the hearing of the outward ear, have not heard in
the sense of attending, have scarcely heard in the sense of
apprehending, and have not heard at all in the sense of obeying?
Friend, what is it that keeps you from hearing, if you do not hear?
Let me run over two or three of the things that thus are like wax in
a man's ears, making him deaf to the message of life in Jesus
Christ, in order to bring out how needful it is that these should be
counteracted by an effort of will, and the vigorous concentration of
thought and heart upon that message.

What is it that keeps men from hearing? Being busy with other things
is one hindrance. There is an old story of St. Bernard riding along
by a lake on his way to a Council, and being so occupied with
thoughts and discussions, that after the day's travel he lifted up
his eyes and said, 'Where is the lake?' And so we, many of us, go
along all our days on the banks of the great sea of divine love, and
we are so busy thinking about other things, or doing other things,
that at the end of the journey we do not know that we have been
travelling by the side of the flashing waters all the day long.
Everybody knows how possible it is to be so engrossed with one's
occupations or thoughts as that when the clock strikes in the next
steeple, we hear it and do not hear it. We have read of soldiers
being so completely absorbed in the fury of the fight that a
thunderstorm has rattled over their heads, and no man heard the
roll, and no man saw the flash. Many of us are so swallowed up in
our trade, in our profession, in our special branch of study, in our
occupations and desires, that all the trumpets of Sinai might be
blown into our ears, and we should hear them as though we heard them
not; and what is worse, that the pleading voice of that great Lord
who is ever saying to each of us, 'Come unto Me, all ye that labour,
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest,' passes us by, and
produces no effect, any more than does the idle wind whistling
through an archway. Brethren, you have the need, the sin, the
weakness, the transiency, to which the Gospel appeals. You have the
faculties to which it addresses itself. Jesus Christ is speaking to
every one of us. I beseech you to ask yourselves, 'Do I hear Him?'
If not, is it not because the clatter of the world's business, or
the more refined sounds of some profession or study, have so taken
up your attention that you have none to spare for that which
requires and repays it most?

Then there is another thing that makes attention, and concentration,
and a dead lift of resolution necessary, if you are rightly to hear,
and that is the very fact that, superficially, you have heard all
your days. You do not know the despair that sometimes comes over men in
my position when we face our congregations of people that are familiar
to weariness with everything that we have to say, and because they are
superficially so familiar with it, fancy that there is no need for
them to give heed any more. What can a poor man like me do to get
through that crust of familiarity with the mere surface of Christian
truth and teaching which is round many of you? You come and listen to
me, and say, 'Oh! he has nothing original to say. We have heard it all
before.' Yes, your ears have heard it. Have _you_ heard? 'Jesus Christ
died for me,' you have been told that ever since you were a little
child; and so the thousand-and-first, the million-and-first, repetition
of it has little power over you. If once, just once, that truth could
get through the crust of familiarity, and touch your heart, your bare
heart, with its quick naked point of fire-shod love, I think there
might be a wound made that would mean healing. But some of you will
go away presently, just as you have gone away a thousand times before,
and my words will rebound from you like an india-rubber ball from a
wall, or run off you like water from the sea-bird's plumes, just
because you think you have heard it all before--and you have never
heard it all your days. 'He that hath ears to hear, let him _hear_.'

Then there is another hindrance. A man may put his fingers in his
ears. And some of you, I am afraid, are not ignorant of what it is
to have made distinct and conscious efforts to get rid of the
impressions of religion, and of Christ's voice to us.

And then there are some of us who, out of sheer listlessness, do not
hear. It is not because we are too busy. It is not because we have
any intellectual objection to the message. It is not because we have
made any definite effort to get away from it. It is not even because
we have been so accustomed to hear it, that it is impossible to make
an impression on our listless indifference. Go down into Morecambe
Bay when the tide is making; and, as the water is beginning to
percolate through the sand, try to make an impression with a stick
upon the tremulous jelly. As soon as you take out the point the
impression is lost. And there are many of us like that, who, out of
sheer stolid listlessness, retain no fragment of the truth that is
sounding in our ears. Dear friends, 'If the word spoken by angels
was steadfast, how shall we escape if we'--what? Reject? Deny? Fight
against? Angrily repel? No;--'if we _neglect_ so great salvation?' That
is the question for you negligent people, for you people who think you
know all about it and there an end, for you people who are so busy
with your daily lives that, amidst the hubbub of earth, heaven's silent
voice is inaudible to your ears. Neglect stops the ears and ruins the
man. But you will not hear, though you have ears, unless you make an
effort of will and concentration of attention.

IV. And now the last thing that I have to say is:--If we do not
hear, we shall become deaf.

That is what Christ said in the context. The sentence which I have
taken as my text was spoken at the close of the Parable of the
Sower; and when His disciples came and asked Him why He spake in
parables, His answer was in effect that the people to whom He spoke
had not profited by what they had heard, 'hearing, they heard not,'
and therefore He spoke in parables which veiled as well as revealed
the truth. It was not given to them to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom, because they had not given heed to what had been made known
to them. The great law was taking effect which gives to him that has
and takes from him that has not; and that law applied not only to
the form of Christ's teaching, but also to the faculty of receiving
it. That diminished capacity is sometimes represented as men's own
act, and sometimes as the divinely inflicted penalty of not hearing,
but in either case the same fact is in view--namely, the loss of
susceptibility by neglect, the dying out of faculties by disuse.

Just as in the bodily life capacities untrained and unexercised
become faint and disappear; just as the Indian _fakir_, who
holds his arm up above his head for years, never using the muscles,
has the muscles atrophied, and at last cannot bring his arm down to
his side;--so the people who neglect to use the ears that God has
given them by degrees will lose the capacity of hearing at all.
Which, being put into plain English, just comes to this: that if we
do not listen to Jesus Christ when He calls to us in His love, we
shall gradually have the capacity of hearing diminished until--I do
not know if it ever reaches that point here--until its ultimate
extinction.

Dear friends, this word of the love and pity and pardon and
purifying power of God manifest in Jesus Christ for us all, which I
am trying to preach to you now, is not without an effect even on the
men by whom it is most superficially and perfunctorily heard. It
either softens or hardens. As the old mystics used to say, the same
heat that melts wax hardens clay into brick. The same light that
brings blessing to one eye brings pain to another. You have heard,
and hearing you have not heard; and you will cease to be able to
hear at all; and then the thunders may rattle over your heads, and
be inaudible to you; and that Voice which is as loud as the sound of
many waters, and sweet as harpers harping on their harps, and which
says to each of us, 'Come to Me, and I will be thy peace and thy
rest and thy strength,' will no more be audible in your atrophied
ears. Dear friends! I do not know, as I have said, whether that
ultimate tragic result is ever wholly reached in this world. I am
sure that it is not reached with some of you as yet. And I beseech
you to obey that voice which says, 'This is My beloved Son; hear
Him,' and to let there not be only outward hearing, but to let there
be inward acceptance, attention, apprehension, and obedience. And
then we shall be able to say, 'Blessed are our ears, for they hear;
blessed are our eyes, for they see.' 'Many prophets and righteous
men desired to hear the things that ye hear, and heard them not,
take care that, since you are thus advanced in the outward
possession of the perfect word of God, there be also the yielding
to, and reception of it.




'TO HIM THAT HATH SHALL BE GIVEN'


    'Whosoever hath, to him shall be given, and he shall
    have more abundance: but whosoever hath not, from him
    shall be taken away even that he hath.'-- MATT. xiii. 12.

There are several instances in the Gospels of our Lord's repetition
of sayings which seem to have been, if we may use the expression,
favourites with Him; as, for instance, 'There are first which shall
be last, and there are last which shall be first'; or, again, 'The
servant is not greater than his master, nor the disciple than his
lord.' My text is one of these. It is here said as part of the
explanation why He chose to speak in parables, in order that the
truth, revealed to the diligent and attentive, might be hidden from
the careless. Again, we find it in two other Gospels, in a somewhat
similar connection, though with a different application, where Jesus
enunciates it as the basis of His warning, 'Take heed how'--or, in
another version, 'what'--'ye hear.' Again He employs it in this
Gospel in the parable of the talents, as explaining the principle on
which the retribution to the slothful servant was meted out. And we
find it yet once more in the parable of the pounds in Luke's Gospel,
which, though entirely different in conception and purpose from that
of the talents, is identical in the portion connected with the
slothful servant.

So there are two very distinct directions in which this saying
looks, as it was used by our Lord--one in reference to the attitude
of men towards the Revelation of God, and one in reference to the
solemn subject of future retribution. I wish, now, mainly to try and
illustrate the great law which is set forth here, and to follow out
the various spheres of its operation, and estimate the force of its
influence. For I think that large and very needful lessons for us
all may be drawn therefrom. The principle of my text shapes all
life. It is a paradox, but it is a deep truth. It sounds harsh and
unjust, but it contains the very essence of righteous retribution.
The paradox is meant to spur attention, curiosity, and inquiry. The
key to it lies here--to use is to have. There is a possession which
is no possession. That I have rights of property in a thing, as
contradistinguished to your rights, does not make it in any deep and
real sense mine. What I use I have; and all else is, as one of the
other evangelists has it, but 'seeming' to have.

So much, then, by way of explanation of our text. Now, let me ask
you to look with me into two or three of the regions where we shall
find illustrations of its working.

I. Take the application of this principle to common life.

The lowest instance is in regard to material possessions. It is a
complaint that is made against the present social arrangements and
distribution of wealth, that money makes money; that wealth has a
tendency to clot; the rich man to get richer, and the poor man to
get poorer. Just as in a basin of water when the plug is out, and
circular motion is set up, the little bits of foreign matter that
may be there all tend to get together, so it is in regard to these
external possessions. 'To him that hath shall be given'; and people
grumble about that and say, 'It never rains but it pours, and the
man that needs more money least gets it most easily.' Of course.
Treasure used grows; treasure hoarded rusts and dwindles. The
millionaire will double his fortune by a successful speculation. The
man with half a dozen large shops drives the poor little tradesman
out of the field. So it is all round: 'To him that hath shall be
given; but from him that hath not shall be taken even that he hath.'

Next, go a step higher. Look at how this law works in regard to
powers of body. That is a threadbare old illustration. The
blacksmith's arm we have all heard about; the sailor's eye, the
pianist's wrist, the juggler's fingers, the surgeon's deft hand--all
these come by use. 'To him that hath shall be given.' And the same
man who has cultivated one set of organs to an almost miraculous
fineness or delicacy or strength will, by the operation of the other
half of the same principle, have all but atrophied another set. So
with the blacksmith's arm, which has grown muscular at the expense
of his legs. Part of the physical frame has monopolised what might
have been distributed throughout the whole. Use is strength; use
makes growth. We have what we employ. And even in regard to our
bodily frame the organs that we do not use we carry about with us
rather as a weight attached to us than as a possession.

Again, come a little higher. This great principle largely goes to
determine our position in the world and our work. The man that can do
a thing gets it to do. In the long run the tools come to the hand that
can use them. So here is one medical man's consulting-room crammed
full of patients, and his neighbour next door has scarcely one. The
whole world runs to read A's, B's, or C's books. The briefless
barrister complains that there is no middle course between having
nothing to do and being overwhelmed with briefs. 'To him that hath
shall be given'--the man can do a thing, and he gets it to do--'and
from him that hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath,'
That law largely settles every man's place in the world.

Let us come still higher. The same law has much--not all, but much--to
do in making men's characters. For it operates in its most intense
fashion, and with results most blessed or most disastrous, in the
inner life. The great example that I would adduce is conscience. Use
it, obey it, listen for its voice, never thwart it, and it grows and
grows and grows, and becomes more and more sensitive, more and more
educated, more and more sovereign in its decisions. Neglect it, still
more, go in its teeth, and it dwindles and dwindles and dwindles; and
I suppose it is possible--though one would fain hope that it is a very
exceptional case--for a man, by long-continued indifference to the
voice within that says 'Thou shalt' or 'Thou shalt not,' to come at
last to never hearing it at all, or to its never speaking at all. It
is 'seared as with a hot iron,' says one of the Apostles; and in
seared flesh there is no feeling any more. Are any of you, dear
friends, bringing about such a state? Are you doing what you know you
ought not to do? Then you will be less and less troubled as the days
go on; and, by neglecting the voice, you will come at last to be like
the profligate woman in the book of Proverbs, who, after her sin,
'wipes her mouth and says, I have done no harm.' Do you think _that_
is a desirable state--to put out the eyes of your soul, to stifle
what is the truest echo of God's voice that you will ever hear? Do
you not think that it would be wiser to get the blessed half of this
law on your side, instead of the dreadful one? Listen to that voice.
Never, as you value yourselves, neglect it. Cultivate the habit of
waiting for its monitions, its counsels prohibitory or commendatory,
and then you will have done much to secure that your spirit shall be
enriched by the operations of this wide-spread law.

Take another illustration. People who, by circumstances, are placed
in some position of dependence and subordination, where they have
seldom to exercise the initiative of choice, but just to do what
they are bid, by degrees all but lose the power of making up their
minds about anything. And so a slave set free is proverbially a
helpless creature, like a bit of driftwood; and children who have
been too long kept in a position of pupilage and subordination, when
they are sent into the world are apt to turn out very feeble men,
for want of a good, strong backbone of will in them. So, many a
woman that has been accustomed to leave everything in her husband's
hands, when the clods fall on his coffin finds herself utterly
helpless and bewildered, just because in the long, happy years she
never found it necessary to exercise her own judgment or her own
will about practical matters.

So do not get into the habit of letting circumstances settle what
you are to do, or you will lose the power of dominating them, before
very long. And if a man for years leaves himself, as it were, to be
guided by the stream of circumstances, like long green weeds in a
river, he will lose the power of determining his own fate, and the
Will will die clean out of him. Cultivate it, and it will grow.

Again, this same principle largely settles our knowledge, our
convictions, the operations and the furniture of our understandings.
If a man holds any truth slackly, or in the case of truths that are
meant to influence life and conduct, does not let it influence these,
then that is a kind of having truth that is sure to end in losing it.
If you want to lose your convictions grasp them loosely--do not act
upon them, do not take them for guides of your life--and they will
soon relieve you of their unwelcome presence. If you wish mind and
knowledge to grow, grip with a grip of iron what you do know, and
let it dominate you, as it ought. He that truly _has_ his
learning will learn more and pile by slow degrees stone upon stone,
until the building is complete.

So, dear friends, here, in these illustrations, which might have
been indefinitely enlarged, we see the working of a principle which
has much to do in making men what they are. What you use you
increase, what you leave unused you lose. There are grey heads in my
present audience who, when they were young men, had dreams and
aspirations that they bitterly smile at now. There are men here who
began life with possibilities that have never blossomed or fruited,
but have died on the stem. Why? Because they were so much occupied
with the vulpine craft of making their position and their 'pile'
that generous emotions and noble sympathies and lofty aspirations,
intellectual or otherwise, were all neglected, and so they are dead;
and the men are the poorer incalculably, because of what has thus
been shed away from them. You make your characters by the parts of
yourselves that you choose to cultivate and employ. Do you think
that God gave us whatever of an intellectual and emotional and moral
kind is in us, in order that it might be all used up in our daily
business? A very much scantier outfit would have done for all that
is wanted for that. But there are abortive and dormant organs in
your spiritual nature, as there are in the corporeal, which tell you
what you were meant for, and which it is your sin to leave
undeveloped. Brethren, the law of my text shapes us in the two ways,
that whatever we cultivate, be it noble or be it bestial, will grow,
and whatever we repress or neglect will die. Choose which of the two
halves of yourselves you will foster, and on which you will frown.

So much, then, for the first general application of these words. Now
let me turn for a moment to another.

II. I would note, secondly, the application of this two-fold law in
regard to God's revelation of Himself.

That is the bearing of it in the immediate context from which our
text is taken. Our Lord explains that teaching by parable--a
transparent veil over a truth--was adopted in order that the veiled
truth might be a test as well as a revelation. And although I do not
believe that the Christian revelation has been made in any degree
less plain and obvious than it could have been made, I cannot but
recognise the fact that the necessities of the case demand that,
when God speaks to us, He should speak in such a fashion as that it
is possible to say, 'Tush! It is not God that is speaking; it is
only Eli!' and so to turn about the young Samuel's mistake the other
way. I do not believe that God has diminished the evidence of His
Revelation in order to try us; but I do maintain that the Revelation
which He has made does come to us, and must come to us, in such a
form as that, not by mathematical demonstration but by moral
affinity, we shall be led to recognise and to bow to it. He that
will be ignorant, let him be ignorant, and he that will come asking
for truth, it will flood his eyeballs with a blessed illumination.
The veil will but make more attractive to some eyes the outlines of
the fair form beneath it, whilst others are offended at it and say,
'Unless we see the truth undraped, we will not believe that it is
truth at all.'

So, brethren, let me remind you--what is really but a repetition in
reference to another subject of what I have already said,--that in
regard to God's speech to men, and especially in regard to what I,
for my part, believe to be the complete and ultimate and perfect
speech of God to men, in Jesus Christ our Saviour, the principle of
my text holds good.

'To him that hath shall be given.' If you will make that truth your
own by loyal faith and honest obedience, if you will grapple it to
your heart, then you will learn more and more. Whatever tiny corner
of the great whole you have grasped, hold on by that and draw it
into yourselves, and you will by degrees get the entire, glorious,
golden web to wrap round you. 'If any man wills to do His will he
shall know.' That is Christ's promise; and it will be fulfilled to
us all. 'To him that hath shall be given.'

If, on the other hand, you 'have' Christian truth and Christ, who is
the Truth, in the fashion in which so many of us have it and Him, as
a form, as a mere intellectual possession, so that we can, when we
go to church, repeat the creed without feeling that we are telling a
lie, but that when we go to market we do not carry the Commandments
with us--if that is our Christianity, then it will dribble away into
nothing. We shall not be much the poorer for the loss of such a sham
possession, but it will go. It drops out of the hands that are not
clasped to hold it. It is just that a thing so neglected shall some
day be a thing withdrawn. So in regard to Revelation and a man's
perception and reception of it, my text holds good in both its
halves.

III. Lastly, look at the application of these words in the future.

That is our Lord's own application of them, twice out of the five
times in which the saying appears in the three Gospels: in the
parable of the talents and in the parallel portion of the parable of
the pounds. I do not venture into the regions of speculation about
that future, but from the words before us there come clearly enough
two aspects of it. The man with the ten talents received more; the
man that had hid the talent or the pound in the ground was deprived
of that which he had not used.

Now, with regard to the former there is no difficulty in translating
the representations of the parables, sustained as they are by
distinct statements of other portions of Scripture. They come to
this, that, for the life beyond, indefinite progress in all that is
noble and blessed and Godlike in heart and character, in intellect
and power, are certain; that faith, hope, love, here cultivated but
putting forth few blossoms and small fruitage, there, in that higher
house where these be planted, will flourish in the courts of the
Lord, and will bear fruit abundantly; that here the few things
faithfully administered will be succeeded yonder by the many things
royally ruled over; that here one small coin, as it were, is put
into our palm--namely the present blessedness and peace and strength
and purity of a Christian life; and that yonder we possess the
inheritance of which what we have here is but the earnest. It used
to be the custom when a servant was hired for the next term-day to
give him one of the smallest coins of the realm as what was called
'arles'--wages in advance, to seal the bargain. Similarly, in buying
an estate a bit of turf was passed over to the purchaser. We get the
earnest here of the broad acres of the inheritance above. 'To him
that hath shall be given.'

And the other side of the same principle works in some terrible ways
that we cannot speak about. 'From him that hath not shall be taken
away even that which he hath.' I have spoken of the terrible analogy
to this solemn prospect which is presented us by the imperfect
experiences of earth. And when we see in others, or discover in
ourselves, how it is possible for unused faculties to die entirely
out, I think we shall feel that there is a solemn background of very
awful truth, in the representation of what befell the unfaithful
servant. Hopes unnourished are gone; opportunities unimproved are
gone, capacities undeveloped are gone; fold after fold, as it were,
is peeled off the soul, until there is nothing left but the naked
self, pauperised and empty-handed for evermore. 'Take it from him';
he never was the better for it; he never used it; he shall have it
no longer.

Brethren, cultivate the highest part of yourselves, and see to it that,
by faith and obedience, you truly have the Saviour, whom you have by
the hearing of the ear and by outward profession. And then death will
come to you, as a nurse might to a child that came in from the fields
with its hands full of worthless weeds and grasses, to empty them in
order to fill them with the flowers that never fade. You can choose
whether Death--and Life too, for that matter--shall be the porter
that will open to you the door of the treasure-house of God, or the
robber that will strip you of misused opportunities and unused talents.




SEEING AND BLIND


    'They seeing, see not.'--MATT. xiii, 13.

This is true about all the senses of the word 'seeing'; there is
not one man in ten thousand who sees the things before his eyes. Is
not this the distinction, for instance, of the poet or painter, and
man of science--just that they do see? How true is this about the
eye of the mind, what a small number really understand what they
know! But these illustrations are of less moment than the saddest
example--religious indifference. I wish to speak about this now,
and to ask you to consider--

    I. The extent to which it prevails.
    II. The causes from which it springs.
    III. The fearful contrasts it suggests.
    IV. The end to which it conducts.

I. The extent to which it prevails.

I have no hesitation in saying that it is the condition of by far
the largest proportion of our nation. It is the true enemy of souls.
I do not believe that any large proportion of Englishmen are actual
disbelievers, who reject Christianity as unworthy of credence, or
attach themselves to any of the innumerable varieties of deistical
and pantheistical schools. I am not saying at present whether it
would be a more or less hopeful state if it were so, but only that
it is not so, and that a complacent taking for granted of religious
truth, a torpor of soul, an entire carelessness about God and
Christ, and the whole mighty scheme of the Gospel, is the
characteristic of many in all classes of English society. We have it
here in our churches and chapels as the first foe we have to fight
with. Disbelief slays its thousands, and dissipation its tens of
thousands, but this sleek, well-to-do carelessness, its millions. As
some one says, it is as if an opium sky had rained down soporifics.

II. The causes from which it springs.

Of course, the great cause of this condition is man's evil heart of
alienation, the spirit of slumber--but we may find proximate and
special causes.

There is the indifference springing from the absorbing interests of
the present. A man has only a certain quantity of interest to put
forth. If he expends it all on small things, he has none for great.
This overmastering, overshadowing present draws us all to itself,
and we have no power of attention or interest to spare for anything
