After this humbling incident, Master resumed toward Kumar a former
attitude of unwonted indulgence. Who can solve the mystery of
attraction? In Kumar our guru discovered a charming fount which
did not spurt for the fellow disciples. Though the new boy was
obviously Sri Yukteswar's favorite, I felt no dismay. Personal
idiosyncrasies, possessed even by masters, lend a rich complexity
to the pattern of life. My nature is seldom commandeered by a detail;
I was seeking from Sri Yukteswar a more inaccessible benefit than
an outward praise.

Kumar spoke venomously to me one day without reason; I was deeply
hurt.

"Your head is swelling to the bursting point!" I added a warning
whose truth I felt intuitively: "Unless you mend your ways, someday
you will be asked to leave this ashram."

Laughing sarcastically, Kumar repeated my remark to our guru, who
had just entered the room. Fully expecting to be scolded, I retired
meekly to a corner.

"Maybe Mukunda is right." Master's reply to the boy came with
unusual coldness. I escaped without castigation.

A year later, Kumar set out for a visit to his childhood home.
He ignored the quiet disapproval of Sri Yukteswar, who never
authoritatively controlled his disciples' movements. On the boy's
return to Serampore in a few months, a change was unpleasantly
apparent. Gone was the stately Kumar with serenely glowing face.
Only an undistinguished peasant stood before us, one who had lately
acquired a number of evil habits.

Master summoned me and brokenheartedly discussed the fact that the
boy was now unsuited to the monastic hermitage life.

"Mukunda, I will leave it to you to instruct Kumar to leave the
ashram tomorrow; I can't do it!" Tears stood in Sri Yukteswar's
eyes, but he controlled himself quickly. "The boy would never have
fallen to these depths had he listened to me and not gone away to
mix with undesirable companions. He has rejected my protection;
the callous world must be his guru still."

Kumar's departure brought me no elation; sadly I wondered how one
with power to win a master's love could ever respond to cheaper
allures.  Enjoyment of wine and sex are rooted in the natural man,
and require no delicacies of perception for their appreciation.
Sense wiles are comparable to the evergreen oleander, fragrant with
its multicolored flowers: every part of the plant is poisonous. The
land of healing lies within, radiant with that happiness blindly
sought in a thousand misdirections. {FN12-19}

"Keen intelligence is two-edged," Master once remarked in reference
to Kumar's brilliant mind. "It may be used constructively or
destructively like a knife, either to cut the boil of ignorance,
or to decapitate one's self. Intelligence is rightly guided only
after the mind has acknowledged the inescapability of spiritual
law."

My guru mixed freely with men and women disciples, treating
all as his children. Perceiving their soul equality, he showed no
distinction or partiality.

"In sleep, you do not know whether you are a man or a woman," he
said.  "Just as a man, impersonating a woman, does not become one,
so the soul, impersonating both man and woman, has no sex. The soul
is the pure, changeless image of God."

Sri Yukteswar never avoided or blamed women as objects of seduction.
Men, he said, were also a temptation to women. I once inquired of
my guru why a great ancient saint had called women "the door to
hell."

"A girl must have proved very troublesome to his peace of mind in
his early life," my guru answered causticly. "Otherwise he would have
denounced, not woman, but some imperfection in his own self-control."

If a visitor dared to relate a suggestive story in the hermitage,
Master would maintain an unresponsive silence. "Do not allow yourself
to be thrashed by the provoking whip of a beautiful face," he told
the disciples. "How can sense slaves enjoy the world? Its subtle
flavors escape them while they grovel in primal mud. All nice
discriminations are lost to the man of elemental lusts."

Students seeking to escape from the dualistic MAYA delusion received
from Sri Yukteswar patient and understanding counsel.

"Just as the purpose of eating is to satisfy hunger, not greed,
so the sex instinct is designed for the propagation of the species
according to natural law, never for the kindling of insatiable
longings," he said. "Destroy wrong desires now; otherwise they
will follow you after the astral body is torn from its physical
casing. Even when the flesh is weak, the mind should be constantly
resistant. If temptation assails you with cruel force, overcome it
by impersonal analysis and indomitable will. Every natural passion
can be mastered.

"Conserve your powers. Be like the capacious ocean, absorbing
within all the tributary rivers of the senses. Small yearnings are
openings in the reservoir of your inner peace, permitting healing
waters to be wasted in the desert soil of materialism. The forceful
activating impulse of wrong desire is the greatest enemy to the
happiness of man.  Roam in the world as a lion of self-control;
see that the frogs of weakness don't kick you around."

The devotee is finally freed from all instinctive compulsions. He
transforms his need for human affection into aspiration for God
alone, a love solitary because omnipresent.

Sri Yukteswar's mother lived in the Rana Mahal district of Benares
where I had first visited my guru. Gracious and kindly, she was
yet a woman of very decided opinions. I stood on her balcony one
day and watched mother and son talking together. In his quiet,
sensible way, Master was trying to convince her about something.
He was apparently unsuccessful, for she shook her head with great
vigor.

"Nay, nay, my son, go away now! Your wise words are not for me! I
am not your disciple!"

Sri Yukteswar backed away without further argument, like a scolded
child. I was touched at his great respect for his mother even in
her unreasonable moods. She saw him only as her little boy, not as a
sage.  There was a charm about the trifling incident; it supplied
a sidelight on my guru's unusual nature, inwardly humble and
outwardly unbendable.

The monastic regulations do not allow a swami to retain connection
with worldly ties after their formal severance. He cannot perform
the ceremonial family rites which are obligatory on the householder.
Yet Shankara, the ancient founder of the Swami Order, disregarded
the injunctions. At the death of his beloved mother, he cremated her
body with heavenly fire which he caused to spurt from his upraised
hand.

Sri Yukteswar also ignored the restrictions, in a fashion less
spectacular. When his mother passed on, he arranged the crematory
services by the holy Ganges in Benares, and fed many Brahmins in
conformance with age-old custom.

The SHASTRIC prohibitions were intended to help swamis overcome
narrow identifications. Shankara and Sri Yukteswar had wholly merged
their beings in the Impersonal Spirit; they needed no rescue by
rule.  Sometimes, too, a master purposely ignores a canon in order
to uphold its principle as superior to and independent of form. Thus
Jesus plucked ears of corn on the day of rest. To the inevitable
critics he said: "The sabbath was made for man, and not man for
the sabbath." {FN12-20}

Outside of the scriptures, seldom was a book honored by Sri
Yukteswar's perusal. Yet he was invariably acquainted with the
latest scientific discoveries and other advancements of knowledge.
A brilliant conversationalist, he enjoyed an exchange of views on
countless topics with his guests. My guru's ready wit and rollicking
laugh enlivened every discussion. Often grave, Master was never
gloomy. "To seek the Lord, one need not disfigure his face," he
would remark. "Remember that finding God will mean the funeral of
all sorrows."

Among the philosophers, professors, lawyers and scientists who came
to the hermitage, a number arrived for their first visit with the
expectation of meeting an orthodox religionist. A supercilious
smile or a glance of amused tolerance occasionally betrayed that
the newcomers anticipated nothing more than a few pious platitudes.
Yet their reluctant departure would bring an expressed conviction
that Sri Yukteswar had shown precise insight into their specialized
fields.

My guru ordinarily was gentle and affable to guests; his welcome was
given with charming cordiality. Yet inveterate egotists sometimes
suffered an invigorating shock. They confronted in Master either
a frigid indifference or a formidable opposition: ice or iron!

A noted chemist once crossed swords with Sri Yukteswar. The
visitor would not admit the existence of God, inasmuch as science
has devised no means of detecting Him.

"So you have inexplicably failed to isolate the Supreme Power in
your test tubes!" Master's gaze was stern. "I recommend an unheard-of
experiment. Examine your thoughts unremittingly for twenty-four
hours.  Then wonder no longer at God's absence."

A celebrated pundit received a similar jolt. With ostentatious
zeal, the scholar shook the ashram rafters with scriptural lore.
Resounding passages poured from the MAHABHARATA, the UPANISHADS,
{FN12-21} the BHASYAS {FN12-22} of Shankara.

"I am waiting to hear you." Sri Yukteswar's tone was inquiring, as
though utter silence had reigned. The pundit was puzzled.

"Quotations there have been, in superabundance." Master's words
convulsed me with mirth, as I squatted in my corner, at a respectful
distance from the visitor. "But what original commentary can you
supply, from the uniqueness of your particular life? What holy
text have you absorbed and made your own? In what ways have these
timeless truths renovated your nature? Are you content to be a
hollow victrola, mechanically repeating the words of other men?"

"I give up!" The scholar's chagrin was comical. "I have no inner
realization."

For the first time, perhaps, he understood that discerning placement
of the comma does not atone for a spiritual coma.

"These bloodless pedants smell unduly of the lamp," my guru remarked
after the departure of the chastened one. "They prefer philosophy
to be a gentle intellectual setting-up exercise. Their elevated
thoughts are carefully unrelated either to the crudity of outward
action or to any scourging inner discipline!"

Master stressed on other occasions the futility of mere book
learning.

"Do not confuse understanding with a larger vocabulary," he remarked.
"Sacred writings are beneficial in stimulating desire for inward
realization, if one stanza at a time is slowly assimilated. Continual
intellectual study results in vanity and the false satisfaction of
an undigested knowledge."

Sri Yukteswar related one of his own experiences in scriptural
edification. The scene was a forest hermitage in eastern Bengal,
where he observed the procedure of a renowned teacher, Dabru Ballav.
His method, at once simple and difficult, was common in ancient
India.

Dabru Ballav had gathered his disciples around him in the sylvan
solitudes. The holy BHAGAVAD GITA was open before them. Steadfastly
they looked at one passage for half an hour, then closed their eyes.
Another half hour slipped away. The master gave a brief comment.
Motionless, they meditated again for an hour. Finally the guru
spoke.

"Have you understood?"

"Yes, sir." One in the group ventured this assertion.

"No; not fully. Seek the spiritual vitality that has given these
words the power to rejuvenate India century after century." Another
hour disappeared in silence. The master dismissed the students,
and turned to Sri Yukteswar.

"Do you know the BHAGAVAD GITA?"

"No, sir, not really; though my eyes and mind have run through its
pages many times."

"Thousands have replied to me differently!" The great sage smiled
at Master in blessing. "If one busies himself with an outer display
of scriptural wealth, what time is left for silent inward diving
after the priceless pearls?"

Sri Yukteswar directed the study of his own disciples by the same
intensive method of one-pointedness. "Wisdom is not assimilated
with the eyes, but with the atoms," he said. "When your conviction
of a truth is not merely in your brain but in your being, you may
diffidently vouch for its meaning." He discouraged any tendency a
student might have to construe book-knowledge as a necessary step
to spiritual realization.

"The RISHIS wrote in one sentence profundities that commentating
scholars busy themselves over for generations," he remarked. "Endless
literary controversy is for sluggard minds. What more liberating
thought than 'God is'-nay, 'God'?"

But man does not easily return to simplicity. It is seldom "God"
for him, but rather learned pomposities. His ego is pleased, that
he can grasp such erudition.

Men who were pridefully conscious of high worldly position were likely,
in Master's presence, to add humility to their other possessions.
A local magistrate once arrived for an interview at the seaside
hermitage in Puri. The man, who held a reputation for ruthlessness, had
it well within his power to oust us from the ashram.  I cautioned
my guru about the despotic possibilities. But he seated himself
with an uncompromising air, and did not rise to greet the visitor.
Slightly nervous, I squatted near the door. The man had to content
himself with a wooden box; my guru did not request me to fetch
a chair. There was no fulfillment of the magistrate's obvious
expectation that his importance would be ceremoniously acknowledged.

A metaphysical discussion ensued. The guest blundered through
misinterpretations of the scriptures. As his accuracy sank, his
ire rose.

"Do you know that I stood first in the M. A. examination?" Reason
had forsaken him, but he could still shout.

"Mr. Magistrate, you forget that this is not your courtroom," Master
replied evenly. "From your childish remarks I would have surmised
that your college career was unremarkable. A university degree,
in any case, is not remotely related to Vedic realization. Saints
are not produced in batches every semester like accountants."

After a stunned silence, the visitor laughed heartily.

"This is my first encounter with a heavenly magistrate," he said.
Later he made a formal request, couched in the legal terms which
were evidently part and parcel of his being, to be accepted as a
"probationary" disciple.

My guru personally attended to the details connected with the
management of his property. Unscrupulous persons on various occasions
attempted to secure possession of Master's ancestral land. With
determination and even by instigating lawsuits, Sri Yukteswar
outwitted every opponent. He underwent these painful experiences from
a desire never to be a begging guru, or a burden on his disciples.

His financial independence was one reason why my alarmingly
outspoken Master was innocent of the cunnings of diplomacy. Unlike
those teachers who have to flatter their supporters, my guru was
impervious to the influences, open or subtle, of others' wealth.
Never did I hear him ask or even hint for money for any purpose.
His hermitage training was given free and freely to all disciples.

An insolent court deputy arrived one day at the Serampore ashram
to serve Sri Yukteswar with a legal summons. A disciple named Kanai
and myself were also present. The officer's attitude toward Master
was offensive.

"It will do you good to leave the shadows of your hermitage and breathe
the honest air of a courtroom." The deputy grinned contemptuously.
I could not contain myself.

"Another word of your impudence and you will be on the floor!" I
advanced threateningly.

"You wretch!" Kanai's shout was simultaneous with my own. "Dare
you bring your blasphemies into this sacred ashram?"

But Master stood protectingly in front of his abuser. "Don't get
excited over nothing. This man is only doing his rightful duty."

The officer, dazed at his varying reception, respectfully offered
a word of apology and sped away.

Amazing it was to find that a master with such a fiery will could
be so calm within. He fitted the Vedic definition of a man of God:
"Softer than the flower, where kindness is concerned; stronger than
the thunder, where principles are at stake."

There are always those in this world who, in Browning's words,
"endure no light, being themselves obscure." An outsider occasionally
berated Sri Yukteswar for an imaginary grievance. My imperturbable
guru listened politely, analyzing himself to see if any shred of
truth lay within the denunciation. These scenes would bring to my
mind one of Master's inimitable observations: "Some people try to
be tall by cutting off the heads of others!"

The unfailing composure of a saint is impressive beyond any sermon.
"He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty; and he that
ruleth his spirit than he that taketh a city." {FN12-23}

I often reflected that my majestic Master could easily have been
an emperor or world-shaking warrior had his mind been centered on
fame or worldly achievement. He had chosen instead to storm those
inner citadels of wrath and egotism whose fall is the height of a
man.

{FN12-1} "Worship of Durga." This is the chief festival of the
Bengali year and lasts for nine days around the end of September.
Immediately following is the ten-day festival of DASHAHARA ("the One
who removes ten sins"-three of body, three of mind, four of speech).
Both PUJAS are sacred to Durga, literally "the Inaccessible," an
aspect of Divine Mother, Shakti, the female creative force personified.

{FN12-2} Sri Yukteswar was born on May 10, 1855.

{FN12-3} YUKTESWAR means "united to God." GIRI is a classificatory
distinction of one of the ten ancient Swami branches. SRI means
"holy"; it is not a name but a title of respect.

{FN12-4} Literally, "to direct together." SAMADHI is a superconscious
state of ecstasy in which the yogi perceives the identity of soul
and Spirit.

{FN12-5} Snoring, according to physiologists, is an indication of
utter relaxation (to the oblivious practitioner, solely).

{FN12-6} DHAL is a thick soup made from split peas or other pulses.
CHANNA is a cheese of fresh curdled milk, cut into squares and
curried with potatoes.

{FN12-7} The omnipresent powers of a yogi, whereby he sees, hears,
tastes, smells, and feels his oneness in creation without the use
of sensory organs, have been described as follows in the TAITTIRIYA
ARANYAKA: "The blind man pierced the pearl; the fingerless put a
thread into it; the neckless wore it; and the tongueless praised
it."

{FN12-8} The cobra swiftly strikes at any moving object within its
range. Complete immobility is usually one's sole hope of safety.

{FN12-9} Lahiri Mahasaya actually said "Priya" (first or given
name), not "Yukteswar" (monastic name, not received by my guru
during Lahiri Mahasaya's lifetime). (See page 109.) "Yukteswar" is
substituted here, and in a few other places in this book, in order
to avoid the confusion, to reader, of two names.

{FN12-10} "Therefore I say unto you, What things soever ye desire,
when ye pray, believe that ye receive them, and ye shall have
them."-MARK 11:24. Masters who possess the Divine Vision are fully
able to transfer their realizations to advanced disciples, as Lahiri
Mahasaya did for Sri Yukteswar on this occasion.

{FN12-11} "And one of them smote the servant of the high priest,
and cut off his right ear. And Jesus answered and said, Suffer ye
thus far. And he touched his ear and healed him."-LUKE 22:50-51.

{FN12-12} "Give not that which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast
ye your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under their
feet, and turn again and rend you."-MATTHEW 7:6.

{FN12-13} Disciples; from Sanskrit verb root, "to serve."

{FN12-14} He was once ill in Kashmir, when I was absent from him.
(See chapter 23.)

{FN12-15} A courageous medical man, Charles Robert Richet, awarded
the Nobel Prize in physiology, wrote as follows: "Metaphysics is not
yet officially a science, recognized as such. But it is going to be.
. . .  At Edinburgh, I was able to affirm before 100 physiologists
that our five senses are not our only means of knowledge and that
a fragment of reality sometimes reaches the intelligence in other
ways. . . .  Because a fact is rare is no reason that it does
not exist. Because a study is difficult, is that a reason for not
understanding it? . . .  Those who have railed at metaphysics as
an occult science will be as ashamed of themselves as those who
railed at chemistry on the ground that pursuit of the philosopher's
stone was illusory. . . . In the matter of principles there are only
those of Lavoisier, Claude Bernard, and Pasteur-the EXPERIMENTAL
everywhere and always.  Greetings, then, to the new science which
is going to change the orientation of human thought."

{FN12-16} SAMADHI: perfect union of the individualized soul with
the Infinite Spirit.

{FN12-17} The subconsciously guided rationalizations of the mind
are utterly different from the infallible guidance of truth which
issues from the superconsciousness. Led by French scientists of
the Sorbonne, Western thinkers are beginning to investigate the
possibility of divine perception in man.

"For the past twenty years, students of psychology, influenced by
Freud, gave all their time to searching the subconscious realms,"
Rabbi Israel H. Levinthal pointed out in 1929. "It is true that
the subconscious reveals much of the mystery that can explain human
actions, but not all of our actions. It can explain the abnormal,
but not deeds that are above the normal. The latest psychology,
sponsored by the French schools, has discovered a new region in man,
which it terms the superconscious. In contrast to the subconscious
which represents the submerged currents of our nature, it reveals
the heights to which our nature can reach. Man represents a triple,
not a double, personality; our conscious and subconscious being
is crowned by a superconsciousness. Many years ago the English
psychologist, F.  W. H. Myers, suggested that 'hidden in the
deep of our being is a rubbish heap as well as a treasure house.'
In contrast to the psychology that centers all its researches
on the subconscious in man's nature, this new psychology of the
superconscious focuses its attention upon the treasure-house, the
region that alone can explain the great, unselfish, heroic deeds
of men."

{FN12-18} JNANA, wisdom, and BHAKTI, devotion: two of the main
paths to God.

{FN12-19} "Man in his waking state puts forth innumerable efforts
for experiencing sensual pleasures; when the entire group of sensory
organs is fatigued, he forgets even the pleasure on hand and goes
to sleep in order to enjoy rest in the soul, his own nature,"
Shankara, the great Vedantist, has written. "Ultra-sensual bliss
is thus extremely easy of attainment and is far superior to sense
delights which always end in disgust."

{FN12-20} MARK 2:27.

{FN12-21} The UPANISHADS or VEDANTA (literally, "end of the Vedas"),
occur in certain parts of the VEDAS as essential summaries. The
UPANISHADS furnish the doctrinal basis of the Hindu religion. They
received the following tribute from Schopenhauer: "How entirely
does the UPANISHAD breathe throughout the holy spirit of the VEDAS!
How is everyone who has become familiar with that incomparable book
stirred by that spirit to the very depths of his soul! From every
sentence deep, original, and sublime thoughts arise, and the whole
is pervaded by a high and holy and earnest spirit. . . . The access
to the VEDAS by means of the UPANISHADS is in my eyes the greatest
privilege this century may claim before all previous centuries."

{FN12-22} Commentaries. Shankara peerlessly expounded the UPANISHADS.

{FN12-23} PROVERBS 16:32.



CHAPTER: 13

THE SLEEPLESS SAINT

"Please permit me to go to the Himalayas. I hope in unbroken solitude
to achieve continuous divine communion."

I actually once addressed these ungrateful words to my Master.
Seized by one of the unpredictable delusions which occasionally
assail the devotee, I felt a growing impatience with hermitage
duties and college studies. A feebly extenuating circumstance is
that my proposal was made when I had been only six months with Sri
Yukteswar. Not yet had I fully surveyed his towering stature.

"Many hillmen live in the Himalayas, yet possess no God-perception."
My guru's answer came slowly and simply. "Wisdom is better sought
from a man of realization than from an inert mountain."

Ignoring Master's plain hint that he, and not a hill, was my teacher,
I repeated my plea. Sri Yukteswar vouchsafed no reply. I took his
silence for consent, a precarious interpretation readily accepted
at one's convenience.

In my Calcutta home that evening, I busied myself with travel
preparations. Tying a few articles inside a blanket, I remembered
a similar bundle, surreptitiously dropped from my attic window a
few years earlier. I wondered if this were to be another ill-starred
flight toward the Himalayas. The first time my spiritual elation had
been high; tonight conscience smote heavily at thought of leaving
my guru.

The following morning I sought out Behari Pundit, my Sanskrit
professor at Scottish Church College.

"Sir, you have told me of your friendship with a great disciple of
Lahiri Mahasaya. Please give me his address."

"You mean Ram Gopal Muzumdar. I call him the 'sleepless saint.'
He is always awake in an ecstatic consciousness. His home is at
Ranbajpur, near Tarakeswar."

I thanked the pundit, and entrained immediately for Tarakeswar.
I hoped to silence my misgivings by wringing a sanction from the
"sleepless saint" to engage myself in lonely Himalayan meditation.
Behari's friend, I heard, had received illumination after many
years of KRIYA YOGA practice in isolated caves.

At Tarakeswar I approached a famous shrine. Hindus regard it with
the same veneration that Catholics give to the Lourdes sanctuary in
France. Innumerable healing miracles have occurred at Tarakeswar,
including one for a member of my family.

"I sat in the temple there for a week," my eldest aunt once told
me.  "Observing a complete fast, I prayed for the recovery of your
Uncle Sarada from a chronic malady. On the seventh day I found a
herb materialized in my hand! I made a brew from the leaves, and
gave it to your uncle. His disease vanished at once, and has never
reappeared."

I entered the sacred Tarakeswar shrine; the altar contains nothing
but a round stone. Its circumference, beginningless and endless,
makes it aptly significant of the Infinite. Cosmic abstractions are
not alien even to the humblest Indian peasant; he has been accused
by Westerners, in fact, of living on abstractions!

My own mood at the moment was so austere that I felt disinclined
to bow before the stone symbol. God should be sought, I reflected,
only within the soul.

I left the temple without genuflection and walked briskly toward
the outlying village of Ranbajpur. My appeal to a passer-by for
guidance caused him to sink into long cogitation.

"When you come to a crossroad, turn right and keep going," he
finally pronounced oracularly.

Obeying the directions, I wended my way alongside the banks of
a canal. Darkness fell; the outskirts of the jungle village were
alive with winking fireflies and the howls of near-by jackals. The
moonlight was too faint to supply any reassurance; I stumbled on
for two hours.

Welcome clang of a cowbell! My repeated shouts eventually brought
a peasant to my side.

"I am looking for Ram Gopal Babu."

"No such person lives in our village." The man's tone was surly.
"You are probably a lying detective."

Hoping to allay suspicion in his politically troubled mind,
I touchingly explained my predicament. He took me to his home and
offered a hospitable welcome.

"Ranbajpur is far from here," he remarked. "At the crossroad, you
should have turned left, not right."

My earlier informant, I thought sadly, was a distinct menace to
travelers. After a relishable meal of coarse rice, lentil-DHAL,
and curry of potatoes with raw bananas, I retired to a small hut
adjoining the courtyard. In the distance, villagers were singing
to the loud accompaniment of MRIDANGAS {FN13-1} and cymbals. Sleep
was inconsiderable that night; I prayed deeply to be directed to
the secret yogi, Ram Gopal.

As the first streaks of dawn penetrated the fissures of my dark
room, I set out for Ranbajpur. Crossing rough paddy fields, I trudged
over sickled stumps of the prickly plant and mounds of dried clay.
An occasionally-met peasant would inform me, invariably, that my
destination was "only a KROSHA (two miles)." In six hours the sun
traveled victoriously from horizon to meridian, but I began to feel
that I would ever be distant from Ranbajpur by one KROSHA.

At midafternoon my world was still an endless paddy field. Heat
pouring from the avoidless sky was bringing me to near-collapse. As
a man approached at leisurely pace, I hardly dared utter my usual
question, lest it summon the monotonous: "Just a KROSHA."

The stranger halted beside me. Short and slight, he was physically
unimpressive save for an extraordinary pair of piercing dark eyes.

"I was planning to leave Ranbajpur, but your purpose was good, so
I awaited you." He shook his finger in my astounded face. "Aren't
you clever to think that, unannounced, you could pounce on me? That
professor Behari had no right to give you my address."

Considering that introduction of myself would be mere verbosity in
the presence of this master, I stood speechless, somewhat hurt at
my reception. His next remark was abruptly put.

"Tell me; where do you think God is?"

"Why, He is within me and everywhere." I doubtless looked as
bewildered as I felt.

"All-pervading, eh?" The saint chuckled. "Then why, young sir,
did you fail to bow before the Infinite in the stone symbol at the
Tarakeswar temple yesterday? {FN13-2} Your pride caused you the
punishment of being misdirected by the passer-by who was not bothered
by fine distinctions of left and right. Today, too, you have had
a fairly uncomfortable time of it!"

I agreed wholeheartedly, wonder-struck that an omniscient eye hid
within the unremarkable body before me. Healing strength emanated
from the yogi; I was instantly refreshed in the scorching field.

"The devotee inclines to think his path to God is the only way," he
said. "Yoga, through which divinity is found within, is doubtless
the highest road: so Lahiri Mahasaya has told us. But discovering
the Lord within, we soon perceive Him without. Holy shrines at
Tarakeswar and elsewhere are rightly venerated as nuclear centers
of spiritual power."

The saint's censorious attitude vanished; his eyes became
compassionately soft. He patted my shoulder.

"Young yogi, I see you are running away from your master. He
has everything you need; you must return to him. Mountains cannot
be your guru." Ram Gopal was repeating the same thought which Sri
Yukteswar had expressed at our last meeting.

"Masters are under no cosmic compulsion to limit their residence."
My companion glanced at me quizzically. "The Himalayas in India
and Tibet have no monopoly on saints. What one does not trouble to
find within will not be discovered by transporting the body hither
and yon. As soon as the devotee is WILLING to go even to the ends
of the earth for spiritual enlightenment, his guru appears near-by."

I silently agreed, recalling my prayer in the Benares hermitage,
followed by the meeting with Sri Yukteswar in a crowded lane.

"Are you able to have a little room where you can close the door
and be alone?"

"Yes." I reflected that this saint descended from the general to
