imparting unto him words of happy import; and let me always wait upon
and serve the Brahmanas, and by this acquire, O Brahmana, the sacred
regions hereafter." And hearing these words of the queen, Vamadeva said,
"O thou of beautiful eyes, thou hast saved this royal race. Beg thou an
incomparable boon. I will grant thee whatever thou mayst ask. And, O
thou faultless one, rule thou, O princess, these thy kinsmen and this
great kingdom of the Ikshvakus!" And hearing these words of Vamadeva the
princess said, "This, O holy one, is the boon I seek, viz., that my
husband may now be freed from his sin, and that thou mayst be employed
in thinking of the weal of his son and kinsmen. This is the boon that I
ask, O thou foremost of Brahmanas!"'

"Markandeya continued, 'Hearing these words of the queen, that _Muni_, O
thou foremost of the Kuru race, said, "So be it." And thereupon king
Dala became highly glad and gave unto the _Muni_ his _Vami_ steeds,
having bowed down unto him with reverence!'"


SECTION CLXLII

Vaisampayana said, "The _Rishis_, the Brahmanas, and Yudhishthira then
asked Markandeya, saying, 'How did the _Rishi_ Vaka become so long
lived?'

"Thus asked by them, Markandeya answered, 'The royal sage Vaka is a
great ascetic and endowed with long life. Ye need not enquire into the
reason of this.'

"Hearing this, O Bharata, the son of Kunti, king Yudhishthira the just,
along with his brothers, then asked Markandeya saying, 'It hath been
heard by us that both Vaka and Daivya are of great souls and endowed
with immortality and that those _Rishis_, held in universal reverence,
are the friends of the chief of the gods. O Holy One, I desire to listen
to the (history of the) meeting of Vaka and Indra that is full of both
joy and woe. Narrate thou that history unto us succinctly.'

"Markandeya said, 'When that horrible conflict between the gods and the
_Asuras_ was over, Indra became the ruler of the three worlds. The
clouds showered rain copiously. And the dwellers of the world had
abundance of harvests, and were excellent in disposition. And devoted to
virtue, they always practised morality and enjoyed peace. And all
persons, devoted to the duties of their respective orders, were
perfectly happy and cheerful, and the slayer of Vala, beholding all the
creatures of the world happy and cheerful, became himself filled with
joy. And he of a hundred sacrifices, the chief of the _gods_ seated on
the back of his elephant Airavata, surveyed his happy subjects, and he
cast his eyes on delightful asylums of _Rishis_, on various auspicious
rivers, towns full of prosperity, and villages and rural regions in the
enjoyment of plenty. And he also cast his eyes upon kings devoted to the
practice of virtue and well-skilled in ruling their subjects. And he
also looked upon tanks and reservoirs and wells and lakes and smaller
lakes all full of water and adored by best of Brahmanas in the
observance, besides, of various excellent vows, and then descending on
the delightful earth, O king, the god of a hundred sacrifices, proceeded
towards a blessed asylum teeming with animals and birds, situated by the
side of the sea, in the delightful and auspicious regions of the East on
a spot overgrown with abundance of vegetation. And the chief of the gods
beheld Vaka in that asylum, and Vaka also, beholding the ruler of the
Immortals, became highly glad, and he worshipped Indra by presenting him
with water to wash his feet, a carpet to sit upon, the usual offering of
the _Arghya_, and fruit and roots. And the boon-giving slayer of Vala,
the divine ruler of those that know not old age, being seated at his
ease, asked Vaka the following question, "O sinless _Muni_, thou hast
lived for a hundred years! Tell me, O Brahmana, what the sorrows are of
those that are immortal!"'

"Markandeya continued, 'Hearing this, Vaka answered, saying, "Life with
persons that are disagreeable, separation from those that are agreeable
and beloved, companionship with the wicked, these are the evils which
they that are immortal have to bear. The death of sons and wives, of
kinsmen and friends, and the pain of dependence on others, are some of
the greatest of evils. (These may all be noticed in a deathless life).
There is no more pitiable sight in the world, as I conceive, than that
of men destitute of wealth being insulted by others. The acquisition of
family dignity by those that have it not, the loss of family dignity by
those that have it, unions and disunions,--these all are noticeable by
those that lead deathless lives. How they that have no family dignity
but have prosperity, win what they have not--all this, O god of a
hundred sacrifices, is before thy very eyes! What can be more pitiable
than the calamities and reverses sustained by the gods, the _Asuras_,
the _Gandharvas_, men, the snakes, and the _Rakshasas_! They that have
been of good families suffer afflictions in consequence of their
subjection to persons that are ill-born and the poor are insulted by the
rich. What can be more pitiable than these? Innumerable examples of such
contradictory dispensations are seen in the world. The foolish and the
ignorant are cheerful and happy while the learned and the wise suffer
misery! Plentiful instances of misery and woe are seen among men in this
world! (They that lead deathless lives are destined to behold all these
and suffer on that account.)"

"'Indra then said, "O thou of great good fortune, tell me again, what
the joys are of those persons that lead deathless lives,--joys that are
adored by gods and _Rishis_!"

"'Vaka answered, "If without having to associate with a wicked friend, a
man cooks scanty vegetables in his own house at the eight or the twelfth
part of the day, there can be nothing happier than that.[9] He in whose
case the day is not counted is not called voracious. And, O Maghavan,
happiness is even his own whose scanty vegetables are cooked. Earned by
his own efforts, without having to depend upon any one, he that eateth
even fruits and vegetables in his own house is entitled to respect. He
that eateth in another's house the food given to him in contempt, even
if that food be rich and sweet, doth what is despicable. This,
therefore, is the opinion of the wise that fie on the food of that mean
wretch who like a dog or a _Rakshasa_ eateth at another's house. If
after treating guests and servants and offering food to the manes a good
Brahmana eateth what remains, there can be nothing happier than that.
There is nothing sweeter or more sacred, O thou of a hundred sacrifices,
than that food which such a person takes after serving the guest with
the first portion thereof. Each mouthful (of rice) that the Brahmana
eats after having served the guest, produces merit equal to what
attaches to the gift of a thousand kine. And whatever sins such a one
may have committed in his youth are all washed away of a certainty. The
water in the hands of the Brahmana that hath been fed and honoured with
a pecuniary gift (after the feeding is over) when touched with water
(sprinkled by him that feeds), instantly purges off all the sins of the
latter!"

    [9] They, therefore, that lead deathless lives can enjoy this
    bliss from day to day for ever.

"'Speaking of these and various other things with Vaka, the chief of the
gods went away to heaven.'"[10]

    [10] It is difficult to understand how all that Vaka says can be
    an answer to Indra's question. The chief of the gods enquires:
    What are the joys of those that lead deathless lives? Vaka
    breaks away unto a confused rigmarole about the merits of
    independence and the religious merit of entertaining guests and
    servants. All the printed editions have the passage as rendered
    here.


SECTION CLXLIII

Vaisampayana said, "Then the sons of Pandu again addressed Markandeya
saying, 'Thou hast told us of greatness of Brahmanas. We desire now to
hear of the greatness of the royal Kshatriyas!" Thus addressed by them,
the great _Rishi_ Markandeya spoke, 'Listen now to the greatness of the
royal Kshatriyas. A certain king of the name of Suhotra belonging to the
Kuru race went on a visit to the great _Rishis_. And as he was returning
from that visit, he beheld king Sivi the son of Usinara, seated on his
car, and as each came before the other, each saluted the other as best
befitted his age and each regarding himself as the equal of the other in
respect of qualities, refused to give the way to the other. And at this
juncture Narada appeared there, and beholding what had happened, the
celestial _Rishi_ asked, "Why is it that ye both stand here blocking
each other's way?" And thus questioned both of them spoke to Narada
saying, "O holy one, do not speak so. The sages of old have declared
that the way should be given to one who is superior or to him that is
abler. We, however, that stand blocking each other's way are equal to
each other in every respect. Judged properly there is no superiority
amongst us." Thus addressed by them, Narada recited three _slokas_.
(They are these), "O thou of the Kuru race, he that is wicked behaveth
wickedly even unto him that is humble; he also that is humble behaveth
with humility and honestly unto him that is wicked! He that is honest
behaveth honestly even towards the dishonest. Why should he not behave
honestly towards him that is honest? He that is honest regardeth the
service that is done to him, as if it were a hundred times greater than
it is. Is this not current amongst the gods themselves? Certainly it is
the royal son of Usinara who is possessed of goodness that is greater
than thine. One should conquer the mean by charity; the untruthful by
truth, the man of wicked deeds by forgiveness; and the dishonest by
honesty. Both of you are large-hearted. Let one amongst you stand aside,
according to the indication of the above _slokas_." And having said so
Narada became silent, and hearing what Narada had said the king of the
Kuru race walking round _Sivi_, and praising his numerous achievements,
gave him the way and went on in his course. It was even thus that Narada
had described the high blessedness of the royal Kshatriyas.'"


SECTION CLXLIV

"Markandeya continued, 'Listen now to another story. One day as king
Yayati, the son of Nahusha, was sitting on his throne, surrounded by the
citizens, there came unto him a Brahmana desirous of soliciting wealth
for his preceptor, and approaching the king, the Brahmana said, "O king,
I beg of thee wealth for my preceptor according to my covenant." And the
king said, "O Holy One, tell me what thy covenant is." And thereupon the
Brahmana said, "O king, in this world when men are asked for alms, they
entertain contempt for him that asketh it. I therefore, ask thee, O
king, with what feelings thou wilt give me what I ask and upon which I
have set my heart." And the king replied saying, "Having given away a
thing, I never boast of it. I never also listen to solicitations for
things that cannot be given. I listen, however, to prayers for things
that can be given and giving them away I always become happy. I will
give thee a thousand kine. The Brahmana that asks me for a gift is
always dear to me. I am never angry with the person that begs of me and
I am never sorry for having given away a thing!" And the Brahmana then
obtained from the king a thousand kine and went away.'"


SECTION CLXLV

Vaisampayana said, "The son of Pandu again addressed the _Rishi_ and
said, 'Speak thou unto us of the high fortune of royal Kshatriyas!' And
Markandeya said, 'There were two kings of the name of Vrishadarbha and
Seduka and both of them were conversant with morals and with weapons of
attack and defence. And Seduka knew that Vrishadarbha had from his
boyhood an unuttered vow that he would give no other metal unto
Brahmanas save gold and silver. And once on a time a Brahmana having
completed his study of the _Vedas_ came unto Seduka and uttering a
benediction upon him begged of him wealth for his preceptor, saying,
"Give me a thousand steeds." And thus addressed, Seduka said unto him,
"It is not possible for me to give thee this for thy preceptor.
Therefore, go thou unto king Vrishadarbha, for, O Brahmana, he is a
highly virtuous king. Go and beg of him. He will grant thy request. Even
this is his unuttered vow." Hearing these words that Brahmana went to
Vrishadarbha and begged of him a thousand steeds, and the king thus
solicited, struck the Brahmana with a whip and thereupon the Brahmana
said, "Innocent as I am, why dost thou attack me thus?" And the Brahmana
was on the point of cursing the king, when the latter said, "O Brahmana,
dost thou curse him that doth not give thee what thou askest? Or, is
this behaviour proper for a Brahmana?" And the Brahmana said, "O king of
kings, sent unto thee by Seduka, I come before thee for this." The king
said, "I will give thee now whatever tribute may come to me before the
morning expire. How indeed, can I send away the man empty-handed who
hath been whipped by me." And having said this the king gave unto that
Brahmana the entire proceeds of that day and that was more than the
value of a thousand horses.'"


SECTION CLXLVI

"Markandeya said, 'One day it was resolved by the gods that they should
descend on the earth and try the goodness and virtue of king Sivi, the
son of Usinara. And addressing each other,--"_Well_"--Agni and Indra
came to the earth. And Agni took the form of a pigeon flying away from
Indra who pursued him in the form of a hawk, and that pigeon fell upon
the lap of king Sivi who was seated on an excellent seat. And the priest
thereupon addressing the king said, "Afraid of the hawk and desirous of
saving its life, this pigeon hath come to thee for safety. The learned
have said that the falling of a pigeon upon one's body forebodeth a
great danger. Let the king that understands omens give away wealth for
saving himself from the danger indicated." And the pigeon also addressed
the king and said, "Afraid of the hawk and desirous of saving my life I
have come to thee for protection. I am a _Muni_. Having assumed the form
of a pigeon, I come to thee as a seeker of thy protection. Indeed, I
seek thee as my life. Know me as one possessed of Vedic lore, as one
leading the _Brahmacharya_ mode of life, as one possessed also of
self-control and ascetic virtues. And know me further as one that has
never spoken disagreeably unto his preceptor, as one possessed of every
virtue indeed, as one that is sinless. I repeat the Vedas, I know their
prosody; indeed, I have studied all the Vedas letter by letter. I am not
a pigeon. Oh, do not yield me up to the hawk. The giving up of a learned
and pure Brahmana can never be a good gift." And after the pigeon said
so, the hawk addressed the king, and said, "Creatures do not come into
the world in the same particular order. In the order of creation, thou
mayst, in a former birth, have been begotten by this pigeon. It is not
proper for thee, O king, to interfere with my food by protecting this
pigeon (even though he might have been thy father)." And thus addressed,
the king said, "Hath any one, before this, seen birds thus speak the
pure speech of man? Knowing what this pigeon sayeth, and this hawk also,
how can we act to-day according to virtue? He that giveth up an
affrighted creature seeking protection, unto its foe, doth not obtain
protection when he is in need of it himself. Indeed, the very clouds do
not shower rain seasonably for him, and the seeds though scattered do
not grow for him. He that giveth up an afflicted creature seeking
protection unto its foe, hath to see his offspring die in childhood. The
ancestor of such a person can never dwell in heaven; indeed, the very
gods decline to accept the libations of clarified butter poured by him
into the fire. He that giveth up an affrighted creature seeking
protection, unto its foe, is struck with the thunder-bolt by the gods
with Indra at their head. The food that he eateth is unsanctified, and
he, of a narrow soul, falleth from heaven very soon. O hawk, let the
people of the Sivi tribe place before thee a bull cooked with rice
instead of this pigeon. And let them also carry to the place where thou
livest in joy, meat in abundance." And hearing this, the hawk said, "O
king, I do not ask for a bull, nor, indeed, any other meat, nor meat
more in quantity than that of this pigeon. It hath been given to me by
the gods. The creature, therefore, is my food today in consequence of
its death that hath been ordained. Therefore, O monarch, give it up to
me." Thus addressed by the hawk, the king said, "Let my men see and
carefully carry the bull to thee with every limb entire. Let that bull
be the ransom of this creature afflicted with fright and let it be
carried to thee before my eyes. Oh, slay not this pigeon! I will yield
up my very life, yet I would not give up this pigeon. Dost thou not
know, O hawk, that this creature looketh like a sacrifice with the
_Soma_ juice? O blessed one, cease to take so much trouble for it. I
cannot, by any means, yield up the pigeon to thee. Or, O hawk, if it
pleases thee, command me to do some such thing which I may do for thee,
which may be agreeable to thee, and upon doing which the men of the Sivi
tribe may yet in joy bless me in terms of applause. I promise thee that
I will do what thou mayst did me do." And at this appeal of the king,
the hawk said, "O king, if thou givest me as much flesh as would be
equal to the weight of the pigeon, cutting it off thy right thigh; then
can the pigeon be properly saved by thee; then wouldst thou do what
would be agreeable to me and what the men of the Sivi tribe would speak
of in terms of praise." And the king agreed to this and he cut off a
piece of flesh from his right thigh and weighed it against the pigeon.
But the pigeon weighed heavier. And thereupon the king cut off another
piece of his flesh, but the pigeon still weighed heavier, and then the
king cut off pieces of flesh from all parts of his body and placed them
on the scale. But the pigeon still weighed heavier, and then the king
himself ascended the scale and he felt no grief at this and beholding
this, the hawk disappeared there saying--(The pigeon hath been)
_Saved_,--And the king asked the pigeon saying, "O pigeon, let the Sivis
know who the hawk is. None but the lord of the universe could do as he
did. O Holy One, answer thou this question of mine!" And the pigeon then
said, "I am the smoke-bannered Agni called also Vaiswanara. The hawk is
none other than Sachi's lord armed with the thunder-bolt. O son of
Suratha, thou art a bull among men. We came to try thee. These pieces of
flesh, O king, that thou hast cut off with thy sword from thy body for
saving me have caused gashes in thy body. I will make these marks
auspicious and handsome and they will be of the colour of gold and emit
a sweet perfume, and earning great fame and respected by the gods and
the _Rishis_ thou shall long rule these subjects of thine, and a son
will spring from thy flank who shall be called _Kapataroman_. O king,
thou shalt obtain this son of the name of _Kapataroman_ from out of thy
own body and thou wilt behold him become the foremost of the
_Saurathas_, blazing with renown, possessed of bravery and great
personal beauty!"'"


SECTION CLXLVII

Vaisampayana said, "And the son of Pandu once more addressed Markandeya,
saying, 'Tell us again of the great good fortune of kings.' And
Markandeya said, 'There came unto the horse-sacrifice of king Ashtaka of
Viswamitra's race, many kings. And there came unto that sacrifice the
three brothers also of that king, viz., Pratardana, Vasumanas, and Sivi,
the son of Usinara. And after the sacrifice was completed, Ashtaka was
proceeding on his car along with his brothers when they all beheld
Narada coming that way and they saluted the celestial _Rishi_ and said
unto him, "Ride thou on this car with us." And Narada, saying, _So be
it_, mounted on the car, and one among those kings having gratified the
holy and celestial _Rishi_ Narada, said, "O Holy One, I desire, to ask
thee something." And the _Rishi_ said, "Ask." And the person, thus
permitted, said, "All four of us are blessed with long lives and have
indeed every virtue. We shall, therefore, be permitted to go to a
certain heaven and dwell there for a long period. Who amongst us,
however, O king, shall fall down first?" Thus questioned the _Rishi_
said, "This Ashtaka shall first come down." And thereupon the enquirer
asked, "For what cause?" And the _Rishi_ answered, "I lived for a few
days in the abode of Ashtaka. He carried me (one day) on his car out of
the town and there I beheld thousands of kine distinguished from one
another by difference of hue. And beholding those kine I asked Ashtaka
whose they were and Ashtaka answered me, saying, '_I have given away
these kine.' By this answer_ he gave expression to his own praise. It is
for this answer of his that Ashtaka shall have to come down." And after
Narada had said so, one of them again enquired, saying, "Three of us
then will stay in heaven. Amongst us three, who shall fall down first?"
And the _Rishi_ answered, "Pratardana." And the enquirer asked, "For
what cause?" And the _Rishi_ answered, "I lived for some days in the
abode of Pratardana also. And he carried me on his car one day. And
while doing so, a Brahmana asked him saying, '_Give me a horse_!' And
Pratardana replied, '_After returning, I will give thee one_!' And
thereupon the Brahmana said, '_Let it be given to me soon_.' And as the
Brahmana spoke those words, the king gave unto him the steed that had
been yoked on the right-hand wheel of the car. And there came unto him
another Brahmana desirous of obtaining a steed. And the king having
spoken to him in the same way, gave him the steed that had been yoked on
the left wheel of his car. And having given away the horse unto him, the
king proceeded on his journey. And then there came unto the king another
Brahmana desirous of obtaining a horse. And the king soon gave him the
horse on the left front of his car, unyoking the animal. And having done
so, the king proceeded on his journey. And then there came unto the king
another Brahmana desirous of obtaining a horse. And the king said unto
him, '_Returning, I will give thee a horse_.' But the Brahmana said,
'_Let the steed be given to me soon_.' And the king gave him the only
horse he had. And seizing the yoke of the car himself, the king began to
draw it. And as he did so, he said, '_There is now nothing for the
Brahmanas_.' The king had given away, it is true, but he had done so
with detraction. And for that speech of his, he shall have to fall down
from heaven." And after the _Rishi_ had said so, of the two that
remained, one asked, "Who amongst us two shall fall down?" And the
_Rishi_ answered, "Vasumanas." And the enquirer asked, "For what
reason?" And Narada said, "In course of my wanderings I arrived at the
abode of Vasumanas. And at that time the Brahmanas were performing the
ceremony of _Swastivachana_ for the sake of a flowery car.[11] And I
approached the king's presence. And after the Brahmanas had completed
the ceremony, the flowery car became visible to them. And I praised that
car, and thereupon the king told me, '_Holy one, by thee hath this car
been praised. Let this car, therefore, be thine_.' And after this I went
to Vasumanas another time when I was in need of a (flowery) car. And I
admired the car, and the king said, '_It is thine_.' And I went to the
king a third time and admired the car again. And even then the king
exhibiting the flowery car to the Brahmanas, cast his eyes on me, and
said, '_O holy one, thou hast praised the flowery car sufficiently_."
And the king only said these words, without making me a gift of that
car. And for this he will fall down from heaven."

    [11] The ceremony of _Swastivachana_ is described to be "a
    religious rite, preparatory to any important observance, in
    which the Brahmanas strew boiled rice on the ground, and invoke
    the blessings of the gods on the ceremony about to commence"
    (_Vide_ Wilson's Diet).

    A flowery car was, probably, one of celestial make that the
    kings procured from heaven by performing costly rites and
    ceremonies. These were sometimes exhibited to the people, and
    prior to these exhibitions, the ceremony of _Swastivachana_ was
    performed.

"'And one among them said, "Of the one who is to go with thee, who will
go and who will fall down?" And Narada answered, saying, "Sivi will go,
but I will fall down." "For what reason?" asked the enquirer. And Narada
said, "I am not the equal of Sivi. For one day a Brahmana came unto Sivi
and addressing him, said, 'O Sivi, I came to thee for food.' And Sivi
replied unto him, saying. 'What shall I do? Let me have thy orders.' And
the Brahmana answered, 'This thy son known by the name of Vrihadgarbha
should be killed. And, O king, cook him for my food.' And hearing this,
I waited to see what would follow. And Sivi then killed his son and
cooking him duly and placing that food in a vessel and taking it upon
his head, he went out in search of the Brahmana and while Sivi was thus
seeking, for the Brahmana, some one told him, 'The Brahmana thou
seekest, having entered thy city, is setting fire to thy abode and he is
also setting fire, in wrath, to thy treasury, thy arsenal, the
apartments of the females and thy stables for horses and elephants.' And
Sivi heard all this, without change of colour, and entering his city
spoke unto the Brahmana, 'O holy one, the food has been cooked.' And the
Brahmana hearing this spoke not a word and from surprise he stood with
downcast looks. And Sivi with a view to gratifying the Brahmana said, 'O
holy one, eat thou this.' And the Brahmana looking at Sivi for a moment
said, 'Eat it thyself.' And thereupon Sivi said, 'Let it be so.' And
Sivi cheerfully taking the vessel from his head desired to eat it and
thereupon the Brahmana caught hold of Sivi's hand and addressing him
said, 'Thou hast conquered wrath. There is nothing that thou canst not
give unto the Brahmanas.' And saying this, that Brahmana adored Sivi,
and then as Sivi cast his eyes before him, he beheld his son standing
like a child of the _gods_, decked in ornaments and yielding a fragrance
from his body and the Brahmana, having accomplished all this, made
himself visible and it was _Vidhatri_ himself who had thus come in that
guise to try that royal sage, and after _Vidhatri_ had disappeared, the
counsellors addressed the king, saying, 'Thou knowest everything. For
what didst thou do all this?' And Sivi answered, 'It was not for fame,
nor for wealth, nor from desire of acquiring objects of enjoyment that I
did all this. This course is not sinful. It is for this that I do all
this. The path which is trodden by the virtuous is laudable. My heart
always inclineth towards such a course. This high instance of Sivi's
blessedness I know, and I have, therefore, narrated it duly!'"'"


SECTION CLXLVIII

Vaisampayana said, "The sons of Pandu and those _Rishis_ then asked
Markandeya, 'Is there anybody that is blessed with longer life than
thou?' And Markandeya answered them, saying, 'There is without doubt, a
royal sage of the name of Indradyumna and his virtue having diminished,
he fell from heaven, crying, "My achievements are lost!" And he came
unto me and asked, "Dost thou know me?" And I answered him, saying,
"From our anxiety to acquire religious merit we do not confine ourselves
to any home. We live but for a night in the same village or town. A
person like us, therefore, cannot possibly know thy pursuits. The fasts
and vows we observe render us weak in body and unable to follow any
worldly pursuits on our own behalf. Hence, one like us cannot possibly
know thee." He then asked me, "Is there any one who is longer lived than
thou?" I answered him, saying, "There liveth on the Himavat an owl of
the name of Pravarakarna. He is older than I. He may know thee. The part
of the Himavat where he dwelleth is far off from here." And at this
Indradyumna became a horse and carried me to where that owl lived and
the king asked the owl, saying, "Dost thou know me?" And the owl seemed
to reflect for a moment and then said unto the king, "I do not know
thee." And the royal sage Indradyumna thereupon asked the owl, "Is there
any one who is older than thou?" And thus asked the owl answered,
saying, "There is a lake of the name of Indradyumna. In that lake
dwelleth a crane of the name of Nadijangha. He is older than we. Ask
thou him." And at this king Indradyumna taking both myself and the owl
went to that lake where the crane Nadijangha dwelt. And that crane was
asked by us, "Dost thou know the king Indradyumna?" And the crane
thereupon seemed to reflect a little and then said, "I do not know king
Indradyumna." And the crane was asked by us, "Is there any one who is
older than thou?" And he answered us, saying, "There dwelleth in this
very lake a tortoise of the name of Akupara. He is older than I. He may
know something of this king. Therefore, enquire ye of Akupara." And then
that crane gave information to the tortoise, saying, "It is intended by
us to ask thee something. Please come to us." And hearing this the
tortoise came out of the lake to that part of the bank where we all were
and as he came there we asked him, saying, "Dost thou know this king
Indradyumna?" And the tortoise reflected for a moment. And his eyes were
filled with tears and his heart was much moved and he trembled all over
and was nearly deprived of his senses. And he said with joined hands,
"Alas, do I not know this one? He had planted the sacrificial stake a
thousand times at the time of kindling the sacrificial fire. This lake
was excavated by the feet of the cows given away by this king unto the
Brahmanas on the completion of the sacrifice. I have lived here ever
since." And after the tortoise had said all this, there came from the
celestial regions a car. And an aerial voice was heard which said,
addressing Indradyumna, "Come thou and obtain the place thou deservest
in heaven! Thy achievements are great! Come thou cheerfully to thy
place! Here also are certain _slokas_: The report of virtuous deeds
spreadeth over the earth and ascendeth to heaven. As long as that report
lasts, so long is the doer said to be in heaven. The man whose evil
deeds are bruited about, is said to fall down and live, as long as that
evil report lasts in the lower regions. Therefore should man be virtuous
in his acts if he is to gain Heaven. And he should seek refuge in
virtue, abandoning a sinful heart."

"'And hearing these words, the king said, "Let the car stay here as
long as I do not take these old persons to the places whence I brought
them.' And having brought me and the owl Pravarakarna to our respective
places, he went away, riding on that car, to the place that was fit for
him. Being longlived, I witness all this."'"

Vaisampayana continued, "It was thus that Markandeya narrated all this
unto the son of Pandu. And after Markandeya finished, the sons of Pandu
said, 'Blessed be thou! Thou hadst acted properly in causing king
Indradyumna who had fallen from Heaven to regain his sphere!' And
Markandeya answered them, saying, 'Devaki's son, Krishna, also had thus
raised the royal sage Nriga who had sunk in hell and caused him to
regain Heaven!'"


SECTION CLXLIX

Vaisampayana said, "King Yudhishthira, hearing from the illustrious
Markandeya the story of the royal sage Indradyumna's regaining of
Heaven, again asked the _Muni_, saying, 'O great _Muni_, tell me in what
condition should a man practise charity in order to gain admission into
the regions of Indra? Is it by practising charity while leading a
domestic mode of life, or in boyhood, or in youth, or in old age? O,
tell me about the respective merits reaped from the practice of charity
in these different stages of life.'

"Markandeya said, 'Life that is futile is of four kinds. Charity also
that is futile is of sixteen kinds. His life is vain who hath no son;
and his also who is out of pale of virtue: and his too who liveth on the
food of other; and, lastly, his who cooketh for himself without giving
therefrom unto the _Pitris_, the gods, and the guests, and who eateth of
it before these all. The gift to one that has fallen away from the
practice of virtuous vows, as also the gift of wealth that has been
earned wrongly, are both in vain. The gift to a fallen Brahmana, that to
a thief, that also to a preceptor that is false, is in vain. The gift to
an untruthful man, to a person that is sinful, to one that is
ungrateful, to one that officiates at sacrifices performed by all
classes of people residing in a village, to one that sells the
_Vedas_,[12] to a Brahmana that cooks for Sudra, to one that too by
birth is a Brahmana but who is destitute of the occupations of his
order, is in vain. The gift to one that has married a girl after the
accession of puberty, to females, to one that sports with snakes, and to
one that is employed in menial offices, is also in vain. These sixteen
kinds of gifts are productive of no merits. That man who with mind
clouded with darkness giveth away from fear or anger, enjoyeth the merit
of such gift while he is in the womb of his mother. The man who (under
other circumstances) maketh gifts unto the Brahmanas, enjoyeth the fruit
thereof while he is in old age. Therefore, O king, the man who wishes to
win the way of heaven, should under all conditions, make gifts unto
Brahmanas of everything that he wishes to give away.'

    [12] A man is said to sell the Vedas who lectures on the Vedas
    taking fees from the hearers.

