We _are_ Mental Images in the Infinite Mind--the Infinite Mind holds us
safe--we cannot be lost--we cannot be hurt--we can never disappear,
unless we be absorbed in the Infinite Mind itself, and then we STILL
ARE! The Infinite Mind never forgets--it never can overlook us--it is
aware of our presence, and being, always. We are safe--we are
secure--we ARE! Just as we could not be created from Nothing--so we
cannot be converted into Nothing. We are in the All--and there is no
outside.

At the dawn of the Brahmic Day, The Absolute begins the creation of a
new Universe, or the recreation of one, just as you may care to state
it. The highest Yogi Teachings inform us that the information relating
to this event (which is, of course, beyond the personal knowledge of
man as we know him) has been passed down to the race from teachers, who
have received it from still higher teachers, and so on, and on and on,
higher and higher, until it is believed to have originated with some of
those wonderfully developed souls which have visited the earth from
higher planes of Being, of which there are many. In these lessons we
are making no claims of this sort, but pass on the teachings to you,
believing that their truth will appeal to those who are ready for them,
without any attempt to attribute to them an authority such as just
mentioned. Our reference to this high source of the teachings was made
because of its general acceptance in the Eastern countries, and by
occultists generally.

The Yogi teachings inform us that, in the Beginning, The Absolute
formed a Mental Image, or Thought-Form, of an Universal Mind--that is,
of an Universal Principle of Mind. And here the distinction is made
between this Universal Mind Principle, or Universal Mind-Stuff, as some
have called it, and the Infinite Mind itself. The Infinite Mind is
something infinitely above this creation of the Universal Mind
Principle, the latter being as much an "emanation" as is Matter. Let
there be no mistake about this. The Infinite Mind is Spirit--the
Universal Mind Principle is "Mind-Stuff" of which all Finite Mind is a
part. This Universal Mind Principle was the first conception of The
Absolute, in the process of the creation of the Universe. It was the
"Stuff" from which all Finite Mind forms, and is formed. It is the
Universal Mental Energy. Know it as such--but do not confound it with
Spirit, which we have called Infinite Mind, because we had no other
term. There is a subtle difference here, which is most important to a
careful understanding of the subject.

The Yogi teachings inform us that from this Mental Principle there was
developed the Universal Principle of Force or Energy. And that from
this Universal Force Principle there developed the Universal Principle
of Matter. The Sanscrit terms for these Three Principles are as
follows: _Chitta_, or the Universal Mind Substance, or Principle;
_Prana_, or the Universal Energy Principle; and _Akasa_, or the
Universal Principle of Matter. We have spoken of these Three
Principles, or Three Great Manifestations, in our "Advanced Course" of
lessons, which followed our "Fourteen Lessons," several years ago, but
it becomes necessary for us to refer to them again at this place in
connection with the present presentation of the subject. As was stated
in the lessons just mentioned, these Three Manifestations, or
Principles, are really one, and shade into each other. This matter has
been fully touched upon in the concluding lessons of the aforesaid
"Advanced Course," to which we must refer you for further details, in
order to avoid repetition here. You will find a wonderful
correspondence between these centuries-old Yogi teachings, and the
latest conceptions of Modern Science.

Well, to return to the main path once more, the Teachings inform us
that The Absolute "thought" into being--that is, held the Mental Image,
or Thought-Form, of--_Chitta_, or Universal Mind Principle. This
_Chitta_ was finite, of course, and was bound and governed by the Laws
of Finite Mind, imposed upon it by the Will of The Absolute. Everything
that is Finite is governed by Laws imposed by the great LAW which we
call The Absolute. Then began the Great INVOLUTION which was necessary
before Evolution was possible. The word "Involve," you know, means "to
wrap up; to cover; to hide; etc.;" and the word "Evolve" means "to
unwrap; to unfold; to un-roll; etc." Before a thing can be "evolved,"
or "unfolded," it must first have been "involved" or "folded-in, or
wrapped up, etc." Everything must be "involved" before it can be
"evolved;" remember this, please--it is true on all planes, mental,
physical, and spiritual. A thing must be "put in" before it may be
"taken out." This truth, if remembered and applied to metaphysical
problems, will throw the clearest light upon the darkest problems. Make
it your own.

Therefore before the process of Evolution from the gross forms of
Matter up to the higher, and then on to the Mental, from higher to
higher, and then on the Spiritual plane--that Evolution which we see
being performed before our sight today--before that Evolution became
possible there was a necessary Involution, or "wrapping-up." The Spirit
of the Absolute first "involved" itself in its Mental Image;
Thought-Form, or Creation, of the Mind Principle, just as you may
"involve" yourself in an earnest thought in deep meditation. Did you
never "lose yourself" in thought, or "forget yourself" in an idea? Have
you not spoken of yourself as having been "wrapped in thought?" Well,
then you can see something of what is here meant, at least so far as
the process of "involution" is concerned. You involve yourself in your
meditations--the Absolute involves Itself in Its Mental Creations--but,
remember the one is Finite, and the other Infinite, and the results are
correspondingly weak or strong.

Obeying the laws imposed upon it, the Mental Principle then involved
itself in the Energy Principle, or _Prana_, and the Universal Energy
sprang into existence. Then, in obedience to the same Laws, the _Prana_
involved itself in the _Akasa_, or Universal Matter Principle. Of
course each "involving" practically "created" the "wrapper," "sheath"
of the lower Principle. Do you see this? Each, therefore, depends upon
the Principle higher than itself, which becomes its "Parent Principle,"
as the Yogis express it. And in this process of Involution the extreme
form of Matter was reached before the process of Evolution became
possible. The extreme form of gross Matter is not known to us today, on
this planet, for we have passed beyond it. But the teachings inform us
that such forms were as much grosser that the grossest Matter that we
know today, as the latter is gross in comparison with the most ethereal
vapors known to Modern Science. The human mind cannot grasp this
extreme of the scale, any more than it can the extreme high degree of
manifestation.

At this point we must call your attention to certain occult teachings,
widely disseminated, which the highest Yogi teachers discountenance,
and contradict. We allude to the teaching that in the process of
Involution there was a "degeneration" or "devolution" from higher to
lower forms of life, until the gross state of Matter was reached. Such
a teaching is horrible, when considered in detail. It would mean that
The Absolute deliberately created high forms of life, arch-angels, and
higher than these--gods in fact--and then caused them to "devolve"
until the lowest state was reached. This would mean the exact opposite
of Evolution, and would mean a "going down" in accordance with the
Divine Will, just as Evolution is a "going up" in accordance with the
Divine Will.

This is contrary to man's best instincts, and the advanced Yogi
teachings inform us that it is but an illusion or error that men have
created by endeavoring to solve spiritual mysteries by purely
intellectual processes. The true teaching is that the process of
Involution was accomplished by a Principle involving itself in the
lower Principle created within itself, and so on until the lowest plane
was reached. Note the difference--"Principles as Principles" did this,
and not as Individual Forms of Life or Being. There was no more a
"devolution" in this process than there was in The Absolute involving
itself in the Mental Image of the Mind Principle. There was no
"devolution" or "going down"--only an "involution" or "wrapping up," of
Principle, within Principle--the Individual Life not having as yet
appeared, and not being possible of appearance until the Evolutionary
process began.

We trust that we have made this point clear to you, for it is an
important matter. If the Absolute first made higher beings, and then
caused them to "devolute" into lower and lower forms, then the whole
process would be a cruel, purposeless thing, worthy only of some of the
base conceptions of Deity conceived of by men in their ignorance. No!
the whole effort of the Divine Will seems to be in the direction of
"raising up" Individual Egos to higher and still higher forms. And in
order to produce such Egos the process of "Involution" of Principles
seems to have been caused, and the subsequent wonderful Evolutionary
process instituted. What that "Reason" is, is Unknowable, as we have
said over and over again. We cannot pry into the Infinite Mind of the
Absolute, but we may form certain conclusions by observing and studying
the Laws of the Universe, which seem to be moving in certain
directions. From the manifested Will of the Divine One, we may at least
hazard an idea as to its purposes. And these purposes seem to be always
in an "upward" lifting and evolution. Even the coming of the "Night of
Brahm" is no exception to this statement, as we shall see in future
lessons.

From the starting of the process of Involution from the Mental
Principle, down to the extreme downward point of the grossest
Manifestation of Matter, there were many stages. From the highest
degree of the Finite Mind, down to lower and still lower degrees; then
on to the plane of Force and Energy, from higher to lower degrees of
Principle within Principle; then on to the plane of Matter, the
Involutionary urge proceeded to work. When the plane of Matter was
reached, it, of course, showed its highest degree of manifested
Matter--the most subtle form of Ether, or _Akasa_. Then down, down,
down, went the degrees of Matter, until the grossest possible form was
reached, and then there was a moment's pause, before the Evolutionary
process, or upward-movement, began. The impulse of the Original Will,
or Thought, had exhausted its downward urge, and now began the upward
urge or tendency. But here was manifested a new feature.

This new feature was "The Tendency toward Individualization." During
the downward trend the movement was _en masse_, that is, by Principle
as _Principle_, without any "splitting up" into portions, or centers.
But with the first upward movement there was evidenced a tendency
toward creating Centers of Energy, or Units of activity, which then
manifested itself, as the evolutionary movement continued, from
electrons to atoms; from atoms to man. The gross matter was used as
material for the formation of finer and more complex forms; and these
in turn combined, and formed higher, and so on, and on. And the forms
of Energy operated in the same way. And the manifestations of centers
of Mind or consciousness in the same way. But all in connection.
Matter, Energy and Mind formed a Trinity of Principles, and worked in
connection. And the work was always in the direction of causing higher
and higher "forms" to arise--higher and higher Units--higher and higher
Centers. But in every form, center or unit, there was manifested the
Three Principles, Mind, Energy, and Matter. And within each was the
ever present Spirit. For Spirit _must_ be in All--just as All must be
in Spirit.

And, so this Evolutionary process has continued ever since, and must
continue for aeons yet. The Absolute is raising itself up into Itself
higher and higher Egos, and is providing them with higher and higher
sheaths in which to manifest. And, as we shall see in these lessons, as
we progress, this evolution is not only along the physical lines, but
also along the mental. And it concerns itself not only with "bodies,"
but with "souls," which also evolve, from time to time, and bodies are
given these souls in order that they may work out their evolution. And
the whole end and aim of it all seems to be that Egos may reach the
stage where they are conscious of the Real Self--of the Spirit within
them, and its relation to the Spirit of the Absolute, and then go on
and on and on, to planes of life and being, and activities of which
even the most advanced of the race may only dream.

As some of the Ancient Yogi Teachers have said: "Men are evolving into
super-men; and super-men into gods; and gods into super-gods; and
super-gods into Something still higher; until from the lowest bit of
matter enclosing life, unto the highest being--yea, even unto The
Absolute--there is an Infinite Ladder of Being--and yet the One Spirit
pervades all; is in all, as the all is in It."

The Creative Will, of which we have spoken in these lessons, is in full
operation all through Life. The Natural Laws are laws of Life imposed
by The Absolute in his Mental Image. They are the Natural Laws of this
Universe, just as other Universes have other Laws. But The Absolute
Itself has no Laws affecting It--It, in Itself _is_ LAW.

And these Laws of Life, and Nature, along its varying planes, Material,
of Energy; and Mental; are also, in the Divine Mind, else they would
not be at all, even in appearance. And when they are transcended, or
apparently defied by some man of advanced development, it is only
because such a man is able to rise above the plane upon which such laws
are operative. But even this transcending is, in itself, in accordance
with some higher law.

And so, we see that All, high and low--good and bad--simple or
complex--all are contained Within the Mind of the One. Gods, angels,
adepts, sages, heavens, planes,--all, everything--is within the
Universe, and the Universe is Within the Mind of the One. And all is
proceeding in accordance with Law. And all is moving upward and onward,
along the lines of Evolution. All is Well. We are held firmly in The
Mind of the One.

And, just as the tendency was from the general Principle toward the
particular Individual Soul, so is there a Reconciliation later on, for
the Individual soul, as it develops and unfolds, loses its sense of
Separateness, and begins to feel its identity with the One Spirit, and
moves along the lines of unfoldment, until it becomes in Conscious
Union with God. Spiritual Evolution does not mean the "growth of the
Spirit," for the Spirit cannot grow--it is already Perfect. The term
means the unfoldment of the Individual Mind, until it can recognize the
Spirit Within. Let us close this lesson with the

CENTRAL THOUGHT.

There is but ONE. That ONE is Spirit. In the Infinite Mind of that ONE
SPIRIT there arose the Mental Image or Thought-Form of this Universe.
Beginning with the Thought of the Principle in Mind; and passing on to
the Principle of Energy; and then on to the Principle of Matter;
proceeded the Involutionary Process of Creation. Then, upward began the
Evolutionary Process, and Individual Centers or Units were formed. And
the tendency, and evolutionary urge is ever in the direction of
"unfolding" within the Ego of the Realization of the Indwelling Spirit.
As we throw off sheath after sheath, we approach nearer and nearer to
the SPIRIT within us, which is the One Spirit pervading all things.
This is the Meaning of Life--the Secret of Evolution. All the Universe
is contained Within the Mind of The One. There is Nothing outside of
that Infinite Mind. There is no Outside, for the One is All in All;
Space, Time, and Laws, being but Mental Images in that Mind, as are
likewise all shapes and forms, and phenomena. And as the Ego unfolds
into a realization of Itself--Its Real Self--so does its Wisdom and
Power expand. It thus enters into a greater and greater degree of its
Inheritance. Within the Mind of the One, is All there is. And I, and
Thou, and All Things are HERE within that Infinite Mind. We are always
"held in Mind" by The Absolute--are always safe here. There is nothing
to harm us, in Reality, for our Real Self is the Real Self of the
Infinite Mind. All is Within the Mind of the One. Even the tiniest atom
is under the Law, and protected by the Law. And the LAW is All there
Is. And in that Law we may rest Content and Unafraid. May this
Realization be YOURS.

PEACE BE WITH YOU ALL.




THE SEVENTH LESSON


COSMIC EVOLUTION.

We have now reached a most interesting point in this course of lessons,
and a period of fascinating study lies before us from now until the
close of the course. We have acquainted ourselves with the fundamental
principles, and will now proceed to witness these principles in active
operation. We have studied the Yogi Teachings concerning the Truth
underlying all things, and shall now pass on to a consideration of the
process of Cosmic Evolution; the Cyclic Laws; the Law of Spiritual
Evolution, or Reincarnation; the Law of Spiritual Cause and Effect, or
_Karma_; etc. In this lesson we begin the story of the upward progress
of the Universe, and its forms, shapes, and forces, from the point of
the "moment's pause" following the ceasing of the process of
Involution--the point at which Cosmic Evolution begins. Our progress is
now steadily upward, so far as the evolution of Individual Centres is
concerned. We shall see the principles returning to the Principle--the
centres returning to the great Centre from which they emanated during
the process of Involution. We shall study the long, gradual, but steady
ascent of Man, in his journey toward god-hood. We shall see the
Building of an Universe, and the Growth of the Soul.

In our last lesson we have seen that at the dawn of a Brahmic Day, the
Absolute begins the creation of a new Universe. The Teachings inform us
that in the beginning, the Absolute forms a Mental Image, or
Thought-Form of an Universal Mind Principle, or Universal Mind-Stuff,
as some of the teachers express it. Then this Universal Mind Principle
creates within itself the Universal Energy Principle. Then this
Universal Energy Principle creates within itself the Universal Matter
Principle. Thus, Energy is a product of Mind; and Matter a product of
Energy.

The Teachings then further inform us that from the rare, tenuous,
subtle form of Matter in which the Universal Matter Principle first
appeared, there was produced forms of Matter less rare; and so by easy
stages, and degrees, there appeared grosser and still grosser forms of
matter, until finally there could be no further involution into grosser
forms, and the Involutionary Process ceased. Then ensued the "moment's
pause" of which the Yogi teachers tell us. At that point Matter existed
as much grosser that the grossest form of Matter now known to us, as
the latter is when compared to the most subtle vapors known to science.
It is impossible to describe these lower forms of matter, for they have
ages since disappeared from view, and we would have no words with which
to describe them. We can understand the situation only by comparisons
similar to the above.

Succeeding the moment's pause, there began the Evolutionary Process, or
Cosmic Evolution, which has gone on ever since, and which will go on
for ages to come. From the grossest forms of Matter there evolved forms
a little more refined, and so on and on. From the simple elementarv
forms, evolved more complex and intricate forms. And from these forms
combinations began to be formed. And the urge was ever upward.

But remember this, that all of this Evolutionary Process is but a
Returning Home. It is the Ascent after the Descent. It is not a
Creation but an Unfoldment. The Descent was made by principles as
principles--the Ascent is being made by Individualized Centres evolved
from the principles. Matter manifests finer and finer forms, and
exhibits a greater and greater subservience to Energy or Force. And
Energy or Force shows a greater and greater degree of "mind" in it.
But, remember this, that there is Mind in even the grossest form of
Matter. This must be so, for what springs from a thing must contain the
elements of its cause.

And the Cosmic Evolution continues, and must continue for aeons of
time. Higher and higher forms of Mind are being manifested, and still
higher and higher forms will appear in the scale, as the process
continues. The evolution is not only along material lines, but has
passed on to the mental planes, and is now operating along the
spiritual lines as well. And the end, and aim seems to be that each
Ego, after the experiences of many lives, may unfold and develop to a
point where it may become conscious of its Real Self, and realize its
identity with the One Life, and the Spirit.

At this point we may be confronted with the objection of the student of
material science, who will ask why we begin our consideration of Cosmic
Evolution at a point in which matter has reached the limit of its
lowest vibrations, manifesting in the grossest possible form of matter.
These students may point to the fact that Science begins its
consideration of evolution with the _nebulae_, or faint cloudlike,
vaporous matter, from which the planets were formed. But there is only
an apparent contradiction here. The _nebulae_ were part of the Process
of Involution, and Science is right when it holds that the gross forms
were produced from the finer. But the process of change from finer to
grosser was _Involution_, not Evolution. Do you see the difference?
Evolution begins at the point when the stage of Unfoldment commenced.
When the gross forms begin to yield to the new upward urge, and unfold
into finer forms--then begins Evolution.

We shall pass over the period of Evolution in which Matter was evolving
into finer and still finer forms, until at last it reached a degree of
vibration capable of supporting that which we call "life." Of course
there is "life" in all matter--even in the atom, as we have shown in
previous lessons. But when we speak of "life," as we now do, we mean
what are generally called "living forms." The Yogi Teachings inform us
that the lowest forms of what we call "life" were evolved from forms of
high crystal life, which indeed they very much resemble. We have spoken
of this resemblance, in the previous lessons of this series. And, so we
shall begin at the point where "living forms" began.

Speaking now of our own planet, the Earth, we find matter emerging from
the molten state in which it manifested for ages. Gradually cooling and
stratifying, the Earth contained none of those forms that we call
living forms. The temperature of the Earth in that period is estimated
at about 15,000 times hotter than boiling water, which would, of
course, render impossible the existence of any of the present known
forms of life. But the Yogi Teachings inform us that even in the molten
mass there were elementary forms that were to become the ancestral
forms of the later living forms. These elementary forms were composed
of a vaporous, peculiar form of matter, of minute size,--little more
than the atoms, in fact, and yet, just a little more advanced. From
these elementary forms, there gradually evolved, as the Earth cooled
