increase in the gifts which God bestows on faithful souls. Each of us
will have as much as he desires and is capable of containing. The
walls of the heart are elastic, and desire expands them.

The grace given by faith works in the line of its possessor's natural
faculties; but these are supernaturally reinforced and strengthened
while, at the same time, they are curbed and controlled, by the
divine gift, and the natural gifts thus dealt with become what Paul
calls _charisms_. The whole nature of a Christian should be ennobled,
elevated, made more delicate and intense, when the 'Spirit of life
that is in Christ Jesus' abides in and inspires it. Just as a sunless
landscape is smitten into sudden beauty by a burst of sunshine which
heightens the colouring of the flowers on the river's bank, and is
flashed back from every silvery ripple on the stream, so the faith
which brings the life of Christ into the life of the Christian makes
him more of a man than he was before. So, there will be infinite
variety in the resulting characters. It is the same force in various
forms that rolls in the thunder or gleams in the dewdrops, that
paints the butterfly's feathers or flashes in a star. All individual
idiosyncrasies should be developed in the Christian Church, and will
be when its members yield themselves fully to the indwelling Spirit,
and can truly declare that the lives which they live in the flesh
they live by the faith of the Son of God.

But Paul here regards the measure of faith as itself 'dealt to every
man'; and however we may construe the grammar of this sentence there
is a deep sense in which our faith is God's gift to us. We have to
give equal emphasis to the two conceptions of faith as a human act
and as a divine bestowal, which have so often been pitted against
each other as contradictory when really they are complementary. The
apparent antagonism between them is but one instance of the great
antithesis to which we come to at last in reference to all human
thought on the relations of man to God. 'It is He that worketh in us
both to will and to do of His own good pleasure'; and all our
goodness is God-given goodness, and yet it is our goodness. Every
devout heart has a consciousness that the faith which knits it to God
is God's work in it, and that left to itself it would have remained
alienated and faithless. The consciousness that his faith was his own
act blended in full harmony with the twin consciousness that it was
Christ's gift, in the agonised father's prayer, 'Lord, I believe,
help Thou mine unbelief.'

II. What is a just estimate of our gifts.

The Apostle tells us, negatively, that we are not to think more
highly than we ought to think, and positively that we are to 'think
soberly.'

To arrive at a just estimate of ourselves the estimate must ever be
accompanied with a distinct consciousness that all is God's gift.
That will keep us from anything in the nature of pride or
over-weening self-importance. It will lead to true humility, which is
not ignorance of what we can do, but recognition that we, the doers,
are of ourselves but poor creatures. We are less likely to fancy that
we are greater than we are when we feel that, whatever we are, God
made us so. 'What hast thou that thou didst not receive? Now, if thou
didst receive it, why dost thou glory, as if thou hadst not received
it?'

Further, it is to be noted that the estimate of gifts which Paul
enjoins is an estimate with a view to service. Much
self-investigation is morbid, because it is self-absorbed; and much
is morbid because it is undertaken only for the purpose of
ascertaining one's 'spiritual condition.' Such self-examination is
good enough in its way, and may sometimes be very necessary; but a
testing of one's own capacities for the purpose of ascertaining what
we are fit for, and what therefore it is our duty to do, is far more
wholesome. Gifts are God's summons to work, and our first response to
the summons should be our scrutiny of our gifts with a distinct
purpose of using them for the great end for which we received them.
It is well to take stock of the loaves that we have, if the result be
that we bring our poor provisions to Him, and put them in His hands,
that He may give them back to us so multiplied as to be more than
adequate to the needs of the thousands. Such just estimate of our
gifts is to be attained mainly by noting ourselves at work. Patient
self-observation may be important, but is apt to be mistaken; and the
true test of what we can do is what we _do_ do.

The just estimate of our gifts which Paul enjoins is needful in order
that we may ascertain what God has meant us to be and do, and may
neither waste our strength in trying to be some one else, nor hide
our talent in the napkin of ignorance or false humility. There is
quite as much harm done to Christian character and Christian service
by our failure to recognise what is in our power, as by ambitious or
ostentatious attempts at what is above our power. We have to be
ourselves as God has made us in our natural faculties, and as the new
life of Christ operating on these has made us new creatures in Him
not by changing but by enlarging our old natures. It matters nothing
what the special form of a Christian man's service may be; the
smallest and the greatest are alike to the Lord of all, and He
appoints His servants' work. Whether the servant be a cup-bearer or a
counsellor is of little moment. 'He that is faithful in that which is
least, is faithful also in much.'

The positive aspect of this right estimate of one's gifts is, if we
fully render the Apostle's words, as the Revised Version does, 'so to
think as to think soberly.' There is to be self-knowledge in order to
'sobriety,' which includes not only what we mean by sober-mindedness,
but self-government; and this aspect of the apostolic exhortation
opens out into the thought that the gifts, which a just estimate of
ourselves pronounces us to possess, need to be kept bright by the
continual suppression of the mind of the flesh, by putting down
earthly desires, by guarding against a selfish use of them, by
preventing them by rigid control from becoming disproportioned and
our masters. All the gifts which Christ bestows upon His people He
bestows on condition that they bind them together by the golden chain
of self-control.




MANY AND ONE

   'For we have many members in one body, and all members have
   not the same office: 5. So we, being many, are one body in
   Christ, and every one members one of another.'--ROMANS xii. 4, 5.


To Paul there was the closest and most vital connection between the
profoundest experiences of the Christian life and its plainest and
most superficial duties. Here he lays one of his most mystical
conceptions as the very foundation on which to rear the great
structure of Christian conduct, and links on to one of his
profoundest thoughts, the unity of all Christians in Christ, a
comprehensive series of practical exhortations. We are accustomed to
hear from many lips: 'I have no use for these dogmas that Paul
delights in. Give me his practical teaching. You may keep the Epistle
to the Romans, I hold by the thirteenth of First Corinthians.' But
such an unnatural severance between the doctrine and the ethics of
the Epistle cannot be effected without the destruction of both. The
very principle of this Epistle to the Romans is that the difference
between the law and the Gospel is, that the one preaches conduct
without a basis for it, and that the other says, First believe in
Christ, and in the strength of that belief, do the right and be like
Him. Here, then, in the very laying of the foundation for conduct in
these verses we have in concrete example the secret of the Christian
way of making good men.

I. The first point to notice here is, the unity of the derived life.
Many are one, because they are each in Christ, and the individual
relationship and derivation of life from Him makes them one whilst
continuing to be many. That great metaphor, and nowadays much
forgotten and neglected truth, is to Paul's mind the fact which ought
to mould the whole life and conduct of individual Christians and to
be manifested therein. There are three most significant and
instructive symbols by which the unity of believers in Christ Jesus
is set forth in the New Testament. Our Lord Himself gives us the one
of the vine and its branches, and that symbol suggests the silent,
effortless process by which the life-giving sap rises and finds its
way from the deep root to the furthest tendril and the far-extended
growth. The same symbol loses indeed in one respect its value if we
transfer it to growths more congenial to our northern climate, and
instead of the vine with its rich clusters, think of some great elm,
deeply rooted, and with its firm bole and massive branches, through
all of which the mystery of a common life penetrates and makes every
leaf in the cloud of foliage through which we look up participant of
itself. But, profound and beautiful as our Lord's metaphor is, the
vegetative uniformity of parts and the absence of individual
characteristics make it, if taken alone, insufficient. In the tree
one leaf is like another; it 'grows green and broad and takes no
care.' Hence, to express the whole truth of the union between Christ
and us we must bring in other figures. Thus we find the Apostle
adducing the marriage tie, the highest earthly example of union,
founded on choice and affection. But even that sacred bond leaves a
gap between those who are knit together by it; and so we have the
conception of our text, the unity of the body as representing for us
the unity of believers with Jesus. This is a unity of life. He is not
only head as chief and sovereign, but He is soul or life, which has
its seat, not in this or that organ as old physics teach, but
pervades the whole and 'filleth all in all.' The mystery which
concerns the union of soul and body, and enshrouds the nature of
physical life, is part of the felicity of this symbol in its
Christian application. That commonest of all things, the mysterious
force which makes matter live and glow under spiritual emotion, and
changes the vibrations of a nerve, or the undulations of the grey
brain, into hope and love and faith, eludes the scalpel and the
microscope. Of man in his complex nature it is true that 'clouds and
darkness are round about him,' and we may expect an equally solemn
mystery to rest upon that which makes out of separate individuals one
living body, animated with the life and moved by the Spirit of the
indwelling Christ. We can get no further back, and dig no deeper
down, than His own words, 'I am ... the life.'

But, though this unity is mysterious, it is most real. Every
Christian soul receives from Christ the life of Christ. There is a
real implantation of a higher nature which has nothing to do with sin
and is alien from death. There is a true regeneration which is
supernatural, and which makes all who possess it one, in the measure
of their possession, as truly as all the leaves on a tree are one
because fed by the same sap, or all the members in the natural body
are one, because nourished by the same blood. So the true bond of
Christian unity lies in the common participation of the one Lord, and
the real Christian unity is a unity of derived life.

The misery and sin of the Christian Church have been, and are, that
it has sought to substitute other bonds of unity. The whole weary
history of the divisions and alienations between Christians has
surely sufficiently, and more than sufficiently, shown the failure of
the attempts to base Christian oneness upon uniformity of opinion, or
of ritual, or of purpose. The difference between the real unity, and
these spurious attempts after it, is the difference between bundles
of faggots, dead and held together by a cord, and a living tree
lifting its multitudinous foliage towards the heavens. The bundle of
faggots may be held together in some sort of imperfect union, but is
no exhibition of unity. If visible churches must be based on some
kind of agreement, they can never cover the same ground as that of
'the body of Christ.'

That oneness is independent of our organisations, and even of our
will, since it comes from the common possession of a common life. Its
enemies are not divergent opinions or forms, but the evil tempers and
dispositions which impede, or prevent, the flow into each Christian
soul of the uniting 'Spirit of life in Christ Jesus' which makes the
many who may be gathered into separate folds one flock clustered
around the one Shepherd. And if that unity be thus a fundamental fact
in the Christian life and entirely apart from external organisation,
the true way to increase it in each individual is, plainly, the
drawing nearer to Him, and the opening of our spirits so as to
receive fuller, deeper, and more continuous inflows from His own
inexhaustible fullness. In the old Temple stood the seven-branched
candlestick, an emblem of a formal unity; in the new the seven
candlesticks are one, because Christ stands in the midst. He makes
the body one; without Him it is a carcase.

II. The diversity.

'We have many members in one body, but all members have not the same
office.' Life has different functions in different organs. It is
light in the eye, force in the arm, music on the tongue, swiftness in
the foot; so also is Christ. The higher a creature rises in the scale
of life, the more are the parts differentiated. The lowest is a mere
sac, which performs all the functions that the creature requires; the
highest is a man with a multitude of organs, each of which is
definitely limited to one office. In like manner the division of
labour in society measures its advance; and in like manner in the
Church there is to be the widest diversity. What the Apostle
designates as 'gifts' are natural characteristics heightened by the
Spirit of Christ; the effect of the common life in each ought to be
the intensifying and manifestation of individuality of character. In
the Christian ideal of humanity there is place for every variety of
gifts. The flora of the Mountain of God yields an endless
multiplicity of growths on its ascending slopes which pass through
every climate. There ought to be a richer diversity in the Church
than anywhere besides; that tree should 'bear twelve manner of
fruits, yielding its fruit every month for the healing of the
nations.' 'All flesh is not the same flesh.' 'Star differeth from
star in glory.'

The average Christian life of to-day sorely fails in two things: in
being true to itself, and in tolerance of diversities. We are all so
afraid of being ticketed as 'eccentric,' 'odd,' that we oftentimes
stifle the genuine impulses of the Spirit of Christ leading us to the
development of unfamiliar types of goodness, and the undertaking of
unrecognised forms of service. If we trusted in Christ in ourselves
more, and took our laws from His whispers, we should often reach
heights of goodness which tower above us now, and discover in
ourselves capacities which slumber undiscerned. There is a dreary
monotony and uniformity amongst us which impoverishes us, and weakens
the testimony that we bear to the quickening influence of the Spirit
that is in Christ Jesus; and we all tend to look very suspiciously at
any man who 'puts all the others out' by being himself, and letting
the life that he draws from the Lord dictate its own manner of
expression. It would breathe a new life into all our Christian
communities if we allowed full scope to the diversities of operation,
and realised that in them all there was the one Spirit. The world
condemns originality: the Church should have learned to prize it.
'One after this fashion, and one after that,' is the only wholesome
law of the development of the manifold graces of the Christian life.

III. The harmony.

'We being many are one body in Christ, and every one members one of
another.' That expression is remarkable, for we might have expected
to read rather members _of the body_, than _of each other_;
but the bringing in of such an idea suggests most emphatically that
thought of the mutual relation of each part of the great whole, and
that each has offices to discharge for the benefit of each. In the
Christian community, as in an organised body, the active co-operation
of all the parts is the condition of health. All the rays into which
the spectrum breaks up the pure white light must be gathered together
again in order to produce it; just as every instrument in the great
orchestra contributes to the volume of sound. The Lancashire
hand-bell ringers may illustrate this point for us. Each man picks up
his own bell from the table and sounds his own note at the moment
prescribed by the score, and so the whole of the composer's idea is
reproduced. To suppress diversities results in monotony; to combine
them is the only sure way to secure harmony. Nor must we forget that
the indwelling life of the Church can only be manifested by the full
exhibition and freest possible play of all the forms which that life
assumes in individual character. It needs all, and more than all, the
types of mental characteristics that can be found in humanity to
mirror the infinite beauty of the indwelling Lord. 'There are
diversities of operations,' and all those diversities but partially
represent that same Lord 'who worketh all in all,' and Himself is
more than all, and, after all manifestation through human characters,
remains hinted at rather than declared, suggested but not revealed.

Still further, only by the exercise of possible diversities is the
one body nourished, for each member, drawing life directly and
without the intervention of any other from Christ the Source, draws
also from his fellow-Christian some form of the common life that to
himself is unfamiliar, and needs human intervention in order to its
reception. Such dependence upon one's brethren is not inconsistent
with a primal dependence on Christ alone, and is a safeguard against
the cultivating of one's own idiosyncrasies till they become diseased
and disproportionate. The most slenderly endowed Christian soul has
the double charge of giving to, and receiving from, its brethren. We
have all something which we can contribute to the general stock. We
have all need to supplement our own peculiar gifts by brotherly
ministration. The prime condition of Christian vitality has been set
forth for ever by the gracious invitation, which is also an
imperative command, 'Abide in Me and I in you'; but they who by such
abiding are recipients of a communicated life are not thereby
isolated, but united to all who like them have received 'the
manifestation of the Spirit to do good with.'




GRACE AND GRACES

   'Having then gifts, differing according to the grace that
   is given to us, whether prophecy, let us prophesy according
   to the proportion of faith; 7. Or ministry, let us wait on
   our ministering; or he that teacheth, on teaching; 8. Or he
   that exhorteth, on exhortation; he that giveth, let him do
   it with simplicity; he that ruleth, with diligence; he that
   showeth mercy, with cheerfulness.'--ROMANS xii. 6-8.


The Apostle here proceeds to build upon the great thought of the
unity of believers in the one body a series of practical
exhortations. In the first words of our text, he, with characteristic
delicacy, identifies himself with the Roman Christians as a
recipient, like them, of 'the grace that is given to us,' and as,
therefore, subject to the same precepts which he commends to them. He
does not stand isolated by the grace that is given to him; nor does
he look down as from the height of his apostleship on the multitude
below, saying to them,--Go. As one of themselves he stands amongst
them, and with brotherly exhortation says,--Come. If that had been
the spirit in which all Christian teachers had besought men, their
exhortations would less frequently have been breath spent in vain.
We may note

I. The grace that gives the gifts.

The connection between these two is more emphatically suggested by
the original Greek, in which the word for 'gifts' is a derivative of
that for 'grace.' The relation between these two can scarcely be
verbally reproduced in English; but it may be, though imperfectly,
suggested by reading 'graces' instead of 'gifts.' The gifts are
represented as being the direct product of, and cognate with, the
grace bestowed. As we have had already occasion to remark, they are
in Paul's language a designation of natural capacities strengthened
by the access of the life of the Spirit of Christ. As a candle
plunged in a vase of oxygen leaps up into more brilliant flame, so
all the faculties of the human soul are made a hundred times
themselves when the quickening power of the life of Christ enters
into them.

It is to be observed that the Apostle here assumes that every
Christian possesses, in some form, that grace which gives graces. To
him a believing soul without Christ-given gifts is a monstrosity. No
one is without some graces, and therefore no one is without some
duties. No one who considers the multitude of professing Christians
who hamper all our churches to-day, and reflects on the modern need
to urge on the multitude of idlers forms of Christian activity, will
fail to recognise signs of terribly weakened vitality. The humility,
which in response to all invitations to work for Christ pleads
unfitness is, if true, more tragical than it at first seems, for it
is a confession that the man who alleges it has no real hold of the
Christ in whom he professes to trust. If a Christian man is fit for
no Christian work, it is time that he gravely ask himself whether he
has any Christian life. 'Having gifts' is the basis of all the
Apostle's exhortations. It is to him inconceivable that any Christian
should not possess, and be conscious of possessing, some endowment
from the life of Christ which will fit him for, and bind him to, a
course of active service.

The universality of this possession is affirmed, if we note that,
according to the Greek, it was 'given' at a special time in the
experience of each of these Roman Christians. The rendering 'was
given' might be more accurately exchanged for 'has been given,' and
that expression is best taken as referring to a definite moment in
the history of each believer namely, his conversion. When we 'yield
ourselves to God,' as Paul exhorts us to do in the beginning of this
chapter, as the commencement of all true life of conformity to His
will, Christ yields Himself to us. The possession of these gifts of
grace is no prerogative of officials; and, indeed, in all the
exhortations which follow there is no reference to officials, though
of course such were in existence in the Roman Church. They had their
special functions and special qualifications for these. But what Paul
is dealing with now is the grace that is inseparable from individual
surrender to Christ, and has been bestowed upon all who are His. To
limit the gifts to officials, and to suppose that the universal gifts
in any degree militate against the recognition of officials in the
Church, are equally mistakes, and confound essentially different
subjects.

II. The graces that flow from the grace.

The Apostle's catalogue of these is not exhaustive, nor logically
arranged; but yet a certain loose order may be noted, which may be
profitable for us to trace. They are in number seven--the sacred
number; and are capable of being divided, as so many of the series of
sevens are, into two portions, one containing four and the other
three. The former include more public works, to each of which a man
might be specially devoted as his life work for and in the Church.
Three are more private, and may be conceived to have a wider relation
to the world. There are some difficulties of construction and
rendering in the list, which need not concern us here; and we may
substantially follow the Authorised Version.

The first group of four seems to fall into two pairs, the first of
which, 'prophecy' and 'ministry,' seem to be bracketed together by
reason of the difference between them. Prophecy is a very high form
of special inspiration, and implies a direct reception of special
revelation, but not necessarily of future events. The prophet is
usually coupled in Paul's writings with the apostle, and was
obviously amongst those to whom was given one of the highest forms of
the gifts of Christ. It is very beautiful to note that by natural
contrast the Apostle at once passes to one of the forms of
service which a vulgar estimate would regard as remotest from the
special revelation of the prophet, and is confined to lowly service.
Side by side with the exalted gift of prophecy Paul puts the lowly
gift of ministry. Very significant is the juxtaposition of these two
extremes. It teaches us that the lowliest office is as truly allotted
by Jesus as the most sacred, and that His highest gifts find an
adequate field for manifestation in him who is servant of all.
Ministry to be rightly discharged needs spiritual character. The
original seven were men 'full of faith and of the Holy Ghost,' though
all they had to do was to hand their pittances to poor widows. It may
be difficult to decide for what reason other than the emphasising of
this contrast the Apostle links together ministry and prophecy, and
so breaks a natural sequence which would have connected the second
pair of graces with the first member of the first pair. We should
have expected that here, as elsewhere, 'prophet,' 'teacher,'
'exhorter,' would have been closely connected, and there seems no
reason why they should not have been so, except that which we have
suggested, namely, the wish to bring together the highest and
the lowest forms of service.

The second pair seem to be linked together by likeness. The 'teacher'
probably had for his function, primarily, the narration of the facts
of the Gospel, and the setting forth in a form addressed chiefly to
the understanding the truths thereby revealed; whilst the 'exhorter'
rather addressed himself to the will, presenting the same truth, but
in forms more intended to influence the emotions. The word here
rendered 'exhort' is found in Paul's writings as bearing special
meanings, such as consoling, stimulating, encouraging, rebuking and
others. Of course these two forms of service would often be
associated, and each would be imperfect when alone; but it would
appear that in the early Church there were persons in whom the one or
the other of these two elements was so preponderant that their office
was thereby designated. Each received a special gift from the one
Source. The man who could only say to his brother, 'Be of good
cheer,' was as much the recipient of the Spirit as the man who could
connect and elaborate a systematic presentation of the truths of the
Gospel.

These four graces are followed by a group of three, which may be
regarded as being more private, as not pointing to permanent offices
so much as to individual acts. They are 'giving,' 'ruling,' 'showing
pity,' concerning which we need only note that the second of these
can hardly be the ecclesiastical office, and that it stands between
two which are closely related, as if it were of the same kind. The
gifts of money, or of direction, or of pity, are one in kind. The
right use of wealth comes from the gift of God's grace; so does the
right use of any sway which any of us have over any of our brethren;
and so does the glow of compassion, the exercise of the natural human
sympathy which belongs to all, and is deepened and made tenderer and
intenser by the gift of the Spirit. It would be a very different
Church, and a very different world, if Christians, who were not
conscious of possessing gifts which made them fit to be either
prophets, or teachers, or exhorters, and were scarcely endowed even
for any special form of ministry, felt that a gift from their hands,
or a wave of pity from their hearts, was a true token of the movement
of God's Spirit on their spirits. The fruit of the Spirit is to be
found in the wide fields of everyday life, and the vine bears many
clusters for the thirsty lips of wearied men who may little know what
gives them their bloom and sweetness. It would be better for both
giver and receiver if Christian beneficence were more clearly
recognised as one of the manifestations of spiritual life.

III. The exercise of the graces.

There are some difficulties in reference to the grammatical
construction of the words of our text, into which it is not necessary
that we should enter here. We may substantially follow the Authorised
and Revised Versions in supplying verbs in the various clauses, so as
to make of the text a series of exhortations. The first of these is
to 'prophesy according to the proportion of faith'; a commandment
which is best explained by remembering that in the preceding verse
'the measure of faith' has been stated as being the measure of the
gifts. The prophet then is to exercise his gifts in proportion to his
faith. He is to speak his convictions fully and openly, and to let
his utterances be shaped by the indwelling life. This exhortation may
well sink into the heart of preachers in this day. It is but the echo
of Jeremiah's strong words: 'He that hath my word, let him speak my
word faithfully. What is the chaff to the wheat? saith the Lord. Is
not my word like as fire, saith the Lord, and like a hammer that
breaketh the rock in pieces?' The ancient prophet's woe falls with
double weight on those who use their words as a veil to obscure their
real beliefs, and who prophesy, not 'according to the proportion of
faith,' but according to the expectations of the hearers, whose faith
is as vague as theirs.

In the original, the next three exhortations are alike in grammatical
construction, which is represented in the Authorised Version by the
supplement 'let us wait on,' and in the Revised Version by 'let us
give ourselves to'; we might with advantage substitute for either the
still more simple form 'be in,' after the example of Paul's
exhortation to Timothy 'be in these things'; that is, as our Version
has it, 'give thyself wholly to them.' The various gifts are each
represented as a sphere within which its possessor is to move, for
the opportunities for the exercise of which he is carefully to watch,
and within the limits of which he is humbly to keep. That general law
applies equally to ministry, and teaching and exhorting. We are to
seek to discern our spheres; we are to be occupied with, if not
absorbed in, them. At the least we are diligently to use the gift
which we discover ourselves to possess, and thus filling our several
spheres, we are to keep within them, recognising that each is sacred
as the manifestation of God's will for each of us. The divergence of
forms is unimportant, and it matters nothing whether 'the Giver of
all' grants less or more. The main thing is that each be faithful in
the administration of what he has received, and not seek to imitate
his brother who is diversely endowed, or to monopolise for himself
another's gifts. To insist that our brethren's gifts should be like
ours, and to try to make ours like theirs, are equally sins against
the great truth, of which the Church as a whole is the example, that
there are 'diversities of operations but the same Spirit.'

The remaining three exhortations are in like manner thrown together
by a similarity of construction in which the personality of the doer
is put in the foreground, and the emphasis of the commandment is
rested on the manner in which the grace is exercised. The reason for
that may be that in these three especially the manner will show the
grace. 'Giving' is to be 'with simplicity.' There are to be no
sidelong looks to self-interest; no flinging of a gift from a height,
as a bone might be flung to a dog; no seeking for gratitude; no
ostentation in the gift. Any taint of such mixed motives as these
infuses poison into our gifts, and makes them taste bitter to the
receiver, and recoil in hurt upon ourselves. To 'give with
simplicity' is to give as God gives.

'Diligence' is the characteristic prescribed for the man that rules.
We have already pointed out that this exhortation includes a much
wider area than that of any ecclesiastical officials. It points to
another kind of rule, and the natural gifts needed for any kind of
rule are diligence and zeal. Slackly-held reins make stumbling
steeds; and any man on whose shoulders is laid the weight of
government is bound to feel it as a weight. The history of many a
nation, and of many a family, teaches that where the rule is slothful
all evils grow apace; and it is that natural energy and earnestness,
deepened and hallowed by the Christian life, which here is enjoined
as the true Christian way of discharging the function of ruling,
which, in some form or another, devolves on almost all of us.

'He that showeth mercy with cheerfulness.' The glow of natural human
sympathy is heightened so as to become a 'gift,' and the way in which
it is exercised is defined as being 'with cheerfulness.' That
injunction is but partially understood if it is taken to mean no more
than that sympathy is not to be rendered grudgingly, or as by
necessity. No sympathy is indeed possible on such terms; unless the
heart is in it, it is nought. And that it should thus flow forth
spontaneously wherever sorrow and desolation evoke it, there must be
a continual repression of self, and a heart disengaged from the
entanglements of its own circumstances, and at leisure to make a
brother's burden its very own. But the exhortation may, perhaps,
rather mean that the truest sympathy carries a bright face into
darkness, and comes like sunshine in a shady place.




LOVE THAT CAN HATE

   'Let love be without hypocrisy. Abhor that which is evil;
   cleave to that which is good. 10. In love of the brethren
   be tenderly affectioned one to another; in honour
   preferring one another.'--ROMANS xii. 9-10 (R.V.).


Thus far the Apostle has been laying down very general precepts and
principles of Christian morals. Starting with the one
all-comprehensive thought of self-sacrifice as the very foundation of
all goodness, of transformation as its method, and of the clear
knowledge of our several powers and faithful stewardship of these, as
its conditions, he here proceeds to a series of more specific
exhortations, which at first sight seem to be very unconnected, but
through which there may be discerned a sequence of thought.

The clauses of our text seem at first sight strangely disconnected.
The first and the last belong to the same subject, but the
intervening clause strikes a careless reader as out of place and
heterogeneous. I think that we shall see it is not so; but for the
present we but note that here are three sets of precepts which
enjoin, first, honest love; then, next, a healthy vehemence against
evil and for good; and finally, a brotherly affection and mutual
respect.

I. Let love be honest.

Love stands at the head, and is the fontal source of all separate
individualised duties. Here Paul is not so much prescribing love as
describing the kind of love which he recognises as genuine, and the
main point on which he insists is sincerity. The 'dissimulation' of
the Authorised Version only covers half the ground. It means, hiding
what one is; but there is simulation, or pretending to be what one is
not. There are words of love which are like the iridescent scum on
the surface veiling the black depths of a pool of hatred. A Psalmist
complains of having to meet men whose words were 'smoother than
butter' and whose true feelings were as 'drawn swords'; but, short of
such consciously lying love, we must all recognise as a real danger
besetting us all, and especially those of us who are naturally
inclined to kindly relations with our fellows, the tendency to use
language just a little in excess of our feelings. The glove is
slightly stretched, and the hand in it is not quite large enough to
fill it. There is such a thing, not altogether unknown in Christian
circles, as benevolence, which is largely cant, and words of
conventional love about individuals which do not represent any
corresponding emotion. Such effusive love pours itself in words, and
is most generally the token of intense selfishness. Any man who seeks
to make his words a true picture of his emotions must be aware that
few harder precepts have ever been given than this brief one of the
Apostle's, 'Let love be without hypocrisy.'

But the place where this exhortation comes in the apostolic sequence
here may suggest to us the discipline through which obedience to it
is made possible. There is little to be done by the way of directly
increasing either the fervour of love or the honesty of its
expression. The true method of securing both is to be growingly
transformed by 'the renewing of our minds,' and growingly to bring
our whole old selves under the melting and softening influence of
'the mercies of God.' It is swollen self-love, 'thinking more highly
of ourselves than we ought to think,' which impedes the flow of love
to others, and it is in the measure in which we receive into our
minds 'the mind that was in Christ Jesus,' and look at men as He did,
that we shall come to love them all honestly and purely. When we are
delivered from the monstrous oppression and tyranny of self, we have
hearts capable of a Christlike and Christ-giving love to all men, and
only they who have cleansed their hearts by union with Him, and by
receiving into them the purging influence of His own Spirit, will be
able to love without hypocrisy.

II. Let love abhor what is evil, and cleave to what is good.

If we carefully consider this apparently irrelevant interruption in
the sequence of the apostolic exhortations, we shall, I think, see at
once that the irrelevance is only apparent, and that the healthy
vehemence against evil and resolute clinging to good is as essential
to the noblest forms of Christian love as is the sincerity enjoined
in the previous clause. To detest the one and hold fast by the other
are essential to the purity and depth of our love. Evil is to be
loathed, and good to be clung to in our own moral conduct, and
wherever we see them. These two precepts are not mere tautology, but
the second of them is the ground of the first. The force of our
recoil from the bad will be measured by the firmness of our grasp
of the good; and yet, though inseparably connected, the one is apt to
be easier to obey than is the other. There are types of Christian men
to whom it is more natural to abhor the evil than to cleave to the
good; and there are types of character of which the converse is true.
We often see men very earnest and entirely sincere in their
detestation of meanness and wickedness, but very tepid in their
appreciation of goodness. To hate is, unfortunately, more congenial
with ordinary characters than to love; and it is more facile to look
down on badness than to look up at goodness.

But it needs ever to be insisted upon, and never more than in this
day of spurious charity and unprincipled toleration, that a healthy
hatred of moral evil and of sin, wherever found and however garbed,
ought to be the continual accompaniment of all vigorous and manly
cleaving to that which is good. Unless we shudderingly recoil from
contact with the bad in our own lives, and refuse to christen it with
deceptive euphemisms when we meet it in social and civil life, we
shall but feebly grasp, and slackly hold, that which is good. Such
energy of moral recoil from evil is perfectly consistent with honest
love, for it is things, not men, that we are to hate; and it is
needful as the completion and guardian of love itself. There is
always danger that love shall weaken the condemnation of wrong, and
modern liberality, both in the field of opinion and in regard to
practical life, has so far condoned evil as largely to have lost its
hold upon good. The criminal is pitied rather than blamed, and a
multitude of agencies are so occupied in elevating the wrong-doers
that they lose sight of the need of punishing.

Nor is it only in reference to society that this tendency works harm.
The effect of it is abundantly manifest in the fashionable ideas of
God and His character. There are whole schools of opinion which
practically strike out of their ideal of the Divine Nature abhorrence
of evil, and, little as they think it, are thereby fatally
impoverishing their ideal of God, and making it impossible to
understand His government of the world. As always, so in this matter,
the authentic revelation of the Divine Nature, and the perfect
pattern for the human are to be found in Jesus Christ. We recall that
wonderful incident, when on His last approach to Jerusalem, rounding
the shoulder of the Mount of Olives, He beheld the city, gleaming in
the morning sunshine across the valley, and forgetting His own
sorrow, shed tears over its approaching desolation, which yet He
steadfastly pronounced. His loathing of evil was whole-souled and
absolute, and equally intense and complete was His cleaving to that
which is good. In both, and in the harmony between them, He makes God
known, and prescribes and holds forth the ideal of perfect humanity
to men.

III. Let sincere and discriminating love be concentrated on Christian
men.

In the final exhortation of our text 'the love of the brethren' takes
the place of the more diffused and general love enjoined in the first
clause. The expression 'kindly affectioned' is the rendering of a
very eloquent word in the original in which the instinctive love of a
mother to her child, or the strange mystical ties which unite members
of a family together, irrespective of their differences of character
and temperament, are taken as an example after which Christian men
are to mould their relations to one another. The love which is
without hypocrisy, and is to be diffused on all sides, is also to be
gathered together and concentrated with special energy on all who
'call upon Jesus Christ as Lord, both their Lord and ours.' The more
general precept and the more particular are in perfect harmony,
however our human weakness sometimes confuses them. It is obvious
that this final precept of our text will be the direct result of the
two preceding, for the love which has learned to be moral, hating
evil, and clinging to good as necessary, when directed to possessors
of like precious faith will thrill with the consciousness of a deep
mystical bond of union, and will effloresce in all brotherly love and
kindly affections. They who are like one another in the depths of
their moral life, who are touched by like aspirations after like holy
things, and who instinctively recoil with similar revulsion from like
abominations, will necessarily feel the drawing of a unity far deeper
and sacreder than any superficial likenesses of race, or
circumstance, or opinion. Two men who share, however imperfectly, in
Christ's Spirit are more akin in the realities of their nature,
however they may differ on the surface, than either of them is to
another, however like he may seem, who is not a partaker in the life
of Christ.

This instinctive, Christian love, like all true and pure love, is to
manifest itself by 'preferring one another in honour'; or as the word
might possibly be rendered, 'anticipating one another.' We are not to
wait to have our place assigned before we give our brother his. There
will be no squabbling for the chief seat in the synagogue, or the
uppermost rooms at the feast, where brotherly love marshals the
guests. The one cure for petty jealousies and the miserable strife
for recognition, which we are all tempted to engage in, lies in a
heart filled with love of the brethren because of its love to the
Elder Brother of them all, and to the Father who is His Father as
well as ours. What a contrast is presented between the practice of
Christians and these precepts of Paul! We may well bow ourselves in
shame and contrition when we read these clear-drawn lines indicating
what we ought to be, and set by the side of them the blurred and
blotted pictures of what we are. It is a painful but profitable task
to measure ourselves against Paul's ideal of Christ's commandment;
but it will only be profitable if it brings us to remember that
Christ gives before He commands, and that conformity with His ideal
must begin, not with details of conduct, or with emotion, however
pure, but with yielding ourselves to the God who moves us by His
mercies, and being 'transformed by the renewing of our minds' and
'the indwelling of Christ in our hearts by faith.'




A TRIPLET OF GRACES

   'Not slothful in business; fervent in spirit;
   serving the Lord.'--ROMANS xii. 11.


Paul believed that Christian doctrine was meant to influence
Christian practice; and therefore, after the fundamental and profound
exhibition of the central truths of Christianity which occupies the
earlier portion of this great Epistle, he tacks on, with a
'therefore' to his theological exposition, a series of plain,
practical teachings. The place where conduct comes in the letter is
profoundly significant, and, if the significance of it had been
observed and the spirit of it carried into practice, there would have
been less of a barren orthodoxy, and fewer attempts at producing
righteous conduct without faith.

But not only is the place where this series of exhortations occur
very significant, but the order in which they appear is also
instructive. The great principle which covers all conduct, and may be
broken up into all the minutenesses of practical directions is
self-surrender. Give yourselves up to God; that is the Alpha and the
Omega of all goodness, and wherever that foundation is really laid,
on it will rise the fair building of a life which is a temple,
adorned with whatever things are lovely and of good report. So after
Paul has laid deep and broad the foundation of all Christian virtue
in his exhortation to present ourselves as living sacrifices, he goes
on to point out the several virtues in which such self-surrender will
manifest itself. There runs through the most of these exhortations an
arrangement in triplets--three sister Graces linked together
hand-in-hand as it were--and my text presents an example of that
threefoldness in grouping. 'Not slothful in business; fervent in
spirit; serving the Lord.'

I. We have, first, the prime grace of Christian diligence.

'Not slothful in business' suggests, by reason of our modern
restriction of that word 'business' to a man's daily occupation, a
much more limited range to this exhortation than the Apostle meant to
give it. The idea which is generally drawn from these words by
English readers is that they are to do their ordinary work
diligently, and, all the while, notwithstanding the cooling or
distracting influences of their daily avocations, are to keep
themselves 'fervent in spirit.' That is a noble and needful
conception of the command, but it does not express what is in the
Apostle's mind. He does not mean by 'business' a trade or profession,
or daily occupation. But the word means 'zeal' or 'earnestness.' And
