their past joys.  Yea, even while they yet live, they rest not
without bitterness and weariness and fear.  For from the very
same thing wherein they find delight, thence they oftentimes have
the punishment of sorrow.  Justly it befalleth them, that because
out of measure they seek out and pursue pleasures, they enjoy
them not without confusion and bitterness.  Oh how short, how
false, how inordinate and wicked are all these pleasures!  Yet
because of their sottishness and blindness men do not understand;
but like brute beasts, for the sake of a little pleasure of this
corruptible life, they incur death of the soul.  Thou therefore,
my son, go not after thy lusts, but refrain thyself from thine
appetites.(1)  Delight thou in the Lord, and He shall give thee
thy heart's desire.(2)

5. "For if thou wilt truly find delight, and be abundantly
comforted of Me, behold in the contempt of all worldly things and
in the avoidance of all worthless pleasures shall be thy
blessing, and fulness of consolation shall be given thee.  And
the more thou withdrawest thyself from all solace of creatures,
the more sweet and powerful consolations shalt thou find.  But at
the first thou shalt not attain to them, without some sorrow and
hard striving.  Long-accustomed habit will oppose, but it shall
be overcome by better habit.  The flesh will murmur again and
again, but will be restrained by fervour of spirit.  The old
serpent will urge and embitter thee, but will be put to flight by
prayer; moreover, by useful labour his entrance will be greatly
obstructed."

(1) Ecclesiastes xviii. 30.   (2) Psalm xxxvii. 4.


CHAPTER XIII

Of the obedience of one in lowly subjection after the example of Jesus Christ

"My Son, he who striveth to withdraw himself from obedience,
withdraweth himself also from grace, and he who seeketh private
advantages, loseth those which are common unto all.  If a man
submit not freely and willingly to one set over him, it is a sign
that his flesh is not yet perfectly subject to himself, but
often resisteth and murmureth.  Learn therefore quickly to submit
thyself to him who is over thee, if thou seekest to bring thine
own flesh into subjection.  For the outward enemy is very quickly
overcome if the inner man have not been laid low.  There is no
more grievous and deadly enemy to the soul than thou art to
thyself, if thou art not led by the Spirit.  Thou must not
altogether conceive contempt for thyself, if thou wilt prevail
against flesh and blood.  Because as yet thou inordinately lovest
thyself, therefore thou shrinkest from yielding thyself to the
will of others.

2. "But what great thing is it that thou, who art dust and
nothingness, yieldest thyself to man for God's sake, when I, the
Almighty and the Most High, who created all things out of
nothing, subjected Myself to man for thy sake?  I became the most
humble and despised of men, that by My humility thou mightest
overcome thy pride.  Learn to obey, O dust!  Learn to humble
thyself, O earth and clay, and to bow thyself beneath the feet of
all.  Learn to crush thy passions, and to yield thyself in all
subjection.

3. "Be zealous against thyself, nor suffer pride to live within
thee, but so show thyself subject and of no reputation, that all
may be able to walk over thee, and tread thee down as the clay in
the streets.  What hast thou, O foolish man, of which to
complain?  What, O vile sinner, canst thou answer those who
speak against thee, seeing thou hast so often offended God, and
many a time hast deserved hell?  But Mine eye hath spared thee,
because thy soul was precious in My sight; that thou mightest
know My love, and mightest be thankful for My benefits; and that
thou mightest give thyself altogether to true subjection and
humility, and patiently bear the contempt which thou meritest."


CHAPTER XIV

Of meditation upon the hidden judgments of God, that we may not
be lifted up because of our well-doing

Thou sendest forth Thy judgments against me, O Lord, and shakest
all my bones with fear and trembling, and my soul trembleth
exceedingly.  I stand astonished, and remember that the heavens
are not clean in thy sight.(1)  If Thou chargest Thine angels
with folly, and didst spare them not, how shall it be unto me?
Stars have fallen from heaven, and what shall I dare who am
but dust?  They whose works seemed to be praiseworthy, fell into
the lowest depths, and they who did eat Angels' food, them have I
seen delighted with the husks that the swine do eat.

2. There is therefore no holiness, if Thou O Lord, withdraw Thine
hand.  No wisdom profiteth, if Thou leave off to guide the helm.
No strength availeth, if Thou cease to preserve.  No purity is
secure, if Thou protect it not.  No self-keeping availeth, if Thy
holy watching be not there.  For when we are left alone we are
swallowed up and perish, but when we are visited, we are raised
up, and we live.  For indeed we are unstable, but are made strong
through Thee; we grow cold, but are rekindled by Thee.

3. Oh, how humbly and abjectly must I reckon of myself, how must
I weigh it as nothing, if I seem to have nothing good!  Oh, how
profoundly ought I to submit myself to Thy unfathomable
judgments, O Lord, when I find myself nothing else save nothing,
and again nothing!  Oh weight unmeasurable, oh ocean which cannot
be crossed over, where I find nothing of myself save nothing
altogether!  Where, then, is the hiding-place of glory, where the
confidence begotten of virtue?  All vain-glory is swallowed up in
the depths of Thy judgments against me.

4. What is all flesh in Thy sight?  For how shall the clay boast
against Him that fashioned it?(2)  How can he be lifted up in
vain speech whose heart is subjected in truth to God?  The whole
world shall not lift him up whom Truth hath subdued; nor shall he
be moved by the mouth of all who praise him, who hath placed all
his hope in God.  For they themselves who speak, behold, they
are all nothing; for they shall cease with the sound of their
words, but the truth of the Lord endureth for ever.(3)

(1) Job xv. 15.   (2) Psalm xxix. 16.   (3) Psalm cxvii. 2.


CHAPTER XV

How we must stand and speak, in everything that we desire

"My Son, speak thou thus in every matter, 'Lord, if it please
Thee, let this come to pass.  Lord, if this shall be for Thine
honour, let it be done in Thy Name.  Lord, if thou see it good
for me, and approve it as useful, then grant me to use it for Thy
honour.  But if thou knowest that it shall be hurtful unto me,
and not profitable for the health of my soul, take the desire
away from me'!  For not every desire is from the Holy Ghost,
although it appear to a man right and good.  It is difficult to
judge with certainty whether a good or an evil spirit move thee
to desire this or that, or whether thou art moved by thine own
spirit.  Many have been deceived at the last, who seemed at the
beginning to be moved by a good spirit.

2. "Therefore, whatsoever seemeth to thee desirable, thou must
always desire and seek after it with the fear of God and humility
of heart, and most of all, must altogether resign thyself, and
commit all unto Me and say, 'Lord, thou knowest what is best; let
this or that be, according as Thou wilt.  Give what Thou wilt, so
much as Thou wilt, when Thou wilt.  Do with me as Thou knowest
best, and as best shall please Thee, and as shall be most to
Thine honour.  Place me where Thou wilt, and freely work Thy will
with me in all things.  I am in Thine hand, and turn me in my
course.  Behold, I am Thy servant, ready for all things; for I
desire to live not to myself but to Thee.  Oh, that I might live
worthily and perfectly.'"

		A PRAYER TO BE ENABLED TO DO GOD'S WILL PERFECTLY

3. Grant me Thy grace, most merciful Jesus, that it may be with
me, and work in me, and persevere with me, even unto the end.
Grant that I may ever desire and wish whatsoever is most pleasing
and dear unto Thee.  Let Thy will be mine, and let my will alway
follow Thine, and entirely accord with it.  May I choose and
reject whatsoever Thou dost; yea, let it be impossible for me to
choose or reject except according to Thy will.

4. Grant that I may die to all worldly things, and for Thy sake
love to be despised and unknown in this world.  Grant unto me,
above all things that I can desire, to rest in Thee, and that in
Thee my heart may be at peace.  Thou art the true peace of the
heart, Thou alone its rest; apart from Thee all things are hard
and unquiet.  In Thee alone, the supreme and eternal God, I will
lay me down in peace and take my rest.(1)  Amen.

(1) Psalm iv. 9.


CHAPTER XVI

That true solace is to be sought in God alone

Whatsoever I am able to desire or to think of for my solace, I
look for it not here, but hereafter.  For if I alone had all the
solaces of this world, and were able to enjoy all its delights,
it is certain that they could not endure long.  Wherefore, O my
soul, thou canst be fully comforted and perfectly refreshed, only
in God, the Comforter of the poor, and the lifter up of the
humble.  Wait but a little while, my soul, wait for the Divine
promise, and thou shalt have abundance of all good things in
heaven.  If thou longest too inordinately for the things which
are now, thou shalt lose those which are eternal and heavenly.
Let temporal things be in the use, eternal things in the desire.
Thou canst not be satisfied with any temporal good, for thou wast
not created for the enjoyment of these.

2. Although thou hadst all the good things which ever were
created, yet couldst not thou be happy and blessed; all thy
blessedness and thy felicity lieth in God who created all things;
not such felicity as seemeth good to the foolish lover of the
world, but such as Christ's good and faithful servants wait for,
and as the spiritual and pure in heart sometimes taste, whose
conversation is in heaven.(1)  All human solace is empty and
short-lived; blessed and true is that solace which is felt
inwardly, springing from the truth.  The godly man everywhere
beareth about with him his own Comforter, Jesus, and saith unto
Him: "Be with me, Lord Jesus, always and everywhere.  Let it be
my comfort to be able to give up cheerfully all human comfort.
And if Thy consolation fail me, let Thy will and righteous
approval be alway with me for the highest comfort.  For Thou wilt
not always be chiding, neither keepest Thou Thine anger for
ever."(2)

(1) Philippians iii. 20.   (2) Psalm cii. 9.


CHAPTER XVII

That all care is to be cast upon God

"My Son, suffer me to do with thee what I will; I know what is
expedient for thee.  Thou thinkest as a man, in many things thou
judgest as human affection persuadeth thee."

2. Lord, what Thou sayest is true.  Greater is Thy care for me
than all the care which I am able to take for myself.  For too
insecurely doth he stand who casteth not all his care upon Thee.
Lord, so long as my will standeth right and firm in Thee, do with
me what Thou wilt, for whatsoever Thou shalt do with me cannot be
aught but good.  Blessed be Thou if Thou wilt leave me in
darkness: blessed also be Thou if Thou wilt leave me in light.
Blessed be Thou if Thou vouchsafe to comfort me, and always
blessed be Thou if Thou cause me to be troubled.

3. "My Son! even thus thou must stand if thou desirest to walk
with Me.  Thou must be ready alike for suffering or rejoicing.
Thou must be poor and needy as willingly as full and rich."

4. Lord, I will willingly bear for Thee whatsoever Thou wilt have
to come upon me.  Without choice I will receive from Thy hand
good and evil, sweet and bitter, joy and sadness, and will give
Thee thanks for all things which shall happen unto me.  Keep me
from all sin, and I will not fear death nor hell.  Only cast me
not away for ever, nor blot me out of the book of life.  Then no
tribulation which shall come upon me shall do me hurt.


CHAPTER XVIII

That temporal miseries are to be borne patiently after the
example of Christ

"My Son!  I came down from heaven for thy salvation; I took upon
Me thy miseries not of necessity, but drawn by love that thou
mightest learn patience and mightest bear temporal miseries
without murmuring.  For from the hour of My birth, until My death
upon the Cross, I ceased not from bearing of sorrow; I had much
lack of temporal things; I oftentimes heard many reproaches
against Myself; I gently bore contradictions and hard words; I
received ingratitude for benefits, blasphemies for My miracles,
rebukes for My doctrine."

2. Lord, because Thou wast patient in Thy life, herein most of
all fulfilling the commandment of Thy Father, it is well that I,
miserable sinner, should patiently bear myself according to Thy
will, and as long as Thou wilt have it so, should bear about with
me for my salvation, the burden of this corruptible life.  For
although the present life seemeth burdensome, it is nevertheless
already made very full of merit through Thy grace, and to those
who are weak it becometh easier and brighter through Thy example
and the footsteps of Thy saints; but it is also much more full of
consolation than it was of old, under the old Testament, when the
gate of heaven remained shut; and even the way to heaven seemed
more obscure when so few cared to seek after the heavenly
kingdom.  But not even those who were then just and in the way of
salvation were able, before Thy Passion and the ransom of Thy
holy Death, to enter the kingdom of heaven.

3. Oh what great thanks am I bound to give Thee, who hast
vouchsafed to show me and all faithful people the good and right
way to Thine eternal kingdom, for Thy way is our way, and by holy
patience we walk to Thee who art our Crown.  If Thou hadst not
gone before and taught us, who would care to follow?  Oh, how far
would they have gone backward if they had not beheld Thy glorious
example!  Behold we are still lukewarm, though we have heard of
Thy many signs and discourses; what would become of us if we had
not such a light to help us follow Thee?


CHAPTER XIX

Of bearing injuries, and who shall be approved as truly patient

"What sayest thou, My Son?  Cease to complain; consider My
suffering and that of My saints.  Thou hast not yet resisted unto
blood.(1)  It is little which thou sufferest in comparison with
those who have suffered so many things, have been so strongly
tempted, so grievously troubled, so manywise proved and tried.
Thou oughtest therefore to call to mind the more grievous
sufferings of others that thou mightest bear thy lesser ones more
easily, and if they seem not to thee little, see that it is not
thy impatience which is the cause of this.  But whether they be
little or whether they be great, study to bear them all with
patience.

2. "So far as thou settest thyself to bear patiently, so far thou
dost wisely and art deserving of the more merit; thou shalt also
bear the more easily if thy mind and habit are carefully trained
hereunto.  And say not 'I cannot bear these things from such a
man, nor are things of this kind to be borne by me, for he hath
done me grievous harm and imputeth to me what I had never
thought: but from another I will suffer patiently, such things as
I see I ought to suffer.'  Foolish  is such a thought as this,
for it considereth not the virtue of patience, nor by whom that
virtue is to be crowned, but it rather weigheth persons and
offences against self.

3. "He is not truly patient who will only suffer as far as
seemeth right to himself and from whom he pleaseth.  But the
truly patient man considereth not by what man he is tried,
whether by one above him, or by an equal or inferior, whether by
a good and holy man, or a perverse and unworthy; but
indifferently from every creature, whatsoever or how often soever
adversity happeneth to him, he gratefully accepteth all from the
hand of God and counteth it great gain: for with God nothing
which is borne for His sake, however small, shall lose its
reward.

4. "Be thou therefore ready for the fight if thou wilt have the
victory.  Without striving thou canst not win the crown of
patience; if thou wilt not suffer thou refusest to be crowned.
But if thou desirest to be crowned, strive manfully, endure
patiently.  Without labour thou drawest not near to rest, nor
without fighting comest thou to victory."

5. Make possible to me, O Lord, by grace what seemeth impossible
to me by nature.  Thou knowest how little I am able to bear, and
how quickly I am cast down when a like adversity riseth up
against me.  Whatsoever trial of tribulation may come to me, may
it become unto me pleasing and acceptable, for to suffer and be
vexed for Thy sake is exceeding healthful to the soul.

(1) Hebrews xii. 4.


CHAPTER XX

Of confession of our infirmity and of the miseries of this life

I will acknowledge my sin unto Thee;(1) I will confess to Thee,
Lord, my infirmity.  It is often a small thing which casteth me
down and maketh me sad.  I resolve that I will act bravely, but
when a little temptation cometh, immediately I am in a great
strait.  Wonderfully small sometimes is the matter whence a
grievous temptation cometh, and whilst I imagine myself safe for
a little space; when I am not considering, I find myself often
almost overcome by a little puff of wind.

2. Behold, therefore, O Lord, my humility and my frailty, which
is altogether known to Thee.  Be merciful unto me, and draw me
out of the mire that I sink not,(2) lest I ever remain cast down.
This is what frequently throweth me backward and confoundeth me
before Thee, that I am so liable to fall, so weak to resist my
