antecedents in India we may suspect that they are borrowed from some
other mythology, and if similar figures were known to Zoroastrianism,
that may be their source.

The most important of them is Amitabha. He is strangely obscure in
the earlier art and literature of Indian Buddhism. Some of the
nameless Buddha figures in the Gandharan sculptures may represent him,
but this is not proved and the works of Grunwedel and Foucher suggest
that compared with Avalokita and Tara his images are late and not
numerous. In the earlier part of the Lotus[542] he is only just
mentioned as if he were of no special importance. He is also mentioned
towards the end of the Awakening of Faith ascribed to Asvaghosha,
but the authorship of the work cannot be regarded as certain and, if
it were, the passage stands apart from the main argument and might
well be an addition. Again in the Mahayana-sutralankara[543] of
Asanga, his paradise is just mentioned.

Against these meagre and cursory notices in Indian literature may be
set the fact that two translations of the principal Amidist scripture
into Chinese were made in the second century A.D. and four in the
third, all by natives of Central Asia. The inference that the worship
of Amitabha flourished in Central Asia some time before the earliest
of these translations is irresistible.

According to Taranatha, the Tibetan historian of Buddhism,[544] this
worship goes back to Saraha or Rahulabhadra. He was reputed to have
been the teacher of Nagarjuna and a great magician. He saw Amitabha in
the land of Dhingkota and died with his face turned towards
Sukhavati. I have found no explanation of the name Dhingkota but
the name Saraha does not sound Indian. He is said to have been a sudra
and he is represented in Tibetan pictures with a beard and topknot
and holding an arrow[545] in his hand. In all this there is little
that can be called history, but still it appears that the first person
whom tradition connects with the worship of Amitabha was of low caste,
bore a foreign name, saw the deity in an unknown country, and like
many tantric teachers was represented as totally unlike a Buddhist
monk. It cannot be proved that he came from the lands of the Oxus or
Turkestan, but such an origin would explain much in the tradition.
On the other hand, there would be no difficulty in accounting for
Zoroastrian influence at Peshawar or Takkasila within the frontiers of
India.

Somewhat later Vasubandhu is stated to have preached faith in Amitabha
but it does not appear that this doctrine ever had in India a tithe of
the importance which it obtained in the Far East.

The essential features of Amidist doctrine are that there is a
paradise of light belonging to a benevolent deity and that the
good[546] who invoke his name will be led thither. Both features are
found in Zoroastrian writings. The highest heaven (following after the
paradises of good thoughts, good words and good deeds) is called
Boundless Light or Endless Light.[547] Both this region and its
master, Ahuramazda, are habitually spoken of in terms implying
radiance and glory. Also it is a land of song, just as Amitabha's
paradise re-echoes with music and pleasant sounds.[548] Prayers can
win this paradise and Ahura Mazda and the Archangels will come and
show the way thither to the pious.[549] Further whoever recites the
Ahuna-vairya formula, Ahura Mazda will bring his soul to "the lights
of heaven,"[550] and although, so far as I know, it is not expressly
stated that the repetition of Ahura Mazda's name leads to paradise,
yet the general efficacy of his names as invocations is clearly
affirmed.[551]

Thus all the chief features of Amitabha's paradise are Persian: only
his method of instituting it by making a vow is Buddhist. It is true
that Indian imagination had conceived numerous paradises, and that the
early Buddhist legend tells of the Tushita heaven. But Sukhavati is
not like these abodes of bliss. It appears suddenly in the history of
Buddhism as something exotic, grafted adroitly on the parent trunk but
sometimes overgrowing it.[552]

Avalokita is also connected with Amitabha's paradise. His figure,
though its origin is not clear, assumes distinct and conspicuous
proportions in India at a fairly early date. There appears to be no
reason for associating him specially with Central Asia. On the other
hand later works describe him as the spiritual son or reflex of
Amitabha. This certainly recalls the Iranian idea of the Fravashi
defined as "a spiritual being conceived as a part of a man's
personality but existing before he is born and in independence of him:
it can also belong to divine beings."[553] Although India offers in
abundance both divine incarnations and explanations thereof yet none
of these describe the relationship between a Dhyani Buddha and his
Boddhisattva so well as the Zoroastrian doctrine of the Fravashi.

S. Levi has suggested that the Bodhisattva Manjusri is of Tokharian
origin.[554] His worship at Wu-tai-shan in Shan-si is ancient and
later Indian tradition connected him with China. Local traditions also
connect him with Nepal, Tibet, and Khotan, and he is sometimes
represented as the first teacher of civilization or religion. But
although his Central Asian origin is eminently probable, I do not at
present see any clear proof of it.

The case of the Bodhisattva Kshitigarbha[555] is similar. He appears
to have been known but not prominent in India in the fourth century
A.D.: by the seventh century if not earlier his cult was flourishing
in China and subsequently he became in the Far East a popular deity
second only to Kuan-yin. This popularity was connected with his
gradual transformation into a god of the dead. It is also certain that
he was known in Central Asia[556] but whether he first became
important there or in China is hard to decide. The devotion of the
Chinese to their dead suggests that it was among them that he acquired
his great position, but his role as a guide to the next world has a
parallel in the similar benevolent activity of the Zoroastrian angel
Srosh.

One of Central Asia's clearest titles to importance in the history
of the East is that it was the earliest and on the whole the
principal source of Chinese Buddhism, to which I now turn. Somewhat
later, teachers also came to China by sea and still later, under the
Yuan dynasty, Lamaism was introduced direct from Tibet. But from at
least the beginning of our era onwards, monks went eastwards from
Central Asia to preach and translate the scriptures and it was across
Central Asia that Chinese pilgrims went to India in search of the
truth.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 459: See Luders, _Bruchstucke Buddhistischer Dramen_, 1911,
and _id., Das Sariputra-prakarana_, 1911.]

[Footnote 460: See Senart, "Le ms Kharoshthi du Dhammapada," in
_J.A._, 1898, II. p. 193.]

[Footnote 461: Luders, "Die Sakas und die Nordarische Sprache,"
_Sitzungsber. der Kon. Preuss. Akad_. 1913. Konow, _Gotting.
Gel. Anz_. 1912, pp. 551 ff.]

[Footnote 462: See Hoernle in _J.R.A.S._ 1910, pp. 837 ff. and 1283
ff.; 1911, pp. 202 ff., 447 ff.]

[Footnote 463: An old Turkish text about Maitreya states that it was
translated from an Indian language into Tokhri and from Tokhri into
Turkish. See F.K.W. Muller, _Sitzungsber. der Kon. Preuss. Akad_.
1907, p. 958. But it is not clear what is meant by Tokhri.]

[Footnote 464: The following are some words in this language: Kant, a
hundred; rake, a word; por, fire; soye, son (Greek: uios); suwan,
swese, rain (Greek: uei huetos);  alyek, another; okso, an ox.]

[Footnote 465: The numerous papers on this language are naturally
quickly superseded. But Sieg and Siegling Tokharisch, "Die Sprache der
Indoskythen" (_Sitzungsber. der Berl. Ak. Wiss_. 1908, p. 815), may be
mentioned and Sylvain Levi, "Tokharien B, Langue de Kouteha," _J.A._
1913, II. p. 311.]

[Footnote 466: See Radloff Tisastvustik (_Bibl. Buddh._ vol. xii.), p.
v. This manuscript came from Urumtsi. A translation of a portion of
the Saddharma-pundarika (_Bibl. Buddh._ xiv.) was found at Turfan.]

[Footnote 467: Laufer in _T'oung Pao_, 1907, p. 392; Radloff,
_Kuan-si-im Pursar_, p. vii.]

[Footnote 468: See especially Stein's _Ancient Khotan_, app. B, and
Francke in _J.R.A.S._ 1914, p. 37.]

[Footnote 469: Chavannes, _Les documents chinois decouverts par Aurel
Stein_, 1913.]

[Footnote 470: See especially Chavannes and Pelliot, "Traite
Manicheen" in _J.A._ 1911 and 1913.]

[Footnote 471: Hsuan Chuang notes its existence however in Kabul and
Kapisa.]

[Footnote 472: See for these Fergusson-Burgess, _History of Indian
Architecture_, I. pp. 125-8.]

[Footnote 473: _J.R.A.S._ 1909, p. 313.]

[Footnote 474: _E.g._ Grunwedel, _Altbuddhistische Kultstatten_, fig.
624.]

[Footnote 475: Stein, _Ancient Khotan_, plates xiii-xvii and xl, pp.
83 and 482 ff.]

[Footnote 476: See Grunwedel, _Buddh. Kultstatten_, pp. 129-130 and
plate. Foucher, "L'Art Greco-Bouddhique," p. 145, _J.R.A.S._ 1886, 333
and plate i.]

[Footnote 477: See Wachsberger's "Stil-kritische Studien zur Kunst
Chinesisch-Turkestan's" in _Ostasiatische Ztsft._ 1914 and 1915.]

[Footnote 478: See Grunwedel, _Buddh. Kultstatten_, pp. 332 ff.]

[Footnote 479: _Ancient Khotan_, vol. II. plates lx and lxi.]

[Footnote 480: Le Coq in _J.R.A.S._ 1909, pp. 299 ff. See the whole
article.]

[Footnote 481: For some of the more striking drawings referred to see
Grunwedel, _Buddh. Kultstatten_, figs. 51, 53, 239, 242, 317, 337,
345-349.]

[Footnote 482: In _Geog. Journal_, May 1916, p. 362.]

[Footnote 483: Chavannes, _Documents chinois decouverts par Aurel
Stein_, 1913.]

[Footnote 484: These of course are not the Osmanlis or Turks of
Constantinople. The Osmanlis are the latest of the many branches of
the Turks, who warred and ruled in Central Asia with varying success
from the fifth to the eighth centuries.]

[Footnote 485: That is Kashgar, Khotan, Kucha and Tokmak for which
last Karashahr was subsequently substituted. The territory was also
called An Hsi.]

[Footnote 486: See for lists and details Chavannes, _Documents sur les
Tou-kiue Occidentaux_, pp. 67 ff. and 270 ff.]

[Footnote 487: The conquest and organization of the present Chinese
Turkestan dates only from the reign of Ch'ien Lung.]

[Footnote 488: Thus the pilgrim Wu-K'ung mentions Chinese officials in
the Four Garrisons.]

[Footnote 489: See for this part of their history, Grenard's article
in _J.A._ 1900, I. pp. 1-79.]

[Footnote 490: Pelliot also attributes importance to a Sogdian Colony
to the south of Lob Nor, which may have had much to do with the
transmission of Buddhism and Nestorianism to China. See _J.A._ Jan.
1916, pp. 111-123.]

[Footnote 491: These words have been connected with the tribe called
Sacae, Sakas, or Sok.]

[Footnote 492: See Klaproth, _Tabl. Historique_, p. 166, apparently
quoting from Chinese sources. Specht, _J.A._ 1897, II. p. 187. Franke,
_Beitr.-zur Kenntniss Zentral-Asiens_, p. 83. The passage quoted by
Specht from the Later Han Annals clearly states that the Yueh-chih
made a man of their own choosing prince of Kashgar, although, as
Franke points out, it makes no reference to Kanishka or the story of
the hostages related by Hsuan Chuang.]

[Footnote 493: Fa-Hsien's Chieh-ch'a has been interpreted as Skardo,
but Chavannes seems to have proved that it is Kashgar.]

[Footnote 494: About 643 A.D. He mentions that the inhabitants
tattooed their bodies, flattened their children's heads and had green
eyes. Also that they spoke a peculiar language.]

[Footnote 495: At Bamian the monks belonged to the Lokottaravadin
School.]

[Footnote 496: Beal, _Records_, II. p. 278. The pilgrim is speaking
from hearsay and it is not clear to what part of Persia he refers.]

[Footnote 497: See Chavannes, _Documents sur les Tou-kiue
Occidentaux_, pp. 121, 125. The inhabitants of K'ang (Samarkand or
Sogdiana) are said to honour both religions. _Ib_. p. 135.]

[Footnote 498: Known to the Chinese by several slightly different
names such as Ku-chih, Kiu-tse which are all attempts to represent the
same sound. For Kucha see S. Levi's most interesting article "Le
'Tokharien B' langue de Koutcha" in _J.A._ 1913, II. pp. 311 ff.]

[Footnote 499: _J.A._ 1913, ii. p. 326.]

[Footnote 500: See Chavannes in Stein's _Ancient Khotan_, p. 544. The
Western Tsin reigned 265-317.]

[Footnote 501: The circumstances which provoked the expedition are not
very clear. It was escorted by the king of Turfan and other small
potentates who were the vassals of the Tsin and also on bad terms with
Kucha. They probably asked Fu-chien for assistance in subduing their
rival which he was delighted to give. Some authorities (_e.g._ Nanjio
Cat. p. 406) give Karashahr as the name of Kumarajiva's town, but this
seems to be a mistake.]

[Footnote 502: S. Levi, _J.A._ 1913, ii. p. 348, quoting Hsu Kao Seng
Chuan.]

[Footnote 503: Quoted by S. Levi from the _Sung Kao Seng Chuan_. See
_J.A._ 1913, II. p. 344 and _B.E.F.E.O._ 1904, p. 562.]

[Footnote 504: As a proof of foreign influence in Chinese culture, it
is interesting to note that there were seven orchestras for the
imperial banquets, including those of Kucha, Bokhara and India and a
mixed one in which were musicians from Samarkand, Kashgar, Camboja and
Japan.]

[Footnote 505: Quoted by Bretschneider, _Mediaeval Researches_, ii.
189.]

[Footnote 506: Pelliot, _J.A._ 1912, i. p. 579, suggests that Chotscho
or Qoco is the Turkish equivalent of Kao Ch'ang in T'ang
pronunciation, the nasal being omitted.]

[Footnote 507: Chavannes, _Tou-kiue Occidentaux_, p. 101.]

[Footnote 508: For the history of Khotan see Remusat, _Ville de
Khotan_, 1820, and Stein's great work _Ancient Khotan_, especially
chapter vii. For the Tibetan traditions see Rockhill, _Life of the
Buddha_, pp. 230 ff.]

[Footnote 509: Ku-stana seems to have been a learned perversion of the
name, to make it mean breast of the earth.]

[Footnote 510: The combination is illustrated by the Sino-Kharoshthi
coins with a legend in Chinese on the obverse and in Prakrit on the
reverse. See Stein, _Ancient Khotan_, p. 204. But the coins are later
than 73 A.D.]

[Footnote 511: The Tibetan text gives the date of conversion as the
reign of King Vijayasambhava, 170 years after the foundation of
Khotan.]

[Footnote 512: See Sten Konow in _J.R.A.S._ 1914, p. 345.]

[Footnote 513: See Stein, _Ancient Khotan_, pp. 170, 456.]

[Footnote 514: Chavannes, _Tou-kiue_, p. 125, cf. pp. 121 and 170. For
Hsien shen see Giles's _Chinese Dict._ No. 4477.]

[Footnote 515: Beal, _Life_, p. 205.]

[Footnote 516: Identified by Stein with Kohmari Hill which is still
revered by Mohammedans as a sacred spot.]

[Footnote 517: _Desert Cathay_, II. p. 114.]

[Footnote 518: See Watters, _Yuan Chwang_, II. p. 296. Beal, _Life_.
p. 205. Chavannes, "Voyage de Sung Yun." _B.E.F.E.O._ 1903, 395, and
for the Tibetan sources, Rockhill, _Life of the Buddha_, chap. VIII.
One of the four Tibetan works is expressly stated to be translated
from Khotanese.]

[Footnote 519: The Tibetan Chronicles of Li-Yul say that they
worshipped Vaisravana and Srimahadevi.]

[Footnote 520: A monk from Kashmir called Vairocana was also active in
Tibet about 750 A.D.]

[Footnote 521: It is also possible that Buddhism had a bad time in the
fifth and sixth centuries at the hands of the Tanguts, Juan-Juan and
White Huns.]

[Footnote 522: The Later Han Annals say that the Hindus are weaker
than the Yueh-chih and are not accustomed to fight because they are
Buddhists. (See _T'oung Pao_, 1910, p. 192.) This seems to imply that
the Yueh-chih were not Buddhists. But even this was the real view of
the compiler of the Annals we do not know from what work he took this
statement nor to what date it refers.]

[Footnote 523: See Beal, _Life_, p. 39, Julien, p. 50. The books
mentioned are apparently the Samyuktabhidharmahridaya (Nanjio,
1287), Abhidharma Kosha (Nanjio, 1267), Abhidharma-Vibhasha (Nanjio,
1264) and Yogacaryabhumi (Nanjio, 1170).]

[Footnote 524: The importance of the Tarim basin is due to the
excellent preservation of its records and its close connection with
China. The Oxus regions suffered more from Mohammedan iconoclasm, but
they may have been at least equally important for the history of
Buddhism.]

[Footnote 525: _E.g._ see the Maitreya inscription of Turfan.]

[Footnote 526: Or at least is not accessible to me here in Hongkong,
1914.]

[Footnote 527: I do not mean to say that all Dharanis are late.]

[Footnote 528: It is even probable that apocryphal Sutras were
composed in Central Asia. See Pelliot in _Melanges d'Indianisme_,
Sylvain Levi, p. 329.]

[Footnote 529: The list of manifestations in Jambudvipa enumerates 56
kingdoms. All cannot be identified with certainty, but apparently less
than half are within India proper.]

[Footnote 530: See _Bibl. Budd._ XII. pp. 44, 46, XIV. p. 45.]

[Footnote 531: The Turkish sutras repeatedly style the Buddha God
(t'angri) or God of Gods. The expression devatideva is applied to him
in Sanskrit, but the Turkish phrases are more decided and frequent.
The Sanskrit phrase may even be due to Iranian influence.]

[Footnote 532: An Chou, the Prince to whose memory the temple was
dedicated, seems to be regarded as a manifestation of Maitreya.]

[Footnote 533: _J.A._ 1913, I. p. 154. The series of three articles by
Chavannes and Pelliot entitled "Un traite Manicheen retrouve en Chine"
(_J.A._ 1911, 1913) is a most valuable contribution to our knowledge
of Manichaeism in Central Asia and China.]

[Footnote 534: _E.g._ see _J.A._ 1911, pp. 509 and 589. See also Le
Coq, _Sitzb. preuss. Akad. der Wiss._ 48, 1909, 1202-1218.]

[Footnote 535: _J.A._ 1913, I. pp. 116 and 132.]

[Footnote 536: See especially Havret, "La stele chretienne de
Si-ngan-fu" in _Varietes Sinologues_, pp. 7, 12 and 20.]

[Footnote 537: See Havret, _l. c_. III. p. 54, for some interesting
remarks respecting the unwillingness of the Nestorians and also of the
Jesuits to give publicity to the crucifixion.]

[Footnote 538: See Takakusu, _I-tsing_, pp. 169, 223, and _T'oung
Pao_, 1896, p. 589.]

[Footnote 539: Turfan and Kucha are spoken of as being mainly
Hinayanist.]

[Footnote 540: See Stein, _Zoroastrian deities on Indo-Scythian
coins_, 1887.]

[Footnote 541: See _S.B.E._ IV. (Vendidad) pp. 145, 209; XXIII. p.
184, V. p. III.]

[Footnote 542: Chap. VII. The notices in Chaps. XXII. and XXIV. are
rather more detailed but also later.]

[Footnote 543: XII. p. 23.]

[Footnote 544: Transl. Schiefner, pp. 93, 105 and 303, and Pander's
_Pantheon_, No. 11. But Taranatha also says that he was Aryadeva's
pupil.]

[Footnote 545: Sara in Sanskrit.]

[Footnote 546: The doctrine of salvation by faith alone seems to be
later. The longer and apparently older version of the Sukhavati Vyuha
insists on good works as a condition of entry into Paradise.]

[Footnote 547: _S.B.E._ IV. p. 293; _ib._ XXXIII. pp. 317 and 344.]

[Footnote 548: It may also be noticed that Ameretat, the Archangel of
immortality, presides over vegetation and that Amida's paradise is
full of flowers.]

[Footnote 549: _S.B.E._ XXIII. pp. 335-7.]

[Footnote 550: _S.B.E._ XXXI. p. 261.]

[Footnote 551: _S.B.E._ XXIII. pp. 21-31 (the Ormasd Yasht).]

[Footnote 552: Is it possible that there is any connection between
Sukhavati and the land of Saukavastan, governed by an immortal ruler
and located by the Bundehish between Turkistan and Chinistan? I
imagine there is no etymological relationship, but if Saukavastan was
well known as a land of the blessed it may have influenced the choice
of a significant Sanskrit word with a similar sound.]

[Footnote 553: _E.R.E. sub voce_.]

[Footnote 554: _J.A._ 1912, I. p. 622. Unfortunately only a brief
notice of his communication is given with no details. See also S.
Levi, _Le Nepal_, pp. 330 ff.]

[Footnote 555: Ti-tsang in Chinese, Jizo in Japanese. See for his
history Visser's elaborate articles in _Ostasiatische Ztsft._
1913-1915.]

[Footnote 556: He was accepted by the Manichaeans as one of the Envoys
of Light. _J.A._ 1911, II. p. 549.]




CHAPTER XLII

CHINA

_Prefatory note._


For the transcription of Chinese words I use the modern Peking
pronunciation as represented in Giles's Dictionary. It may be justly
objected that of all dialects Pekingese is perhaps the furthest removed
from ancient Chinese and therefore unsuited for historical studies and
also that Wade's system of transcription employed by Giles is open to
serious criticism. But, on the other hand, I am not competent to write
according to the pronunciation of Nanking or Canton all the names which
appear in these chapters and, if I were, it would not be a convenience
to my readers. Almost all English works of reference about China use the
forms registered in Giles's Dictionary or near approximations to them,
and any variation would produce difficulty and confusion. French and
German methods of transcribing Chinese differ widely from Wade's and
unfortunately there seems to be no prospect of sinologues agreeing on
any international system.

INTRODUCTORY.


The study of Chinese Buddhism is interesting but difficult.[557] Here
more than in other Asiatic countries we feel that the words and
phrases natural to a European language fail to render justly the
elementary forms of thought, the simplest relationships. But Europeans
are prone to exaggerate the mysterious, topsy-turvy character of the
Chinese mind. Such epithets are based on the assumption that human
thought and conduct normally conform to reason and logic, and that
when such conformity is wanting the result must be strange and hardly
human, or at least such as no respectable European could expect or
approve. But the assumption is wrong. In no country with which I am
acquainted are logic and co-ordination of ideas more wanting than
in the British Isles. This is not altogether a fault, for human
systems are imperfect and the rigorous application of any one
imperfect system must end in disaster. But the student of Asiatic
psychology must begin his task by recognising that in the West and
East alike, the thoughts of nations, though not always of individuals,
are a confused mosaic where the pattern has been lost and a thousand
fancies esteemed at one time or another as pleasing, useful or
respectable are crowded into the available space. This is especially
true in the matter of religion. An observer fresh to the subject might
find it hard to formulate the relations to one another and to the
Crown of the various forms of Christianity prevalent in our Empire or
to understand how the English Church can be one body, when some
sections of it are hardly distinguishable from Roman Catholicism and
others from non-conformist sects. In the same way Chinese religion
offers startling combinations of incongruous rites and doctrines: the
attitude of the laity and of the government to the different churches
is not to be defined in ordinary European terms and yet if one
examines the practice of Europe, it will often throw light on the
oddities of China.

The difficulty of finding a satisfactory equivalent in Chinese for the
word God is well known and has caused much discussion among
missionaries. Confucius inherited and handed on a worship of Heaven
which inspired some noble sayings and may be admitted to be
monotheism. But it was a singularly impersonal monotheism and had
little to do with popular religion, being regarded as the prerogative
and special cult of the Emperor. The people selected their deities
from a numerous pantheon of spirits, falling into many classes among
which two stand out clearly, namely, nature spirits and spirits of
ancestors. All these deities, as we must call them for want of a
better word, present odd features, which have had some influence on
Chinese Buddhism. The boundary between the human and the spirit worlds
is slight. Deification and euhemerism are equally natural to the
Chinese. Not only are worthies of every sort made into gods,[558] but
foreign deities are explained on the same principle. Thus Yen-lo
(Yama), the king of the dead, is said to have been a Chinese official
of the sixth century A.D. But there is little mythology. The deities
are like the figures on porcelain vases: all know their appearance and
some their names, but hardly anyone can give a coherent account of
them. A poly-daemonism of this kind is even more fluid than Hinduism:
you may invent any god you like and neglect gods that don't concern
you. The habit of mind which produces sects in India, namely the
desire to exalt one's own deity above others and make him the All-God,
does not exist. No Chinese god inspires such feelings.

The deities of medieval and modern China, including the spirits
recognized by Chinese Buddhism, are curiously mixed and vague
personalities.[559] Nature worship is not absent, but it is nature as
seen by the fancy of the alchemist and astrologer. The powers that
control nature are also identified with ancient heroes, but they are
mostly heroes of the type of St. George and the Dragon of whom history
has little to say, and Chinese respect for the public service and
official rank takes the queer form of regarding these spirits as
celestial functionaries. Thus the gods have a Ministry of Thunder
which supervises the weather and a Board of Medicine which looks after
sickness and health.

The characteristic expression of Chinese popular religion is not
exactly myth or legend but religious romance. A writer starts from
some slender basis of fact and composes an edifying novel. Thus the
well-known story called Hsi-Yu-Chi[560] purports to be an account of
Hsuan Chuang's journey to India but, except that it represents the
hero as going there and returning with copies of the scriptures, it is
romance pure and simple, a fantastic Pilgrim's Progress, the scene
of which is sometimes on earth and sometimes in the heavens. The
traveller is accompanied by allegorical creatures such as a magic
monkey, a pig, and a dragon horse, who have each their own
significance and may be seen represented in Buddhist and Taoist
temples even to-day. So too another writer, starting from the
tradition that Avalokita (or Kuan-Yin) was once a benevolent human
being, set himself to write the life of Kuan-Yin, represented as a
princess endued with every virtue who cheerfully bears cruel
persecution for her devotion to Buddhism. It would be a mistake to
seek in this story any facts throwing light on the history of
Avalokita and his worship. It is a religious novel, important only
because it still finds numerous readers.

It is commonly said that the Chinese belong to three religions,
Confucianism, Buddhism and Taoism, and the saying is not altogether
inaccurate. Popular language speaks of the three creeds and an
ordinary person in the course of his life may take part in rites which
imply a belief in them all.[561] Indeed the fusion is so complete that
one may justly talk of Chinese religion, meaning the jumble of
ceremonies and beliefs accepted by the average man. Yet at the same
time it is possible to be an enthusiast for any one of the three
without becoming unconventional.

Of the three religions, Confucianism has a disputable claim to the
title. If the literary classes of China find it sufficient, they do so
only by rejecting the emotional and speculative sides of religion. The
Emperor Wan-li[562] made a just epigram when he said that Confucianism
and Buddhism are like the wings of a bird. Each requires the
co-operation of the other. Confucius was an ethical and political
philosopher, not a prophet, hierophant or church founder. As a
moralist he stands in the first rank, and I doubt if either the
Gospels or the Pitakas contain maxims for the life of a good citizen
equal to his sayings. But he ignored that unworldly morality which,
among Buddhists and Christians, is so much admired and so little
practised. In religion he claimed no originality, he brought no
revelation, but he accepted the current ideas of his age and time,
though perhaps he eliminated many popular superstitions. He commended
the worship of Heaven, which, if vague, still connected the deity with
the moral law, and he enjoined sacrifice to ancestors and spirits. But
all this apparently without any theory. His definition of wisdom is
well known: "to devote oneself to human duties and keep aloof from
spirits while still respecting them." This is not the utterance of a
sceptical statesman, equivalent to "remember the political importance
of religion but keep clear of it, so far as you can." The best
commentary is the statement in the _Analects_ that he seldom spoke
about the will of Heaven, yet such of his utterances about it as have
been preserved are full of awe and submission.[563] A certain delicacy
made him unwilling to define or discuss the things for which he felt
the highest reverence, and a similar detached but respectful attitude
is still a living constituent of Chinese society. The scholar and
gentleman will not engage in theological or metaphysical disputes, but
he respectfully takes part in ceremonies performed in honour of such
venerated names as Heaven, Earth and Confucius himself. Less
willingly, but still without remonstrance, he attends Buddhist or
Taoist celebrations.

If it is hard to define the religious element in Confucianism, it is
still harder to define Taoism, but for another reason, namely, that
the word has more than one meaning. In one sense it is the old popular
religion of China, of which Confucius selected the scholarly and
gentlemanly features. Taoism, on the contrary, rejected no godlings
and no legends however grotesque: it gave its approval to the most
extravagant and material superstitions, especially to the belief that
physical immortality could be insured by drinking an elixir, which
proved fatal to many illustrious dupes. As an organized body it owes
its origin to Chang-Ling _(c._ 130 A.D.) and his grandson
Chang-Lu.[564] The sect received its baptism of blood but made terms
with the Chinese Government, one condition being that a member of the
house of Chang should be recognized as its hereditary Patriarch or
Pope.[565] Rivalry with Buddhism also contributed to give Taoism
something of that consistency in doctrine and discipline which we
associate with the word religion, for in their desire to show that
they were as good as their opponents the Taoists copied them in
numerous and important particulars, for instance triads of deities,
sacred books and monastic institutions.

The power of inventive imitation is characteristic of Taoism.[566] In
most countries great gods are children of the popular mind. After long
gestation and infancy they emerge as deities bound to humanity by a
thousand ties of blood and place. But the Taoists, whenever they
thought a new deity needful or ornamental, simply invented him, often
with the sanction of an Imperial Edict. Thus Yu-Ti,[567] the precious
or jade Emperor, who is esteemed the supreme ruler of the world, was
created or at least brought into notice about 1012 A.D. by the Emperor
Chen Tsung[568] who pretended to have correspondence with him. He is
probably an adaptation of Indra and is also identified with a prince
of ancient China, but cannot be called a popular hero like Rama or
Krishna, and has not the same hold on the affections of the people.

But Taoism is also the name commonly given not only to this fanciful
church but also to the philosophic ideas expounded in the Tao-te-ching
and in the works of Chuang-tzu. The Taoist priesthood claim this
philosophy, but the two have no necessary connection. Taoism as
philosophy represents a current of thought opposed to Confucianism,
compared with which it is ascetic, mystic and pantheistic, though
except in comparison it does not deserve such epithets. My use of
pantheistic in particular may raise objection, but it seems to me that
Tao, however hard to define, is analogous to Brahman, the impersonal
Spirit of Hindu philosophy. The universe is the expression of Tao and
in conforming to Tao man finds happiness. For Confucianism, as for
Europe, man is the pivot and centre of things, but less so for
Taoism and Buddhism. Philosophic Taoism, being somewhat abstruse and
unpractical, might seem to have little chance of becoming a popular
superstition. But from early times it was opposed to Confucianism, and
as Confucianism became more and more the hall-mark of the official and
learned classes, Taoism tended to become popular, at the expense of
degrading itself. From early times too it dallied with such
fascinating notions as the acquisition of miraculous powers and
longevity. But, as an appeal to the emotional and spiritual sides of
humanity, it was, if superior to Confucianism, inferior to Buddhism.

Buddhism, unlike Confucianism and Taoism, entered China as a foreign
religion, but, in using this phrase, we must ask how far any system of
belief prevalent there is accepted as what we call a religion. Even in
Ceylon and Burma people follow the observances of two religions or at
least of a religion and a superstition, but they would undoubtedly
call themselves Buddhists. In China the laity use no such designations
and have no sense of exclusive membership. For them a religion is
comparable to a club, which they use for special purposes. You may
frequent both Buddhist and Taoist temples just as you may belong to
both the Geographical and Zoological Societies. Perhaps the position
of spiritualism in England offers the nearest analogy to a Chinese
religion. There are, I believe, some few persons for whom spiritualism
is a definite, sufficient and exclusive creed. These may be compared
to the Buddhist clergy with a small minority of the laity. But the
majority of those who are interested or even believe in spiritualism,
do not identify themselves with it in this way. They attend seances as
their curiosity or affections may prompt, but these beliefs and
practices do not prevent them from also belonging to a Christian
denomination. Imagine spiritualism to be better organized as an
institution and you will have a fairly accurate picture of the average
Chinaman's attitude to Buddhism and Taoism. One may also compare the
way in which English poets use classical mythology. _Lycidas_, for
instance, is an astounding compound of classical and biblical ideas,
and Milton does not hesitate to call the Supreme Being Jove in a
serious passage. Yet Milton's Christianity has never, so far as I
know, been called in question.

There is an obvious historical parallel between the religions of
the Chinese and early Roman Empires. In both, the imperial and
official worship was political and indifferent to dogma without being
hostile, provided no sectary refused to call the Emperor Son of Heaven
or sacrifice to his image. In both, ample provision was made outside
the state cult for allaying the fears of superstition, as well as for
satisfying the soul's thirst for knowledge and emotion. A Roman
magistrate of the second century A.D. may have offered official
sacrifices, propitiated local genii, and attended the mysteries of
Mithra, in the same impartial way as Chinese magistrates took part a
few years ago in the ceremonies of Confucianism, Taoism and Buddhism.
In both cases there was entire liberty to combine with the official
religious routine private beliefs and observances incongruous with it
and often with one another: in both there was the same essential
feature that no deity demanded exclusive allegiance. The popular
polytheism of China is indeed closely analogous to the paganism of the
ancient world.[569] Hinduism contains too much personal religion and
real spiritual feeling to make the resemblance perfect, but in dealing
with Apollo, Mars and Venus a Roman of the early Empire seems to have
shown the mixture of respect and scepticism which is characteristic of
China.

This attitude implies not only a certain want of conviction but also a
utilitarian view of religion. The Chinese visit a temple much as they
visit a shop or doctor, for definite material purposes, and if it be
asked whether they are a religious people in the better sense of the
word, I am afraid the answer must be in the negative. It is with
regret that I express this opinion and I by no means imply that there
are not many deeply religious persons in China, but whereas in India
the obvious manifestations of superstition are a superficial disease
and the heart of the people is keenly sensitive to questions of
personal salvation and speculative theology, this cannot be said of
the masses in China, where religion, as seen, consists of
superstitious rites and the substratum of thought and feeling is
small.

This struck me forcibly when visiting Siam some years ago. In
Bangkok there is a large Chinese population and several Buddhist
temples have been made over to them. The temples frequented by Siamese
are not unlike catholic churches in Europe: the decoration is roughly
similar, the standard of decorum much the same. The visitors come to
worship, meditate or hear sermons. But in the temples used by the
Chinese, a lower standard is painfully obvious and the atmosphere is
different. Visitors are there in plenty, but their object is to "get
luck," and the business of religion has become transformed into
divination and spiritual gambling. The worshipper, on entering, goes
to a counter where he buys tapers and incense-sticks, together with
some implements of superstition such as rods or inscribed cards. After
burning incense he draws a card or throws the rods up into the air and
takes an augury from the result. Though the contrast presented in Siam
makes the degradation more glaring, yet these temples in Bangkok are
not worse than many which I have seen in China. I gladly set on the
other side of the account some beautiful and reverent halls of worship
in the larger monasteries, but I fear that the ordinary Chinese
temple, whether Taoist or Buddhist, is a ghostly shop where, in return
for ceremonies which involve neither moral nor intellectual effort,
the customer is promised good luck, offspring, and other material
blessings.

It can hardly be denied that the populace in China are grossly
superstitious. Superstition is a common failing and were statistics
available to show the number and status of Europeans who believe in
fortune-telling and luck, the result might be startling. But in most
civilized countries such things are furtive and apologetic. In China
the strangest forms of magic and divination enjoy public esteem. The
ideas which underlie popular practice and ritual are worthy of African
savages: there has been a monstrous advance in systematization, yet
the ethics and intellect of China, brilliant as are their
achievements, have not leavened the lump. The average Chinese, though
an excellent citizen, full of common sense and shrewd in business, is
in religious matters a victim of fatuous superstition and completely
divorced from the moral and intellectual standards which he otherwise
employs.

Conspicuous among these superstitions is Feng Shui or
Geomancy,[570] a pseudo-science which is treated as seriously as
law or surveying. It is based on the idea that localities have a sort
of spiritual climate which brings prosperity or the reverse and
depends on the influences of stars and nature spirits, such as the
azure dragon and white tiger. But since these agencies find expression
in the contours of a locality, they can be affected if its features
are modified by artificial means, for instance, the construction of
walls and towers. Buddhism did not disdain to patronize these notions.
The principal hall of a monastery is usually erected on a specially
auspicious site and the appeals issued for the repair of sacred
buildings often point out the danger impending if edifices essential
to the good Feng Shui of a district are allowed to decay. The
scepticism and laughter of the educated does not clear the air, for
superstition can flourish when neither respected nor believed. The
worst feature of religion in China is that the decently educated
public ridicules its external observances, but continues to practise
them, because they are connected with occasions of good fellowship or
because their omission might be a sign of disrespect to departed
relatives or simply because in dealing with uncanny things it is
better to be on the safe side. This is the sum of China's composite
religion as visible in public and private rites. Its ethical value is
far higher than might be supposed, for its most absurd superstitions
also recommend love and respect in family life and a high standard of
civic duty. But China has never admitted that public or private
morality requires the support of a religious creed.

As might be expected, life and animation are more apparent in sects
than in conventional religion. Since the recent revolution it is no
longer necessary to confute the idea that the Chinese are a stationary
and unemotional race, but its inaccuracy was demonstrated by many
previous movements especially the T'ai-p'ing rebellion, which had at
first a religious tinge. Yet in China such movements, though they may
kindle enthusiasm and provoke persecution, rarely have the religious
value attaching to a sect in Christian, Hindu and Mohammedan
countries. Viewed as an ecclesiastical or spiritual movement, the
T'ai-p'ing is insignificant: it was a secret society permitted by
circumstances to become a formidable rising and in its important
phases the political element was paramount. The same is true of many
sects which have not achieved such notoriety. They are secret
societies which adopt a creed, but it is not in the creed that their
real vitality lies.

If it is difficult to say how far the Buddhism of China is a religion,
it is equally difficult to define its relation to the State. Students
well acquainted with the literature as well as with the actual
condition of China have expressed diametrically opposite views as to
the religious attitude of the Imperial Government,[571] one stating
roundly that it was "the most intolerant, the most persecuting of all
earthly Governments," and another that it "at no period refused
hospitality and consideration to any religion recommended as
such."[572]

In considering such questions I would again emphasize the fact that
Chinese terms have often not the same extension as their apparent
synonyms in European languages, which, of course, means that the
provinces of human life and thought have also different boundaries.
For most countries the word clergy has a definite meaning and, in
spite of great diversities, may be applied to Christian clerics,
Mollahs and Brahmans without serious error. It means a class of men
who are the superintendents of religion, but also more. On the one
side, though they may have serious political differences with the
Government, they are usually in touch with it: on the other, though
they may dislike reformers and movements from below, they patronize
and minister to popular sentiment. They are closely connected with
education and learning and sometimes with the law. But in China there
is no class which unites all these features. Learning, law and
education are represented by the Confucian scholars or literati.
Though no one would think of calling them priests, yet they may offer
official sacrifices, like Roman magistrates. Though they are
contemptuous of popular superstition, yet they embody the popular
ideal. It is the pride of a village to produce a scholar. But the
scholarship of the literati is purely Confucian: Buddhist and Taoist
learning have no part in it.

The priest, whether Buddhist or Taoist, is not in the mind of the
people the repository of learning and law. He is not in religious
matters the counterpart of the secular arm, but rather a private
practitioner, duly licensed but of no particular standing. But he is
skilful in his own profession: he has access to the powers who help,
pity and console, and even the sceptic seeks his assistance when
confronted with the dangers of this world and the next.

The student of Chinese history may object that at many periods,
notably under the Yuan dynasty, the Buddhist clergy were officially
recognized as an educational body and even received the title of
Kuo-shih or teacher of the people. This is true. Such recognition by
no means annihilated the literati, but it illustrates the decisive
influence exercised by the Emperor and the court. We have, on the one
side, a learned official class, custodians of the best national ideals
but inclined to reject emotion and speculation as well as
superstition: on the other, two priesthoods, prone to superstition but
legitimately strong in so far as they satisfied the emotional and
speculative instincts. The literati held persistently, though
respectfully, to the view that the Emperor should be a Confucianist
pure and simple, but Buddhism and Taoism had such strong popular
support that it was always safe and often politic for an Emperor to
patronize them. Hence an Emperor of personal convictions was able to
turn the balance, and it must be added that Buddhism often flourished
in the courts of weak and dissolute Emperors who were in the hands of
women and eunuchs. Some of these latter were among its most
distinguished devotees.

All Chinese religions agreed in accepting the Emperor as head of the
Church, not merely titular but active. He exercised a strange
prerogative of creating, promoting and degrading deities. Even within
the Buddhist sphere he regulated the incarnations of Bodhisattvas in
the persons of Lamas and from time to time re-edited the canon[573] or
added new works to it. This extreme Erastianism had its roots in
Indian as well as Chinese ideas. The Confucianist, while reminding the
Emperor that he should imitate the sages and rulers of antiquity,
gladly admitted his right to control the worship of all spirits[574]
and the popular conscience, while probably unable to define what was
meant by the title _Son of Heaven_,[575] felt that it gave him a
viceregal right to keep the gods in order, so long as he did not
provoke famine or other national calamities by mismanagement. The
Buddhists, though tenacious of freedom in the spiritual life, had no
objection to the patronage of princes. Asoka permitted himself to
regulate the affairs of the Church and the success of Buddhists as
missionaries was due in no small measure to their tact in allowing
other sovereigns to follow his example.

That Buddhism should have obtained in China a favourable reception and
a permanent status is indeed remarkable, for in two ways it was
repugnant to the sentiments of the governing classes to say nothing of
the differences in temper and outlook which divide Hindus and Chinese.
Firstly, its ideal was asceticism and celibacy; it gave family life
the lower place and ignored the popular Chinese view that to have a
son is not only a duty, but also essential for those sacrifices
without which the departed spirit cannot have peace. Secondly, it was
not merely a doctrine but an ecclesiastical organization, a
congregation of persons who were neither citizens nor subjects, not
exactly an _imperium in imperio_ nor a secret society, but
dangerously capable of becoming either. Such bodies have always
incurred the suspicion and persecution of the Chinese Government. Even
in the fifth century Buddhist monasteries were accused of organizing
armed conspiracies and many later sects suffered from the panic which
they inspired in official bosoms. But both difficulties were overcome
by the suppleness of the clergy. If they outraged family sentiment
they managed to make themselves indispensable at funeral
ceremonies.[576] If they had a dangerous resemblance to an _imperium
in imperio_, they minimized it by their obvious desire to exercise
influence through the Emperor. Though it is true that the majority of
anti-dynastic political sects had a Buddhist colour, the most
prominent and influential Buddhists never failed in loyalty. To this
adroitness must be added a solid psychological advantage. The success
of Buddhism in China was due to the fact that it presented religious
emotion and speculation in the best form known there, and when it
began to spread the intellectual soil was not unpropitious. The higher
Taoist philosophy had made familiar the ideas of quietism and the
contemplative life: the age was unsettled, harassed alike by foreign
invasion and civil strife. In such times when even active natures tire
of unsuccessful struggles, the asylum of a monastery has attractions
for many.

We have now some idea of the double position of Buddhism in China and
can understand how it sometimes appears as almost the established
church and sometimes as a persecuted sect. The reader will do well to
remember that in Europe the relations of politics to religion have not
always been simple: many Catholic sovereigns have quarrelled with
Popes and monks. The French Government supports the claims of Catholic
missions in China but does not favour the Church in France. The fact
that Huxley was made a Privy Councillor does not imply that Queen
Victoria approved of his religious views. In China the repeated
restrictive edicts concerning monasteries should not be regarded as
acts of persecution. Every politician can see the loss to the state if
able-bodied men become monks by the thousand. In periods of literary
and missionary zeal, large congregations of such monks may have a
sufficient sphere of activity but in sleepy, decadent periods they are
apt to become a moral or political danger. A devout Buddhist or
Catholic may reasonably hold that though the monastic life is the best
for the elect, yet for the unworthy it is more dangerous than the
temptations of the world. Thus the founder of the Ming dynasty had
himself been a bonze, yet he limited the number and age of those
who might become monks.[577] On the other hand, he attended Buddhist
services and published an edition of the Tripitaka. In this and in the
conduct of most Emperors there is little that is inconsistent or
mysterious: they regarded religion not in our fashion as a system
deserving either allegiance or rejection, but as a modern Colonial
Governor might regard education. Some Governors are enthusiastic for
education: others mistrust it as a stimulus of disquieting ideas: most
accept it as worthy of occasional patronage, like hospitals and races.
In the same way some Emperors, like Wu-Ti,[578] were enthusiasts for
Buddhism and made it practically the state religion: a few others were
definitely hostile either from conviction or political circumstances,
but probably most sovereigns regarded it as the average British
official regards education, as something that one can't help having,
that one must belaud on certain public occasions, that may now and
then be useful, but still emphatically something to be kept within
limits.

Outbursts against Buddhism are easy to understand. I have pointed out
its un-Chinese features and the persistent opposition of the literati.
These were sufficient reasons for repressive measures whenever the
Emperor was unbuddhist in his sympathies, especially if the
monasteries had enjoyed a period of prosperity and become crowded and
wealthy. What is harder to understand is the occasional favour shown
by apparently anti-Buddhist Emperors.

The Sacred Edict of the great K'ang Hsi forbids heterodoxy (i tuan) in
which the official explanation clearly includes Buddhism.[579] It was
published in his extreme youth, but had his mature approval, and until
recently was read in every prefecture twice a month. But the same
Emperor gave many gifts to monasteries, and in 1705 he issued a
decree to the monks of P'uto in which he said, "we since our boyhood
have been earnest students of Confucian lore and have had no time to
become minutely acquainted with the sacred books of Buddhism, but we
are satisfied that Virtue is the one word which indicates what is
essential in both systems. Let us pray to the compassionate Kuan-yin
that she may of her grace send down upon our people the spiritual rain
and sweet dew of the good Law: that she may grant them bounteous
harvests, seasonable winds and the blessings of peace, harmony and
long life and finally that she may lead them to the salvation which
she offers to all beings in the Universe."[580] The two edicts are not
consistent but such inconsistency is no reproach to a statesman nor
wholly illogical. The Emperor reprimands extravagance in doctrine and
ceremonial and commends Confucianism to his subjects as all that is
necessary for good life and good government, but when he finds that
Buddhism conduces to the same end he accords his patronage and
politely admits the existence and power of Kuan-yin.

But I must pass on to another question, the relation of Chinese to
Indian Buddhism. Chinese Buddhism is often spoken of as a strange and
corrupt degeneration, a commixture of Indian and foreign ideas. Now if
such phrases mean that the pulse of life is feeble and the old lights
dim, we must regretfully admit their truth, but still little is to be
found in Chinese Buddhism except the successive phases of later Indian
Buddhism, introduced into China from the first century A.D. onwards.
In Japan there arose new sects, but in China, when importation ceased,
no period of invention supervened. The T'ien-t'ai school has some
originality, and native and foreign ideas were combined by the
followers of Bodhidharma. But the remaining schools were all founded
by members of Indian sects or by Chinese who aimed at scrupulous
imitation of Indian models. Until the eighth century, when the
formative period came to an end, we have an alternation of Indian or
Central Asian teachers arriving in China to meet with respect and
acceptance, and of Chinese enquirers who visited India in order to
discover the true doctrine and practice and were honoured on their
return in proportion as they were believed to have found it. There is
this distinction between China and such countries as Java, Camboja and
Champa, that whereas in them we find a mixture of Hinduism and
Buddhism, in China the traces of Hinduism are slight. The imported
ideas, however corrupt, were those of Indian Buddhist scholars, not
the mixed ideas of the Indian layman.[581]

Of course Buddhist theory and practice felt the influence of their new
surroundings. The ornaments and embroidery of the faith are Chinese
and sometimes hide the original material. Thus Kuan-yin, considered
historically, has grown out of the Indian deity Avalokita, but the
goddess worshipped by the populace is the heroine of the Chinese
romance mentioned above. And, since many Chinese are only half
Buddhists, tales about gods and saints are taken only half-seriously;
the Buddha periodically invites the immortals to dine with him in
Heaven and the Eighteen Lohan are described as converted brigands.

In every monastery the buildings, images and monks obviously bear the
stamp of the country. Yet nearly all the doctrines and most of the
usages have Indian parallels. The ritual has its counterpart in what
I-Ching describes as seen by himself in his Indian travels. China has
added the idea of _feng-shui_, and has modified architectural forms.
For instance the many-storeyed pagoda is an elongation of the
