for you:

011.026
Y: "That ye serve none but Allah: Verily I do fear for you the penalty
of a grievous day."

P: That ye serve none, save Allah. Lo! I fear for you the retribution of
a painful Day.

S: That you shall not serve any but Allah, surely I fear for you the
punishment of a painful day.

011.027
Y: But the chiefs of the Unbelievers among his people said: "We see (in)
thee nothing but a man like ourselves: Nor do we see that any follow
thee but the meanest among us, in judgment immature: Nor do we see in
you (all) any merit above us: in fact we thing ye are liars!"

P: The chieftains of his folk, who disbelieved, said: We see thee but a
mortal like us, and we see not that any follow thee save the most
abject among us, without reflection. We behold in you no merit above us
- nay, we deem you liars.

S: But the chiefs of those who disbelieved from among his people said:
We do not consider you but a mortal like ourselves, and we do not see
any have followed you but those who are the meanest of us at first
thought and we do not see in you any excellence over us; nay, we deem
you liars.

011.028
Y: He said: "O my people! See ye if (it be that) I have a Clear Sign
from my Lord, and that He hath sent Mercy unto me from His own
presence, but that the Mercy hath been obscured from your sight? shall
we compel you to accept it when ye are averse to it?"

P: He said: O my people! Bethink you, if I rely on a clear proof from my
Lord and there hath come unto me a mercy from His presence, and it hath
been made obscure to you, can we compel you to accept it when ye are
averse thereto?

S: He said: O my people! tell me if I have with me clear proof from my
Lord, and He has granted me mercy from Himself and it has been made
obscure to you; shall we constrain you to (accept) it while you are
averse from it?

011.029
Y: "And O my people! I ask you for no wealth in return: my reward is
from none but Allah: But I will not drive away (in contempt) those who
believe: for verily they are to meet their Lord, and ye I see are the
ignorant ones!"

P: And O my people! I ask of you no wealth therefor. My reward is the
concern only of Allah, and I am not going to thrust away those who
believe - Lo! they have to meet their Lord! - but I see you a folk that
are ignorant.

S: And, O my people! I ask you not for wealth in return for it; my
reward is only with Allah and I am not going to drive away those who
believe; surely they shall meet their Lord, but I consider you a people
who are ignorant:

011.030
Y: "And O my people! who would help me against Allah if I drove them
away? Will ye not then take heed?"

P: And, O my people! who would deliver me from Allah if I thrust them
away? Will ye not then reflect?

S: And, O my people! who will help me against Allah if I drive them
away? Will you not then mind?

011.031
Y: "I tell you not that with me are the treasures of Allah, nor do I
know what is hidden, nor claim I to be an angel. Nor yet do I say, of
those whom your eyes do despise that Allah will not grant them (all)
that is good: Allah knoweth best what is in their souls: I should, if I
did, indeed be a wrong-doer."

P: I say not unto you: "I have the treasures of Allah" nor "I have
knowledge of the Unseen," nor say I: "Lo! I am an angel!" Nor say I
unto those whom your eyes scorn that Allah will not give them good -
Allah knoweth best what is in their hearts - Lo! then indeed I should
be of the wrong-doers.

S: And I do not say to you that I have the treasures of Allah and I do
not know the unseen, nor do I say that I am an angel, nor do I say
about those whom your eyes hold in mean estimation (that) Allah will
never grant them (any) good-- Allah knows best what is in their souls--
for then most surely I should be of the unjust.

011.032
Y: They said: "O Noah! thou hast disputed with us, and (much) hast thou
prolonged the dispute with us: now bring upon us what thou threatenest
us with, if thou speakest the truth!"

P: They said: O Noah! Thou hast disputed with us and multiplied
disputation with us; now bring upon us that wherewith thou threatenest
us, if thou art of the truthful.

S: They said: O Nuh! indeed you have disputed with us and lengthened
dispute with us, therefore bring to us what you threaten us with, if
you are of the truthful ones.

011.033
Y: He said: "Truly, Allah will bring it on you if He wills,- and then,
ye will not be able to frustrate it!"

P: He said: Only Allah will bring it upon you if He will, and ye can by
no means escape.

S: He said: Allah only will bring it to you if He please, and you will
not escape:

011.034
Y: "Of no profit will be my counsel to you, much as I desire to give you
(good) counsel, if it be that Allah willeth to leave you astray: He is
your Lord! and to Him will ye return!"

P: My counsel will not profit you if I were minded to advise you, if
Allah's will is to keep you astray. He is your Lord and unto Him ye
will be brought back.

S: And if I intend to give you good advice, my advice will not profit
you if Allah intended that He should leave you to go astray; He is your
Lord, and to Him shall you be returned.

011.035
Y: Or do they say, "He has forged it"? Say: "If I had forged it, on me
were my sins! and I am free of the sins of which ye are guilty!"

P: Or say they (again): He hath invented it? Say: If I have invented it,
upon me be my crimes, but I am innocent of (all) that ye commit.

S: Or do they say: He has forged it? Say: If I have forged it, on me is
my guilt, and I am clear of that of which you are guilty.

011.036
Y: It was revealed to Noah: "None of thy people will believe except
those who have believed already! So grieve no longer over their (evil)
deeds."

P: And it was inspired in Noah, (saying): No-one of thy folk will
believe save him who hath believed already. Be not distressed because
of what they do.

S: And it was revealed to Nuh: That none of your people will believe
except those who have already believed, therefore do not grieve at what
they do:

011.037
Y: "But construct an Ark under Our eyes and Our inspiration, and address
Me no (further) on behalf of those who are in sin: for they are about
to be overwhelmed (in the Flood)."

P: Build the ship under Our eyes and by Our inspiration, and speak not
unto Me on behalf of those who do wrong. Lo! they will be drowned.

S: And make the ark before Our eyes and (according to) Our revelation,
and do not speak to Me in respect of those who are unjust; surely they
shall be drowned.

011.038
Y: Forthwith he (starts) constructing the Ark: Every time that the
chiefs of his people passed by him, they threw ridicule on him. He
said: "If ye ridicule us now, we (in our turn) can look down on you
with ridicule likewise!"

P: And he was building the ship, and every time that chieftains of his
people passed him, they made mock of him. He said: Though ye make mock
of Us, yet We mock at you even as ye mock;

S: And he began to make the ark; and whenever the chiefs from among his
people passed by him they laughed at him. He said: If you laugh at us,
surely we too laugh at you as you laugh (at us).

011.039
Y: "But soon will ye know who it is on whom will descend a penalty that
will cover them with shame,- on whom will be unloosed a penalty
lasting:"

P: And ye shall know to whom a punishment that will confound him cometh,
and upon whom a lasting doom will fall.

S: So shall you know who it is on whom will come a chastisement which
will disgrace him, and on whom will lasting chastisement come down.

011.040
Y: At length, behold! there came Our command, and the fountains of the
earth gushed forth! We said: "Embark therein, of each kind two, male
and female, and your family - except those against whom the word has
already gone forth,- and the Believers." but only a few believed with
him.

P: (Thus it was) till, when Our commandment came to pass and the oven
gushed forth water, We said: Load therein two of every kind, a pair
(the male and female), and thy household, save him against whom the
word hath gone forth already, and those who believe. And but a few were
they who believed with him.

S: Until when Our command came and water came forth from the valley, We
said: Carry in it two of all things, a pair, and your own family--
except those against whom the word has already gone forth, and those
who believe. And there believed not with him but a few.

011.041
Y: So he said: "Embark ye on the Ark, In the name of Allah, whether it
move or be at rest! For my Lord is, be sure, Oft-Forgiving, Most
Merciful!"

P: And he said: Embark therein! In the name of Allah be its course and
its mooring. Lo! my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.

S: And he said: Embark in it, in the name of Allah be its sailing and
its anchoring; most surely my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.

011.042
Y: So the Ark floated with them on the waves (towering) like mountains,
and Noah called out to his son, who had separated himself (from the
rest): "O my son! embark with us, and be not with the unbelievers!"

P: And it sailed with them amid waves like mountains, and Noah cried
unto his son - and he was standing aloof - O my son! Come ride with us,
and be not with the disbelievers.

S: And it moved on with them amid waves like mountains; and Nuh called
out to his son, and he was aloof: O my son! embark with us and be not
with the unbelievers.

011.043
Y: The son replied: "I will betake myself to some mountain: it will save
me from the water." Noah said: "This day nothing can save, from the
command of Allah, any but those on whom He hath mercy!" And the waves
came between them, and the son was among those overwhelmed in the
Flood.

P: He said: I shall betake me to some mountain that will save me from
the water. (Noah) said: This day there is none that saveth from the
commandment of Allah save him on whom He hath had mercy. And the wave
came in between them, so he was among the drowned.

S: He said: I will betake myself for refuge to a mountain that shall
protect me from the water. Nuh said: There is no protector today from
Allah's punishment but He Who has mercy; and a wave intervened between
them, so he was of the drowned.

011.044
Y: Then the word went forth: "O earth! swallow up thy water, and O sky!
Withhold (thy rain)!" and the water abated, and the matter was ended.
The Ark rested on Mount Judi, and the word went forth: "Away with those
who do wrong!"

P: And it was said: O earth! Swallow thy water and, O sky! be cleared of
clouds! And the water was made to subside. And the commandment was
fulfilled. And it (the ship) came to rest upon (the mount) Al-Judi and
it was said: A far removal for wrongdoing folk!

S: And it was said: O earth, swallow down your water, and O cloud, clear
away; and the water was made to abate and the affair was decided, and
the ark rested on the Judi, and it was said: Away with the unjust
people.

011.045
Y: And Noah called upon his Lord, and said: "O my Lord! surely my son is
of my family! and Thy promise is true, and Thou art the Justest of
Judges!"

P: And Noah cried unto his Lord and said: My Lord! Lo! my son is of my
household! Surely Thy promise is the truth and Thou are the Most Just
of Judges.

S: And Nuh cried out to his Lord and said: My Lord! surely my son is of
my family, and Thy promise is surely true, and Thou art the most just
of the judges.

011.046
Y: He said: "O Noah! He is not of thy family: For his conduct is
unrighteous. So ask not of Me that of which thou hast no knowledge! I
give thee counsel, lest thou act like the ignorant!"

P: He said: O Noah! Lo! he is not of thy household; lo! he is of evil
conduct, so ask not of Me that whereof thou hast no knowledge. I
admonish thee lest thou be among the ignorant.

S: He said: O Nuh! surely he is not of your family; surely he is (the
doer of) other than good deeds, therefore ask not of Me that of which
you have no knowledge; surely I admonish you lest you may be of the
ignorant.

011.047
Y: Noah said: "O my Lord! I do seek refuge with Thee, lest I ask Thee
for that of which I have no knowledge. And unless thou forgive me and
have Mercy on me, I should indeed be lost!"

P: He said: My Lord! Lo! in Thee do I seek refuge (from the sin) that I
should ask of Thee that whereof I have no knowledge. Unless Thou
forgive me and have mercy on me I shall be among the lost.

S: He said: My Lord! I seek refuge in Thee from asking Thee that of
which I have no knowledge; and if Thou shouldst not forgive me and have
mercy on me, I should be of the losers.

011.048
Y: The word came: "O Noah! Come down (from the Ark) with peace from Us,
and blessing on thee and on some of the peoples (who will spring) from
those with thee: but (there will be other) peoples to whom We shall
grant their pleasures (for a time), but in the end will a grievous
penalty reach them from Us."

P: It was said (unto him): O Noah! Go thou down (from the mountain) with
peace from Us and blessings upon thee and some nations (that will
spring) from those with thee. (There will be other) nations unto whom
We shall give enjoyment a long while and then a painful doom from Us
will overtake them.

S: It was said: O Nuh! descend with peace from Us and blessings on you
and on the people from among those who are with you, and there shall be
nations whom We will afford provisions, then a painful punishment from
Us shall afflict them.

011.049
Y: Such are some of the stories of the unseen, which We have revealed
unto thee: before this, neither thou nor thy people knew them. So
persevere patiently: for the End is for those who are righteous.

P: This is of the tidings of the Unseen which We inspire in thee
(Muhammad). Thou thyself knewest it not, nor did thy folk (know it)
before this. Then have patience. Lo! the sequel is for those who ward
off (evil).

S: These are announcements relating to the unseen which We reveal to
you, you did not know them-- (neither) you nor your people-- before
this; therefore be patient; surely the end is for those who guard
(against evil).

011.050
Y: To the 'Ad People (We sent) Hud, one of their own brethren. He said:
"O my people! worship Allah! ye have no other god but Him. (Your other
gods) ye do nothing but invent!"

P: And unto (the tribe of) A'ad (We sent) their brother, Hud. He said: O
my people! Serve Allah! Ye have no other Allah save Him. Lo! ye do but
invent.

S: And to Ad (We sent) their brother Hud. He said: O my people! serve
Allah, you have no god other than He; you are nothing but forgers (of
lies).

011.051
Y: "O my people! I ask of you no reward for this (Message). My reward is
from none but Him who created me: Will ye not then understand?"

P: O my people! I ask of you no reward for it. Lo! my reward is the
concern only of Him Who made me. Have ye then no sense?

S: O my people! I do not ask of you any reward for it; my reward is only
with Him Who created me; do you not then understand?

011.052
Y: "And O my people! Ask forgiveness of your Lord, and turn to Him (in
repentance): He will send you the skies pouring abundant rain, and add
strength to your strength: so turn ye not back in sin!"

P: And, O my people! Ask forgiveness of your Lord, then turn unto Him
repentant; He will cause the sky to rain abundance on you and will add
unto you strength to your strength. Turn not away, guilty!

S: And, O my people! ask forgiveness of your Lord, then turn to Him; He
will send on you clouds pouring down abundance of rain and add strength
to your strength, and do not turn back guilty.

011.053
Y: They said: "O Hud! No Clear (Sign) that hast thou brought us, and we
are not the ones to desert our gods on thy word! Nor shall we believe
in thee!"

P: They said: O Hud! Thou hast brought us no clear proof and we are not
going to forsake our gods on thy (mere) saying, and we are not
believers in thee.

S: They said: O Hud! you have not brought to us any clear argument and
we are not going to desert our gods for your word, and we are not
believers in you:

011.054
Y: "We say nothing but that (perhaps) some of our gods may have seized
thee with imbecility." He said: "I call Allah to witness, and do ye
bear witness, that I am free from the sin of ascribing, to Him,"

P: We say naught save that one of our gods hath possessed thee in an
evil way. He said: I call Allah to witness, and do ye (too) bear
witness, that I am innocent of (all) that ye ascribe as partners (to
Allah)

S: We cannot say aught but that some of our gods have smitten you with
evil. He said: Surely I call Allah to witness, and do you bear witness
too, that I am clear of what you associate (with Allah).

011.055
Y: "Other gods as partners! so scheme (your worst) against me, all of
you, and give me no respite."

P: Beside Him. So (try to) circumvent me, all of you, give me no
respite.

S: Besides Him, therefore scheme against me all together; then give me
no respite:

011.056
Y: "I put my trust in Allah, My Lord and your Lord! There is not a
moving creature, but He hath grasp of its forelock. Verily, it is my
Lord that is on a straight Path."

P: Lo! I have put my trust in Allah, my Lord and your Lord. Not an
animal but He doth grasp it by the forelock! Lo! my Lord is on a
straight path.

S: Surely I rely on Allah, my Lord and your Lord; there is no living
creature but He holds it by its forelock; surely my Lord is on the
right path.

011.057
Y: "If ye turn away,- I (at least) have conveyed the Message with which
I was sent to you. My Lord will make another people to succeed you, and
you will not harm Him in the least. For my Lord hath care and watch
over all things."

P: And if ye turn away, still I have conveyed unto you that wherewith I
was sent unto you, and my Lord will set in place of you a folk other
than you. Ye cannot injure Him at all. Lo! my Lord is Guardian over all
things.

S: But if you turn back, then indeed I have delivered to you the message
with which I have been sent to you, and my Lord will bring another
people in your place, and you cannot do Him any harm; surely my Lord is
the Preserver of all things.

011.058
Y: So when Our decree issued, We saved Hud and those who believed with
him, by (special) Grace from Ourselves: We saved them from a severe
penalty.

P: And when Our commandment came to pass We saved Hud and those who
believed with him by a mercy from Us; We saved them from a harsh doom.

S: And when Our decree came to pass, We delivered Hud and those who
believed with him with mercy from Us, and We delivered them from a hard
chastisement.

011.059
Y: Such were the 'Ad People: they rejected the Signs of their Lord and
Cherisher; disobeyed His messengers; And followed the command of every
powerful, obstinate transgressor.

P: And such were A'ad. They denied the revelations of their Lord and
flouted His messengers and followed the command of every froward
potentate.

S: And this was Ad; they denied the communications of their Lord, and
disobeyed His messengers and followed the bidding of every insolent
opposer (of truth).

011.060
Y: And they were pursued by a Curse in this life,- and on the Day of
Judgment. Ah! Behold! for the 'Ad rejected their Lord and Cherisher!
Ah! Behold! removed (from sight) were 'Ad the people of Hud!

P: And a curse was made to follow them in the world and on the Day of
Resurrection. Lo! A'ad disbelieved in their Lord. A far removal for
A'ad, the folk of Hud!

S: And they were overtaken by curse in this world and on the
resurrection day; now surely Ad disbelieved in their Lord; now surely,
away with Ad, the people of Hud.

011.061
Y: To the Thamud People (We sent) Salih, one of their own brethren. He
said: "O my people! Worship Allah: ye have no other god but Him. It is
He Who hath produced you from the earth and settled you therein: then
ask forgiveness of Him, and turn to Him (in repentance): for my Lord is
(always) near, ready to answer."

P: And unto (the tribe of) Thamud (We sent) their brother Salih. He
said: O my people! Serve Allah, Ye have no other Allah save Him. He
brought you forth from the earth and hath made you husband it. So ask
forgiveness of Him and turn unto Him repentant. Lo! my Lord is Nigh,
Responsive.

S: And to Samood (We sent) their brother Salih. He said: O my people!
serve Allah, you have no god other than He; He brought you into being
from the earth, and made you dwell in it, therefore ask forgiveness of
Him, then turn to Him; surely my Lord is Nigh, Answering.

011.062
Y: They said: "O Salih! thou hast been of us! a centre of our hopes
hitherto! dost thou (now) forbid us the worship of what our fathers
worshipped? But we are really in suspicious (disquieting) doubt as to
that to which thou invitest us."

P: They said: O Salih! Thou hast been among us hitherto as that wherein
our hope was placed. Dost thou ask us not to worship what our fathers
worshipped? Lo! we verily are in grave doubt concerning that to which
thou callest us.

S: They said: O Salih! surely you were one amongst us in whom great
expectations were placed before this; do you (now) forbid us from
worshipping what our fathers worshipped? And as to that which you call
us to, most surely we are in disquieting doubt.

011.063
Y: He said: "O my people! do ye see? if I have a Clear (Sign) from my
Lord and He hath sent Mercy unto me from Himself,- who then can help me
against Allah if I were to disobey Him? What then would ye add to my
(portion) but perdition?"

P: He said: O my people! Bethink you: if I am (acting) on clear proof
from my Lord and there hath come unto me a mercy from Him, who will
save me from Allah if I disobey Him? Ye would add to me naught save
perdition.

S: He said: O my people! tell me if I have clear proof from my Lord and
He has granted to me mercy from Himself-- who will then help me against
Allah if I disobey Him? Therefore you do not add to me other than loss:

011.064
Y: "And O my people! This she-camel of Allah is a symbol to you: leave
her to feed on Allah's (free) earth, and inflict no harm on her, or a
swift penalty will seize you!"

P: O my people! This is the camel of Allah, a token unto you, so suffer
her to feed in Allah's earth, and touch her not with harm lest a near
torment seize you.

S: And, O my people! this will be (as) Allah's she-camel for you, a
sign; therefore leave her to pasture on Allah's earth and do not touch
her with evil, for then a near chastisement will overtake you.

011.065
Y: But they did ham-string her. So he said: "Enjoy yourselves in your
homes for three days: (Then will be your ruin): (Behold) there a
promise not to be belied!"

P: But they hamstrung her, and then he said: Enjoy life in your
dwelling-place three days! This is a threat that will not be belied.

S: But they slew her, so he said: Enjoy yourselves in your abode for
three days, that is a promise not to be belied.

011.066
Y: When Our Decree issued, We saved Salih and those who believed with
him, by (special) Grace from Ourselves - and from the Ignominy of that
day. For thy Lord - He is the Strong One, and able to enforce His Will.

P: So, when Our commandment came to pass, We saved Salih, and those who
believed with him, by a mercy from Us, from the ignominy of that day.
Lo, thy Lord! He is the Strong, the Mighty.

S: So when Our decree came to pass, We delivered Salih and those who
believed with him by mercy from Us, and (We saved them) from the
disgrace of that day; surely your Lord is the Strong, the Mighty.

011.067
Y: The (mighty) Blast overtook the wrong-doers, and they lay prostrate
in their homes before the morning,-

P: And the (awful) Cry overtook those who did wrong, so that morning
found them prostrate in their dwellings,

S: And the rumbling overtook those who were unjust, so they became
motionless bodies in their abodes,

011.068
Y: As if they had never dwelt and flourished there. Ah! Behold! for the
Thamud rejected their Lord and Cherisher! Ah! Behold! removed (from
sight) were the Thamud!

P: As though they had not dwelt there. Lo! Thamud disbelieved in their
Lord. A far removal for Thamud!

S: As though they had never dwelt in them; now surely did Samood
disbelieve in their Lord; now surely, away with Samood.

011.069
Y: There came Our messengers to Abraham with glad tidings. They said,
"Peace!" He answered, "Peace!" and hastened to entertain them with a
roasted calf.

P: And Our messengers came unto Abraham with good news. They said: Peace!
He answered: Peace! and delayed not to bring a roasted calf.

S: And certainly Our messengers came to Ibrahim with good news. They
said: Peace. Peace, said he, and he made no delay in bringing a roasted
calf.

011.070
Y: But when he saw their hands went not towards the (meal), he felt some
mistrust of them, and conceived a fear of them. They said: "Fear not:
We have been sent against the people of Lut."

P: And when he saw their hands reached not to it, he mistrusted them and
conceived a fear of them. They said: Fear not! Lo! we are sent unto the
folk of Lot.

S: But when he saw that their hands were not extended towards it, he
deemed them strange and conceived fear of them. . They said: Fear not,
surely we are sent to Lut's people.

011.071
Y: And his wife was standing (there), and she laughed: But we gave her
glad tidings of Isaac, and after him, of Jacob.

P: And his wife, standing by laughed when We gave her good tidings (of
the birth) of Isaac, and, after Isaac, of Jacob.

S: And his wife was standing (by), so she laughed, then We gave her the
good news of Ishaq and after Ishaq of (a son's son) Yaqoub.

011.072
Y: She said: "Alas for me! shall I bear a child, seeing I am an old
woman, and my husband here is an old man? That would indeed be a
wonderful thing!"

P: She said: Oh woe is me! Shall I bear a child when I am an old woman,
and this my husband is an old man? Lo! this is a strange thing!

S: She said: O wonder! shall I bear a son when I am an extremely old
woman and this my husband an extremely old man? Most surely this is a
wonderful thing.

011.073
Y: They said: "Dost thou wonder at Allah's decree? The grace of Allah
and His blessings on you, O ye people of the house! for He is indeed
worthy of all praise, full of all glory!"

P: They said: Wonderest thou at the commandment of Allah? The mercy of
Allah and His blessings be upon you, O people of the house! Lo! He is
Owner of Praise, Owner of Glory!

S: They said: Do you wonder at Allah's bidding? The mercy of Allah and
His blessings are on you, O people of the house, surely He is Praised,
Glorious.

011.074
Y: When fear had passed from (the mind of) Abraham and the glad tidings
had reached him, he began to plead with us for Lut's people.

P: And when the awe departed from Abraham, and the glad news reached
him, he pleaded with Us on behalf of the folk of Lot.

S: So when fear had gone away from Ibrahim and good news came to him, he
began to plead with Us for Lut's people.

011.075
Y: For Abraham was, without doubt, forbearing (of faults),
compassionate, and given to look to Allah.

P: Lo! Abraham was mild, imploring, penitent.

S: Most surely Ibrahim was forbearing, tender-hearted, oft-returning (to
Allah):

011.076
Y: O Abraham! Seek not this. The decree of thy Lord hath gone forth: for
them there cometh a penalty that cannot be turned back!

P: (It was said) O Abraham! Forsake this! Lo! thy Lord's commandment
hath gone forth, and lo! there cometh unto them a doom which cannot be
repelled.

S: O Ibrahim! leave off this, surely the decree of your Lord has come to
pass, and surely there must come to them a chastisement that cannot be
averted.

011.077
Y: When Our messengers came to Lut, he was grieved on their account and
felt himself powerless (to protect) them. He said: "This is a
distressful day."

P: And when Our messengers came unto Lot, he was distressed and knew not
how to protect them. He said: This is a distressful day.

S: And when Our messengers came to Lut, he was grieved for them, and he
lacked strength to protect them, and said: This is a hard day.

011.078
Y: And his people came rushing towards him, and they had been long in
the habit of practising abominations. He said: "O my people! Here are
my daughters: they are purer for you (if ye marry)! Now fear Allah, and
cover me not with shame about my guests! Is there not among you a
single right-minded man?"

P: And his people came unto him, running towards him - and before then
they used to commit abominations - He said: O my people! Here are my
daughters! They are purer for you. Beware of Allah, and degrade me not
in (the person of) my guests. Is there not among you any upright man?

S: And his people came to him, (as if) rushed on towards him, and
already they did evil deeds. He said: O my people! these are my
daughters-- they are purer for you, so guard against (the punishment
of) Allah and do not disgrace me with regard to my guests; is there not
among you one right-minded man?

011.079
Y: They said: "Well dost thou know we have no need of thy daughters:
indeed thou knowest quite well what we want!"

P: They said: Well thou knowest that we have no right to thy daughters,
and well thou knowest what we want.

S: They said: Certainly you know that we have no claim on your
daughters, and most surely you know what we desire.

011.080
Y: He said: "Would that I had power to suppress you or that I could
betake myself to some powerful support."

P: He said: Would that I had strength to resist you or had some strong
support (among you)!

S: He said: Ah! that I had power to suppress you, rather I shall have
recourse to a strong support.

011.081
Y: (The Messengers) said: "O Lut! We are Messengers from thy Lord! By no
means shall they reach thee! now travel with thy family while yet a
part of the night remains, and let not any of you look back: but thy
wife (will remain behind): To her will happen what happens to the
people. Morning is their time appointed: Is not the morning nigh?"

P: (The messengers) said: O Lot! Lo! we are messengers of thy Lord; they
shall not reach thee. So travel with thy people in a part of the night,
and let not one of you turn round - (all) save thy wife. Lo! that which
smiteth them will smite her (also). Lo! their tryst is (for) the
morning. Is not the morning nigh?

S: They said: O Lut! we are the messengers of your Lord; they shall by
no means reach you; so remove your followers in a part of the night--
and let none of you turn back-- except your wife, for surely whatsoever
befalls them shall befall her; surely their appointed time is the
morning; is not the morning nigh?

011.082
Y: When Our Decree issued, We turned (the cities) upside down, and
rained down on them brimstones hard as baked clay, spread, layer on
layer,-

P: So when Our commandment came to pass We overthrew (that township) and
rained upon it stones of clay, one after another,

S: So when Our decree came to pass, We turned them upside down and
rained down upon them stones, of what had been decreed, one after
another.

011.083
Y: Marked as from thy Lord: Nor are they ever far from those who do
wrong!

P: Marked with fire in the providence of thy Lord (for the destruction
of the wicked). And they are never far from the wrong-doers.

S: Marked (for punishment) with your Lord and it is not far off from the
unjust.

011.084
Y: To the Madyan People (We sent) Shu'aib, one of their own brethren: he
said: "O my people! worship Allah: Ye have no other god but Him. And
give not short measure or weight: I see you in prosperity, but I fear
for you the penalty of a day that will compass (you) all round."

P: And unto Midian (We sent) their brother Shu'eyb. He said: O my
people! Serve Allah. Ye have no other Allah save Him! And give not
short measure and short weight. Lo! I see you well-to-do, and lo! I
fear for you the doom of a besetting Day.

S: And to Madyan (We sent) their brother Shu'aib. He said: O my people!
serve Allah, you have no god other than He, and do not give short
measure and weight: surely I see you in prosperity and surely I fear
for you the punishment of an all-encompassing day.

011.085
Y: "And O my people! give just measure and weight, nor withhold from the
people the things that are their due: commit not evil in the land with
intent to do mischief."

P: O my people! Give full measure and full weight in justice, and wrong
not people in respect of their goods. And do not evil in the earth,
causing corruption.

S: And, O my people! give full measure and weight fairly, and defraud
not men their things, and do not act corruptly in the land, making
mischief:

011.086
Y: "That which is left you by Allah is best for you, if ye (but)
believed! but I am not set over you to keep watch!"

P: That which Allah leaveth with you is better for you if ye are
believers; and I am not a keeper over you.

S: What remains with Allah is better for you if you are believers, and I
am not a keeper over you.

011.087
Y: They said: "O Shu'aib! Does thy (religion of) prayer command thee
that we leave off the worship which our fathers practised, or that we
leave off doing what we like with our property? truly, thou art the one
that forbeareth with faults and is right-minded!"

P: They said: O Shu'eyb! Doth thy way of prayer command thee that we
should forsake that which our fathers (used to) worship, or that we
(should leave off) doing what we will with our own property. Lo! thou
art the mild, the guide to right behaviour.

S: They said: O Shu'aib! does your prayer enjoin you that we should
forsake what our fathers worshipped or that we should not do what we
please with regard to our property? Forsooth you are the forbearing,
the right-directing one.

011.088
Y: He said: "O my people! see ye whether I have a Clear (Sign) from my
Lord, and He hath given me sustenance (pure and) good as from Himself?
I wish not, in opposition to you, to do that which I forbid you to do.
I only desire (your) betterment to the best of my power; and my success
(in my task) can only come from Allah. In Him I trust, and unto Him I
look."

P: He said: O my people! Bethink you: if I am (acting) on a clear proof
from my Lord and He sustaineth me with fair sustenance from Him (how
can I concede aught to you)? I desire not to do behind your backs that
which I ask you not to do. I desire naught save reform so far as I am
able. My welfare is only in Allah. In Him I trust and unto Him I turn
(repentant).

S: He said: O my people! have you considered if I have a clear proof
from my Lord and He has given me a goodly sustenance from Himself, and
I do not desire that in opposition to you I should betake myself to
that which I forbid you: I desire nothing but reform so far as I am
able, and with none but Allah is the direction of my affair to a right
issue; on Him do I rely and to Him do I turn:

011.089
Y: "And O my people! let not my dissent (from you) cause you to sin,
lest ye suffer a fate similar to that of the people of Noah or of Hud
or of Salih, nor are the people of Lut far off from you!"

P: And, O my people! Let not the schism with me cause you to sin so that
there befall you that which befell the folk of Noah and the folk of
Hud, and the folk of Salih; and the folk of Lot are not far off from
you.

S: And, O my people! let not opposition to me make you guilty so that
there may befall you the like of what befell the people of Nuh, or the
people of Hud, or the people of Salih, nor are the people of Lut far
off from you;

011.090
Y: "But ask forgiveness of your Lord, and turn unto Him (in repentance):
For my Lord is indeed full of mercy and loving-kindness."

P: Ask pardon of your Lord and then turn unto Him (repentant). Lo! my
Lord is Merciful, Loving.

S: And ask forgiveness of your Lord, then turn to Him; surely my Lord is
Merciful, Loving-kind.

011.091
Y: They said: "O Shu'aib! much of what thou sayest we do not understand!
In fact among us we see that thou hast no strength! Were it not for thy
family, we should certainly have stoned thee! for thou hast among us no
great position!"

P: They said: O Shu'eyb! We understand not much of that thou tellest,
and lo! we do behold thee weak among us. But for thy family, we should
have stoned thee, for thou art not strong against us.

S: They said: O Shu'aib! we do not understand much of what you say and
most surely we see you to be weak among us, and were it not for your
family we would surely stone you, and you are not mighty against us.

011.092
Y: He said: "O my people! is then my family of more consideration with
you than Allah? For ye cast Him away behind your backs (with contempt).
But verily my Lord encompasseth on all sides all that ye do!"

P: He said: O my people! Is my family more to be honoured by you than
Allah? and ye put Him behind you, neglected! Lo! my Lord surroundeth
what ye do.

S: He said: O my people! is my family more esteemed by you than Allah?
And you neglect Him as a thing cast behind your back; surely my Lord
encompasses what you do:

011.093
Y: "And O my people! Do whatever ye can: I will do (my part): Soon will
ye know who it is on whom descends the penalty of ignominy; and who is
a liar! and watch ye! for I too am watching with you!"

P: And, O my people! Act according to your power, lo! I (too) am acting.
Ye will soon know on whom there cometh a doom that will abase him, and
who it is that lieth. And watch! Lo! I am a watcher with you.

S: And, O my people! act according to your ability, I too am acting; you
will come to know soon who it is on whom will light the punishment that
will disgrace him and who it is that is a liar, and watch, surely I too
am watching with you.

011.094
Y: When Our decree issued, We saved Shu'aib and those who believed with
him, by (special) mercy from Ourselves: But the (mighty) blast did
seize the wrong-doers, and they lay prostrate in their homes by the
morning,-

P: And when Our commandment came to pass We saved Shu'eyb and those who
believed with him by a mercy from Us; and the (Awful) Cry seized those
who did injustice, and morning found them prostrate in their dwellings,

S: And when Our decree came to pass We delivered Shu'aib, and those who
believed with him by mercy from Us, and the rumbling overtook those who
were unjust so they became motionless bodies in their abodes,

011.095
Y: As if they had never dwelt and flourished there! Ah! Behold! How the
Madyan were removed (from sight) as were removed the Thamud!

P: As though they had not dwelt there. A far removal for Midian, even as
Thamud had been removed afar!

S: As though they had never dwelt in them; now surely perdition overtook
Madyan as had perished Samood.

011.096
Y: And we sent Moses, with Our Clear (Signs) and an authority manifest,

P: And verily We sent Moses with Our revelations and a clear warrant

S: And certainly We sent Musa with Our communications and a clear
authority,

011.097
Y: Unto Pharaoh and his chiefs: but they followed the command of Pharaoh
and the command of Pharaoh was no right (guide).

P: Unto Pharaoh and his chiefs, but they did follow the command of
Pharaoh, and the command of Pharaoh was no right guide.

S: To Firon and his chiefs, but they followed the bidding of Firon, and
Firon's bidding was not right-directing.

011.098
Y: He will go before his people on the Day of Judgment, and lead them
into the Fire (as cattle are led to water): But woeful indeed will be
the place to which they are led!

P: He will go before his people on the Day of Resurrection and will lead
them to the Fire for watering-place. Ah, hapless is the watering-place
(whither they are) led.

S: He shall lead his people on the resurrection day, and bring them down
to the fire; and evil the place to which they are brought.

011.099
Y: And they are followed by a curse in this (life) and on the Day of
Judgment: and woeful is the gift which shall be given (unto them)!

P: A curse is made to follow them in the world and on the Day of
Resurrection. Hapless is the gift (that will be) given (them).

S: And they are overtaken by curse in this (world), and on the
resurrection day, evil the gift which shall be given.

011.100
Y: These are some of the stories of communities which We relate unto
thee: of them some are standing, and some have been mown down (by the
sickle of time).

P: That is (something) of the tidings of the townships (which were
destroyed of old). We relate it unto thee (Muhammad). Some of them are
standing and some (already) reaped.

S: This is an account of (the fate of) the towns which We relate to you;
of them are some that stand and (others) mown down.

011.101
Y: It was not We that wronged them: They wronged their own souls: the
deities, other than Allah, whom they invoked, profited them no whit
when there issued the decree of thy Lord: Nor did they add aught (to
their lot) but perdition!

P: We wronged them not, but they did wrong themselves; and their gods on
whom they call beside Allah availed them naught when came thy Lord's
command; they added to them naught save ruin.

S: And We did not do them injustice, but they were unjust to themselves,
so their gods whom they called upon besides Allah did not avail them
aught when the decree of your Lord came to pass; and they added but to
their ruin.

011.102
Y: Such is the chastisement of thy Lord when He chastises communities in
the midst of their wrong: grievous, indeed, and severe is His
chastisement.

P: Even thus is the grasp of thy Lord when He graspeth the townships
while they are doing wrong. Lo! His grasp is painful, very strong.

S: And such is the punishment of your Lord when He punishes the towns
while they are unjust; surely His punishment is painful, severe.

011.103
Y: In that is a Sign for those who fear the penalty of the Hereafter:
that is a Day for which mankind will be gathered together: that will be
a Day of Testimony.

P: Lo! herein verily there is a portent for those who fear the doom of
the Hereafter. That is a day unto which mankind will be gathered, and
that is a day that will be witnessed.

S: Most surely there is a sign in this for him who fears the
chastisement of the hereafter; this is a day on which the people shall
be gathered together and this is a day that shall be witnessed.

011.104
Y: Nor shall We delay it but for a term appointed.

P: And We defer it only to a term already reckoned.

S: And We do not delay it but to an appointed term.

011.105
Y: The day it arrives, no soul shall speak except by His leave: of those
(gathered) some will be wretched and some will be blessed.

P: On the day when it cometh no soul will speak except by His
permission; some among them will be wretched, (others) glad.

S: On the day when it shall come, no soul shall speak except with His
permission, then (some) of them shall be unhappy and (others) happy.

011.106
Y: Those who are wretched shall be in the Fire: There will be for them
therein (nothing but) the heaving of sighs and sobs:

P: As for those who will be wretched (on that day) they will be in the
Fire; sighing and wailing will be their portion therein,

S: So as to those who are unhappy, they shall be in the fire; for them
shall be sighing and groaning in it:

011.107
Y: They will dwell therein for all the time that the heavens and the
earth endure, except as thy Lord willeth: for thy Lord is the (sure)
accomplisher of what He planneth.

P: Abiding there so long as the heavens and the earth endure save for
that which thy Lord willeth. Lo! thy Lord is Doer of what He will.

S: Abiding therein so long as the heavens and the earth endure, except
as your Lord please; surely your Lord is the mighty doer of what He
intends.

011.108
Y: And those who are blessed shall be in the Garden: They will dwell
therein for all the time that the heavens and the earth endure, except
as thy Lord willeth: a gift without break.

P: And as for those who will be glad (that day) they will be in the
Garden, abiding there so long as the heavens and the earth endure save
for that which thy Lord willeth: a gift unfailing.

S: And as to those who are made happy, they shall be in the garden,
abiding in it as long as the heavens and the earth endure, except as
your Lord please; a gift which shall never be cut off.

011.109
Y: Be not then in doubt as to what these men worship. They worship
nothing but what their fathers worshipped before (them): but verily We
shall pay them back (in full) their portion without (the least)
abatement.

P: So be not thou in doubt concerning that which these (folk) worship.
They worship only as their fathers worshipped aforetime. Lo! we shall
pay them their whole due unabated.

S: Therefore be not in doubt as to what these worship; they do not
worship but as their fathers worshipped before; and most surely We will
pay them back in full their portion undiminished.

011.110
Y: We certainly gave the Book to Moses, but differences arose therein:
had it not been that a word had gone forth before from thy Lord, the
matter would have been decided between them, but they are in suspicious
doubt concerning it.

P: And we verily gave unto Moses the Scripture, and there was strife
thereupon; and had it not been for a Word that had already gone forth
from thy Lord, the case would have been judged between them, and lo!
they are in grave doubt concerning it.

S: And certainly We gave the book to Musa, but it was gone against; and
had not a word gone forth from your Lord, the matter would surely have
been decided between them; and surely they are in a disquieting doubt
about it.

011.111
Y: And, of a surety, to all will your Lord pay back (in full the
recompense) of their deeds: for He knoweth well all that they do.

P: And lo! unto each thy Lord will verily repay his works in full. Lo!
He is Informed of what they do.

S: And your Lord will most surely pay back to all their deeds in full;
surely He is aware of what they do.

011.112
Y: Therefore stand firm (in the straight Path) as thou art commanded,-
thou and those who with thee turn (unto Allah); and transgress not
(from the Path): for He seeth well all that ye do.

P: So tread thou the straight path as thou art commanded, and those who
turn (unto Allah) with thee, and transgress not. Lo! He is Seer of what
ye do.

S: Continue then in the right way as you are commanded, as also he who
has turned (to Allah) with you, and be not inordinate (O men!), surely
He sees what you do.

011.113
Y: And incline not to those who do wrong, or the Fire will seize you;
and ye have no protectors other than Allah, nor shall ye be helped.

P: And incline not toward those who do wrong lest the Fire touch you,
and ye have no protecting friends against Allah, and afterward ye would
not be helped.

S: And do not incline to those who are unjust, lest the fire touch you,
and you have no guardians besides Allah, then you shall not be helped.

011.114
Y: And establish regular prayers at the two ends of the day and at the
approaches of the night: For those things, that are good remove those
that are evil: Be that the word of remembrance to those who remember
(their Lord):

P: Establish worship at the two ends of the day and in some watches of
the night. Lo! good deeds annul ill-deeds. This is reminder for the
mindful.

S: And keep up prayer in the two parts of the day and in the first hours
of the night; surely good deeds take away evil deeds this is a reminder
to the mindful.

011.115
Y: And be steadfast in patience; for verily Allah will not suffer the
reward of the righteous to perish.

P: And have patience, (O Muhammad), for lo! Allah loseth not the wages
of the good.

S: And be patient, for surely Allah does not waste the reward of the
good-doers.

011.116
Y: Why were there not, among the generations before you, persons
possessed of balanced good sense, prohibiting (men) from mischief in
the earth - except a few among them whom We saved (from harm)? But the
wrong-doers pursued the enjoyment of the good things of life which were
given them, and persisted in sin.

P: If only there had been among the generations before you men
possessing a remnant (of good sense) to warn (their people) from
corruption in the earth, as did a few of those whom We saved from them!
The wrong-doers followed that by which they were made sapless, and were
guilty.

S: But why were there not among the generations before you those
possessing understanding, who should have forbidden the making of
mischief in the earth, except a few of those whom We delivered from
among them? And those who were unjust went after what they are made to
enjoy of plenty, and they were guilty.

011.117
Y: Nor would thy Lord be the One to destroy communities for a single
wrong-doing, if its members were likely to mend.

P: In truth thy Lord destroyed not the townships tyrannously while their
folk were doing right.

S: And it did not beseem your Lord to have destroyed the towns
tyrannously, while their people acted well.

011.118
Y: If thy Lord had so willed, He could have made mankind one people: but
they will not cease to dispute.

P: And if thy Lord had willed, He verily would have made mankind one
nation, yet they cease not differing,

S: And if your Lord had pleased He would certainly have made people a
single nation, and they shall continue to differ.

011.119
Y: Except those on whom thy Lord hath bestowed His Mercy: and for this
did He create them: and the Word of thy Lord shall be fulfilled: "I
will fill Hell with jinns and men all together."

P: Save him on whom thy Lord hath mercy; and for that He did create
them. And the Word of thy Lord hath been fulfilled: Verily I shall fill
hell with the jinn and mankind together.

S: Except those on whom your Lord has mercy; and for this did He create
them; and the word of your Lord is fulfilled: Certainly I will fill
hell with the jinn and the men, all together.

011.120
Y: All that we relate to thee of the stories of the messengers,- with it
We make firm thy heart: in them there cometh to thee the Truth, as well
as an exhortation and a message of remembrance to those who believe.

P: And all that We relate unto thee of the story of the messengers is in
order that thereby We may make firm thy heart. And herein hath come
unto thee the Truth and an exhortation and a reminder for believers.

S: And all we relate to you of the accounts of the messengers is to
strengthen your heart therewith; and in this has come to you the truth
and an admonition, and a reminder to the believers.

011.121
Y: Say to those who do not believe: "Do what ever ye can: We shall do
our part;"

P: And say unto those who believe not: Act according to your power. Lo!
We (too) are acting.

S: And say to those who do not believe: Act according to your state;
surely we too are acting.

011.122
Y: "And wait ye! We too shall wait."

P: And wait! Lo! We (too) are waiting.

S: And wait; surely we are waiting also.

011.123
Y: To Allah do belong the unseen (secrets) of the heavens and the earth,
and to Him goeth back every affair (for decision): then worship Him,
and put thy trust in Him: and thy Lord is not unmindful of aught that
ye do.

P: And Allah's is the Invisible of the heavens and the earth, and unto
Him the whole matter will be returned. So worship Him and put thy trust
in Him. Lo! thy Lord is not unaware of what ye (mortals) do.

S: And Allah's is the unseen in the heavens and the earth, and to Him is
returned the whole of the affair; therefore serve Him and rely on Him,
and your Lord is not heedless of what you do.

---------------------------------------------------------------------

 Chapter 12:

                               YUSUF (JOSEPH)
 Total Verses: 111 Revealed At: MAKKA


---------------------------------------------------------------------

           In the name of Allah, the Most Beneficent, the Most Merciful.

012.001
Y: A.L.R. These are the symbols (or Verses) of the perspicuous Book.

P: Alif. Lam. Ra. These are verse of the Scripture that maketh plain.

S: Alif Lam Ra. These are the verses of the Book that makes (things)
manifest.

012.002
Y: We have sent it down as an Arabic Qur'an, in order that ye may learn
wisdom.

P: Lo! We have revealed it, a Lecture in Arabic, that ye may understand.

S: Surely We have revealed it-- an Arabic Quran-- that you may
understand.

012.003
Y: We do relate unto thee the most beautiful of stories, in that We
reveal to thee this (portion of the) Qur'an: before this, thou too was
among those who knew it not.

P: We narrate unto thee (Muhammad) the best of narratives in that We
have inspired in thee this Qur'an, though aforetime thou wast of the
heedless.

S: We narrate to you the best of narratives, by Our revealing to you
this Quran, though before this you were certainly one of those who did
not know.

012.004
Y: Behold! Joseph said to his father: "O my father! I did see eleven
stars and the sun and the moon: I saw them prostrate themselves to me!"

P: When Joseph said unto his father: O my father! Lo! I saw in a dream
eleven planets and the sun and the moon, I saw them prostrating
themselves unto me.

S: When Yusuf said to his father: O my father! surely I saw eleven stars
and the sun and the moon-- I saw them making obeisance to me.

012.005
Y: Said (the father): "My (dear) little son! relate not thy vision to
thy brothers, lest they concoct a plot against thee: for Satan is to
man an avowed enemy!"

P: He said: O my dear son! Tell not thy brethren of thy vision, lest
they plot a plot against thee. Lo! Satan is for man an open foe.

S: He said: O my son! do not relate your vision to your brothers, lest
they devise a plan against you; surely the Shaitan is an open enemy to
man.

012.006
Y: "Thus will thy Lord choose thee and teach thee the interpretation of
stories (and events) and perfect His favour to thee and to the
posterity of Jacob - even as He perfected it to thy fathers Abraham and
Isaac aforetime! for Allah is full of knowledge and wisdom."

P: Thus thy Lord will prefer thee and will teach thee the interpretation
of events, and will perfect His grace upon thee and upon the family of
Jacob as He perfected it upon thy forefathers, Abraham and Isaac. Lo!
thy Lord is Knower, Wise.

S: And thus will your Lord choose you and teach you the interpretation
of sayings and make His favor complete to you and to the children of
Yaqoub, as He made it complete before to your fathers, Ibrahim and
Ishaq; surely your Lord is Knowing, Wise.

012.007
Y: Verily in Joseph and his brethren are signs (or symbols) for seekers
(after Truth).

P: Verily in Joseph and his brethren are signs (of Allah's Sovereignty)
for the inquiring.

S: Certainly in Yusuf and his brothers there are signs for the
inquirers.

012.008
Y: They said: "Truly Joseph and his brother are loved more by our father
than we: But we are a goodly body! really our father is obviously
wandering (in his mind)!"

P: When they said: Verily Joseph and his brother are dearer to our
father than we are, many though we be. Lo! our father is in plain
aberration.

S: When they said: Certainly Yusuf and his brother are dearer to our
father than we, though we are a (stronger) company; most surely our
father is in manifest error:

012.009
Y: "Slay ye Joseph or cast him out to some (unknown) land, that so the
favour of your father may be given to you alone: (there will be time
enough) for you to be righteous after that!"

P: (One said): Kill Joseph or cast him to some (other) land, so that
your father's favour may be all for you, and (that) ye may afterward be
righteous folk.

S: Slay Yusuf or cast him (forth) into some land, so that your father's
regard may be exclusively for you, and after that you may be a
righteous people.

012.010
Y: Said one of them: "Slay not Joseph, but if ye must do something,
throw him down to the bottom of the well: he will be picked up by some
caravan of travellers."

P: One among them said: Kill not Joseph but, if ye must be doing, fling
him into the depth of the pit; some caravan will find him.

S: A speaker from among them said: Do not slay Yusuf, and cast him down
into the bottom of the pit if you must do (it), (so that) some of the
travellers may pick him up.

012.011
Y: They said: "O our father! why dost thou not trust us with Joseph,-
seeing we are indeed his sincere well-wishers?"

P: They said: O our father! Why wilt thou not trust us with Joseph, when
lo! we are good friends to him?

S: They said: O our father! what reason have you that you do not trust
in us with respect to Yusuf? And most surely we are his sincere
well-wishers:

012.012
Y: "Send him with us tomorrow to enjoy himself and play, and we shall
take every care of him."

P: Send him with us to-morrow that he may enjoy himself and play. And
lo! we shall take good care of him.

S: Send him with us tomorrow that he may enjoy himself and sport, and
surely we will guard him well.

012.013
Y: (Jacob) said: "Really it saddens me that ye should take him away: I
fear lest the wolf should devour him while ye attend not to him."

P: He said: Lo! in truth it saddens me that ye should take him with you,
and I fear less the wolf devour him while ye are heedless of him.

S: He said: Surely it grieves me that you should take him off, and I
fear lest the wolf devour him while you are heedless of him.

012.014
Y: They said: "If the wolf were to devour him while we are (so large) a
party, then should we indeed (first) have perished ourselves!"

P: They said: If the wolf should devour him when we are (so strong) a
band, then surely we should have already perished.

S: They said: Surely if the wolf should devour him notwithstanding that
we are a (strong) company, we should then certainly be losers.

012.015
Y: So they did take him away, and they all agreed to throw him down to
the bottom of the well: and We put into his heart (this Message): 'Of a
surety thou shalt (one day) tell them the truth of this their affair
while they know (thee) not'

P: Then, when they led him off, and were of one mind that they should
place him in the depth of the pit, We inspired in him: Thou wilt tell
them of this deed of theirs when they know (thee) not.

S: So when they had gone off with him and agreed that they should put
him down at the bottom of the pit, and We revealed to him: You will
most certainly inform them of this their affair while they do not
perceive.

012.016
Y: Then they came to their father in the early part of the night,
weeping.

P: And they came weeping to their father in the evening.

S: And they came to their father at nightfall, weeping.

012.017
Y: They said: "O our father! We went racing with one another, and left
Joseph with our things; and the wolf devoured him.... But thou wilt
never believe us even though we tell the truth."

P: Saying: O our father! We went racing one with another, and left
Joseph by our things, and the wolf devoured him, and thou believest not
our saying even when we speak the truth.

S: They said: O our father! surely we went off racing and left Yusuf by
our goods, so the wolf devoured him, and you will not believe us though
we are truthful.

012.018
Y: They stained his shirt with false blood. He said: "Nay, but your
minds have made up a tale (that may pass) with you, (for me) patience
is most fitting: Against that which ye assert, it is Allah (alone)
Whose help can be sought"..

P: And they came with false blood on his shirt. He said: Nay, but your
minds have beguiled you into something. (My course is) comely patience.
And Allah it is Whose help is to be sought in that (predicament) which
ye describe.

S: And they brought his shirt with false blood upon it. He said: Nay,
your souls have made the matter light for you, but patience is good and
Allah is He Whose help is sought for against what you describe.

012.019
Y: Then there came a caravan of travellers: they sent their
water-carrier (for water), and he let down his bucket (into the
well)...He said: "Ah there! Good news! Here is a (fine) young man!" So
they concealed him as a treasure! But Allah knoweth well all that they
do!

P: And there came a caravan, and they sent their waterdrawer. He let
down his pail (into the pit). He said: Good luck! Here is a youth. And
they hid him as a treasure, and Allah was Aware of what they did.

S: And there came travellers and they sent their water-drawer and he let
down his bucket. He said: O good news! this is a youth; and they
concealed him as an article of merchandise, and Allah knew what they
did.

012.020
Y: The (Brethren) sold him for a miserable price, for a few dirhams
counted out: in such low estimation did they hold him!

P: And they sold him for a low price, a number of silver coins; and they
attached no value to him.

S: And they sold him for a small price, a few pieces of silver, and they
showed no desire for him.

012.021
Y: The man in Egypt who bought him, said to his wife: "Make his stay
(among us) honourable: may be he will bring us much good, or we shall
adopt him as a son." Thus did We establish Joseph in the land, that We
might teach him the interpretation of stories (and events). And Allah
hath full power and control over His affairs; but most among mankind
know it not.

P: And he of Egypt who purchased him said unto his wife: Receive him
honourably. Perchance he may prove useful to us or we may adopt him as
a son. Thus we established Joseph in the land that We might teach him
the interpretation of events. And Allah was predominant in His career,
but most of mankind know not.

S: And the Egyptian who bought him said to his wife: Give him an
honorable abode, maybe he will be useful to us, or we may adopt him as
a son. And thus did We establish Yusuf in the land and that We might
teach him the interpretation of sayings; and Allah is the master of His
affair, but most people do not know.

012.022
Y: When Joseph attained His full manhood, We gave him power and
knowledge: thus do We reward those who do right.

P: And when he reached his prime We gave him wisdom and knowledge.
Thus We reward the good.

S: And when he had attained his maturity, We gave him wisdom and
knowledge: and thus do We reward those who do good.

012.023
Y: But she in whose house he was, sought to seduce him from his (true)
self: she fastened the doors, and said: "Now come, thou (dear one)!" He
said: "Allah forbid! truly (thy husband) is my lord! he made my sojourn
agreeable! truly to no good come those who do wrong!"

P: And she, in whose house he was, asked of him an evil act. She bolted
the doors and said: Come! He said: I seek refuge in Allah! Lo! he is my
lord, who hath treated me honourably. Lo! wrong-doers never prosper.

S: And she in whose house he was sought to make himself yield (to her),
and she made fast the doors and said: Come forward. He said: I seek
Allah's refuge, surely my Lord made good my abode: Surely the unjust do
not prosper.

012.024
Y: And (with passion) did she desire him, and he would have desired her,
but that he saw the evidence of his Lord: thus (did We order) that We
might turn away from him (all) evil and shameful deeds: for he was one
of Our servants, sincere and purified.

P: She verily desired him, and he would have desired her if it had not
been that he saw the argument of his Lord. Thus it was, that We might
ward off from him evil and lewdness. Lo! he was of Our chosen slaves.

S: And certainly she made for him, and he would have made for her, were
it not that he had seen the manifest evidence of his Lord; thus (it
was) that We might turn away from him evil and indecency, surely he was
one of Our sincere servants.

012.025
Y: So they both raced each other to the door, and she tore his shirt
from the back: they both found her lord near the door. She said: "What
is the (fitting) punishment for one who formed an evil design against
thy wife, but prison or a grievous chastisement?"

P: And they raced with one another to the door, and she tore his shirt
from behind, and they met her lord and master at the door. She said:
What shall be his reward, who wisheth evil to thy folk, save prison or
a painful doom?

S: And they both hastened to the door, and she rent his shirt from
behind and they met her husband at the door. She said: What is the
punishment of him who intends evil to your wife except imprisonment or
a painful chastisement?

012.026
Y: He said: "It was she that sought to seduce me - from my (true) self."
And one of her household saw (this) and bore witness, (thus):- "If it
be that his shirt is rent from the front, then is her tale true, and he
is a liar!"

P: (Joseph) said: She it was who asked of me an evil act. And a witness
of her own folk testified: If his shirt is torn from before, then she
speaketh truth and he is of the liars.

S: He said: She sought to make me yield (to her); and a witness of her
own family bore witness: If his shirt is rent from front, she speaks
the truth and he is one of the liars:

012.027
Y: "But if it be that his shirt is torn from the back, then is she the
liar, and he is telling the truth!"

P: And if his shirt is torn from behind, then she hath lied and he is of
the truthful.

S: And if his shirt is rent from behind, she tells a lie and he is one
of the truthful.

012.028
Y: So when he saw his shirt,- that it was torn at the back,- (her
husband) said: "Behold! It is a snare of you women! truly, mighty is
your snare!"

P: So when he saw his shirt torn from behind, he said: Lo! this is of
the guile of you women. Lo! the guile of you is very great.

S: So when he saw his shirt rent from behind, he said: Surely it is a
guile of you women; surely your guile is great:

012.029
Y: "O Joseph, pass this over! (O wife), ask forgiveness for thy sin, for
truly thou hast been at fault!"

P: O Joseph! Turn away from this, and thou, (O woman), ask forgiveness
for thy sin. Lo! thou art of the faulty.

S: O Yusuf! turn aside from this; and (O my wife)! ask forgiveness for
your fault, surely you are one of the wrong-doers.

012.030
Y: Ladies said in the City: "The wife of the (great) 'Aziz is seeking to
seduce her slave from his (true) self: Truly hath he inspired her with
violent love: we see she is evidently going astray."

P: And women in the city said: The ruler's wife is asking of her
slave-boy an ill-deed. Indeed he has smitten her to the heart with
love. We behold her in plain aberration.

S: And women in the city said: The chief's wife seeks her slave to yield
himself (to her), surely he has affected her deeply with (his) love;
most surely we see her in manifest error.

012.031
Y: When she heard of their malicious talk, she sent for them and
prepared a banquet for them: she gave each of them a knife: and she
said (to Joseph), "Come out before them." When they saw him, they did
extol him, and (in their amazement) cut their hands: they said, "Allah
preserve us! no mortal is this! this is none other than a noble angel!"

P: And when she heard of their sly talk, she sent to them and prepared
for them a cushioned couch (to lie on at the feast) and gave to every
one of them a knife and said (to Joseph): Come out unto them! And when
they saw him they exalted him and cut their hands, exclaiming: Allah
Blameless! This is no a human being. This is not other than some
gracious angel.

S: So when she heard of their sly talk she sent for them and prepared
for them a repast, and gave each of them a knife, and said (to Yusuf):
Come forth to them. So when they saw him, they deemed him great, and
cut their hands (in amazement), and said: Remote is Allah (from
imperfection); this is not a mortal; this is but a noble angel.

012.032
Y: She said: "There before you is the man about whom ye did blame me! I
did seek to seduce him from his (true) self but he did firmly save
himself guiltless!.... And now, if he doth not my bidding, he shall
certainly be cast into prison, and (what is more) be of the company of
the vilest!"

P: She said: This is he on whose account ye blamed me. I asked of him an
evil act, but he proved continent, but if he do not my behest he verily
shall be imprisoned, and verily shall be of those brought low.

S: She said: This is he with respect to whom you blamed me, and
certainly I sought his yielding himself (to me), but he abstained, and
if he does not do what I bid him, he shall certainly be imprisoned, and
he shall certainly be of those who are in a state of ignominy.

012.033
Y: He said: "O my Lord! the prison is more to my liking than that to
which they invite me: Unless Thou turn away their snare from me, I
should (in my youthful folly) feel inclined towards them and join the
ranks of the ignorant."

P: He said: O my Lord! Prison is more dear than that unto which they
urge me, and if Thou fend not off their wiles from me I shall incline
unto them and become of the foolish.

S: He said: My Lord! the prison house is dearer to me than that to which
they invite me; and if Thou turn not away their device from me, I will
yearn towards them and become (one) of the ignorant.

012.034
Y: So his Lord hearkened to him (in his prayer), and turned away from
him their snare: Verily He heareth and knoweth (all things).

P: So his Lord heard his prayer and fended off their wiles from him. Lo!
He is Hearer, Knower.

S: Thereupon his Lord accepted his prayer and turned away their guile
from him; surely He is the Hearing, the Knowing.

012.035
Y: Then it occurred to the men, after they had seen the signs, (that it
was best) to imprison him for a time.

P: And it seemed good to them (the men-folk) after they had seen the
signs (of his innocence) to imprison him for a time.

S: Then it occurred to them after they had seen the signs that they
should imprison him till a time.

012.036
Y: Now with him there came into the prison two young men. Said one of
them: "I see myself (in a dream) pressing wine." said the other: "I see
myself (in a dream) carrying bread on my head, and birds are eating,
thereof." "Tell us" (they said) "The truth and meaning thereof: for we
see thou art one that doth good (to all)."

P: And two young men went to prison with him. One of them said: I
dreamed that I was pressing wine. The other said: I dreamed that I was
carrying upon my head bread whereof the birds were eating. Announce
unto us the interpretation, for we see thee of those good (at
interpretation).

S: And two youths entered the prison with him. One of them said: I saw
myself pressing wine. And the other said: I saw myself carrying bread
on my head, of which birds ate. Inform us of its interpretation; surely
we see you to be of the doers of good.

012.037
Y: He said: "Before any food comes (in due course) to feed either of
you, I will surely reveal to you the truth and meaning of this ere it
befall you: that is part of the (duty) which my Lord hath taught me. I
have (I assure you) abandoned the ways of a people that believe not in
Allah and that (even) deny the Hereafter."

P: He said: The food which ye are given (daily) shall not come unto you
but I shall tell you the interpretation ere it cometh unto you. This is
of that which my Lord hath taught me. Lo! I have forsaken the religion
of folk who believe not in Allah and are disbelievers in the Hereafter.

S: He said: There shall not come to you the food with which you are fed,
but I will inform you both of its interpretation before it comes to
you; this is of what my Lord has taught me; surely I have forsaken the
religion of a people who do not believe in Allah, and they are deniers
of the hereafter:

012.038
Y: "And I follow the ways of my fathers,- Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and
never could we attribute any partners whatever to Allah: that (comes)
of the grace of Allah to us and to mankind: yet most men are not
grateful."

P: And I have followed the religion of my fathers, Abraham and Isaac and
Jacob. It never was for us to attribute aught as partner to Allah. This
is of the bounty of Allah unto us (the seed of Abraham) and unto
mankind; but most men give not thanks.

S: And I follow the religion of my fathers, Ibrahim and Ishaq and
Yaqoub; it beseems us not that we should associate aught with Allah;
this is by Allah's grace upon us and on mankind, but most people do not
give thanks:

012.039
Y: "O my two companions of the prison! (I ask you): are many lords
differing among themselves better, or the One Allah, Supreme and
Irresistible?"

P: O my fellow-prisoners! Are divers lords better, or Allah the One,
Almighty?

S: O my two mates of the prison! are sundry lords better or Allah the
One, the Supreme?

012.040
Y: "If not Him, ye worship nothing but names which ye have named,- ye
and your fathers,- for which Allah hath sent down no authority: the
command is for none but Allah: He hath commanded that ye worship none
but Him: that is the right religion, but most men understand not..."

P: Those whom ye worship beside Him are but names which ye have named,
ye and your fathers. Allah hath revealed no sanction for them. The
decision rests with Allah only, Who hath commanded you that ye worship
none save Him. This is the right religion, but most men know not.

S: You do not serve besides Him but names which you have named, you and
your fathers; Allah has not sent down any authority for them; judgment
is only Allah's; He has commanded that you shall not serve aught but
Him; this is the right religion but most people do not know:

012.041
Y: "O my two companions of the prison! As to one of you, he will pour
out the wine for his lord to drink: as for the other, he will hang from
the cross, and the birds will eat from off his head. (So) hath been
decreed that matter whereof ye twain do enquire..."

P: O my two fellow-prisoners! As for one of you, he will pour out wine
for his lord to drink; and as for the other, he will be crucified so
that the birds will eat from his head. Thus is the case judged
concerning which ye did inquire.

S: O my two mates of the prison! as for one of you, he shall give his
lord to drink wine; and as for the other, he shall be crucified, so
that the birds shall eat from his head, the matter is decreed
concerning which you inquired.

012.042
Y: And of the two, to that one whom he consider about to be saved, he
said: "Mention me to thy lord." But Satan made him forget to mention
him to his lord: and (Joseph) lingered in prison a few (more) years.

P: And he said unto him of the twain who he knew would be released:
Mention me in the presence of thy lord. But Satan caused him to forget
to mention it to his lord, so he (Joseph) stayed in prison for some
years.

S: And he said to him whom he knew would be delivered of the two:
Remember me with your lord; but the Shaitan caused him to forget
mentioning (it) to his lord, so he remained in the prison a few years.

012.043
Y: The king (of Egypt) said: "I do see (in a vision) seven fat kine,
whom seven lean ones devour, and seven green ears of corn, and seven
(others) withered. O ye chiefs! Expound to me my vision if it be that
ye can interpret visions."

P: And the king said: Lo! I saw in a dream seven fat kine which seven
lean were eating, and seven green ears of corn and other (seven) dry. O
notables! Expound for me my vision, if ye can interpret dreams.

S: And the king said: Surely I see seven fat kine which seven lean ones
devoured; and seven green ears and (seven) others dry: O chiefs!
explain to me my dream, if you can interpret the dream.

012.044
Y: They said: "A confused medley of dreams: and we are not skilled in
the interpretation of dreams."

P: They answered: Jumbled dreams! And we are not knowing in the
interpretation of dreams.

S: They said: Confused dreams, and we do not know the interpretation of
dreams.

012.045
Y: But the man who had been released, one of the two (who had been in
prison) and who now bethought him after (so long) a space of time,
said: "I will tell you the truth of its interpretation: send ye me
(therefore)."

P: And he of the two who was released, and (now) at length remembered,
said: I am going to announce unto you the interpretation, therefore
send me forth.

S: And of the two (prisoners) he who had found deliverance and
remembered after a long time said: I will inform you of its
interpretation, so let me go:

012.046
Y: "O Joseph!" (he said) "O man of truth! Expound to us (the dream) of
seven fat kine whom seven lean ones devour, and of seven green ears of
corn and (seven) others withered: that I may return to the people, and
that they may understand."

P: (And when he came to Joseph in the prison, he exclaimed): Joseph! O
thou truthful one! Expound for us the seven fat kine which seven lean
were eating and the seven green ears of corn and other (seven) dry,
that I may return unto the people, so that they may know.

S: Yusuf! O truthful one! explain to us seven fat kine which seven lean
ones devoured, and seven green ears and (seven) others dry, that I may
go back to the people so that they may know.

012.047
Y: (Joseph) said: "For seven years shall ye diligently sow as is your
wont: and the harvests that ye reap, ye shall leave them in the ear,-
except a little, of which ye shall eat."

P: He said: Ye shall sow seven years as usual, but that which ye reap,
leave it in the ear, all save a little which ye eat.

S: He said: You shall sow for seven years continuously, then what you
reap leave it in its ear except a little of which you eat.

012.048
Y: "Then will come after that (period) seven dreadful (years), which
will devour what ye shall have laid by in advance for them,- (all)
except a little which ye shall have (specially) guarded."

P: Then after that will come seven hard years which will devour all that
ye have prepared for them, save a little of that which ye have stored.

S: Then there shall come after that seven years of hardship which shall
eat away all that you have beforehand laid up in store for them, except
a little of what you shall have preserved:

012.049
Y: "Then will come after that (period) a year in which the people will
have abundant water, and in which they will press (wine and oil)."

P: Then, after that, will come a year when the people will have
plenteous crops and when they will press (wine and oil).

S: Then there will come after that a year in which people shall have
rain and in which they shall press (grapes).

012.050
Y: So the king said: "Bring ye him unto me." But when the messenger came
to him, (Joseph) said: "Go thou back to thy lord, and ask him, 'What is
the state of mind of the ladies who cut their hands'? For my Lord is
certainly well aware of their snare."

P: And the king said: Bring him unto me. And when the messenger came
unto him, he (Joseph) said: Return unto thy lord and ask him what was
the case of the women who cut their hands. Lo! my Lord knoweth their
guile.

S: And the king said: Bring him to me. So when the messenger came to
him, he said: Go back to your lord and ask him, what is the case of the
women who cut their hands; surely my Lord knows their guile.

012.051
Y: (The king) said (to the ladies): "What was your affair when ye did
seek to seduce Joseph from his (true) self?" The ladies said: "Allah
preserve us! no evil know we against him!" Said the 'Aziz's wife: "Now
is the truth manifest (to all): it was I who sought to seduce him from
his (true) self: He is indeed of those who are (ever) true (and
virtuous)."

P: He (the king) (then sent for those women and) said: What happened
when ye asked an evil act of Joseph? They answered: Allah Blameless! We
know no evil of him. Said the wife of the ruler: Now the truth is out.
I asked of him an evil act, and he is surely of the truthful.

S: He said: How was your affair when you sought Yusuf to yield himself
(to you)? They said: Remote is Allah (from imperfection), we knew of no
evil on his part. The chief's wife said: Now has the truth become
established: I sought him to yield himself (to me), and he is most
surely of the truthful ones.

012.052
Y: "This (say I), in order that He may know that I have never been false
to him in his absence, and that Allah will never guide the snare of the
false ones."

P: (Then Joseph said: I asked for) this, that he (my lord) may know that
I betrayed him not in secret, and that surely Allah guideth not the
snare of the betrayers.

S: This is that he might know that I have not been unfaithful to him in
secret and that Allah does not guide the device of the unfaithful.

012.053
Y: "Nor do I absolve my own self (of blame): the (human) soul is
certainly prone to evil, unless my Lord do bestow His Mercy: but surely
my Lord is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful."

P: I do not exculpate myself. Lo! the (human) soul enjoineth unto evil,
save that whereon my Lord hath mercy. Lo! my Lord is Forgiving,
Merciful.

S: And I do not declare myself free, most surely (man's) self is wont to
command (him to do) evil, except such as my Lord has had mercy on,
surely my Lord is Forgiving, Merciful.

012.054
Y: So the king said: "Bring him unto me; I will take him specially to
serve about my own person." Therefore when he had spoken to him, he
said: "Be assured this day, thou art, before our own presence, with rank
firmly established, and fidelity fully proved!"

P: And the king said: Bring him unto me that I may attach him to my
person. And when he had talked with him he said: Lo! thou art to-day in
our presence established and trusted.

S: And the king said: Bring him to me, I will choose him for myself. So
when he had spoken with him, he said: Surely you are in our presence
today an honorable, a faithful one.

012.055
Y: (Joseph) said: "Set me over the store-houses of the land: I will
indeed guard them, as one that knows (their importance)."

P: He said: Set me over the storehouses of the land. Lo! I am a skilled
custodian.

S: He said: Place me (in authority) over the treasures of the land,
surely I am a good keeper, knowing well.

012.056
Y: Thus did We give established power to Joseph in the land, to take
possession therein as, when, or where he pleased. We bestow of our
Mercy on whom We please, and We suffer not, to be lost, the reward of
those who do good.

P: Thus gave We power to Joseph in the land. He was the owner of it
where he pleased. We reach with Our mercy whom We will. We lose not the
reward of the good.

S: And thus did We give to Yusuf power in the land-- he had mastery in
it wherever he liked; We send down Our mercy on whom We please, and We
do not waste the reward of those who do good.

012.057
Y: But verily the reward of the Hereafter is the best, for those who
believe, and are constant in righteousness.

P: And the reward of the Hereafter is better, for those who believe and
ward off (evil).

S: And certainly the reward of the hereafter is much better for those
who believe and guard (against evil).

012.058
Y: Then came Joseph's brethren: they entered his presence, and he knew
them, but they knew him not.

P: And Joseph's brethren came and presented themselves before him, and
he knew them but they knew him not.

S: And Yusuf's brothers came and went in to him, and he knew them, while
they did not recognize him.

012.059
Y: And when he had furnished them forth with provisions (suitable) for
them, he said: "Bring unto me a brother ye have, of the same father as
yourselves, (but a different mother): see ye not that I pay out full
measure, and that I do provide the best hospitality?"

P: And when he provided them with their provision he said: Bring unto me
a brother of yours from your father. See ye not that I fill up the
measure and I am the best of hosts?

S: And when he furnished them with their provision, he said: Bring to me
a brother of yours from your father; do you not see that I give full
measure and that I am the best of hosts?

012.060
Y: "Now if ye bring him not to me, ye shall have no measure (of corn)
from me, nor shall ye (even) come near me."

P: And if ye bring him not unto me, then there shall be no measure for
you with me, nor shall ye draw near.

S: But if you do not bring him to me, you shall have no measure (of
corn) from me, nor shall you come near me.

012.061
Y: They said: "We shall certainly seek to get our wish about him from
his father: Indeed we shall do it."

P: They said: We will try to win him from his father: that we will
surely do.

S: They said: We will strive to make his father yield in respect of him,
and we are sure to do (it).

012.062
Y: And (Joseph) told his servants to put their stock-in-trade (with
which they had bartered) into their saddle-bags, so they should know it
only when they returned to their people, in order that they might come
back.

P: He said unto his young men: Place their merchandise in their
saddlebags, so that they may know it when they go back to their folk,
and so will come again.

S: And he said to his servants: Put their money into their bags that
they may recognize it when they go back to their family, so that they
may come back.

012.063
Y: Now when they returned to their father, they said: "O our father! No
more measure of grain shall we get (unless we take our brother): So
send our brother with us, that we may get our measure; and we will
indeed take every care of him."

P: So when they went back to their father they said: O our father! The
measure is denied us, so send with us our brother that we may obtain
the measure, surely we will guard him well.

S: So when they returned to their father, they said: O our father, the
measure is withheld from us, therefore send with us our brother, (so
that) we may get the measure, and we will most surely guard him.

012.064
Y: He said: "Shall I trust you with him with any result other than when
I trusted you with his brother aforetime? But Allah is the best to take
care (of him), and He is the Most Merciful of those who show mercy!"

P: He said: Can I entrust him to you save as I entrusted his brother to
you aforetime? Allah is better at guarding, and He is the Most Merciful
of those who show mercy.

S: He said: I cannot trust in you with respect to him, except as I
trusted in you with respect to his brother before; but Allah is the
best Keeper, and He is the most Merciful of the merciful ones.

012.065
Y: Then when they opened their baggage, they found their stock-in-trade
had been returned to them. They said: "O our father! What (more) can we
desire? this our stock-in-trade has been returned to us: so we shall
get (more) food for our family; We shall take care of our brother; and
add (at the same time) a full camel's load (of grain to our
provisions). This is but a small quantity."

P: And when they opened their belongings they discovered that their
merchandise had been returned to them. They said: O our father! What
(more) can we ask? Here is our merchandise returned to us. We shall get
provision for our folk and guard our brother, and we shall have the
extra measure of a camel (load). This (that we bring now) is a light
measure.

S: And when they opened their goods, they found their money returned to
them. They said: O our father! what (more) can we desire? This is our
property returned to us, and we will bring corn for our family and
guard our brother, and will have in addition the measure of a camel
(load); this is an easy measure.

012.066
Y: (Jacob) said: "Never will I send him with you until ye swear a solemn
oath to me, in Allah's name, that ye will be sure to bring him back to
me unless ye are yourselves hemmed in (and made powerless)." And when
they had sworn their solemn oath, he said: "Over all that we say, be
Allah the witness and guardian!"

P: He said: I will not send him with you till ye give me an undertaking
in the name of Allah that ye will bring him back to me, unless ye are
surrounded. And when they gave him their undertaking he said: Allah is
the Warden over what we say.

S: He said: I will by no means send him with you until you give me a
firm covenant in Allah's name that you will most certainly bring him
back to me, unless you are completely surrounded. And when they gave
him their covenant, he said: Allah is the One in Whom trust is placed
as regards what we say.

012.067
Y: Further he said: "O my sons! enter not all by one gate: enter ye by
different gates. Not that I can profit you aught against Allah (with my
advice): None can command except Allah: On Him do I put my trust: and
let all that trust put their trust on Him."

P: And he said: O my sons! Go not in by one gate; go in by different
gates. I can naught avail you as against Allah. Lo! the decision rests
with Allah only. In Him do I put my trust, and in Him let all the
trusting put their trust.

S: And he said: O my sons! do not (all) enter by one gate and enter by
different gates and I cannot avail you aught against Allah; judgment is
only Allah's; on Him do I rely, and on Him let those who are reliant
rely.

012.068
Y: And when they entered in the manner their father had enjoined, it did
not profit them in the least against (the plan of) Allah: It was but a
necessity of Jacob's soul, which he discharged. For he was, by our
instruction, full of knowledge (and experience): but most men know not.

P: And when they entered in the manner which their father had enjoined,
it would have naught availed them as against Allah; it was but a need
of Jacob's soul which he thus satisfied; and lo! he was a lord of
knowledge because We had taught him; but most of mankind know not.

S: And when they had entered as their father had bidden them, it did not
avail them aught against Allah, but (it was only) a desire in the soul
of Yaqoub which he satisfied; and surely he was possessed of knowledge
because We had given him knowledge, but most people do not know.

012.069
Y: Now when they came into Joseph's presence, he received his (full)
brother to stay with him. He said (to him): "Behold! I am thy (own)
brother; so grieve not at aught of their doings."

P: And when they went in before Joseph, he took his brother unto him,
saying: Lo! I, even I, am thy brother, therefore sorrow not for what
they did.

S: And when they went in to Yusuf. he lodged his brother with himself,
saying: I am your brother, therefore grieve not at what they do.

012.070
Y: At length when he had furnished them forth with provisions (suitable)
for them, he put the drinking cup into his brother's saddle-bag. Then
shouted out a crier: "O ye (in) the caravan! behold! ye are thieves,
without doubt!"

P: And when he provided them with their provision, he put the
drinking-cup in his brother's saddlebag, and then a crier cried: O
camel-riders! Lo! ye are surely thieves!

S: So when he furnished them with their provisions, (someone) placed the
drinking cup in his brother's bag. Then a crier cried out: O caravan!
you are most surely thieves.

012.071
Y: They said, turning towards them: "What is it that ye miss?"

P: They cried, coming toward them: What is it ye have lost?

S: They said while they were facing them: What is it that you miss?

012.072
Y: They said: "We miss the great beaker of the king; for him who
produces it, is (the reward of) a camel load; I will be bound by it."

P: They said: We have lost the king's cup, and he who bringeth it shall
have a camel-load, and I (said Joseph) am answerable for it.

S: They said: We miss the king's drinking cup, and he who shall bring it
shall have a camel-load and I am responsible for it.

012.073
Y: (The brothers) said: "By Allah! well ye know that we came not to make
mischief in the land, and we are no thieves!"

P: They said: By Allah, well ye know we came not to do evil in the land,
and are no thieves.

S: They said: By Allah! you know for certain that we have not come to
make mischief in the land, and we are not thieves.

012.074
Y: (The Egyptians) said: "What then shall be the penalty of this, if ye
are (proved) to have lied?"

P: They said: And what shall be the penalty for it, if ye prove liars?

S: They said: But what shall be the requital of this, if you are liars?

012.075
Y: They said: "The penalty should be that he in whose saddle-bag it is
found, should be held (as bondman) to atone for the (crime). Thus it is
we punish the wrong-doers!"

P: They said: The penalty for it! He in whose bag (the cup) is found, he
is the penalty for it. Thus we requite wrong-doers.

S: They said: The requital of this is that the person in whose bag it is
found shall himself be (held for) the satisfaction thereof; thus do we
punish the wrongdoers.

012.076
Y: So he began (the search) with their baggage, before (he came to) the
baggage of his brother: at length he brought it out of his brother's
baggage. Thus did We plan for Joseph. He could not take his brother by
the law of the king except that Allah willed it (so). We raise to
degrees (of wisdom) whom We please: but over all endued with knowledge
is one, the All-Knowing.

P: Then he (Joseph) began the search with their bags before his
brother's bag, then he produced it from his brother's bag. Thus did We
contrive for Joseph. He could not have taken his brother according to
the king's law unless Allah willed. We raise by grades (of mercy) whom
We will, and over every lord of knowledge there is one more knowing.

S: So he began with their sacks before the sack of his brother, then he
brought it out from his brother's sack. Thus did We plan for the sake
of Yusuf; it was not (lawful) that he should take his brother under the
king's law unless Allah pleased; We raise the degrees of whomsoever We
please, and above every one possessed of knowledge is the All-knowing
one.

012.077
Y: They said: "If he steals, there was a brother of his who did steal
before (him)." But these things did Joseph keep locked in his heart,
revealing not the secrets to them. He (simply) said (to himself): "Ye
are the worse situated; and Allah knoweth best the truth of what ye
assert!"

P: They said: If he stealeth, a brother of his stole before. But Joseph
kept it secret in his soul and revealed it not unto them. He said
(within himself): Ye are in worse case, and Allah knoweth best (the
truth of) that which ye allege.

S: They said: If he steal, a brother of his did indeed steal before; but
Yusuf kept it secret in his heart and did not disclose it to them. He
said: You are in an evil condition and Allah knows best what you state.

012.078
Y: They said: "O exalted one! Behold! he has a father, aged and
venerable, (who will grieve for him); so take one of us in his place;
for we see that thou art (gracious) in doing good."

P: They said: O ruler of the land! Lo! he hath a very aged father, so
take one of us instead of him. Lo! we behold thee of those who do
kindness.

S: They said: O chief! he has a father, a very old man, therefore retain
one of us in his stead; surely we see you to be of the doers of good.

012.079
Y: He said: "Allah forbid that we take other than him with whom we found
our property: indeed (if we did so), we should be acting wrongfully."

P: He said: Allah forbid that we should seize save him with whom we
found our property; then truly we should be wrong-doers.

S: He said: Allah protect us that we should seize other than him with
whom we found our property, for then most surely we would be unjust.

012.080
Y: Now when they saw no hope of his (yielding), they held a conference
in private. The leader among them said: "Know ye not that your father
did take an oath from you in Allah's name, and how, before this, ye did
fail in your duty with Joseph? Therefore will I not leave this land
until my father permits me, or Allah commands me; and He is the best to
command."

P: So, When they despaired of (moving) him, they conferred together
apart. The eldest of them said: Know ye not how your father took an
undertaking from you in Allah's name and how ye failed in the case of
Joseph aforetime? Therefore I shall not go forth from the land until my
father giveth leave or Allah judgeth for me. He is the Best of Judges.

S: Then when they despaired of him, they retired, conferring privately
together. The eldest of them said: Do you not know that your father
took from you a covenant in Allah's name, and how you fell short of
your duty with respect to Yusuf before? Therefore I will by no means
depart from this land until my father permits me or Allah decides for
me, and He is the best of the judges:

012.081
Y: "Turn ye back to your father, and say, 'O our father! behold! thy son
committed theft! we bear witness only to what we know, and we could not
well guard against the unseen!"

P: Return unto your father and say: O our father! Lo! thy son hath
stolen. We testify only to that which we know; we are not guardians of
the Unseen.

S: Go back to your father and say: O our father! surely your son
committed theft, and we do not bear witness except to what we have
known, and we could not keep watch over the unseen:

012.082
Y: "'Ask at the town where we have been and the caravan in which we
returned, and (you will find) we are indeed telling the truth.'"

P: Ask the township where we were, and the caravan with which we
travelled hither. Lo! we speak the truth.

S: And inquire in the town in which we were and the caravan with which
we proceeded, and most surely we are truthful.

012.083
Y: Jacob said: "Nay, but ye have yourselves contrived a story (good
enough) for you. So patience is most fitting (for me). Maybe Allah will
bring them (back) all to me (in the end). For He is indeed full of
knowledge and wisdom."

P: (And when they came unto their father and had spoken thus to him) he
said: Nay, but your minds have beguiled you into something. (My course
is) comely patience! It may be that Allah will bring them all unto me.
Lo! He, only He, is the Knower, the Wise.

S: He (Yaqoub) said: Nay, your souls have made a matter light for you,
so patience is good; maybe Allah will bring them all together to me;
surely He is the Knowing, the Wise.

012.084
Y: And he turned away from them, and said: "How great is my grief for
Joseph!" And his eyes became white with sorrow, and he fell into silent
melancholy.

P: And he turned away from them and said: Alas, my grief for Joseph! And
his eyes were whitened with the sorrow that he was suppressing.

S: And he turned away from them, and said: O my sorrow for Yusuf! and
his eyes became white on account of the grief, and he was a repressor
(of grief).

012.085
Y: They said: "By Allah! (never) wilt thou cease to remember Joseph
until thou reach the last extremity of illness, or until thou die!"

P: They said: By Allah, thou wilt never cease remembering Joseph till
thy health is ruined or thou art of those who perish!

S: They said: By Allah! you will not cease to remember Yusuf until you
are a prey to constant disease or (until) you are of those who perish.

012.086
Y: He said: "I only complain of my distraction and anguish to Allah, and
I know from Allah that which ye know not..."

P: He said: I expose my distress and anguish only unto Allah, and I know
from Allah that which ye know not.

S: He said: I only complain of my grief and sorrow to Allah, and I know
from Allah what you do not know.

012.087
Y: "O my sons! go ye and enquire about Joseph and his brother, and never
give up hope of Allah's Soothing Mercy: truly no one despairs of
Allah's Soothing Mercy, except those who have no faith."

P: Go, O my sons, and ascertain concerning Joseph and his brother, and
despair not of the Spirit of Allah. Lo! none despaireth of the Spirit
of Allah save disbelieving folk.

S: O my sons! Go and inquire respecting Yusuf and his brother, and
despair not of Allah's mercy; surely none despairs of Allah's mercy
except the unbelieving people.

012.088
Y: Then, when they came (back) into (Joseph's) presence they said: "O
exalted one! distress has seized us and our family: we have (now)
brought but scanty capital: so pay us full measure, (we pray thee), and
treat it as charity to us: for Allah doth reward the charitable."

P: And when they came (again) before him (Joseph) they said: O ruler!
Misfortune hath touched us and our folk, and we bring but poor
merchandise, so fill for us the measure and be charitable unto us. Lo!
Allah will requite the charitable,

S: So when they came in to him, they said: O chief! distress has
afflicted us and our family and we have brought scanty money, so give
us full measure and be charitable to us; surely Allah rewards the
charitable.

012.089
Y: He said: "Know ye how ye dealt with Joseph and his brother, not
knowing (what ye were doing)?"

