it did not depend upon us to exist or not to exist. Would the bird be
under such great obligations to the bird-catcher for having caught it in
his net and for having put it into his cage, in order to eat it after
being amused with it?




XCIV.--TO PRETEND THAT MAN IS THE BELOVED CHILD OF PROVIDENCE, GOD'S
FAVORITE, THE ONLY OBJECT OF HIS LABORS, THE KING OF NATURE, IS FOLLY.

In spite of the infirmities, the troubles, the miseries to which man is
compelled to submit in this world; in spite of the danger which his
alarmed imagination creates in regard to another, he is still foolish
enough to believe himself to be God's favorite, the only aim of all His
works. He imagines that the entire universe was made for him; he calls
himself arrogantly the king of nature, and ranks himself far above other
animals. Poor mortal! upon what can you establish your high pretensions?
It is, you say, upon your soul, upon your reason, upon your sublime
faculties, which place you in a condition to exercise an absolute
authority over the beings which surround you. But weak sovereign of this
world, art thou sure one instant of the duration of thy reign? The least
atoms of matter which you despise, are they not sufficient to deprive
you of your throne and life? Finally, does not the king of animals
terminate always by becoming food for the worms?

You speak of your soul. But do you know what your soul is? Do you not
see that this soul is but the assemblage of your organs, from which life
results? Would you refuse a soul to other animals who live, who think,
who judge, who compare, who seek pleasure, and avoid pain even as you
do, and who often possess organs which are better than your own? You
boast of your intellectual faculties, but these faculties which render
you so proud, do they make you any happier than other creatures? Do you
often make use of this reason which you glory in, and which religion
commands you not to listen to? Those animals which you disdain because
they are weaker or less cunning than yourself, are they subject to
troubles, to mental anxieties, to a thousand frivolous passions, to a
thousand imaginary needs, of which your heart is continually the prey?
Are they, like you, tormented by the past, alarmed for the future?

Limited solely to the present, what you call their instinct, and what I
call their intelligence, is it not sufficient to preserve and to defend
them and to provide for their needs? This instinct, of which you speak
with disdain, does it not often serve them much better than your
wonderful faculties? Their peaceable ignorance, is it not more
advantageous than these extravagant meditations and these futile
investigations which render you miserable, and for which you are driven
to murdering beings of your own noble kind? Finally, these animals, have
they, like mortals, a troubled imagination which makes them fear not
only death, but even eternal torments? Augustus, having heard that
Herod, king of Judea, had murdered his sons, cried out: "It would be
better to be Herod's pig than his son!" We can say as much of men; this
beloved child of Providence runs much greater risks than all other
animals. After having suffered a great deal in this world, do we not
believe ourselves in danger of suffering for eternity in another?




XCV.--COMPARISON BETWEEN MAN AND ANIMALS.

What is the exact line of demarcation between man and the other animals
which he calls brutes? In what way does he essentially differ from the
beasts? It is, we are told, by his intelligence, by the faculties of his
mind, by his reason, that man is superior to all the other animals,
which in all they do, act but by physical impulsions, reason taking no
part. But the beasts, having more limited needs than men, do very well
without these intellectual faculties, which would be perfectly useless
in their way of living. Their instinct is sufficient for them, while all
the faculties of man are hardly sufficient to render his existence
endurable, and to satisfy the needs which his imagination, his
prejudices, and his institutions multiply to his torment.

The brute is not affected by the same objects as man; it has neither the
same needs, nor the same desires, nor the same whims; it early reaches
maturity, while nothing is more rare than to see the human being
enjoying all of his faculties, exercising them freely, and making a
proper use of them for his own happiness.




XCVI.--THERE ARE NO MORE DETESTABLE ANIMALS IN THIS WORLD THAN TYRANTS.

We are assured that the human soul is a simple substance; but if the
soul is such a simple substance, it ought to be the same in all the
individuals of the human race, who all ought to have the same
intellectual faculties; however, this is not the case; men differ as
much in qualities of mind as in the features of the face. There are in
the human race, beings as different from one another as man is from a
horse or a dog. What conformity or resemblance do we find between some
men? What an infinite distance between the genius of a Locke, of a
Newton, and that of a peasant, of a Hottentot, or of a Laplander!

Man differs from other animals but by the difference of his
organization, which causes him to produce effects of which they are not
capable. The variety which we notice in the organs of individuals of the
human race, suffices to explain to us the difference which is often
found between them in regard to the intellectual faculties. More or less
of delicacy in these organs, of heat in the blood, of promptitude in the
fluids, more or less of suppleness or of rigidity in the fibers and the
nerves, must necessarily produce the infinite diversities which are
noticeable in the minds of men. It is by exercise, by habitude, by
education, that the human mind is developed and succeeds in rising above
the beings which surround it; man, without culture and without
experience, is a being as devoid of reason and of industry as the brute.
A stupid individual is a man whose organs are acted upon with
difficulty, whose brain is hard to move, whose blood circulates slowly;
a man of mind is he whose organs are supple, who feels very quickly,
whose brain moves promptly; a learned man is one whose organs and whose
brain have been exercised a long while upon objects which occupy him.

The man without culture, experience, or reason, is he not more
despicable and more abominable than the vilest insects, or the most
ferocious beasts? Is there a more detestable being in nature than a
Tiberius, a Nero, a Caligula? These destroyers of the human race, known
by the name of conquerors, have they better souls than those of bears,
lions, and panthers? Are there more detestable animals in this world
than tyrants?




XCVII.--REFUTATION OF MAN'S EXCELLENCE.

Human extravagances soon dispel, in the eyes of reason, the superiority
which man arrogantly claims over other animals. Do we not see many
animals show more gentleness, more reflection and reason than the animal
which calls itself reasonable par excellence? Are there amongst men, who
are so often enslaved and oppressed, societies as well organized as
those of ants, bees, or beavers? Do we ever see ferocious beasts of the
same kind meet upon the plains to devour each other without profit? Do
we see among them religious wars? The cruelty of beasts against other
species is caused by hunger, the need of nourishment; the cruelty of man
against man has no other motive than the vanity of his masters and the
folly of his impertinent prejudices. Theorists who try to make us
believe that everything in the universe was made for man, are very much
embarrassed when we ask them in what way can so many mischievous animals
which continually infest our life here, contribute to the welfare of
men. What known advantage results for God's friend to be bitten by a
viper, stung by a gnat, devoured by vermin, torn into pieces by a tiger?
Would not all these animals reason as wisely as our theologians, if they
should pretend that man was made for them?




XCVIII.--AN ORIENTAL LEGEND.

At a short distance from Bagdad a dervis, celebrated for his holiness,
passed his days tranquilly in agreeable solitude. The surrounding
inhabitants, in order to have an interest in his prayers, eagerly
brought to him every day provisions and presents. The holy man thanked
God incessantly for the blessings Providence heaped upon him. "O Allah,"
said he, "how ineffable is Thy tenderness toward Thy servants. What have
I done to deserve the benefactions which Thy liberality loads me with!
Oh, Monarch of the skies! oh, Father of nature! what praises could be
worthy to celebrate Thy munificence and Thy paternal cares! O Allah, how
great are Thy gifts to the children of men!" Filled with gratitude, our
hermit made a vow to undertake for the seventh time the pilgrimage to
Mecca. The war, which then existed between the Persians and the Turks,
could not make him defer the execution of his pious enterprise. Full of
confidence in God, he began his journey; under the inviolable safeguard
of a respected garb, he passed through without obstacle the enemies'
detachments; far from being molested, he receives at every step marks of
veneration from the soldiers of both sides. At last, overcome by
fatigue, he finds himself obliged to seek a shelter from the rays of the
burning sun; he finds it beneath a fresh group of palm-trees, whose
roots were watered by a limpid rivulet. In this solitary place, where
the silence was broken only by the murmuring of the waters and the
singing of the birds, the man of God found not only an enchanting
retreat, but also a delicious repast; he had but to extend the hand to
gather dates and other agreeable fruits; the rivulet can appease his
thirst; very soon a green plot invites him to take sweet repose. As he
awakens he performs the holy cleansing; and in a transport of ecstasy,
he exclaimed: "O Allah! HOW GREAT IS THY GOODNESS TO THE CHILDREN OF
MEN!" Well rested, refreshed, full of life and gayety, our holy man
continues on his road; it conducts him for some time through a
delightful country, which offers to his sight but blooming shores and
trees filled with fruit. Softened by this spectacle, he worships
incessantly the rich and liberal hand of Providence, which is everywhere
seen occupied with the welfare of the human race. Going a little
farther, he comes across a few mountains, which were quite hard to
ascend; but having arrived at their summit, a hideous sight suddenly
meets his eyes; his soul is all consternation. He discovers a vast plain
entirely devastated by the sword and fire; he looks at it and finds it
covered with more than a hundred thousand corpses, deplorable remains of
a bloody battle which had taken place a few days previous. Eagles,
vultures, ravens, and wolves were devouring the dead bodies with which
the earth was covered. This sight plunges our pilgrim into a sad
reverie. Heaven, by a special favor, had made him understand the
language of beasts. He heard a wolf, gorged with human flesh, exclaim in
his excessive joy: "O Allah! how great is Thy kindness for the children
of wolves! Thy foreseeing wisdom takes care to send infatuation upon
these detestable men who are so dangerous to us. Through an effect of
Thy Providence which watches over Thy creatures, these, our destroyers,
murder each other, and thus furnish us with sumptuous repasts. O Allah!
HOW GREAT IS THY GOODNESS TO THE CHILDREN OF WOLVES!"




XCIX.--IT IS FOOLISH TO SEE IN THE UNIVERSE ONLY THE BENEFACTIONS OF
HEAVEN, AND TO BELIEVE THAT THIS UNIVERSE WAS MADE BUT FOR MAN.

An exalted imagination sees in the universe but the benefactions of
Heaven; a calm mind finds good and evil in it. I exist, you will say;
but is this existence always a benefit? You will say, look at this sun,
which shines for you; this earth, which is covered with fruits and
verdure; these flowers, which bloom for our sight and smell; these
trees, which bend beneath the weight of fruits; these pure streams,
which flow but to quench your thirst; these seas, which embrace the
universe to facilitate your commerce; these animals, which a foreseeing
nature produces for your use! Yes, I see all these things, and I enjoy
them when I can. But in some climates this beautiful sun is most always
obscured from me; in others, its excessive heat torments me, produces
storm, gives rise to dreadful diseases, dries up the fields; the meadows
have no grass, the trees are fruitless, the harvests are scorched, the
springs are dried up; I can scarcely exist, and I sigh under the cruelty
of a nature which you find so benevolent. If these seas bring me spices,
riches, and useless things, do they not destroy a multitude of mortals
who are dupes enough to go after them?

Man's vanity persuades him that he is the sole center of the universe;
he creates for himself a world and a God; he thinks himself of
sufficient consequence to derange nature at his will, but he reasons as
an atheist when the question of other animals is involved. Does he not
imagine that the individuals different from his species are automatons
unworthy of the cares of universal Providence, and that the beasts can
not be the objects of its justice and kindness? Mortals consider
fortunate or unfortunate events, health or sickness, life and death,
abundance or famine, as rewards or punishments for the use or misuse of
the liberty which they arrogate to themselves. Do they reason on this
principle when animals are taken into consideration? No; although they
see them under a just God enjoy and suffer, be healthy and sick, live
and die, like themselves, it does not enter their mind to ask what
crimes these beasts have committed in order to cause the displeasure of
the Arbiter of nature. Philosophers, blinded by their theological
prejudices, in order to disembarrass themselves, have gone so far as to
pretend that beasts have no feelings!

Will men never renounce their foolish pretensions? Will they not
recognize that nature was not made for them? Will they not see that this
nature has placed on equal footing all the beings which she produced?
Will they not see that all organized beings are equally made to be born
and to die, to enjoy and to suffer? Finally, instead of priding
themselves preposterously on their mental faculties, are they not
compelled to admit that they often render them more unhappy than the
beasts, in which we find neither opinions, prejudices, vanities, nor the
weaknesses which decide at every moment the well-being of men?




C.--WHAT IS THE SOUL? WE KNOW NOTHING ABOUT IT. IF THIS PRETENDED SOUL
WAS OF ANOTHER ESSENCE FROM THAT OF THE BODY, THEIR UNION WOULD BE
IMPOSSIBLE.

The superiority which men arrogate to themselves over other animals, is
principally founded upon the opinion of possessing exclusively an
immortal soul. But as soon as we ask what this soul is, they begin to
stammer. It is an unknown substance; it is a secret force distinguished
from their bodies; it is a spirit of which they can form no idea. Ask
them how this spirit, which they suppose like their God, totally
deprived of a physical substance, could combine itself with their
material bodies? They will tell you that they know nothing about it;
that it is a mystery to them; that this combination is the effect of the
Almighty power. These are the clear ideas which men form of the hidden,
or, rather, imaginary substance which they consider the motor of all
their actions! If the soul is a substance essentially different from the
body, and which can have no affinity with it, their union would be, not
a mystery, but a thing impossible. Besides, this soul, being of an
essence different from that of the body, ought to act necessarily in a
different way from it. However, we see that the movements of the body
are felt by this pretended soul, and that these two substances, so
different in essence, always act in harmony. You will tell us that this
harmony is a mystery; and I will tell you that I do not see my soul,
that I know and feel but my body; that it is my body which feels, which
reflects, which judges, which suffers, and which enjoys, and that all of
its faculties are the necessary results of its own mechanism or of its
organization.




CI.--THE EXISTENCE OF A SOUL IS AN ABSURD SUPPOSITION, AND THE EXISTENCE
OF AN IMMORTAL SOUL IS A STILL MORE ABSURD SUPPOSITION.

Although it is impossible for men to have the least idea of the soul, or
of this pretended spirit which animates them, they persuade themselves,
however, that this unknown soul is exempt from death; everything proves
to them that they feel, think, acquire ideas, enjoy or suffer, but by
the means of the senses or of the material organs of the body. Even
admitting the existence of this soul, one can not refuse to recognize
that it depends wholly on the body, and suffers conjointly with it all
the vicissitudes which it experiences itself; and however it is imagined
that it has by its nature nothing analogous with it; it is pretended
that it can act and feel without the assistance of this body; that
deprived of this body and robbed of its senses, this soul will be able
to live, to enjoy, to suffer, be sensitive of enjoyment or of rigorous
torments. Upon such a tissue of conjectural absurdities the wonderful
opinion of the immortality of the soul is built.
