formerly, and by the command of authority, the fruit whereof, though
great, yet answered not our expectation; the Lord surely hath been
displeased with the slightness of our hearts in the work. I beseech you
be more watchful, and stir up your hearts with more industry this day
than ever before. As it is the last oath you are likely to take in this
kind, so it is our last refuge, _Tabula post naufragium_. If this help
us not, we are likely to remain to our dying day an unhappy people; but
if otherwise, "You will indeed swear with all your hearts, and seek the
Lord with your whole desire, God will be found, and give you rest round
about."

And having sworn, and entered into this solemn engagement to God and
man, make conscience to do accordingly; otherwise it is better thou
shouldst not vow. As is said of fasting, "It is not the bowing down of
the head for a day;" so of this solemn swearing, It is not the lifting
up of the hand for a day, but an honest and faithful endeavouring after
the contents of this covenant, all our days. A truce-breaker is reckoned
up amongst the vilest of Christians, so a covenant-breaker is listed
amongst the worst of heathens, but he that sweareth and changeth not,
tho' he swear to his hurt, that is, he that will keep his covenant and
oath, tho' the contents of it prove not for him, nay possibly against
him, yet he will keep it for his oath's sake, such an one "shall have
his habitation with the most High, and dwell in His tabernacle." And as
for you, reverend brethren, that are ministers of the gospel, there is
yet another obligation will lie upon you: let us look to ourselves, and
make provision to walk answerable to this our covenant, for the gospel's
sake: it will reflect a great aspersion upon the truth of the gospel, if
we should be false or inconstant in any word or purpose, tho' in a
matter of less consequence, as you can easily collect from that apology
of Paul. How much more in such a case as this is, if we should be found
to purpose, nay more, to vow, and covenant, and swear, and all this
according unto the flesh, and with us there should be, notwithstanding
all these obligations, yea, yea, and nay, nay.

That we may all, who take the covenant this day, be constant,
immoveable, and abound in this work of the Lord, that we may not start
aside, or give back, or go on uncomfortably, there is a twofold grace or
qualification to be laboured after.

1. We must get courage, spirits that are bold and resolute. It is said
in Haggai, that "the Lord stirred up the Spirit of Zerubbabel, governor
of Judah, and the spirit of Joshua, the high priest, and the spirit of
all the remnant of the people, and they came and did work in the house
of the Lord." The work of God's house, reformation work especially, is a
stirring work: read history, you find not any where, reformation made in
any age, either in doctrine or discipline, without great stir and
opposition. This was foretold by the same prophet, the promise is, "He
will fill His house with glory." But what goeth before. "Yet once it is
a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the earth, and the
sea, and the dry land," that is, all nations, as in the words following.
This place is applied to the removing Jewish rites, the moveables of
God's house. The like you find in the apostles' times, the truth being
preached, some believed, others did not. Here beginneth the stir. Those
that believed not, "took unto themselves certain lewd fellows of the
baser sort, and gathered a company, and set all the city in an uproar;"
and when they had done so, complained of the brethren to the rulers, as
men that turn the world upside down. In such a work therefore, men had
need be of stout, resolute and composed spirits, that we may be able to
go on in the main, and stir in the midst of such stirs, and not be
amazed at any such doings. It may possibly happen, that even amongst
yourselves, there will be outcries: Sir, you will undo all, saith one;
You will put all into confusion, saith another; If you take this course,
saith a third, we can expect nothing but blood. But a wise statesman,
like an experienced seaman, knoweth the compass of his vessel, and tho'
it heave, toss, and the passengers cry out about him, yet in the midst
of all, he is himself, turneth not aside from his work, but steereth on
his course. I beseech you, let it be seriously considered, if you mean
to do any such work in the house of God, as this is; if you mean to
pluck up what many years ago was planted, or to build up what so long
ago was pulled down, and to go thro' with this work and not be
discouraged, you must beg of the Lord this excellent spirit, this
resolute, stirring spirit, otherwise you will be outspirited, and both
you and your cause slighted and dishonoured.

2. On the other hand, we must labour for humility, prudence, gentleness,
meekness. A man may be very zealous and resolute, and yet very meek and
merciful: Jesus Christ was a Lion, and yet a Lamb also; in one place, He
telleth them He cometh to send "fire on the earth:" and, in another
place, rebuketh His disciples "for their fiery spirits." There was the
like composition in Moses, and in Paul; and it is of great use,
especially in this work of reformation. I have not observed any disputes
carried on with more bitterness in men's writings, and with a more
unsanctified heat of spirit, yea, and by godly men too, than in
controversies about discipline, church government, ceremonies, and the
like. Surely, to argue about government with such ungoverned passions,
to argue for reformation with a spirit so unreformed, is very uncomely.
Let us be zealous, as Christ was, to cast out all, to extirpate and root
out every plant His heavenly Father hath not planted; and yet let us do
it in an orderly way, and with the Spirit of Christ, whose servants we
are. "The servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle to all men,
apt to teach, patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose." We
solemnly engage this day our utmost endeavours for reformation; let us
remember this, that too much heat, as well as too much coldness, may
harden men in their ways, and hinder reformation.

Brethren, let us come to this blessed work with such a frame of heart,
with such a mind, for the present, with such resolutions for the time to
come; let us not be wanting to the opportunity God hath put into our
hands this day; and then I can promise you, as the prophet, "Consider
this day and upwards, even from this day, that the foundation of the
Lord's work is laid, consider it, from this day will I bless you saith
the Lord." Nay, we have received, as it were, the first fruits of this
promise; for, as it is said of some men's good "works, they are manifest
before-hand." Even so may be said of the good work of this day, it is
manifested before-hand. God hath, as it were before-hand, testified His
acceptance; while we were thinking and purposing this free-will
offering, He was protecting and defending our army, causing our enemies,
the enemies of this work, to flee before us, and gave us a victory, not
to be despised. Surely this oath and covenant shall be Judah's joy, the
joy and comfort of this whole kingdom, yea, of all the three kingdoms.

Jesus Christ, King of the saints, govern us by His Spirit, strengthen us
by His power, undertake for us according as He hath sworn, even the
"oath which He sware to our father Abraham, that He would grant unto us,
that we being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve Him
without fear, in holiness and righteousness before Him, all the days of
our life." Grant unto us also, that when this life is finished, and we
gathered to our fathers, there may be a generation out of our loins to
stand up in this cause, that His great and reverend name may be exalted
from one generation to another, until He Himself shall come, and perfect
all His own wisdom: even so come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen.




THE SOLEMN LEAGUE AND COVENANT.

ADDRESS AT WESTMINSTER.[7]

_BY ALEXANDER HENDERSON._


Although the time be far spent, yet am I bold (honourable, reverend, and
beloved in the Lord) to crave your patience a little. It were both sin
and shame to us in this so acceptable a time in this day, which the Lord
hath made, to be silent and to say nothing. If we should hold our peace,
we could neither be answerable to God, whose cause and work is in hand,
nor to this church and kingdom, unto which we have made so large
profession of duty, and owe much more; nor to our native kingdom, so
abundant in affection towards you; nor to our own hearts, which
exceedingly rejoice to see this day. We have greater reason than the
leprous men sitting in a time of great extremity at the gates of
Samaria, to say one to another, "We do not well, this day is a day of
good tidings, and we hold our peace." It is true, the Syrians are not
yet fled; but our hope is through God, that the work begun this day,
being sincerely performed, and faithfully pursued, shall put to flight,
not only the Syrians and Babylonians, but all other enemies of the
church of God, of the king's honour, and of our liberty and peace.

For it is acceptable to God, and well pleasing in His sight, when His
people come willingly in the day of His power (and how shall they not be
willing in the day of His power?) to enter into a religious covenant
with Him, and amongst themselves, whatsoever be the condition of the
people of God, whether in sorrow and humiliation before deliverance, or
in rejoicing and thanksgiving after deliverance. This is it which the
Lord waits for at their hands, which they have been used to perform, and
with which He hath been so well pleased, that it hath been the fountain
of many deliverances and blessings unto them. When a people begin to
forget God, He lifteth up His hand against them, and smiteth them: and
when His people, humbled before Him, lift up their hands, not only in
supplication, but in covenant before the most high God, He is pleased
(such is His mercy and wonderful compassion) first, to lift His hand
unto them, saying, "I am the Lord your God;" as we have it three times
in two verses of the 20th of Ezekiel: and next He stretcheth out His
hand against His enemies and theirs. It is the best work of faith, to
join in covenant with God, the best work of love and Christian
communion, to join in covenant with the people of God; the best work of
the best zeal, to join in covenant for reformation, against the enemies
of God and religion; the best work of true loyalty, to join in covenant
for the preservation of our king and superiors; and the best proof of
natural affection, (and to be without natural affection is one of the
great sins of the Gentiles) to join in covenant for defence of our
native country, liberties and laws: such as from these necessary ends do
withdraw, and are not willing to enter into covenant, have reason to
enter into their own hearts, and to look into their faith, love, zeal,
loyalty, and natural affection.

As it is acceptable to God, so have we for it the precedent and example
not only of the people of God of old, of the reformed churches of
Germany, and the low countries; but of our own noble and Christian
progenitors in the time of the danger of religion, which is expressed in
the covenant itself. The defect was, they went not on thoroughly to
enter into a solemn covenant, an happiness reserved for this time, which
had they done, the corruptions and calamities of these days might have
been prevented. And if the Lord shall be pleased to move, loose, and
enlarge the hearts of His people in his majesty's dominions to take this
covenant, not in simulation, nor in lukewarmness, as those that are
almost persuaded to be Christians, but as becometh the people of God, it
shall be the prevention of many evils and miseries, and a means of many
and rich blessings, spiritual and temporal, to ourselves, our little
ones, and the posterity that shall come after us, for many generations.

The near and neighbouring example of the church and kingdom of Scotland,
is in this case worthy of our best observation. When the prelates there
were grown by their rents, and lordly dignities, by their exorbitant
power over all sorts of his majesty's subjects, ministers and others, by
their places in parliament, council, college of justice, exchequer, and
high commission, to a monstrous dominion and greatness, and, like
giants, setting their one foot on the neck of the church, and the other
on the neck of the state, were become intolerably insolent. And when the
people of God, through their oppression in religion, liberties and laws,
and what was dearest unto them, were brought so low, that they choose
rather to die, than to live in such slavery, or to live in any other
place, rather than in their own native country: then did the Lord say,
"I have seen the affliction of My people, and I have heard their
groaning, and am come down to deliver them." The beginnings were small
and contemptible in the eyes of the presumptuous enemies, such as used
to be the beginnings of the greatest works of God; but were so seconded
and continually followed by the undeniable evidences of divine
providence, leading them forward from one step to another, that their
mountain became strong in the end. No tongue can tell what motions
filled the hearts, what tears were poured forth from the eyes, and what
cries came from the mouths of many thousands in that land, when they
found an unwonted flame warming their breasts, and perceived the power
of God, raising them from the dead, and creating for them a new world,
wherein shall dwell religion and righteousness. When they were destitute
both of monies and munition, which, next unto the spirit and arms of
men, are the sinews of war, the Lord brought them forth out of His hid
treasures, which was wonderful in their eyes, and matter of astonishment
to their hearts: when they were many times at a pause in their
deliberations, and brought to such perplexity, that they knew not what
to choose, or to do for prosecuting the work of God, only their eyes
were towards Him; not only the fears and furies, but the plots also and
policies of the adversaries opened the way unto them, their devices were
turned upon their own heads, and served for promoting of the work of
God. The purity of their intentions elevated above base and earthly
respects, and the constant peace of their hearts in the midst of many
dangers, did bear them out against the malicious accusations and
aspersions put upon their actions: all which were sensible impressions
of the good providence of God, and legible characters of His work; which
the church and kingdom of England, exercised at this time with greater
difficulty than theirs, have in part already found; so shall the
parallel be perfected to their greater comfort in the faithful pursuing
of the work unto the end.

Necessity, which hath in it a kind of sovereignty, and is a law above
all laws, and therefore is said to have no law, doth mightily press the
church and kingdom of Scotland at this time. It is no small comfort unto
them, that they have not been idle, and at ease, but have used all good
and lawful means of supplications, declarations and remonstrances to his
majesty, for quenching the combustion in this kingdom: and after all
these, that they sent commissioners to his majesty, humbly to mediate
for a reconcilement and pacification. But the offer of their humble
service was rejected from no other reason, but that they had no warrant
nor capacity for such a mediation; and that the intermixture of the
government of the church of England, with the civil government of the
kingdom, was such a mystery as could not be understood by them. Although
it be true, which was at that time often replied, that the eighth demand
of the treaty, and the answer given thereunto, concerning the uniformity
of religion, was a sufficient ground of capacity; and the proceedings of
the houses of parliament against episcopal government, as a stumbling
block hindering reformation, and as a prejudice to the civil state, was
ground enough for their information. The commissioners having returned
from his majesty without success, and the miseries of Ireland, and the
distresses of England, and the dangers and pressures of the kingdom of
Scotland, growing to greater extremity; such as were intrusted with the
public affairs of the kingdom, were necessitate, according to the
practice of former times, his majesty having denied a parliament, to
call a convention of the estates, for considering of the present
affairs, and for providing the best remedies: which, immediately upon
their meeting, by the special providence of God, did receive information
of divers treacherous attempts of papists, in all the three kingdoms, as
if they had been called for that effect. And by the same providence,
commissioners were sent from both houses of parliament, to consider with
the estates of the kingdom of Scotland, of such articles and
propositions, as might make the conjunction betwixt the two nations more
beneficial and effectual for the securing of religion and liberty
against papists and prelates, with their adherents. Their consultations
with the commissioners of the General Assembly did in the end bring
forth a covenant, as the only means after all other had been essayed,
for the deliverance of England and Ireland out of the depths of
affliction, preservation of the church and kingdom of Scotland from the
extremity of misery, and the safety of our native king and his kingdoms,
from destruction and desolation. This is the manifold necessity which
nature, religion, loyalty and love hath laid upon them.

Nor is it unknown in this honourable, reverend and wise audience, what
errors and heresies in doctrine, what superstition and idolatry in
worship, what usurpation and tyranny in government, what cruelty against
the souls and bodies of the saints have been set on foot, exercised and
executed for many generations, and now of late by the Roman church: all
which we hope, through the blessing of God upon this work, shall be
brought to an end. Had the Pope at Rome the knowledge of what is doing
this day in England, and were this covenant written on the plaster of
the wall over against him, where he sitteth, Belshazzar-like in his
sacrilegious pomp, it would make his heart to tremble, his countenance
to change, his head and mitre to shake, his joints to loose, and all his
cardinals and prelates to be astonished.

When the reformed churches, which by their letters have been exciting us
to Christian communion and sympathy, in this time of the danger of
religion and distress of the godly, shall hear of this blessed
conjunction for uniformity in religion, according to the Word of God,
and the defence thereof, it shall quicken their hearts against the
heaviness of oppressing sorrows and fears; and be no other than a
beginning of a jubilee and joyful deliverance unto them, from the
antichristian yoke and tyranny.

Upon these and the like considerations, we are very confident that the
church and kingdom of Scotland will most cheerfully join in this
covenant; at the first motion whereof, their bowels were moved within
them. And to give testimony of this our confidence, we who are
Commissioners from the General Assembly, although we have no particular
and express commission for that end (not from want of willingness, but
of foresight) offer to join our hearts and hands unto it, being assured,
that the Lord in His own time will, against all opposition, even against
the gates of hell, crown it with a blessing from heaven. The Word of God
is for it, as you have been now resolved by the consent and testimony of
a reverend assembly of so many godly, learned and great divines. In your
own sense and experience, upon seeking God in private or public, as in
the evening of a well spent Sabbath or day of fast and humiliation, the
bent and inclinations of your hearts will be strongest to go through
with this work. It is a good testimony that our designs and ways are
agreeable to the will of God, if we affect them most when our hearts are
farthest from the world, and our temper is most spiritual and heavenly,
and least carnal and earthly. As the Word of God, so the prayers of the
people of God in all the reformed churches, are for us. That divine
providence also which hath maintained this cause, and supported His
servants in a marvellous manner unto this day, and which this time past
hath kept things in an equal balance and vicissitude of success, will,
we trust, from this day forth, through the weight of this covenant, cast
the balance, and make religion and righteousness to prevail, to the
glory of God, the honour of our king, the confusion of our common
enemies, and the comfort and safety of the people of God; which, may He
grant who is able to do above any thing that we can ask or think.




[Illustration: Fac-simile of old Title page of following Sermon.]

_The Heart's Engagement._

A

SERMON

PREACHED AT

St. _Margaret's Westminster_,

At the publick Entering into the

COVENANT,

BY

I. _Some of the Nobility, Knighthood and Gentry._
II. _Divers Colonels, Officers and Soldiers._
III. _Those of the_ Scotish _Nation about the City._
IV. _Many Reverend Divines here residing._

September 29th, Anno 1643.

By the Reverend Mr. Thomas Coleman, one of the Members of the
_Westminster_ Assembly of _Divines_.

Preached and published according to the several Orders of the
Honourable House of Commons.

Nehem. x. 28, 29. _The people ... entred into a curse, and into an
oath to walk in God's law,_ &c.

GLASGOW,
Printed for George Paton, Book-seller in _Linlithgow_. MDCCXLI.


THE SOLEMN LEAGUE AND

COVENANT.

SERMON AT WESTMINSTER.

_BY THOMAS COLEMAN._

"For who is this, that engaged his heart to approach unto Me,
saith the Lord?"--_Jerem._ xxx. 21.


Two things in this clause cause some obscurity: _First_, The uncertainty
of the subject. _Second_, The ambiguity of one phrase.

1. The uncertainty of the subject, or person of whom the prophet speaks
here: whether of Christ, by way of prophecy, or of some particular
person, by way of story, or indefinitely of every one, by way of duty.

2. The ambiguity of that phrase, _engaged;_ which, according to the
variety of its signification, is or may be variously rendered. _He
adorned His heart; He applied His heart; He directed His heart; He
engaged His heart._

Hereupon the sense becomes various.

1. Who is he, _viz._ Christ, hath appointed his heart? Can there be
found a parallel to Christ in the world, that hath so given himself up
to God? made Him and His ways his meat and drink, yea more than his
ordinary food?

2. Who hath fitted and adorned his heart? Is there any that can adorn
and prepare himself to approach unto God, without God?

3. To omit others of like nature: it may be true, that it is chiefly
spoken of Christ: the titles in the beginning of the verse look this
way; his noble One, his Ruler; but seeing Christ is the head of the
body, and one with His body, it may secondarily, and by way of
communication, be also affirmed of His members; and to them we extend
it.

The clause therefore seems dependent, and as it is applied to man, hath
reference to that which is an act of God, and seems to be a reason
thereof. "I will cause him," saith God, "to draw nigh, and he then shall
approach; for who is this that hath engaged his heart?" The force of
which inference may look two ways.

1. Shewing the impossibility in man to begin the action: "I will cause
him to draw nigh; for who is this, that hath engaged his heart?" Where
is the man that can direct his heart, approach to Me of himself, by his
own power? Not any, not one: "Without Me you can do nothing."

2. Approving the endeavour to continue; I will cause him to draw near,
that he may approach, and stay with Me: he doeth his best, according to
his strength; "he engageth his heart," I will help on with the work;
"for who is this?" Oh this is an excellent one; there are not many so;
that any, that this is so, is beyond expectation, worthy of
commendation. What an one is this? "Who is it that hath engaged," tied,
bound his heart from starting aside like a broken bow, to approach to,
and to continue with Me, saith the Lord?

In the words (to proceed methodically and clearly) I offer the sum of my
thoughts, to be considered under four general heads, or parts.

    I. The opening of the phrases.
    II. The propounding of the point.
    III. The viewing of the duty.
    IV. The encouragement to the practice.

In and through these we shall walk, as travellers, who speed their pace
in those fields which yield no novelties, no fruit, no delight, but
where they meet with varieties to delight the senses, fruitful places,
green pastures to refresh themselves and beasts, they rest themselves
and bait: so in some of these we shall only take and offer a taste, on
others insist, as God shall direct; wherein an engagement of the
attentions in the handling to me, may, through God's mercy, beget an
engagement of the heart to God in the applying of them in order.


I.--_The opening of the phrases._

For the fuller understanding of the prophet's drift, three words or
phrases in this short sentence are a little to be cleared; for it
containeth three parts: 1. An action of piety. 2. The object of this
action. 3. The inquiry into both: and these are expressed in so many
several particles.

