
A "law" of nature is not a statute drawn up by a legislator; it is the
interpretation and the summation which we give to the observed facts.
The phenomena which we observe do not act in a particular manner because
there is a law; but we state the "law" because they act in that
particular manner. It cannot be said that the laws of nature are the
result of a lawmaker; it cannot be affirmed that a supreme intelligence
told things in nature to act just that way and no other. If the theist
claims that a supreme intelligence issued laws for his own pleasure and
without any reason, then he must admit that there is something which is
not subject to law and the train of natural law is interrupted. If it is
claimed that a supreme intelligence had a reason for the laws which he
gave, the reason being to create the best possible universe, then it
follows that God himself was subject to law and there is no advantage in
introducing God as an intermediary. This contention would make it appear
that there is a law outside and anterior to the divine edicts, and God
does not serve the purpose of the theist since he is not the ultimate
lawgiver.

The anthropomorphic conception of God, our Martian finds, is now denied
by most cultured theists; nevertheless, they still maintain a belief in
a deity endowed with consciousness. Professor H. N. Wieman states that,
"God is superhuman, but not supernatural. He is a present, potent,
operative, observable reality.... He is more worthy of love than any
other beloved ... He is one to whom men can pray and do pray, and who
answers prayer." This can be understood to be not greatly removed from
the fundamentalists' conception of God, but when he continues to say,
"God is that interaction between individuals, groups, and ages which
generates and promotes the greatest possible mutuality of good," and "it
responds to prayer and is precisely what answers prayer, when prayer is
answered," the personal "He" has suddenly changed to the unpersonal
"It." Emotions and intelligence are connected with nerve structures in
all sentient beings that we have experience and knowledge of. How can we
attribute these qualities to a being who is described to us as devoid of
any nerve structure?

In former ages the theist saw God in the color and construction of a
flower, in the starry heavens, and in a sunset or sunrise. The
biologists have driven the theists from this misconception, the
physicists have explained the phenomena of sunset and sunrise, and with
the advance of astronomy the heavens no longer proclaim the glory of
God, and the theistic arguments have shifted from worlds to atoms. At
the present moment the vision of God has narrowed down to a perception
of the divine intelligence noted in the design of the atom. Astronomy,
physics, geology, chemistry, medicine, psychology, ethics, aesthetics,
and the social sciences have left no room for a theistic explanation of
the universe. The mystics who proclaim God in their intuitive trances
are being crowded out into the light of reason by the researches of
psychologists. There are still many gaps in our knowledge, and if the
theist persists in finding the manifestation of a supreme being in these
vague zones of our present ignorance, he is at the mercy of the science
of the future. Science is concerned with mind as much as it is with the
material aspects of atoms and stars, hence the sciences of psychology,
ethics, and aesthetics. The entire universe is the province of science
and it is rapidly providing a scientific interpretation of all the
contents of the universe. It may well be a few more centuries before the
scientific explanation is partially complete, but it must be kept in
mind that science as we conceive the term is less than 2500 years old,
and out of this infantile period, at least 1000 years must be deducted
for the intellectual stagnation of the dark ages.

In tracing the retreat of the clergy from the arguments from the First
Cause, the arguments from design, causation, and directivity, the
Martian recalls the words of Vivian Phelips, "How is it that God allowed
earnest and learned divines to commit themselves to arguments in proof
of His existence, the subsequent overthrow of which has been a potent
cause for unbelief?"

"The finite mind cannot expect to understand the Infinite," retorts a
theist to our Martian. "What manner of reasoning is this," asks our
Martian, "that denies my finite mind the right to question the 'proofs'
of the existence of an Infinite, when these same 'proofs' are derived by
finite minds? The theist cannot infer God from the cosmic process until
he can discover some feature of it which is unintelligible without him."

(2) The belief in a deity, but the rejection of revelations, theology,
priestcraft, and church.

To the Martian the opinion held by these individuals presented two
difficulties. First, if the adherents of this hypothesis considered
their deity as a providence which took an active part in the life of
this world, then the objections heretofore stated against belief in a
personal god are still valid. Secondly, if they considered this being as
only a creator, who then leaves this world to its own resources, they
are only assuming a philosophical existence behind phenomena. Such a
being, they believe, they deduce intellectually. But actually who
created this creator? They assume a god who remains always hidden behind
phenomena, but such a god has no connection with the God that the
religious man worships and to whom he prays for guidance and for
blessings, for actual interference in the life of this world. Such
theories impress our visitor as but a feeble attempt at new concepts of
the same hypothetical deity, and it seemed to him that we already had
sufficient ideas of God to trouble our earthly minds.

(3) The god of the Physicists.

It was brought to the Martian's attention that two scientists, Sir
Arthur Eddington, a British astronomer, and Sir James Jeans, a
mathematical physicist, had still another concept of God.

According to Eddington, "Phenomena all boil down to a scheme of symbols,
of mathematical equations." He admits that this mathematics of nature
does not explain anything. They do not define reality, they only define
the relations that exist between the phenomena of reality. So far does
he go, and then his limited mind, our Martian perceives, meets an
obstacle that he cannot explain. He, therefore, abandons the formula and
returns to the human mind which has conceived this formula. From the
"spiritual essence of Man's nature," he assumes the spiritual nature of
the cosmos itself, which he finds in what religion has known for
centuries as God. To him, it is impossible to explain the universe
except in terms of spirit.

Professor Jeans insists that in the equations which reveal the relations
between phenomena, there may reside also the revelation of the ultimate
which these phenomena express. He believes that there may exist "a great
architect of the universe who is a pure mathematician."

However, the Martian argues, "Is it not a fact that in your earthly
experience, you have created your gods in your own image? Your savages
created God in the only fashion their mental capacities could supply, in
the shape of an idol; now the modern physicist creates his god in the
light of his own intimate vision, which is that of a mathematician! This
is just another attempt to formulate an hypothetical existence of a
supernatural being."

The theologians, by this time thoroughly aroused, lay down a verbal
barrage, and learned Jesuits place before the visitor a recent
publication entitled, "The Question and Answer" by Hilaire Belloc. The
author, acting as the mouthpiece of the Roman Catholic Church, attempts
to prove two things: namely, whether God is, and that the witness to
Revelation is the Roman Catholic Church. Were it not for the fact that
the work was published by permission of the Church, one could logically
suppose from its arguments that the author was attempting to give the
answer, "No," to the question propounded, as to whether God is. There is
one sentence, however, to which the Martian agrees: this one, "But
religions, though not very numerous, considering the vast spaces of time
over which we can study them, and the vast number of millions to which
they apply, differ and contradict each other; on which account, any one
approaching this problem for the first time, and being made acquainted
at the outset with the variety of religions, would naturally conclude
that every religion is man-made, and every religion an illusion."

On reading the opening remarks, the Martian exclaims, "This earthling
plainly tells us at the beginning that he will make his theories fit in
with his conclusion! He informs us that he does not seek the truth, no
matter where it may lead, but he only deems it necessary to fit ideas,
no matter how distorted, in order that the final conclusion will
simulate what he deliberately sets out to prove."

Mr. Belloc's statement, "How many men will agree that wanton cruelty,
treason to family or the state, falsehood for private gain, breach of
faith, are admirable?" strikes the Martian as absurd when viewed in the
light of the historical annals of the Church itself. Mr. Belloc's creed
must have considered these very vices as virtues, judging from the
actions of his Church.

In calling the Roman Catholic Church the witness to revelation, the
author continues with, "Yet, that it should suffer from men's hatred and
persecution." If God has divinely ordained this institution as His
Church on earth, and in His omnipotence and omniscience allows this
Church to be hated, then how do the religionists assume that their god
is a god of love? The author tells us that He is a god of hate, such a
god as was conceived of by the barbarians and the Hebrews--cruel,
vengeful, and monstrous. Does not this apologist confuse his god with
his devil? Then again, has it not occurred to this apologist that he is
in all futility attempting to prove something which is a contradiction
within itself? If God is, and is benevolent, is it not logical to assume
(since the theologians assume all sorts of attributes to this deity)
that he would not have constructed the minds of men when He created them
so as to desire to doubt His being; would not have tortured the minds of
men with cruel doubt as to His existence?

If He is omnipotent, it would have been just as easy to instill into the
minds of men only the strongest desire to believe in His reality; and
even that would not be necessary had He so arranged matters that by His
everlasting presence He would reveal Himself or His deeds to man in such
a conclusive manner that even the feeblest of intellects could not
doubt His existence.

If He is omniscient, as the parable asserts, that not a hair falls from
the head of man, not a sparrow dies without His knowledge, it must
therefore be apparent that He created man with the foreknowledge that
man would doubt His existence. This is a contradiction in itself.

The Martian notes that in the entire length of the work not a reference
is made to the time-worn theological defense, "the revelation" which the
Church has always claimed for its scriptures.

Appended as an afterthought, as an apology, as it were, for the
philosophical defense and not the theological, the Jesuit father reminds
the reader of its messiah, Jesus and the New Testament. The Jesuit
states, "The New Testament writings, considered merely as trustworthy
historical documents, inform us that--" but at this point the Martian
interrupted the speaker, for the audacity of any learned man terming the
New Testament writings "historical" was beyond his comprehension. It
brought forcibly to his attention the great change which the apologies
for the Church had undergone, and the new methods which they assumed.
The old theological defense of the deity was gone; not even philosophy
was deemed strong enough support for the present day. How the Church had
fallen! The Church which had persecuted, anathematized, burned, and
tortured the scientist, the geologist, the astronomer, the geographer,
the biologist, the chemist, and the physician; this same Church in its
last extremus, casts aside theology as its weapon and its appeal to the
minds of the sceptics whom they aim to convert. The Church casts aside
its own theology, having learned by bitter experience and recanting of
opinions, bulls, and infallible statements by infallible popes, and now
succumbs to the opinions it has formerly anathematized. In the present
age the Church calls science to its aid, and utterly disregards its
obsolete theology which it still practices, and attempts, by means of
the misinterpretation of scientific facts and statements of a few men
such as Eddington and Jeans, to force science into some illogical and
unscientific concordance with the conception of a supreme being.

Ironically it occurs to the Martian that the shades of Hypatia, Bruno,
Galileo, Copernicus, Vanini, Darwin, and the vast numbers of Waldenses,
Albigenses, Huguenots, Jews, and the victims of the Inquisition and the
Witch Hunt, must, as they contemplate the present tactics of that Holy
Institution, the Church, find some consolation in the depths of that
hell to which the Church consigned them. The Martian logically deduces
that by employing science for its defense, the Church admits the
impotence of "divine revelation," in this age, to convince even its own
adherents of the problematical existence of a divine being. _Theology is
no longer recognized as authoritative even by theologians!_

Will the theologians now discard their theology based on the
supernatural, and build a system of theology based on science? Is this
all that is left to the theologian: that he must use the pitiful
"Theology of Gaps"? That is, wherever there are gaps in scientific
knowledge, the theologians insert their idea of God! This is but the
replacing of the question mark with a meaningless label.




CHAPTER V

THE PERSISTENCE OF RELIGION

    _We believe what we believe, not because we have been convinced by
    such and such arguments, but because we are of such and such a
    disposition._

    C. E. M. JOAD.


    _The mind of the ordinary man is in so imperfect a condition that it
    requires a creed; that is to say, a theory concerning the unknown
    and the unknowable in which it may place its deluded faith and be at
    rest._

    WINWOOD READE.

    _Generations followed and what had been offered as hypothetical
    theological suppositions were through custom and tradition taken for
    granted as unquestioned truth._

    LLEWELYN POWYS.


The Martian has had his attention drawn to the statement that religion
in some form or other has existed from most primitive times down to the
present day. The theologians point to this as a proof of the existence
of a supreme being. An investigation of this assertion leads the Martian
to the conclusion that religions have continued to exist mainly because
of the power which inherited superstitions wield over mankind. Men are
born with a marked tendency towards superstitions.

Certain isolated families of men are born with an inherited tendency
towards tuberculosis. Most of these are born, not with an active
tuberculosis, but some as yet imperfectly understood tendency, a defect
in their protoplasmic make-up that renders them an easy prey to the
tubercle bacillus if they are exposed to it. Similarly, generations of
men have been born with a weakened mental vitality towards superstition;
a weakened mental capacity that renders their minds an easy prey to that
fear which manifests itself in superstition, creed, religion--the
God-idea. It was Karl Marx who remarked that, "The tradition of all the
generations of the past weighs down like an Alp upon the brain of the
living."

Since the days of our racial childhood, our beliefs have been handed
down from generation to generation, and they have persisted since in all
ages it was forbidden to question their existence. Man has persuaded
himself that it is so just because he has said it for so long and so
often. The force of repetition is great; it is, in fact, taken by a vast
majority of men as the equivalent of proof.

Most men have to accept their religions ready made. Their daily tasks
leave them no time or opportunity for a personal search. The toil for
bread is incessant, there is not sufficient leisure to verify the
sources of their religious beliefs. Moreover, the ecclesiastic's answers
to the riddles of life are easier, by far, to grasp than the answers of
science. These two factors, of innate mental inertia and force of
repetition, are well manifested by the present tactics of advertising.
The manufacturer of any product well knows that constant repetition and
the dangling of his product before the eyes of the public will lead to a
widespread acceptance of the advertising slogans propounded for his
article.

The force of so-called authority has aggravated this mental inertia. It
takes a tremendous amount of will power and mental courage for any
individual to assert an opinion that runs counter to the accepted mode
of thinking. It is much easier and much more pleasant to give oneself
passively to that delusion of grandeur, that delusion that pleasantly
drugs the mind with the assumption that there is a supreme being who is
personally interested in our well-being; a providence who, like a school
master, at his pleasure dispenses rewards and punishments; as
immortality, Heaven and Hell. So firmly has this become entrenched in
the minds of men that the irrationalities which manifest themselves
against such a conception make no impression. Schopenhauer well states,
"Nothing is more provoking, when we are arguing against a man with
reasons and explanations, and taking all pains to convince him, than to
discover at last that he _will_ not understand, that we have to do with
his _will_."

The Martian, knowing the widespread extent of religious beliefs and
their supposed influence in our daily lives, is prepared to find in our
annals a vast literature that would attest to the overwhelming benefits
that mankind had derived from his religious beliefs.

He is amazed to find that the little good which religion had
accomplished, had occurred at the time when our race was in its infancy.
Just as fear is instilled into the mind of the child to protect it from
the dangers of its environment before the child has reached the age when
it can use its reason for protection, just so had religion, by its
implantation of fear, served its purpose in the days of our racial
childhood. The child, however, as soon as it learns to reason, replaces
