
The Salik Darwishes are those who perform the Zikrs.[86] What little hope
there is of these professedly religious men working any reform in Islam
will be seen from the following account of their doctrines.[87]

1. God only exists,--He is in all things, and all things are in Him.
"Verily we are _from_ God, and _to_ Him shall we return." (Sura ii. 151.)

{96}

2. All visible and invisible beings are an emanation from Him, and are not
really distinct from Him. Creation is only a pastime with God.

3. Paradise and Hell, and all the dogmas of positive religions, are only so
many allegories, the spirit of which is only known to the Sufi.

4. Religions are matters of indifference; they, however, serve as a means
of reaching to realities. Some, for this purpose, are more advantageous
than others. Among which is the Musalman religion, of which the doctrine of
the Sufis is the philosophy.

5. There is not any real difference between good and evil, for all is
reduced to unity, and God is the real author of the acts of mankind.

6. It is God who fixes the will of man. Man, therefore, is not free in his
actions.

7. The soul existed before the body, and is now confined within it as in a
cage. At death the soul returns to the Divinity from which it emanated.

8. The principal occupation of the Sufi is to meditate on the unity, and so
to attain to spiritual perfection--unification with God.

9. Without the grace of God no one can attain to this unity; but God does
not refuse His aid to those who are in the right path.

The power of a Sheikh, a spiritual leader, is very great. The following
account of the admission of a Novice, called Tawakkul Beg, into an Order,
and of the severe tests applied, will be of some interest.[88] Tawakkul Beg
says:--"Having been introduced by Akhund Moolla Muhammad to Sheikh Moolla
Shah, my heart, through frequent intercourse with him, was filled with such
a burning desire to arrive at a true knowledge of the mystical science that
I found no sleep by night, nor rest by day. When the initiation commenced,
{97} I passed the whole night without sleep, and repeated innumerable times
the Surat-ul-Ikhlas:--

 "Say: He is God alone:
  God the eternal:
  He begetteth not, and He is not begotten;
  And there is none like unto Him." (Sura cxii.)

Whosoever repeats this Sura one hundred times can accomplish all his vows.
I desired that the Sheikh should bestow on me his love. No sooner had I
finished my task than the heart of the Sheikh became full of sympathy for
me. On the following night I was conducted to his presence. During the
whole of that night he concentrated his thoughts on me, whilst I gave
myself up to inward meditation. Three nights passed in this way. On the
fourth night the Sheikh said:--'Let Moolla Senghim and Salih Beg, who are
very susceptible to ecstatic emotions, apply their spiritual energies to
Tawakkul Beg.'

They did so, whilst I passed the whole night in meditation, with my face
turned toward Mecca. As the morning drew near, a little light came into my
mind, but I could not distinguish form or colour. After the morning
prayers, I was taken to the Sheikh who bade me inform him of my mental
state. I replied that I had seen a light with my inward eye. On hearing
this, the Sheikh became animated and said: 'Thy heart is dark, but the time
is come when I will show myself clearly to thee.' He then ordered me to sit
down in front of him, and to impress his features on my mind. Then having
blindfolded me, he ordered me to concentrate all my thoughts upon him. I
did so, and in an instant by the spiritual help of the Sheikh my heart
opened. He asked me what I saw. I said that I saw another Tawakkul Beg and
another Moolla Shah. The bandage was then removed, and I saw the Sheikh in
front of me. Again they covered my face, and again I saw him with my inward
eye. Astonished, I cried; 'O master! whether I look with my bodily eye, or
with my spiritual {98} sight, it is always you I see.' I then saw a
dazzling figure approach me. The Sheikh told me to say to the apparition,
'What is your name?' In my spirit I put the question, and the figure
answered to my heart: 'I am 'Abd-ul-Qadir Jilani, I have already aided
thee, thy heart is opened.' Much affected, I vowed that in honour of the
saint, I would repeat the whole Quran every Friday night.

Moolla Shah then said: 'The spiritual world has been shown to thee in all
its beauty.' I then rendered perfect obedience to the Sheikh. The following
day I saw the Prophet, the chief Companions, and legions of saints and
angels. After three months, I entered the cheerless region in which the
figures appeared no more. During the whole of this time, the Sheikh
continued to explain to me the mystery of the doctrine of the Unity and of
the knowledge of God; but as yet he did not show me the absolute reality.
It was not until a year had passed that I arrived at the true conception of
unity. Then in words such as these I told the Sheikh of my inspiration. 'I
look upon the body as only dust and water, I regard neither my heart nor my
soul, alas! that in separation from Thee (God) so much of my life has
passed. Thou wert I and I knew it not.' The Sheikh was delighted, and said
that the truth of the union with God was now clearly revealed to me. Then
addressing those who were present, he said: 'Tawakkul Beg learnt from me
the doctrine of the Unity, his inward eye has been opened, the spheres of
colours and of images have been shown to him. At length, he entered the
colourless region. He has now attained to the Unity, doubt and scepticism
henceforth have no power over him. No one sees the Unity with the outward
eye, till the inward eye gains strength and power.'"

I cannot pass from this branch of the subject without making a few remarks
on Omar Khayyam, the great Astronomer-Poet of Persia. He is sometimes
confounded with the Sufis, for there is much in his poetry which is similar
{99} in tone to that of the Sufi writers. But his true position was that of
a sceptic. He wrote little, but what he has written will live. As an
astronomer he was a man of note. He died in the year 517 A.H. There are two
things which may have caused his scepticism. To a man of his intelligence
the hard and fast system of Islam was an intolerable burden. Then, his
scientific spirit had little sympathy with mysticism, the earnest
enthusiasts of which were too often followed by hollow impostors. It is
true, that there was much in the spirit of some of the better Sufis that
seemed to show a yearning for something higher than mere earthly good;
above all, there was the recognition of a Higher Power. But with all this
came spiritual pride, the world and its duties became a thing of evil, and
the religious and the secular life were completely divorced, to the ruin of
both. The Pantheism which soon pervaded the system left no room for man's
will to act, for his conscience to guide. So the moral law become a dead
letter. Irreligious men, to free themselves from the bondage and restraints
of law, assumed the religious life. "Thus a movement, animated at first by
a high and lofty purpose, has degenerated into a fruitful source of ill.
The stream which ought to have expanded into a fertilising river has become
a vast swamp, exhaling vapours charged with disease and death."

Omar Khayyam saw through the unreality of all this. In vain does he try, by
an assumed air of gaiety, to hide from others the sadness which fills his
heart, as all that is bright is seen passing away into oblivion.

  One moment in annihilation's waste,
  One moment, of the well of life to taste--
  The stars are setting and the Caravan
  Starts for the dawn of nothing--oh, make haste!

  Ah, fill the cup:--what boots it to repeat
  How Time is slipping underneath our feet:
  Unborn To-morrow, and dead Yesterday,
  Why fret about them if To-day be sweet.

{100}

Omar held to the earthly and the material. For him there was no spiritual
world. Chance seemed to rule all the affairs of men. A pitiless destiny
shaped out the course of each human being.

 "'Tis all a chequer-board of nights and days
  Where destiny with men for pieces plays:
  Hither and thither moves, and mates, and slays,
  And one by one back in the closet lays.

  The moving finger writes; and, having writ,
  Moves on: nor all thy piety nor wit
  Shall lure it back to cancel half a line,
  Nor all thy tears wash out a word of it."

Neither from earth nor heaven could he find any answer to his cry. With
sages and saints he discussed, and heard, "great argument, but evermore
came out by the same door as in he went." He left the wise to talk, for one
thing alone was certain, and all else was lies,--"the flower that once has
blown for ever dies." Leaving men he turned to nature, but it was all the
same.

 "Up from earth's centre through the seventh gate
  I rose, and on the throne of Saturn sate,
  And many knots unravell'd by the road;
  But not the knot of human death and fate.

  And that inverted bowl we call the sky,
  Where under crawling coop'd we live and die,
  Lift not thy hands to it for help--for it
  Rolls impotently on as thou or I."

Omar has with justice been compared to Lucretius. Both were materialists,
both believed not in a future life. "Lucretius built a system for himself
in his poem ... it has a professed practical aim--to explain the world's
self-acting machine to the polytheist, and to disabuse him of all spiritual
ideas." Omar builds up no system, he only shows forth his own doubts and
difficulties, "he loves to balance antitheses of belief, and settle himself
in the equipoise of the sceptic." {101}

The fact that there is no hereafter gives Lucretius no pain, but Omar who,
if only his reason could let him, would believe, records his utter despair
in words of passionate bitterness. He is not glad that there is no help
anywhere.[89] And though he calls for the wine-cup, and listens to the
voice within the tavern cry,

 "Awake, my little ones, and fill the cup
  Before Life's liquor in its cup be dry,"

yet he also looks back to the time, when he consorted with those who
professed to know, and could say:

 "With them the seed of wisdom did I sow,
  And with my own hand laboured it to grow."

The founder of the Wahhabi sect was Muhammad-ibn-Abd-ul-Wahhab, who was
born at a village in Nejd in the year 1691 A.D. The Wahhabis speak of
themselves as Muwahhid--Unitarians; but their opponents have given to them
the name of the father of the founder of their sect and call them Wahhabis.
Muhammad was a bright intelligent youth, of a strong constitution and
generous spirit. After going through a course of Arabic literature he
studied jurisprudence under a teacher of the Hanifi school. He then set out
in company with his father to perform the Hajj. At Madina he received
further instruction in the Law. He spent sometime at Ispahan in the society
of learned men. Full of {102} knowledge, he returned to his native village
of Ayina where he assumed the position of a religious teacher. He was
shocked to see how the Arabs had departed from what seemed to him the
strict unchanging precepts of the Prophet. Luxury in the form of rich
dresses and silken garments, superstition in the use of omens, auguries,
and the like, in the pilgrimages to shrines and tombs seemed to be altering
the character of the religion as given by the Apostle of God. He saw, or
thought he saw, that in the veneration paid to saints and holy men, the
great doctrine of the "Unity" was being obscured. The reason was very
plain. The Quran and the Traditions of the Companions had been neglected,
whilst the sayings of men of lesser note, and the jurisprudence of the four
great Imams had been too readily followed. Here was work to do. He would
reform the Church of Islam, and restore men to their allegiance to the Book
and the Sunnat, as recorded by the Companions. It is true, that the Sunnis
would rise up in opposition, for thus the authority of the four Imams, the
"Canonical Legists" of the orthodox sect, would be set aside; but what of
that? Had he not been a follower of Abu Hanifa? Now he was prepared to let
Aba Hanifa go, for none but a Companion of the Prophet could give an
authoritative statement with regard to the Sunnat--the Prophet's words and
acts. He must break a lance with the glorious Imam, and start a school of
his own.

He said: "The Muslim pilgrims adore the tomb of the Prophet, and the
sepulchre of 'Ali, and of other saints who have died in the odour of
sanctity. They run there to pay the tribute of their fervent prayers. By
this means they think that they can satisfy their spiritual and temporal
needs, From what do they seek this benefit? From walls made of mud and
stones, from corpses deposited in tombs. If you speak to them they will
reply, 'We do not call these monuments God; we turn to them in prayer, and
we pray the saints to intercede for us on high.' Now, the true {103} way of
salvation is to prostrate one's self before Him who is ever present, and to
venerate Him--the one without associate or equal." Such outspoken language
raised up opposition, and he had to seek the protection of
Muhammad-Ibn-Saud, a chief of some importance, who now vigorously supported
the Wahhabi movement. He was a stern and uncompromising man. "As soon as
you seize a place," he said to his soldiers, "put the males to the sword.
Plunder and pillage at your pleasure, but spare the women and do not strike
a blow at their modesty." On the day of battle he used to give each soldier
a paper, a safe conduct to the other world. This letter was addressed to
the Treasurer of Paradise. It was enclosed in a bag which the warrior
suspended to his neck. The soldiers were persuaded that the souls of those
who died in battle would go straight to heaven, without being examined by
the angels Munkar and Nakir in the grave. The widows and orphans of all who
fell were supported by the survivors. Nothing could resist men who, fired
with a burning zeal for what they deemed the truth, received a share of the
booty, if conquerors; who went direct to Paradise if they were slain. In
course of time, Muhammad-Ibn-Saud married the daughter of Ibn-Abd-ul-Wahhab
and founded the Wahhabi dynasty which to this day rules at Ryadh.[90]

Such was the origin of this great movement, which spread, in course of
time, over Central and Eastern Arabia, and in the beginning of this century
found acceptance in India. In the year 1803 A.D. both Mecca and Madina fell
into the hands of the Wahhabis. A clean sweep was made of all things, the
use of which was opposed to Wahhabi principles. Not only rosaries and
charms, but silk robes and pipes were consigned to the flames, for smoking
is a {104} deadly sin. On this point there is a good story told by
Palgrave--"'Abd-ul-Karim said: 'The first of the great sins is the giving
divine honours to a creature.' Of course I replied, 'The enormity of such a
sin is beyond all doubt. But if this be the first, there must be a second;
what is it?' 'Drinking the shameful!' (in English idiom, 'smoking tobacco')
was the unhesitating answer. 'And murder, and adultery, and false witness?'
I suggested. 'God is merciful and forgiving,' rejoined my friend; that is,
these are merely little sins."[91]

After holding possession of the holy cities for nine years they were driven
out by the Turkish forces. 'Abdullah, the fourth Wahhabi ruler, was
captured by Ibrahim Pasha, and afterwards executed in the square of St.
Sophia (1818 A.D.) The political power of the Wahhabis has since been
confined to parts of Arabia; but their religious opinions have widely
spread.

The leader of the Wahhabi movement in India was Sayyid Ahmad, a reformed
freebooter. He was now born at Rai Bareili, in Oudh, 1786 A.D. When about
thirty years of age he gave up his wild way of living and settled down in
Delhi as a student of the Law of Islam. After a while, he went on
pilgrimage to Mecca, but his opinions, so similar to those of the noted
Wahhabi, attracted the attention of the orthodox theologians, through whose
influence he was expelled from the sacred city. Persecution deepened his
religious convictions, and he returned to India a pronounced Wahhabi. He
soon gained a large number of disciples, and in 1826 A.D. he preached a
Jihad against the Sikhs. This war was not a success. In the year 1831 the
Wahhabis were suddenly attacked by the Sikhs, under Sher Singh, and Sayyid
Ahmad was slain. This did not, however, prevent the spread of Wahhabi
principles, for he had the good fortune to leave behind him an enthusiastic
disciple. This man, {105} Muhammad Isma'il, was born near Delhi in the year
1781 A.D. He was a youth of good abilities and soon mastered the subjects
which form the curriculum of a liberal education amongst Musalmans. His
first preaching was in a Mosque at Delhi on Tauhid (Unity), and against
Shirk (Polytheism). He now met with Sayyid Ahmad who soon acquired great
influence over his new disciple. Isma'il told him one evening that he could
not offer up his prayers with Huzur-i-Kalb, presence of heart. The Sayyid
took him to his room where he instructed him to repeat the first of the
prayers after him, and then to conclude them alone. He did so, and was able
to so abstract himself in the contemplation of God that he remained engaged
in prayer till the morning. Henceforward he was a devoted adherent of his
spiritual teacher. In the public discussions, which now often took place,
none were a match for Isma'il. This fervent preacher of Wahhabiism is now
chiefly remembered by his great work, the Takwiat-ul-Iman, the book from
which the account of Wahhabi doctrine given in this chapter is taken. If I
make no special reference to the quotations given, it will be known that my
authority for the statements thus made is Muhammad Isma'il, the most famous
of all Sayyid Ahmad's disciples. This book was followed by the
Sirat-ul-Mustaqim, said to have been written by one of Isma'il's followers.
Wahhabi doctrines are now spread throughout India. In the South there is
not much religious excitement or inquiry, yet Wahhabis are to be found
there.[92] It was and is a remarkable movement. In one sense it is a
struggle against the traditionalism of later ages, but in no sense can it
be said that the Wahhabis reject Tradition. They acknowledge as the
foundation of the faith--first, the Quran; secondly, the Traditions which
are recorded on the authority of the Companions, and also the Ijma' of the
Companions, that is, all things on which they were unanimous in opinion
{106} or in practice. Thus to the Wahhabi as to the Sunni, Muhammad is in
all his _acts_ and _words_ a perfect guide.

So far from Wahhabiism being a move onward because it is a return to first
principles, it rather binds the fetters of Islam more tightly. It does not
originate anything new, it offers no relaxation from a system which looks
upon the Quran and the Traditions as a perfect and complete law, social and
political, moral and religious.

The Wahhabi places the doctrine of the "Tauhid," or Unity, in a very
prominent position. It is true that all Musalman sects put this dogma in
the first rank, but Wahhabis set their faces against practices common to
the other sects, because they consider that they obscure this fundamental
doctrine. It is this which brings them into collision with other Musalmans.
The greatest of all sins is Shirk (_i.e._ the ascribing of plurality to the
Deity). A Mushrik (Polytheist) is one who so offends. All Musalmans
consider Christians to be Polytheists, and all Wahhabis consider all other
Musalmans also to be Polytheists, because they look to the Prophet for
intercession, pray to saints, visit shrines, and do other unlawful acts.

The Takwiat-ul-Iman says that "two things are necessary in religion--to
know God as God, and the Prophet as the Prophet." The two fundamental bases
of the faith are the "Doctrine of the Tauhid (Unity) and obedience to the
Sunnat." The two great errors to be avoided are Shirk (Polytheism) and
Bida't (Innovation). As Bida't is looked upon as evil, it is somewhat
