committee of ladies aids in providing shelter and work for the prisoners
when they are discharged. The great publishing house of Hachette & Co.,
although the head of the firm is a Catholic, provides employment in
folding paper for books.

Through the kind offices of Mademoiselle Monod we called on Mademoiselle
Dumas. She is now an extremely aged woman; but her interest in the
Christian reformation of prisoners of her sex is as keen as it was over
fifty years ago, when her labors began. The registers of many years
stand by her desk, and from these we were shown how the records of the
mission are kept, and in what way the lives of those assisted are
watched and followed for years. Narratives of individual reformation
were related to us, and through the long correspondence of many years
she was enabled to tell us of those who had turned to a better life and
held to it permanently. As she talked her eyes brightened, the tones of
her voice became stronger and clearer, her manner more vivacious, and
the years seemed to slip from her. Finally, as if overcome by the
memories that the long retrospect had brought to her, and thrilled by
the recollections, of all this work meant to her, she ended by
exclaiming, "O, my dear St. Lazare!" I looked at her astonished. I had
just come from the walls of the gloomy prison, and the place had chilled
me with horror as I walked through its corridors, and read the stories
of shame and guilt in the faces of its inmates; most hopeless looking
faces, belonging to little children of ten and twelve up to hardened and
prematurely aged women of fifty and sixty. I could not comprehend a term
of endearment applied to such a place. But a moment's consideration led
me to see that this aged saint had there fought and won the best of her
life's battles, and the place remains glorified in her thoughts by most
hallowed and Christ-like memories.

Now that Mademoiselle Dumas is kept to her room, the deaconesses still
come to her weekly, make their reports, and keep up the proper entries
in her books.

A recent letter from Mademoiselle Monod says: "Mademoiselle Dumas still
lives, having completed her ninety-sixth year the 26th of last December
(1888). Only yesterday our prison committee met at her house, she acting
as presiding officer."

The life of this quiet woman is but little known outside the circle of
her immediate influence, but it has been more valuable to her country
than that of many a general or statesman who has been ranked among the
famous of the earth.

The deaconess home has also branches of work in different parts of
France. These include nine hospitals, two homes for the aged and infirm,
four orphanages, two work-rooms for young girls, and a convalescents'
home. The house has established close connection with the deaconess
houses at St. Loup in French Switzerland, and with Strasburg. The ties
of a common language and former memories are strong, and these are the
homes most akin to the Paris home.

The ordinary expenses of the Paris deaconess home are about thirty
thousand dollars a year. Nearly seven thousand dollars are collected
annually by subscriptions, the remaining sum being made up of returns
arising from service.

The institution was founded in 1841 by Rev. Antoine Vermeil, a
distinguished minister of the Reformed Church, aided by a devout and
worthy minister of the Lutheran Church, Rev. Louis Valette. It has grown
up under the joint and harmonious patronage of these two State Churches.

A later deaconess home, entirely devoted to training and employing
parish deaconesses, was started in 1874, under the sole control of the
Lutheran Church. Some pastors secured the co-operation of a few young
Christian women to consecrate a portion of their strength and time to
the service of the Church. From this beginning sprang the work that
exists to-day. The home is located in the Rue de Bridaine. There are now
sixteen deaconesses, six of whom are probationers. Five of them are
located in different parishes in Paris, usually at a long distance from
the central house. Each goes forth early in the morning to her parish,
where is a room of some kind serving as a center to the work. Materials
used in nursing and medicines are stored here, and there is an office
for the physician, who comes at stated periods to give free
consultation. From the district house the deaconess goes in all
directions and in all weather to look up families which have fallen away
from the Church, to gather in children for the Sunday-school, to visit
the sick, and to collect garments and money from the rich in order to
distribute them among the poor. Such are some of their duties. Each
sister is under the direction of a pastor, and is aided by his advice,
while still remaining a member of the community to which she belongs.

In both of the deaconess houses of Paris, as in the German houses, a
special service sets apart those sisters who have passed their period of
probation, and have been received into full connection. As one of the
deaconess reports beautifully says: "When Christ calls the soul to a
special vocation he gives it special grace, and those who consecrate
themselves to him he consecrates to their task by the strength of his
Spirit. So in conformity with the usages of the primitive Church we give
consecration to our sisters by the laying on of hands. The consecration
is not a sacramental act, conferring a particular character, greater
sanctity, or special powers; neither is it simply a ceremony or pious
formality. It is a real and efficacious benediction, which the Saviour
accords to our sisters to consecrate them to their holy work, as he
accorded it to the deacons who received the imposition of the apostles'
hands."

The good that can be accomplished by deaconesses working together with
ministers in behalf of the manifold interests of the Church is
incalculable. The most faithful pastor can make only short and
unsatisfactory visits. Many sorrows which he overlooks the deaconess can
discern and assuage. She knows best how to reach the heart of a
sorrowing woman, to care for her needs, to discern her wants, and to
bring solace to the sorrowing and succor to the needy. Deaconesses who
have been specially trained for service cannot be spared now that the
world has learned to know of them. For "charity cannot take the place of
experience, nor good-will replace knowledge;" and trained Christian
service is the highest of all service.

The old spirit of the Huguenots has not died out of France, and with
that ready susceptibility to noble ideas which is a marked
characteristic of the French character, we can expect to see the
deaconess cause thrive and prosper as it has done in other lands.


  [50] Speak to God about the little ones, rather than to the little
       souls of God.
  [51] See a sympathetic study of the work by Maxime du Camp, a
       member of the French Academy, in his book _Paris Bienfaisant_.




CHAPTER X.

DEACONESSES IN ENGLAND.


To learn the first facts about deaconesses in England, we must go back
to the early days of the Puritans. In 1576, under Queen Elizabeth, about
sixty non-conformist ministers of the eastern counties assembled to make
regulations concerning Church constitution and discipline, and one of
them was as follows: "Touching deacons of both sorts, namely, both men
and women, the Church should be admonished what is required by the
apostle, that they are not to choose men by custom or course, or for
their riches, but for their faith, zeal, and integrity; and that the
Church is to pray in the meantime to be so directed that they may choose
them that are meet. Let the names of those that are thus chosen be
published the next Lord's Day, and after that their duties to the
Church, and the Church's duty toward them. Then let them be received
into their office with the general prayers of the whole Church."[52]

There are other references in the works of the early Puritans that
indicate that the office of deaconess was as well known and recognized
as were the other offices that were named in accordance with the usages
of the primitive Church.

In the early part of the seventeenth century it still survived, as we
shall see from a quaint and curious picture that is of especial interest
to all Americans, because it portrays what took place in that community
of pious souls who furnished us the men we delight to honor as the
Pilgrim Fathers. A number of these heroic souls, who could give up their
country, but would not yield their faith, went forth from England in
1608, and settled in Amsterdam. They preserved in a foreign land their
own Church usages, as the following words show: "In Amsterdam there were
about three hundred communicants, and they had for their pastor and
teacher those two eminent men before named (Johnson and Ainsworth); and
had at one time four grave men for ruling elders, three able, godly men
for deacons, and one ancient widow for a deaconess, who did them service
many years, though she was sixty years of age when she was chosen. She
honored her place, and was an ornament to the congregation. She usually
sat in a convenient place in the congregation, with a little birchen rod
in her hand, and kept little children in awe from disturbing the
congregation. She did frequently visit the sick and weak, especially
women, and as there was need called out ladies and young women to watch
and do them other helps as their necessity should require; and if there
were poor she would gather relief for them of those that were able, or
acquaint the deacons. And she was obeyed as a mother in Israel and an
officer of Christ."[53]

Whether the "ancient widow" with the little "birchen rod" had any
followers in the early Puritan communities of the Plymouth Colony we
cannot say, as there are no records that throw light on the subject; but
the history of early New England Congregationalism gives us one
indication that the office was recognized in the New World. In the
Cambridge Platform, a system of Church discipline agreed upon by the
elders and messengers of the New England churches assembled in synod at
Cambridge, in 1648, the seventh chapter enumerates the duties of elder
and deacons, and then adds, "The Lord hath appointed _ancient widdows_,
where they may be had, to minister in the Church, in giving attendance
to the sick, and to give succor unto them and others in the like
necessities." The same confusion of thought concerning the Church widow
and the deaconess is here seen, but there is evident the recognition of
the services that women were officially to render the Church.

In the early part of the present century Southey voiced the complaint,
long reiterated, that Protestantism had no missionaries. We who live in
the closing years of the same century, surrounded by the multiplied
evidences of the extent of missions, when the Protestants of the world
are expending nearly ten millions of dollars annually, and employing
nearly six thousand men and women as missionaries, cannot realize the
change that has taken place. In 1830 Southey again wrote: "Thirty years
hence another reproach may also be effaced, and England may have her
Sisters of Charity." He had learned to know their value when serving as
a volunteer in Wellington's army, and a year after the battle of
Waterloo he had visited the Beguines at Ghent, and what he saw deeply
impressed him. "We should have such women among us," he said. "It is a
great loss to England that we have no Sisters of Charity. There is
nothing Romish, nothing unevangelical in such communities; nothing but
what is right and holy; nothing but what belongs to that religion which
the apostle James has described as 'pure and undefiled before God the
Father.'"[54]

Southey's prophecy has come true. England to-day in her deaconesses
possesses her Sisters of Charity. How has this change been brought
about? The acquaintance of Mrs. Fry with Fliedner, and her visit to
Kaiserswerth, led her to introduce into England the practical training
of nurses for the sick. The Nursing Sisters' Institution in Devonshire
Square, Bishop's Gate, was founded through her efforts in 1840, and
still exists "to train nurses for private families, and to provide
pensions for aged nurses."[55]

In 1842, Fliedner came to London, accompanied by four sisters, at the
invitation of the German Hospital at Dalston. These deaconesses won
golden opinions from the hospital authorities for their quiet, efficient
manner, and their trained skill. The hospital continues to be served by
them, but the Sisters now come from the mother house at Darmstadt.

Kaiserswerth and its deaconesses became more widely known through the
life and inestimable services of Florence Nightingale. When a child,
one of Fliedner's reports fell into her hands. Its perusal marked an
era in her life. It made clear to her what she should do. She would go
to Kaiserswerth, and fit herself for a nurse. Her childish resolve never
wavered. "Happy is the man who holds fast to the ideals of his youth."
Florence Nightingale held fast to hers. She went to Kaiserswerth at two
different times, and through her deeds and her writings the care of the
sick in England has been completely transformed. She has won a nation's
gratitude, and now is living in honored old age in one of the London
institutions founded mainly by the money that she contributed, and which
she obtained by selling some valuable gifts given her by a foreign
government in acknowledgment of her care of its wounded soldiers during
the Crimean war.

Another woman distinguished in England's philanthropies is Agnes Jones,
who left a home of wealth and refinement to receive her training also at
Kaiserswerth. Returning to England she gave her time and talents in
single-hearted devotion to the care of the poor in the Liverpool
work-house, and met death in the midst of her labors. The training which
led two such women to accomplish such noble deeds naturally was
recognized as valuable, and Kaiserswerth soon became an honored name in
England.

In 1851 Miss Nightingale sent out anonymously her little book entitled
_An Account of the Institution of Deaconesses_, which added to the
knowledge already in circulation about the movement in Germany.
Meanwhile articles were appearing in the reviews. In 1848 one was
written in the _Edinburgh Review_ by John Malcolm Ludlow, who later, in
1866, gave the results of the thoughts and studies of a number of years
in _Woman's Work in the Church_, the best historical study of the
subject up to the date at which it was written. Since then the Germans
have pushed their historical investigations further, and the work needs
to be revised and to be brought down to the present time.

In _Good Words_ for 1861 there were two articles by Dr. Stevenson, of
the Irish Presbyterian Church, entitled "The Blue Flag of Kaiserswerth,"
afterward incorporated in his work, _Praying and Working_, a book too
little known among us.

The great upholder of the deaconess cause in the Church of England was
the late Dean of Chester, Rev. J. S. Howson. His essay, first published
in the _Quarterly Review_, was amplified and issued in book form in 1860
under the title _Deaconesses_. It won many friends. The cause remained a
favorite one with him, and he constantly advocated it by speech and by
deed. Since his death his latest thoughts, which remained substantially
the same as those that he first advanced, have been published in a work
entitled _The Diaconate of Women_.

Within the Church of England, however, the deaconess cause has not met
the same prosperous development that it has obtained in connection with
certain independent institutions, notably that of Mildmay.

Among the institutions on the Continent, as well as in the pages of this
work up to the present, the terms "sister" and "deaconess" are used
synonymously, to indicate one and the same person. But when we come to
consider the deaconess institutions within the Church of England we
cannot continue to use these two names in the same way. A deaconess is a
member of a deaconess institution, actively engaged in charitable deeds,
but, like the deaconess on the Continent, she can sever her connection
with it when adequate cause presents itself, and return to her family
and friends. A sister belongs to a sisterhood which closely resembles
the Roman Catholic sisterhoods in many features. These sisterhoods began
in 1847 with a number of ladies brought together through the influence
of Dr. Pusey, who formed themselves into a community to live under its
rule. Their influence and number increased, and twenty-three
sisterhoods are mentioned in the last official report.[56]

Doubtless it was the activity and great usefulness of the continental
deaconess houses that provided the stimulating examples which acted on
the Church of England and led to the rise of sisterhoods and deaconess
institutions. But the two opposing tendencies within the Episcopal
Church--namely, that which desires to approach the Church of Rome, with
which it feels itself in sympathy on many points, and that which views
with disfavor any conformity to it, and strives to keep to the landmarks
set at the great Reformation--these two distinct tendencies are closely
reflected in the woman's work of the Anglican Church.[57] The
sisterhoods are distinctly under the fostering care of the former
element, the deaconesses are manifestly favored by the latter.
Sisterhoods, again, differ among themselves, some being strongly
conventual in their life and practice, adopting the three vows of
poverty, chastity, and obedience, and a few even advocating penance and
confession. The vows are taken for life, and, in connection with the
view of the sacred obligation to life-long service, great stress is laid
upon the position of the sister as the "bride of Christ"--the same
thought of the mysterious union with the heavenly Bridegroom that is so
dwelt upon in the nunneries of the Catholic Church. With such views
Protestants, distinctly such, can have no sympathy. Those who look upon
the deaconess as a valuable member of the Church economy do so because
they regard her as a Christian woman, strengthened and disciplined by
special training to do better service for Christ in the world. This is
the recognized difference: "The sisterhood exists primarily for the sake
of forming a religious community, but deaconesses live together for the
sake of the work itself, attracted to deaconess work by the want which
in most populous towns is calling loudly for assistance; and with a view
of being trained, therefore, for spiritual and temporal usefulness among
the poor."[58]

There are now seven deaconess establishments in the Church of England,
each having a larger or smaller number of branches, with diocesan
sanction and under the supervision of clergymen.[59]

The first of these was founded in 1861, and is now known as the London
Diocesan Deaconess Institution. At that time Kaiserswerth was accepted
as its model; deaconesses were sent there to be trained; Kaiserswerth
rules were adopted as far as possible, and a modification of the
Kaiserswerth dress for the sisters. The house was then represented at
the triennial Conferences in Germany, and in the list of mother houses
published at Kaiserswerth[60] the name still appears. It would seem,
however, that now the Kaiserswerth connection is entirely set aside by
the London house, for in an historical sketch of the revival of
deaconesses in the Church, that is found in the organ of the
institution, called _Ancilla Domini_, for March, 1887, there is no
mention made of any of the continental houses. The Anglican Church
apparently dates the entire work from the setting apart of its first
deaconess, Elizabeth C. Ferard, in 1861, as she was the first to receive
consecration through the touch of a bishop's hand. The former connection
with Kaiserswerth and the great work carried on in Germany from 1836 to
