metropolis on the one bank, but a wide-spreading suburb on the other. As
the Trastevere is to Rome, as Southwark to London, so is earth to
heaven, the bit of the city on the other side the bridge. As Philippi
was to Rome, so is earth to heaven, the colony on the outskirts of the
empire, ringed round by barbarians, and separated by sounding seas, but
keeping open its communications, and one in citizenship.

Be it our care, then, to keep the sense of that city beyond the
river vivid and constant. Amid the shows and shams of earth look
ever onward to the realities 'the things which _are_,' while all
else only seems to be. The things which are seen are but smoke
wreaths, floating for a moment across space, and melting into
nothingness while we look. We do not belong to them or to the
order of things to which they belong. There is no kindred between
us and them. Our true relationships are elsewhere. In this present
visible world all other creatures find their sufficient and homelike
abode. 'Foxes have holes, and birds their roosting-places'; but man
alone has not where to lay his head, nor can he find in all the width
of the created universe a place in which and with which he can be
satisfied. Our true _habitat_ is elsewhere. So let us set our thoughts
and affections on things above. The descendants of the original settlers
in our colonies talk still of coming to England as going 'home,' though
they were born in Australia, and have lived there all their lives. In
like manner we Christian people should keep vigorous in our minds the
thought that our true home is there where we have never been, and that
here we are foreigners and wanderers.

Nor need that feeling of detachment from the present sadden our spirits,
or weaken our interest in the things around us. To recognise our
separation from the order of things in which we 'move,' because we
belong to that majestic unseen order in which we really 'have our
being,' makes life great and not small. It clothes the present with
dignity beyond what is possible to it if it be not looked at in the
light of its connection with 'the regions beyond.' From that connection
life derives all its meaning. Surely nothing can be conceived more
unmeaning, more wearisome in its monotony, more tragic in its joy, more
purposeless in its efforts, than man's life, if the life of sense and
time be all. Truly it is 'like a tale told by an idiot, full of sound
and fury, signifying nothing.' 'The white radiance of eternity,'
streaming through it from above, gives all its beauty to the 'dome of
many-coloured glass' which men call life. They who feel most their
connection with the city which hath foundations should be best able to
wring the last drop of pure sweetness out of all earthly joys, to
understand the meaning of all events, and to be interested most keenly,
because most intelligently and most nobly, in the homeliest and
smallest of the tasks and concerns of the present.

So, in all things, act as citizens of the great Mother of heroes and
saints beyond the sea. Ever feel that you belong to another order, and
let the thought, 'Here we have no continuing city,' be to you not merely
the bitter lesson taught by the transiency of earthly joys and treasures
and loves, but the happy result of 'seeking for the city which hath the
foundations.'

II. Another exhortation which our text gives is, Live by the laws of the
city.

The Philippian colonists were governed by the code of Rome. Whatever
might be the law of the province of Macedonia, they owed no obedience to
it. So Christian men are not to be governed by the maxims and rules of
conduct which prevail in the province, but to be governed from the
capital. We ought to get from on-lookers the same character that was
given to the Jews, that we are 'a people whose laws are different from
all people that be on earth,' and we ought to reckon such a character
our highest praise. Paul would have these Philippian Christians act
'worthy of _the gospel_.' That is our law.

The great good news of God manifest in the flesh, and of our salvation
through Christ Jesus, is not merely to be believed, but to be obeyed.
The gospel is not merely a message of deliverance, it is also a rule of
conduct. It is not merely theology, it is also ethics. Like some of the
ancient municipal charters, the grant of privileges and proclamation of
freedom is also the sovereign code which imposes duties and shapes life.
A gospel of laziness and mere exemption from hell was not Paul's gospel.
A gospel of doctrines, to be investigated, spun into a system of
theology, and accepted by the understanding, and there an end, was not
Paul's gospel. He believed that the great facts which he proclaimed
concerning the self-revelation of God in Christ would unfold into a
sovereign law of life for every true believer, and so his one
all-sufficient precept and standard of conduct are in these simple
words, 'worthy of the gospel.'

That law is all-sufficient. In the truths which constituted Paul's
gospel, that is to say, in the truths of the life, death, and
resurrection of Jesus Christ, lies all that men need for conduct and
character. In Him we have the 'realised ideal,' the flawless example,
and instead of a thousand precepts, for us all duty is resolved into
one--be like Christ. In Him we have the mighty motive, powerful enough
to overcome all forces that would draw us away, and like some strong
spring to keep us in closest contact with right and goodness. Instead of
a confusing variety of appeals to manifold motives of interest and
conscience, and one knows not what beside, we have the one all-powerful
appeal, 'If ye love Me, keep My commandments,' and that draws all the
agitations and fluctuations of the soul after it, as the rounded fulness
of the moon does the heaped waters in the tidal wave that girdles the
world. In Him we have all the helps that weakness needs, for He Himself
will come and dwell with us and in us, and be our righteousness and our
strength.

Live 'worthy of the gospel,' then. How grand the unity and simplicity
thus breathed into our duties and through our lives! All duties are
capable of reduction to this one, and though we shall still need
detailed instruction and specific precepts, we shall be set free from
the pedantry of a small scrupulous casuistry, which fetters men's limbs
with microscopic bands, and shall joyfully learn how much mightier and
happier is the life which is shaped by one fruitful principle, than that
which is hampered by a thousand regulations.

Nor is such an all-comprehensive precept a mere toothless generality.
Let a man try honestly to shape his life by it; and he will find soon
enough how close it grips him, and how wide it stretches, and how deep
it goes. The greatest principles of the gospel are to be fitted to the
smallest duties. Indeed that combination--great principles and small
duties--is the secret of all noble and calm life, and nowhere should it
be so beautifully exemplified as in the life of a Christian man. The
tiny round of the dew-drop is shaped by the same laws that mould the
giant sphere of the largest planet. You cannot make a map of the poorest
grass-field without celestial observations. The star is not too high nor
too brilliant to move before us and guide simple men's feet along their
pilgrimage. 'Worthy of the gospel' is a most practical and stringent
law.

And it is an exclusive commandment too, shutting out obedience to other
codes, however common and fashionable they may be. We are governed from
home, and we give no submission to provincial authorities. Never mind
what people say about you, nor what may be the maxims and ways of men
around you. These are no guides for you. Public opinion (which only
means for most of us the hasty judgments of the half-dozen people who
happen to be nearest us), use and wont, the customs of our set, the
notions of the world about duty, with all these we have nothing to do.
The censures or the praise of men need not move us. We report to
headquarters, and subordinates' estimate need be nothing to us. Let us
then say, 'With me it is a very small matter that I should be judged of
men's judgment. He that judgeth me is the Lord.' When we may be
misunderstood or harshly dealt with, let us lift our eyes to the lofty
seat where the Emperor sits, and remove ourselves from men's sentences
by our 'appeal unto Caesar'; and, in all varieties of circumstances and
duty, let us take the Gospel which is the record of Christ's life,
death, and character, for our only law, and labour that, whatever others
may think of us, we 'may be well pleasing to Him.'

III. Further, our text bids the colonists fight for the advance of the
dominions of the City.

Like the armed colonists whom Russia and other empires had on their
frontier, who received their bits of land on condition of holding the
border against the enemy, and pushing it forward a league or two when
possible, Christian men are set down in their places to be 'wardens of
the marches,' citizen soldiers who hold their homesteads on a military
tenure, and are to 'strive together for the faith of the gospel.'

There is no space here and now to go into details of the exposition of
this part of our text. Enough to say in brief that we are here exhorted
to 'stand fast'; that is, as it were, the defensive side of our warfare,
maintaining our ground and repelling all assaults; that this successful
resistance is to be 'in one spirit,' inasmuch as all resistance depends
on our poor feeble spirits being ingrafted and rooted in God's Spirit,
in vital union with whom we may be knit together into a unity which
shall oppose a granite breakwater to the onrushing tide of opposition;
that in addition to the unmoved resistance which will not yield an inch
of the sacred soil to the enemy, we are to carry the war onwards, and,
not content with holding our own, are with one mind to strive together
for the faith of the gospel. There is to be discipline, then, and
compact organisation, like that of the legions whom Paul, from his
prison among the Praetorian guards, had often seen shining in steel,
moving like a machine, grim, irresistible. The cause for which we are to
fight is the faith of the gospel, an expression which almost seems to
justify the opinion that 'the faith' here means, as it does in later
usage, the sum and substance of that which is believed. But even here
the word may have its usual meaning of the subjective act of trust in
the gospel, and the thought may be that we are unitedly to fight for its
growing power in our own hearts and in the hearts of others. In any
case, the idea is plainly here that Christian men are set down in the
world, like the frontier guard, to push the conquests of the empire, and
to win more ground for their King.

Such work is ever needed, never more needed than now. In this day when a
wave of unbelief seems passing over society, when material comfort and
worldly prosperity are so dazzlingly attractive to so many, the solemn
duty is laid upon us with even more than usual emphasis, and we are
called upon to feel more than ever the oneness of all true Christians,
and to close up our ranks for the fight. All this can only be done after
we have obeyed the other injunctions of this text. The degree in which
we feel that we belong to another order of things than this around us,
and the degree in which we live by the Imperial laws, will determine the
degree in which we can fight with vigour for the growth of the dominion
of the City. Be it ours to cherish the vivid consciousness that we are
here dwelling not in the cities of the Canaanites, but, like the father
of the faithful, in tents pitched at their gates, nomads in the midst
of a civic life to which we do not belong, in order that we may breathe
a hallowing influence through it, and win hearts to the love of Him whom
to imitate is perfection, whom to serve is freedom.

IV. The last exhortation to the colonists is, Be sure of victory.

'In nothing terrified by your adversaries,' says Paul. He uses a very
vivid, and some people might think, a very vulgar metaphor here. The
word rendered _terrified_ properly refers to a horse shying or plunging
at some object. It is generally things half seen and mistaken for
something more dreadful than themselves that make horses shy; and it is
usually a half-look at adversaries, and a mistaken estimate of their
strength, that make Christians afraid. Go up to your fears and speak to
them, and as ghosts are said to do, they will generally fade away. So we
may go into the battle, as the rash French minister said he did into the
Franco-German war, 'with a light heart,' and that for good reasons. We
have no reason to fear for ourselves. We have no reason to fear for the
ark of God. We have no reason to fear for the growth of Christianity in
the world. Many good men in this time seem to be getting half-ashamed of
the gospel, and some preachers are preaching it in words which sound
like an apology rather than a creed. Do not let us allow the enemy to
overpower our imaginations in that fashion. Do not let us fight as if we
expected to be beaten, always casting our eyes over our shoulders, even
while we are advancing, to make sure of our retreat, but let us trust
our gospel, and trust our King, and let us take to heart the old
admonition, 'Lift up thy voice with strength; lift it up, be not
afraid.'

Such courage is a prophecy of victory. Such courage is based upon a sure
hope. 'Our citizenship is in heaven, from whence also we look for the
Lord Jesus as Saviour.' The little outlying colony in this far-off edge
of the empire is ringed about by wide-stretching hosts of dusky
barbarians. Far as the eye can reach their myriads cover the land, and
the watchers from the ramparts might well be dismayed if they had only
their own resources to depend on. But they know that the Emperor in his
progress will come to this sorely beset outpost, and their eyes are
fixed on the pass in the hills where they expect to see the waving
banners and the gleaming spears. Soon, like our countrymen in Lucknow,
they will hear the music and the shouts that tell that He is at hand.
Then when He comes, He will raise the siege and scatter all the enemies
as the chaff of the threshing-floor, and the colonists who held the post
will go with Him to the land which they have never seen, but which is
their home, and will, with the Victor, sweep in triumph 'through the
gates into the city.'




A PLEA FOR UNITY

          'If there is therefore any comfort in Christ, if
          any consolation of love, if any fellowship of the
          Spirit, if any tender mercies and compassions, 2.
          Fulfil ye my joy, that ye be of the same mind,
          having the same love, being of one accord, of one
          mind; 3. Doing nothing through faction or through
          vainglory, but in lowliness of mind each counting
          other better than himself; 4. Not looking each of
          you to his own things, but each of you also to the
          things of others.'--PHIL. ii. 1-4 (R.V.).


There was much in the state of the Philippian church which filled Paul's
heart with thankfulness, and nothing which drew forth his censures, but
these verses, with their extraordinary energy of pleading, seem to hint
that there was some defect in the unity of heart and mind of members of
the community. It did not amount to discord, but the concord was not as
full as it might have been. There is another hint pointing in the same
direction in the appeal to Paul's true yoke-fellow, in chapter iv., to
help two good women who, though they had laboured much in the gospel,
had not managed to keep 'of the same mind in the Lord,' and there is
perhaps a still further indication that Paul's sensitive heart was
conscious of the beginnings of strife in the air, in the remarkable
emphasis with which, at the very outset of the letter, he over and over
again pours out his confidence and affection on them 'all,' as if aware
of some incipient rifts in their brotherhood. There are always forces at
work which tend to part the most closely knit unities even when these
are consecrated by Christian faith. Where there are no dogmatical
grounds of discord, nor any open alienation, there may still be the
beginnings of separation, and a chill breeze may be felt even when the
sun is shining with summer warmth. Wasps are attracted by the ripest
fruit.

The words of our text present no special difficulty, and bring before us
a well-worn subject, but it has at least this element of interest, that
it grips very tightly the deepest things in Christian life, and that
none of us can truly say that we do not need to listen to Paul's
pleading voice. We may notice the general division of his thoughts in
these words, in that he puts first the heart-touching motives for
listening to his appeal, next describes with the exuberance of
earnestness the fair ideal of unity to which he exhorts, and finally
touches on the hindrances to its realisation, and the victorious powers
which will overcome these.

I. The motives and bonds of Christian unity.

It is not a pedantic dissection (and vivisection) of the Apostle's
earnest words, if we point out that they fall into four clauses, of
which the first and third ('any comfort in Christ, any fellowship of the
Spirit') urge the objective facts of Christian revelation, and the
second and fourth ('any consolation of love, any tender mercies and
compassions') put emphasis on the subjective emotions of Christian
experience. We may lay the warmth of all of these on our own hearts, and
shall find that these hearts will be drawn into the blessedness of
Christian unity in the precise measure in which they are affected by
them.

As to the first of them, it may be suggested that here, as elsewhere in
the New Testament, the true idea of the word rendered 'comfort' is
rather 'exhortation.' The Apostle is probably not so much pointing to
the consolations for trouble which come from Jesus, as to the stimulus
to unity which flows from Him. It would rather weaken the force of
Paul's appeal, if the two former grounds of it were so nearly identical
as they are, if the one is based upon 'comfort' and the other on
'consolation.' The Apostle is true to his dominant belief, that in Jesus
Christ there lies, and from Him flows, the sovereign exhortation that
rouses men to 'whatsoever things are lovely and of good report.' In Him
we shall find in the measure in which we are in Him, the most persuasive
of all exhortations to unity, and the most omnipotent of all powers to
enforce it. Shall we not be glad to be in the flock of the Good
Shepherd, and to preserve the oneness which He gave His life to
establish? Can we live in Him, and not share His love for His sheep?
Surely those who have felt the benediction of His breath on their
foreheads when He prayed 'that they may all be one; even as Thou,
Father, art in Me and I in Thee,' cannot but do what is in them to
fulfil that prayer, and to bring a little nearer the realisation of
their Lord's purpose in it, 'that the world may believe that Thou didst
send Me.' Surely if we lay to heart, and enter into sympathy with, the
whole life and death of Jesus Christ, we shall not fail to feel the
dynamic power fusing us together, nor fail to catch the exhortation to
unity which comes from the lips that said, 'I am the vine, ye are the
branches.'

The Apostle next bases his appeal for unity on the experiences of the
Philippian Christians, and on their memories of the comfort which they
have tasted in the exercise of mutual love. Our hearts find it hard to
answer the question whether they are more blessed when their love passes
out from them in a warm stream to others, or when the love of others
pours into them. To love and to be loved equally elevate courage, and
brace the weakest for calm endurance and high deeds. The man who loves
and knows that he is loved will be a hero. It must always seem strange
and inexplicable that a heart which has known the enlargement and joy of
love given and received, should ever fall so far beneath itself as to be
narrowed and troubled by nourishing feelings of separation and
alienation from those whom it might have gathered into its embrace, and
thereby communicated, and in communicating acquired, courage and
strength. We have all known the comfort of love; should it not impel us
to live in 'the unity of the spirit and the bond of peace'? Men around
us are meant to be our helpers, and to be helped by us, and the one way
to secure both is to walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us.

But Paul has still further heart-melting motives to urge. He turns the
Philippians' thoughts to their fellowship in the Spirit. All believers
have been made to drink into one spirit, and in that common
participation in the same supernatural life they partake of a oneness,
which renders any clefts or divisions unnatural, and contradictory of
the deepest truths of their experience. The branch can no more shiver
itself off from the tree, or keep the life sap enclosed within itself,
than one possessor of the common gift of the Spirit can separate himself
from the others who share it. We are one in Him; let us be one in heart
and mind. The final appeal is connected with the preceding, inasmuch as
it lays emphasis on the emotions which flow from the one life common to
all believers. That participation in the Spirit naturally leads in each
participant to 'tender mercies and compassions' directed to all sharers
in it. The very mark of truly possessing the Spirit's life is a nature
full of tenderness and swift to pity, and they who have experienced the
heaven on earth of such emotions should need no other motive than the
memory of its blessedness, to send them out among their brethren, and
even into a hostile world, as the apostles of love, the bearers of
tender mercies, and the messengers of pity.

II. The fair ideal which would complete the Apostle's joy.

We may gather from the rich abundance of motives which the Apostle
suggests before he comes to present his exhortation, that he suspected
the existence of some tendencies in the opposite direction in Philippi,
and possibly the same conclusion may be drawn from the exuberance of
the exhortation itself, and from its preceding the dehortation which
follows. He does not scold, he scarcely even rebukes, but he begins by
trying to melt away any light frost that had crept over the warmth of
the Philippians' love; and having made that preparation, he sets before
them with a fulness which would be tautological but for the earnestness
that throbs in it, the ideal of unity, and presses it upon them still
more meltingly, by telling them that their realisation of it will be the
completion of his joy. The main injunction is 'that ye be of the same
mind,' and that is followed by three clauses which are all but exactly
synonymous with it, 'having the same love, being of one accord, of one
mind.' The resemblance of the latter clause to the main exhortation is
still more complete, if we read with Revised Version (margin) 'of the
same mind,' but in any case the exhortations are all practically the
same. The unity which Paul would fain see, is far deeper and more vital
than mere unanimity of opinion, or identity of polity, or co-operation
in practice. The clauses which expand it guard us against the mistake of
thinking that intellectual or practical oneness is all that is meant by
Christian unity. They are 'of the same mind,' who have the same wishes,
aims, outlooks, the same hopes and fears, and who are one in the depths
of their being. They have 'the same love,' all similarly loving and
being loved, the same emotion filling each heart. They are united in
soul, or 'with accordant souls' having, and knowing that they have them,
akin, allied to one another, moving to a common end, and aware of their
oneness. The unity which Christian people have hitherto reached is at
its best but a small are of the great circle which the Apostle drew,
and none of us can read these fervid words without shame. His joy is not
yet fulfilled.

That exhortation to be 'of the same mind,' not only points to a deep and
vital unity, but suggests that the ground of the unity is to be found
without us, in the common direction of our 'minds,' which means far more
than popular phraseology means by it, to an external object. It is
having our hearts directed to Christ that makes us one. He is the bond
and centre of unity. We have just said that the object is external, but
that has to be taken with a modification, for the true basis of unity is
the common possession of 'Christ in us.' It is when we have this mind in
us 'which was also in Christ Jesus,' that we have 'the same mind' one
with another.

The very keynote of the letter is joy, as may be seen by a glance over
it. He joys and rejoices with them all, but his cup is not quite full.
One more precious drop is needed to make it run over. Probably the
coldness which he had heard of between Euodias and Syntyche had troubled
him, and if he could be sure of the Philippians' mutual love he would
rejoice in his prison. We cannot tell whether that loving and careful
heart is still aware of the fortunes of the Church, but we know of a
more loving and careful heart which is, and we cannot but believe that
the alienations and discords of His professed followers bring some
shadow over the joy of Christ. Do we not hear His voice again asking,
'what was it that you disputed among yourselves by the way?' and must we
not, like the disciples, 'hold our peace' when that question is asked?
May we not hear a voice sweeter in its cadence, and more melting in its
tenderness than Paul's, saying to us 'Fulfil ye My joy that ye be of
the same mind.'

III. The hindrances and helps to being of the same mind.

The original has no verb in front of 'nothing' in verse 3, and it seems
better to supply the one which has been so frequently used in the
preceding exhortation than 'doing,' which carries us too abruptly into
the outer region of action. Paul indicates two main hindrances to being
of the same mind, namely, faction and vainglory on the one hand, and
self-absorption on the other, and opposed to each the tone of mind which
is its best conqueror. Faction and vainglory are best defeated by
humility and unselfishness. As to the former, the love of making or
heading little cliques in religion or politics or society, has oftenest
its roots in nothing loftier than vanity or pride. Many a man who poses
as guided by staunch adherence to conviction is really impelled only by
a wish to make himself notorious as a leader, and loves to talk of
'those with whom I act.' There is a strong admixture of a too lofty
estimate of self in most of the disagreements of Christian people. They
expect more deference than they get, or their judgment is not taken as
law, or their place is not so high as they think is their due, or in a
hundred different ways self-love is wounded, and self-esteem is
inflamed. All this is true in reference to the smaller communities of
congregations, and with the necessary modifications it is quite as true
in reference to the larger aggregations which we call churches or
denominations. If all in their work that is directly due to faction and
vainglory were struck out there would be great gaps in their activities,
and many a flourishing scheme would fall dead.

The cure for all these evils is lowliness of mind. That is a Christian
word. Used by Greek thinkers, it meant abjectness; and it is one
conspicuous instance of the change effected in morals by Christian
teaching that it has become the name of a virtue. We are to dwell not on
our gifts but on our imperfections, and if we judge ourselves with
constant reference to the standard in Christ's life, we shall need
little more to bring us to our knees in true lowliness of mind. The man
who has been forgiven so many talents will not be in a hurry to take his
brother by the throat and leave the marks of his fingers for tenpence.

Christian unity is further broken by selfishness. To be absorbed in self
is of course to have the heart shut to others. Our own interests,
inclinations, possessions, when they assert themselves in our lives,
build up impassable barriers between us and our fellows. To live to self
is the real root of every sin as it is of all loveless life. The Apostle
uses careful language: he admits the necessity for attention to our 'own
things,' and only requires that we should look 'also' on the things of
others. His cure for the hindrances to Christian unity is very complete,
very practical, and very simple. Each counting other better than
himself, and each 'looking also to the things of others' seem very
homely and pedestrian virtues, but homely as they are we shall find that
they grip us tight, if we honestly try to practise them in our daily
lives, and we shall find also that the ladder which has its foot on
earth has its top in the heavens, and that the practice of humility and
unselfishness leads straight to having 'the mind which was also in
Christ Jesus.'




THE DESCENT OF THE WORD

          'Have this mind in you which was also in Christ
          Jesus: 6. Who, being in the form of God, counted
          it not a prize to be on an equality with God, 7.
          But emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant,
          being made in the likeness of men; 8. And being
          found in fashion as a man, He humbled Himself,
          becoming obedient even unto death, yea, the death
          of the cross.'--PHIL. ii. 5-8 (R.V.).


The purpose of the Apostle in this great passage must ever be kept
clearly in view. Our Lord's example is set forth as the pattern of that
unselfish disregard of one's own things, and devotion to the things of
others, which has just been urged on the Philippians, and the mind which
was in Him is presented as the model on which they are to fashion their
minds. This purpose in some measure explains some of the peculiarities
of the language here, and may help to guide us through some of the
intricacies and doubtful points in the interpretation of the words. It
explains why Christ's death is looked at in them only in its bearing
upon Himself, as an act of obedience and of condescension, and why even
that death in which Jesus stands most inimitable and unique is presented
as capable of being imitated by us. The general drift of these verses is
clear, but there are few Scripture passages which have evoked more
difference of opinion as to the precise meaning of nearly every phrase.
To enter on the subtle discussions involved in the adequate exposition
of the words would far exceed our limits, and we must perforce content
ourselves with a slight treatment of them, and aim chiefly at bringing
out their practical side.

The broad truth which stands sun-clear amid all diverse interpretations
is--that the Incarnation, Life, and Death are the great examples of
living humility and self-sacrifice. To be born was His supreme act of
condescension. It was love which made Him assume the vesture of human
flesh. To die was the climax of His voluntary obedience, and of His
devotion to us.

I. The height from which Jesus descended.

The whole strange conception of birth as being the voluntary act of the
Person born, and as being the most stupendous instance of condescension
in the world's history, necessarily reposes on the clear conviction that
He had a prior existence so lofty that it was an all but infinite
descent to become man. Hence Paul begins with the most emphatic
assertion that he who bore the name of Jesus lived a divine life before
He was born. He uses a very strong word which is given in the margin of
the Revised Version, and might well have been in its text. 'Being
originally' as the word accurately means, carries our thoughts back not
only to a state which preceded Bethlehem and the cradle, but to that
same timeless eternity from which the prologue of the Gospel of John
partially draws the veil when it says, 'In the beginning was the Word,'
and to which Jesus Himself more obscurely pointed when He said, 'Before
Abraham was I am.'

Equally emphatic in another direction is Paul's next expression, 'In the
form of God,' for 'form' means much more than 'shape.' I would point out
the careful selection in this passage of three words to express three
ideas which are often by hasty thought regarded as identical. We read of
'the _form_ of God' (verse 6), 'the _likeness_ of men' (verse 7), and
'in _fashion_ as a man.' Careful investigation of these two words 'form'
and 'fashion' has established a broad distinction between them, the
former being more fixed, the latter referring to that which is
accidental and outward, which may be fleeting and unsubstantial. The
possession of the form involves participation in the essence also. Here
it implies no corporeal idea as if God had a material form, but it
implies also much more than a mere apparent resemblance. He who is in
the form of God possesses the essential divine attributes. Only God can
be 'in the form of God': man is made in the likeness of God, but man is
not 'in the form of God.' Light is thrown on this lofty phrase by its
antithesis with the succeeding expression in the next verse, 'the form
of a servant,' and as that is immediately explained to refer to Christ's
assumption of human nature, there is no room for candid doubt that
'being originally in the form of God' is a deliberately asserted claim
of the divinity of Christ in His pre-existent state.

As we have already pointed out, Paul soars here to the same lofty height
to which the prologue of John's Gospel rises, and he echoes our Lord's
own words about 'the glory which I had with Thee before the foundation
of the world.' Our thoughts are carried back before creatures were, and
we become dimly aware of an eternal distinction in the divine nature
which only perfects its eternal oneness. Such an eternal participation
in the divine nature before all creation and before time is the
necessary pre-supposition of the worth of Christ's life as the pattern
of humility and self-sacrifice. That pre-supposition gives all its
meaning, its pathos, and its power, to His gentleness, and love, and
death. The facts are different in their significance, and different in
their power to bless and gladden, to purge and sway the soul, according
as we contemplate them with or without the background of His
pre-existent divinity. The view which regards Him as simply a man, like
all the rest of us, beginning to be when He was born, takes away from
His example its mightiest constraining force. Only when we with all our
hearts believe 'that the Word became flesh,' do we discern the
overwhelming depths of condescension manifested in the Birth. If it was
not the incarnation of God, it has no claim on the hearts of men.

II. The wondrous act of descent.

The stages in that long descent are marked out with a precision and
definiteness which would be intolerable presumption, if Paul were
speaking only his own thoughts, or telling what he had seen with his own
eyes. They begin with what was in the mind of the eternal Word before He
began His descent, and whilst yet He is 'in the form of God.' He stands
on the lofty level before the descent begins, and in spirit makes the
surrender, which, stage by stage, is afterwards to be wrought out in
act. Before any of these acts there must have been the disposition of
mind and will which Paul describes as 'counting it not a thing to be
grasped to be on an equality with God.' He did not regard the being
equal to God as a prey or treasure to be clutched and retained at all
hazards. That sweeps our thoughts into the dim regions far beyond
Calvary or Bethlehem, and is a more overwhelming manifestation of love
than are the acts of lowly gentleness and patient endurance which
followed in time. It included and transcended them all.

It was the supreme example of not 'looking on one's own things.' And
what made Him so count? What but infinite love. To rescue men, and win
them to Himself and goodness, and finally to lift them to the place from
which He came down for them, seemed to Him to be worth the temporary
surrender of that glory and majesty. We can but bow and adore the
perfect love. We look more deeply into the depths of Deity than unaided
eyes could ever penetrate, and what we see is the movement in that abyss
of Godhead of purest surrender which, by beholding, we are to
assimilate.

Then comes the wonder of wonders, 'He emptied Himself.' We cannot enter
here on the questions which gather round that phrase, and which give it
a factitious importance in regard to present controversies. All that we
would point out now is that while the Apostle distinctly treats the
Incarnation as being a laying aside of what made the Word to be equal
with God, he says nothing, on which an exact determination can be based,
of the degree or particulars in which the divine nature of our Lord was
limited by His humanity. The fact he asserts, and that is all. The scene
in the Upper Chamber was but a feeble picture of what had already been
done behind the veil. Unless He had laid aside His garments of divine
glory and majesty, He would have had no human flesh from which to strip
the robes. Unless He had willed to take the 'form of a servant,' He
would not have had a body to gird with the slave's towel. The
Incarnation, which made all His acts of lowly love possible, was a
greater act of lowly love than those which flowed from it. Looking at it
from earth, men say, 'Jesus was born.' Looking at it from heaven, Angels
say, 'He emptied Himself.'

But how did He empty Himself? By taking the form of a slave, that is to
God. And how did He take the form of a slave? By 'becoming in the
likeness of men.' Here we are specially to note the remarkable language
implying that what is true of none other in all the generations of men
is true of Him. That just as 'emptying Himself' was His own act, also
the taking the form of a slave by His being born was His own act, and
was more truly described as a 'becoming.' We note, too, the strong
contrast between that most remarkable word and the 'being originally'
which is used to express the mystery of divine pre-existence.

Whilst His becoming in the likeness of men stands in strong contrast
with 'being originally' and energetically expresses the voluntariness of
our Lord's birth, the 'likeness of men' does not cast any doubt on the
reality of His manhood, but points to the fact that 'though certainly
perfect man, He was by reason of the divine nature present in Him not
simply and merely man.'

Here then the beginning of Christ's manhood is spoken of in terms which
are only explicable, if it was a second form of being, preceded by a
pre-existent form, and was assumed by His own act. The language, too,
demands that that humanity should have been true essential manhood. It
was in 'the form' of man and possessed of all essential attributes. It
was in 'the likeness' of man possessed of all external characteristics,
and yet was something more. It summed up human nature, and was its
representative.

III. The obedience which attended the descent.

It was not merely an act of humiliation and condescension to become man,
but all His life was one long act of lowliness. Just as He 'emptied
Himself' in the act of becoming in the 'likeness of men,' so He 'humbled
Himself,' and all along the course of His earthly life He chose constant
lowliness and to be 'despised and rejected of men.' It was the result
moment by moment of His own will that to the eyes of men He presented
'no form nor comeliness,' and that will was moment by moment steadied
in its unmoved humility, because He perpetually looked 'not on His own
things, but on the things of others.' The guise He presented to the eyes
of men was 'the _fashion_ of a man.' That word corresponds exactly to
Paul's carefully selected term, and makes emphatic both its superficial
and its transitory character.

The lifelong humbling of Himself was further manifested in His becoming
'obedient.' That obedience was, of course, to God. And here we cannot
but pause to ask the question, How comes it that to the man Jesus
obedience to God was an act of humiliation? Surely there is but one
explanation of such a statement. For all men but this one to be God's
slaves is their highest honour, and to speak of obedience as humiliation
is a sheer absurdity.

Not only was the life of Jesus so perfect an example of unbroken
obedience that He could safely front His adversaries with the question,
'Which of you convinceth Me of sin?' and with the claim to 'do always
the things that pleased Him,' but the obedience to the Father was
perfected in His death. Consider the extraordinary fact that a man's
death is the crowning instance of his humility, and ask yourselves the
question, Who then is this who chose to be born, and stooped in the act
of dying? His death was obedience to God, because by it He carried out
the Father's will for the salvation of the world, His death is the
greatest instance of unselfish self-sacrifice, and the loftiest example
of looking on the 'things of others' that the world has ever seen. It
dwindles in significance, in pathos, and in power to move us to
imitation unless we clearly see the divine glory of the eternal Lord as
the background of the gentle lowliness of the Man of Sorrows, and the
Cross. No theory of Christ's life and death but that He was born for us,
and died for us, either explains the facts and the apostolic language
concerning them, or leaves them invested with their full power to melt
our hearts and mould our lives. There is a possibility of imitating Him
in the most transcendent of His acts. The mind may be in us which was in
Christ Jesus. That it may, His death must first be the ground of our
hope, and then we must make it the pattern of our lives, and draw from
it the power to shape them after His blessed Example.




THE ASCENT OF JESUS

          'Wherefore also God highly exalted Him and gave
          unto Him the name which is above every name; 10.
          That in the name of Jesus every knee should bow,
          of things in heaven, and things on earth, and
          things under the earth; 11. And that every tongue
          should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the
          glory of God the Father.'--PHIL. ii. 9-11 (R.V.).


'He that humbleth himself shall be exalted,' said Jesus. He is Himself
the great example of that law. The Apostle here goes on to complete his
picture of the Lord Jesus as our pattern. In previous verses we had the
solemn steps of His descent, and the lifelong humility and obedience of
the incarnate Son, the man Christ Jesus. Here we have the wondrous
ascent which reverses all the former process. Our text describes the
reflex motion by which Jesus is borne back to the same level as that
from which the descent began.

We have

I. The act of exaltation which forms the contrast and the parallel to
the descent.

'God highly exalted Him.' The Apostle coins an emphatic word which
doubly expresses elevation, and in its grammatical form shows that it
indicates a historical fact. That elevation was a thing once
accomplished on this green earth; that is to say it came to pass in the
fact of our Lord's ascension when from some fold of the Mount of Olives
He was borne upwards and, with blessing hands, was received into the
Shechinah cloud, the glory of which hid Him from the upward-gazing eyes.

It is plain that the 'Him' of whom this tremendous assertion is made,
must be the same as the 'He' of whom the previous verses spoke, that is,
the Incarnate Jesus. It is the manhood which is exalted. His humiliation
consisted in His becoming man, but His exaltation does not consist in
His laying aside His humanity. It is not a transient but an eternal
union into which in the Incarnation it entered with divinity.
Henceforward we have to think of Him in all the glory of His heavenly
state as man, and as truly and completely in the 'likeness of men' as
when He walked with bleeding feet on the flinty road of earthly life. He
now bears for ever the 'form of God' and 'the fashion of a man.'

Here I would pause for a moment to point out that the calm tone of this
reference to the ascension indicates that it was part of the recognised
Christian beliefs, and implies that it had been familiar long before the
date of this Epistle, which itself dates from not more than at the most
thirty years from the death of Christ. Surely that lapse of time is far
too narrow to allow of such a belief having sprung up, and been
universally accepted about a dead man, who all the while was lying in a
nameless grave.

The descent is presented as _His_ act, but decorum and truth required
that the exaltation should be God's act. 'He humbled Himself,' but 'God
exalted Him.' True, He sometimes represented Himself as the Agent of His
own Resurrection and Ascension, and established a complete parallel
between His descent and His ascent, as when He said, 'I came out from
the Father, and am come into the world: again, I leave the world, and go
unto the Father.' He was no less obedient to the Father's will when He
ascended up on high, than He was when He came down to earth, and whilst,
from one point of view, His Resurrection and Ascension were as truly His
own acts as were His birth and His death, from another, He had to pray,
'And now, O Father, glorify Thou Me with Thine own self with the glory
which I had with Thee before the world was.' The Titans presumptuously
scaled the heavens, according to the old legend, but the Incarnate Lord
returned to 'His own calm home, His habitation from eternity,' was
exalted thither by God, in token to the universe that the Father
approved the Son's descent, and that the work which the Son had done was
indeed, as He declared it to be, 'finished.' By exalting Him, the Father
not merely reinstated the divine Word in its eternal union with God, but
received into the cloud of glory the manhood which the Word had assumed.

II. The glory of the name of Jesus.

What is the name 'which is above every name'? It is the name Jesus. It
is to be noted that Paul scarcely ever uses that simple appellative.
There are, roughly speaking, about two hundred instances in which he
names our Lord in his Epistles, and there are only four places, besides
this, in which he uses this as his own, and two in which he, as it were,
puts it into the mouth of an enemy. Probably then, some special reason
led to its occurrence here, and it is not difficult, I think, to see
what that reason is. The simple personal name was given indeed with
reference to His work, but had been borne by many a Jewish child before
Mary called her child Jesus, and the fact that it is this common name
which is exalted above every name, brings out still more strongly the
thought already dwelt upon, that what is thus exalted is the manhood of
our Lord. The name which expressed His true humanity, which showed His
