    one to another; who say, We piped unto you, and ye did not dance;
    we wailed, and ye did not weep. 33 For John the Baptist is came
    eating no bread nor drinking wine; and ye say, He hath a demon. 34
    The Son of man is come eating and drinking; and ye say, Behold, a
    gluttonous man, and a winebibber, a friend of publicans and
    sinners! 35 And wisdom is justified of all her children.


Due to the darkness of his dungeon or to the long delay of Jesus in
fulfilling his cherished hopes, the mind of John the Baptist became
clouded with doubt and he sent messengers to Jesus to ask whether or not
he was really the Messiah whom John had declared him to be, "Art thou he
that cometh, or look we for another?" John had not lost faith in God or in
his promises; he believed that if Jesus were not the Messiah, the Messiah
was still to come.

The Master lovingly reassured his great herald by sending back the report
of the mighty works which he was accomplishing. John was already familiar
with these acts but the recital must have dispelled his fears. Jesus
sympathizes with us also in our hours of darkness, but his relief usually
consists in reminding us of facts we already know concerning his power and
love and presence and the truths of his written Word.

Jesus, however, does not praise us for our doubts; he sent to John a
gentle and loving rebuke: "And blessed is he, whosoever shall find no
occasion of stumbling in me." This benediction he pronounces upon all who
in spite of darkness, imprisonment, delay, and mystery still confidently
put their trust in him.

It was upon this occasion when John seems to have failed that Jesus
pronounced upon him unparalleled praise, declaring that "among them that
are born of women there is none greater than John." He vindicated this
deliberate judgment and thereby, showed wherein true greatness lies. He
spoke first of the character of John and then of his career. He praised
the man and then the messenger. He described his moral and then his
official greatness.

His expression as to the character of John is voiced by two questions, to
each of which a negative answer of course must be given: first, "What went
ye out into the wilderness to behold? a reed shaken with the wind?" Surely
true greatness does not lie in the moral cowardice which bends before
every breeze; quite on the contrary, John was like a rock which no storm
could move.

Then there was a second question: "What went ye out to see? a man clothed
in soft raiment?" Surely greatness does not lie along the line of
self-gratification and indulgence. John endured all hardships and was
oblivious to all human delights because he was so devoted to his divine
task. Courage and consecration--these constitute prime factors in moral
greatness.

The real greatness of John consisted, however, in his mission. Jesus
declared that he was the messenger whom Malachi had predicted should
prepare the way of the Lord. Other prophets had appeared and had predicted
the coming of the Messiah. It was given to John not only to declare that
the Christ would come, but to point to him and to say, "Behold, the Lamb
of God! ... this is the Son of God." No greater dignity had ever been
conferred upon a human soul; and no higher privilege can now be enjoyed
than that of turning the thoughts and hearts of men to Jesus Christ, the
Saviour of the world. The present followers of Christ have a larger
knowledge of him than was possessed by John. What their relative positions
will be in the glory of the perfected Kingdom will depend upon the
comparative faithfulness with which they serve their Master.

The praise of John is sharply contrasted with the condemnation of the
Pharisees which Jesus now turned to express. He declared that these
professed leaders were like children sitting in the market place,
complaining one to another that they are willing to play neither at mock
funerals nor at mock weddings, for when John came they refused to follow
him because his aspect and message were too severe, and when Christ came
they criticized him as being too genial, "a friend of publicans and
sinners." The trouble with the Pharisees was that they made an excuse of
the demeanor of John and the conduct of Jesus for refusing what was
essential in their mission and message. They were unwilling to repent at
the command of John or to put their trust in Christ in response to his
promise of grace and life. Thus some men are still refusing to accept the
salvation which is offered because of something in Christianity which is
purely external, while they fail to appreciate its true essence; but there
were those in the days of Jesus, and there are those to-day who are
willing to accept both the call to repentance and the offer of life, "And
wisdom is justified of all her children."



6. A Sinful Woman Forgiven. Ch. 7:36-50


    36 And one of the Pharisees desired him that he would eat with
    him. And he entered into the Pharisee's house, and sat down to
    meat. 37 And behold, a woman who was in the city, a sinner; and
    when she knew that he was sitting at meat in the Pharisee's house,
    she brought an alabaster cruse of ointment, 38 and standing behind
    at his feet, weeping, she began to wet his feet with her tears,
    and wiped them with the hair of her head, and kissed his feet, and
    anointed them with ointment. 39 Now when the Pharisee that had
    bidden him saw it, he spake within himself, saying, This man, if
    he were a prophet, would have perceived who and what manner of
    woman this is that toucheth him, that she is a sinner. 40 And
    Jesus answering said unto him, Simon, I have somewhat to say unto
    thee. And he saith, Teacher, say on. 41 A certain lender had two
    debtors: the one owed five hundred shillings, and the other fifty.
    42 When they had not _wherewith_ to pay, he forgave them both.
    Which of them therefore will love him most? 43 Simon answered and
    said, He, I suppose, to whom he forgave the most. And he said unto
    him, Thou hast rightly judged. 44 And turning to the woman, he
    said unto Simon, Seest thou this woman? I entered into thy house,
    thou gavest me no water for my feet: but she hath wetted my feet
    with her tears, and wiped them with her hair. 45 Thou gavest me no
    kiss: but she, since the time I came in, hath not ceased to kiss
    my feet. 46 My head with oil thou didst not anoint: but she hath
    anointed my feet with ointment. 47 Wherefore I say unto thee, Her
    sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much: but to
    whom little is forgiven, _the same_ loveth little. 48 And he said
    unto her, Thy sins are forgiven. 49 And they that sat at meat with
    him began to say within themselves, Who is this that even
    forgiveth sins? 50 And he said unto the woman, Thy faith hath
    saved thee; go in peace.


The Gospel of Luke appears to place special emphasis upon the grace and
forgiveness manifested by Jesus. It alone records his sympathy with the
sorrowing widow of Nain, and it is also alone in expressing the sympathy
which Jesus felt for the sinful woman who anointed his feet in the house
of Simon, the Pharisee. It is a picture, however, not only of the loving
mercy of our Lord, but of the unbounded gratitude felt by one who truly
appreciated the priceless gift of his pardoning grace.

By an unfortunate error of interpretation this woman has been confused
with Mary of Magdala or with Mary of Bethany. These three persons should
be, however, absolutely distinct. It is true that Jesus delivered the
first of these from demoniac possession, and that the second, like the
woman in this story, anointed his feet with perfume, but there is every
reason for believing that of the three only this woman was reputed to be a
sinner. She seems to have met Jesus on some previous occasion, to have
repented of her sins, and to have received from the Lord his word of
forgiveness.

It was her gratitude which gave her courage to enter unbidden into the
house of Simon, where Jesus was being entertained as a guest. She had come
to anoint his feet but as she beheld him, she thought again of her sins
and her hot tears of penitence fell upon the feet of her Lord. She hastily
unbound her hair and with it dried his feet and then poured upon them a
flask of fragrant ointment. No truer expression could have been given to
her gratitude and passionate devotion. The fact that Jesus allowed a woman
of such notorious character to express her love for him made Simon
conclude that Jesus could not be a prophet, for otherwise he would have
been able to discern the nature of so depraved a woman.

By his reply Jesus showed his ability to read even the secret thoughts of
his host. The words of Jesus not only answered the silent criticism of
Simon but also rebuked him for his own impenitence and lack of faith.
Jesus proposed to his host a parable of two forgiven debtors, illustrating
the fact that gratitude depends upon the realization of the amount which
has been forgiven, and then he applied this principle to Simon and to the
woman whom Simon had been regarding with scorn. Jesus showed how keenly he
had felt the lack of love shown him by his host, and he contrasted it with
the affection shown by the woman. When he had entered the house Simon had
neglected the customary service of providing a bath for his feet; the
woman had washed his feet with her tears. Simon had withheld the kiss with
which a host usually welcomed his guests; the woman had passionately
kissed his feet. Simon had not furnished the perfume with which it was
usual to anoint an honored guest; the woman had come to the house with the
special purpose of pouring fragrant oil upon the feet of her Lord.

In view of the parable the message of Jesus is plain, "Wherefore I say
unto thee, Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much; but
to whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little." Jesus did not mean to
say that until now she had not been pardoned, nor yet that her pardon was
conditioned upon her love. He meant that her love resulted from her
pardon, and his words have been rightfully interpreted thus: "I say unto
thee that her many sins are forgiven, as thou mayest infer from this
exhibition of her love." The remainder of the sentence was devoted to
Simon, "To whom little is forgiven, the same loveth little." The words do
not prove that Simon had been pardoned; they rather indicate that his lack
of love had proved his lack of penitence and so of forgiveness. Jesus then
turned to the woman with a word of benediction: "Thy sins are forgiven."
He thus assured her of the pardon previously granted, but still more he
vindicated her in the eyes of the guests and assured them of the new life
upon which the woman already had entered. They marveled as they heard him
pronouncing pardon. That is a divine function; but the ideal Man whose
sympathy Luke records was likewise the Son of God. Last of all, Jesus
turned to the woman with the final word of blessing: "Thy faith hath saved
thee; go in peace." This is a clear statement of the fact that faith had
secured pardon and pardon had awakened gratitude and gratitude had been
expressed by a deed of devoted love. Such a penitent can rightfully go
away "into peace," that is, to its present and continual enjoyment.



7. The Ministering Women. Ch. 8:1-3


    1 And it came to pass soon afterwards, that he went about through
    cities and villages, preaching and bringing the good tidings of
    the kingdom of God, and with him the twelve, 2 and certain women
    who had been healed of evil spirits and infirmities: Mary that was
    called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out, 3 and
    Joanna the wife of Chuzas Herod's steward, and Susanna, and many
    others, who ministered unto them of their substance.


Luke writes the Gospel of womanhood. He alone records those tender
incidents in the lives of Elisabeth, Mary, and Anna which are associated
with the infancy of Jesus; he alone tells us of the widow of Nain whose
son Jesus restored to life; of the woman bowed down by Satan but relieved
by Jesus; of the penitent sinner who anointed his feet; of the domestic
scene in the home of Mary and Martha; of the woman who congratulated the
mother of Jesus; and of the women who condoled with him on his way to the
cross. Perhaps most significant of all is the statement of Luke that as
Jesus and his apostles moved about Galilee preaching the gospel, they were
attended by a company of women "who ministered unto them of their
substance."

Among these women Luke mentions "Mary that was called Magdalene," probably
so designated from the town of Magdala where formerly she had lived. By
this title she was distinguished from Mary the mother of Jesus, from Mary
of Bethany, and from other women of this same name.

It is a cruel error to confuse her with the sinful woman of whom Luke has
just been writing. Mary had suffered from demon possession, as here
stated, but there is nothing in the Gospels to indicate that she had ever
been a woman of notoriously evil life.

Luke also mentions Joanna, whose husband, Chuzas, had charge of the
household and personal estates of King Herod, evidently then a woman of
some social standing; but of her and her companions nothing further is
known, excepting this important fact, that their motive in ministering to
the Master was that of gratitude; they "had been healed of evil spirits
and infirmities."

This statement by Luke is brief but illuminating. It throws light upon an
interesting question to which no other answer is given in the Gospels: How
did Jesus and his followers secure financial support during the years of
his ministry? Evidently those who had received from him spiritual help
gladly supplied his temporal wants and rendered to him all needful
service. Thus this passage indicates not only what Jesus did for women,
but what women did for him. It suggests a question: Who can estimate how
far the gifts and sacrifices of grateful women have been making possible,
through the passing ages, the preaching of the gospel in all the world?



8. The Parable of the Sower. Ch. 8:4-18


    4 And when a great multitude came together, and they of every city
    resorted unto him, he spake by a parable: 5 The sower went forth
    to sow his seed: and as he sowed, some fell by the way side; and
    it was trodden under foot, and the birds of the heaven devoured
    it. 6 And other fell on the rock; and as soon as it grew, it
    withered away, because it had no moisture. 7 And other fell amidst
    the thorns; and the thorns grew with it, and choked it. 8 And
    other fell into the good ground, and grew, and brought forth fruit
    a hundredfold. As he said these things, he cried, He that hath
    ears to hear, let him hear.


    9 And his disciples asked him what this parable might be. 10 And
    he said, Unto you it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom
    of God: but to the rest in parables; that seeing they may not see,
    and hearing they may not understand.


    11 Now the parable is this: The seed is the word of God. 12 And
    those by the way side are they that have heard; then cometh the
    devil, and taketh away the word from their heart, that they may
    not believe and be saved. 13 And those on the rock _are_ they who,
    when they have heard, receive the word with joy; and these have no
    root, who for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall
    away. 14 And that which fell among the thorns, these are they that
    have heard, and as they go on their way they are choked with cares
    and riches and pleasures of _this_ life, and bring no fruit to
    perfection. 15 And that in the good ground, these are such as in
    an honest and good heart, having heard the word, hold it fast, and
    bring forth fruit with patience.


    16 And no man, when he hath lighted a lamp, covereth it with a
    vessel, or putteth it under a bed; but putteth it on a stand, that
    they that enter in may see the light. 17 For nothing is hid, that
    shall not be made manifest; nor _anything_ secret, that shall not
    be known and come to light. 18 Take heed therefore how ye hear:
    for whosoever hath, to him shall be given; and whosoever hath not,
    from him shall be taken away even that which he thinketh he hath.


Because of its greater length and more elaborate workmanship and greater
fullness of detail, this story of the sower is rightly regarded as the
first parable of our Lord, even though he had previously used brief
illustrations which were designated by the same name. Parables henceforth
formed a prominent part of his teaching, and that he was now beginning a
somewhat new method of instruction is evident from the fact that the
disciples now asked him to explain his meaning, v. 9, and from the fact
that he here gave the reason for the use of all his parables. This reason
is twofold: these inimitable illustrations would enable those who were
attentive and rightly disposed toward him to remember more easily the
teachings of the Master; while to inattentive or hostile minds the meaning
would be veiled. V. 10. This twofold purpose met the demands of the crisis
which had arisen, due on the one hand to the increasing popularity of
Jesus' teachings and on the other to the murderous hatred and dark plots
of the Pharisees and scribes.

The parable of the Sower thus forms a proper introduction to all the
parables for they are vehicles of truth, and our Lord here made it clear
that the effect of truth depends upon the spiritual state of the hearers.
This is sometimes called the parable of the Soils, for it illustrates the
various states of heart found among men to whom the Christian message
comes.
